[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](is307)  [Next](is309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MAGNUS' SAGA THE LONGER.

 

1.            Praise glory and splendour and honour be to Almighty God,
our redeemer and maker, for his manifold mercy and grace, which he
bestows on us who dwell on the uttermost edge of the world;  so that
after the saying of the masters who so set it in their books, it seems
to them as though we were come out of the world.  And yet all the same
though it be so, God hath deigned to show us his mercy, especially in
that he hath let us come to the knowledge of his blessed name;  and
therewith given us strong pillars, the most saintly forerunners of holy
Christianity, from whose holiness the whole North shines and beams near
and far.  These are, the saint king Olaf, and the exalted Hallvard his
kinsman, who adorn Norway with their halidoms;  the worshipful Magnus,
the Isle-earl, who brightens the Orkneys with his holiness, to whose
honour the aftercoming Saga is put together.  Herewith are the blessed
bishops John and Thorlak, who have enlightened Iceland with the exalted
shining of their bright worthiness.  By this it may be seen that we are
not far off from God's mercy, though we be far off from other peoples in
our abode in the world;  and therefore we are bound to pay Him thanks,
honour and reverence all the time of our life.

Master Robert, who hath collected and composed the Saga of the holy earl
Magnus in Latin, so begins his Prologue as may here be heard.

2.            Each one bringeth such things as he hath means to bring
into the tabernacle of God, as a help to mercy for himself.  One gold,
others silver, some gemstones, some goats hair and red buckskin;  and
such offerings are not to be contemptuously esteemed, for of such is
made the covering over the tabernacle of God, to shield it and keep it
from wet and sun heat.  These words may be so glossed with few words. 
Let every christain man offer to God of the gifts and grants which He
hath bestowed on him, what he hath best.  That God's christianity is the
tabernacle that Moses made for God's service, denotes its worth as a
shelter and support against the onslaughts of his foes.  Gold denotes
wit and wisdom;  silver chastity;  gemstones the miracles of holy men; 
goatshair the repentance of sins;  red buckskin martyrdom.  Now the man
who reads may so make up his mind, that all these offerings hath the
holy Magnus offered to his Lord, as the story of his life witnesseth. 
Now though the praise of God be not seemly in sinful man's mouth, still
it may be profitable and helpful to others;  for we so read that the
whole house was filled with the sweetest savour of the ointment and
spices of that sinful woman, who in penitence fell down to wash and
anoint the Lord's feet.  But after the bad fashion of those men who
cultivate others' lands, the neglect their own and let them lie dry, so
we begin this story about the life of earl Magnus the saint all the more
trustfully and lovingly, and we bestow our toil on such holy and sublime
knowledge, because we trust on and thoroughly look for his help to stay
and strengthen us to his worship and honour.  Now for that he is a
partaker in the kingdom of heaven, and hath entered into the power of
the Lord, so is he mighty to obtain all that he willeth.  But for that
we are sinful, and for the sake of our wretched life are not able to set
others good examples of ourselves, so we show saint Magnus with his
fameful life, which all are bound to follow, and take holy patterns
from.  Now that we may not make trouble to  our readers by this
discourse, for the Lord made short discourses, so we make this story
plain with clear words and pure telling, as God hath granted us to
discern.

3.            In the days of Harold Sigurd's son king of Norway there
ruled as earls over the Orkneys two brothers, Paul and Erlend, sons of
earl Thorfinn, who has been the mightiest of all the earls of the
Orkneyingers.  He was the son of earl Sigurd, whom king Olaf Tryggvi's
son christened and all the folk in the Orkneys.  This Sigurd fell in
Brian's battle in Ireland.  The mother of those two Paul and Erlend was
Ingibjörg, who was called earlsmother, the daughter of earl Finn Arni's
son;  but Harold Sigurd's son had to wife Thora the daughter of Thorberg
Arni's son, the mother of Olaf the quiet, and in that way they were
second cousins, king Olaf and the aforesaid earls.  Earl Erlend had to
wife that woman whose name was Thora, she was Summerled's daughter, the
son of Ospak.  The mother of Ospak was Thordis the daughter of Hall of
the Side.  Egill was the name of a son of the aforenamed Hall;  his
daughter was Thorgerda, the mother of Saint John, bishop of Holar.  The
sons of earl Erlend and Thora were these, Saint Magnus and Erling, but
their daughters were Gunnhilda and Cecilia.  Kol Kali's son, a liegeman
in Norway, afterwards had Gunnhilda to wife;  their son was
Rognvald-Kali, who became afterwards earl in the Orkneys;  he is a
thoroughly saintly man;  Rognvald-Kali was a sister's son of earl Magnus
the Saint.  Earl Paul the brother of Erlend had to wife a daughter of
earl Hacon Ivar's son and Ragnhilda the daughter of king Magnus the
good, son of the saint-king Olaf.  Paul's son's name was Hacon, who
afterwards comes into the story.

4.            Saint Magnus the earl was born in the Orkneys, the most
noble of race and the most famous of kindred.  His father Erlend was
earl of the Orkneys, a worshipful lord and chief, honoured in power and
esteem, as is the wont of those who live mightily on this earth.  His
mother Thora was sprung from the most noble chiefs of that land.  But
though to many good birth might turn to pride and spoiling of temper,
this blessed youth was already in the first offshoot of his childhood
bright and learned by the teaching of the Holy Spirit;  for he held to
and loved, valued and kept, the highest power of the mind, sweetness of
temper and soberness of morals, and the steadiness of honourable
habits.  This youth showed himself old in good behaviour, shareless of
childish life in his deeds, gladspoken and blithe, gentle in his loving
words, and yielding and reasonable in his conduct and in all his
doings.  Well mature and self restrained, so that nothing was found in
his dealings that might hurt or shock men who beheld him.  He was soon
put to school to learn holy writings, and all that other knowledge which
men were then most wont to know.  Magnus was docile and obedient, pliant
and attentive to his father and mother and his masters;  kind and
pleasant to the whole people.  He cared little for loose company and 
games like other young men, but rather showed himself of seemly conduct,
though he were young in the tale of winters;  because at once was
revealed in him the evident gift of the Holy Spirit, which guided him to
all good things.

5.            When those brothers, Paul and Erlend, had taken the power
in the Orkneys, king Harold Sigurd's son, came from the east from Norway
with a mighty host to the Orkney's and left there behind him queen
Elizabeth, and Maria and Ingigerda his daughters.  The earls made them
ready to go along with the king with a great host, and they held on
south for England;  and in that battle which they fought against king
Harold Godwin's son, Harold Sigurd's son fell five nights after the
feast of St. Matthew in the autumn.  After this battle Olaf the quiet,
Harold's son, sailed with the earls that autumn back to the Orkneys. 
And that same day and at that hour on which king Harold fell in England,
his daughter Maria died a sudden death in the Orkneys;  and it is the
saying of men that they both had one life between them.  Olaf the quiet
was the winter over in the Orkneys, and he was the dearest friend of the
earls his kinsmen, for they were brothers' daughters, Thora the mother
of Olaf and Ingibjörg the mother of the earls.  Olaf fared in the spring
east to Norway, and there he was taken to be king with his (brother)
Magnus.

6.            Those brothers, Paul and Erlend, ruled the Orkneys a long
while, and their agreement was a long time good.  But when their sons
began to grow up, then Hacon and Erling got to be very overbearing men,
but Magnus was the quietest and best behaved of them in every way.  All
those kinsmen were tall and strong, and proper men in all things. 
Hacon, Paul's son, wished to be ruler over the sons of Erlend, because
he thought himself greater by birth than they;  for that he was the
daughter's son of earl Hacon, Ivar's son, and Ragnhilda, the daughter of
king Magnus the good, as was shown before, and Hacon would have the
higher hand in all their dealings.  Then it so fell out, that they could
not agree peacefully together, for many men leaned towards the sons of
Erlend, and would not let them bear the lower lot there in the isles; 
for they were better friends with all the people and more beloved of
men;  Hacon harboured many a grudge for this all his life long.  So then
there was risk with the earl's sons.  Then their fathers took part in
the matter with them, that they should make things up.  Then a meeting
was summoned;  and it was soon found out  that each of the earls leaned
towards his sons, and they could not agree;  thenceforth arose great
discord between those brothers, and they parted as things stood.  Then
next after that men came between them to try to make peace, and then a
meeting was summoned between them in Hrossey.  At that meeting peace was
agreed to between them on these terms, that the isles were shared into
halves;  then things stood so for a while.  Hacon Paul's son pressed
hard on those men who served Erlend and his sons, so that they thought
things could not stand thus, and so it came about again that they became
at variance, and marched against one another with a great force.  Havard
Gunni's son and other chiefs and friends of the earls then tried to
bring about an atonement between them;  but Erlend and his sons would
not then take any terms, so that Hacon should be there in the isles. 
But for that their friends thought that there was much to answer for if
they were at variance, then Hacon fared away out of the isles at once; 
and then an atonement was brought about between those brothers by the
counsel of good men and true.  Hacon fared first east to Norway to see
king Olaf the quiet, that was toward the end of his days;  there he
stayed a short while.  Thence he fared east to Sweden to see king Ingi
Steinkel's son, and was with him some while well received.  Then
christianity was young in Sweden;  there were many men there who went
about with witchcraft, and so thought that they would become wiser as to
many things which had not yet come to pass.  King Ingi was a good
christian, and took great pains in rooting out those bad customs which
had long followed heathendom.

7.            When Hacon Paul's son was in Sweden, he had heard say that
there in the land was a man who went about with wisdom and spaedom,
whether it were by witchcraft or other things.  Hacon had a great
longing to find out this man, and to know whether he could be made wise
as to his future fate.  Then he fared to look for that man, and found
him at last in a woodland district;  there he used to go about to
feasts, and told the freemen about their crops and other things which
they were curious to know.  But when Hacon found that man, then he asked
him how he might come to power or other good luck.  The wizard asks him
what manner of man he might be.  He tells him his name and kin, that he
was the daughter's son of earl Hacon Ivar's son.  Then answers the
wizard:  "Why wilt thou get from me wisdom or sayings?  Knowest thou not
that those former kinsmen of thine have had little faith in such like
men as I am.  And it may serve thy turn that thou shouldest seek to know
thy fate from Olaf the Stout, in Norway, thy kinsman, whom ye set all
faith in.  But I rather doubt that he would not have lowly mindedness
enought to tell thee what thou art eager to know, or perhaps be not so
powerful either as ye say he is."  Hacon answers:  "I will not blame
him;  I think it more likely that I may not have worthiness enough to
get wisdom from him, than that he should not be able to make me wise, if
he would.  But this is why I have come to see thee, because it hath come
into my mind that here neither of us twain will need to look down upon
the other for the sake of matters of virtue or belief."  That man
answers:  "It likes me well that I find that thou dost not think that
thou hast all trust where thy kinsmen of yore had faith.  Wonderful it
is, too, that those men who strive after such things go about with fasts
and wakes, and deem that therefore those things must be granted to them
which they are eager to know.  But though ye take such pains, yet are ye
all the less wise the more curious ye are to know those things which it
is worth your while to know;  but we lay ourselves under no torments,
and yet we are always wise as to those things of which our friends think
it worth while to know.  Now things will so go with us two that thou
shalt get thyself better able to get the truth from me than from king
Ingi's priestly teachers, whom he thinks he may put all trust in.  Thou
shalt come to me in three nights' space, and then we two will try if I
can tell thee any of these things which thou art eager to know."  After
that they parted, and Hacon stayed there in those parts.  And when three
nights were gone by he fared to meet the wizard.  He was then in a
certain house all alone, and drew his breath heavily when he \[Hacon\]
went in, and stroked his brow with his hand, and said it had cost him
much ere he became wise of those things which he wished to know
beforehand.  Hacon said he was then willing to hear what he had to say. 
He then said:  "If thou wilt know thy fate, then is it long to tell
about, and about thy life;  for that from thy voyage west to the Orkneys
very great tidings will come to pass when everything hath been fulfilled
which will follow from it.  And it is my belief that thou wilt come to
be sole chief over the Orkneys in the end;  may be that thou wilt think
it long.  I trow also that thy offspring will dwell there.  Thou wilt
also in thy days let that wickedness be done, which thou must either
make atonement for or not to that God in whom thou believest.  But thy
footsteps lie further out into the world than I can get to see;  but
still I think that thou wilt bring back thy bones here to the northern
half of the world.  Now have I told thee those things that I can at this
time, but say thou how thou likest thy lot or errand."  Hacon answers: 
"A great story is this thou tellest, if it be sooth; but  I think it
will go better with me, as it may well be that thou hast not seen all
this of a truth."  The spaeman bade him believe as much of it as he
chose.  And after that they parted.

And when Hacon had been a short time with king Ingi, then he fared
thence to Norway to see king Magnus barelegs his kinsman.  There he
learned those tidings from the Orkneys, that earl Erlend and his sons
had most of the rule there, and were very much beloved, but earl Paul
his father had very little share in the rule.  He thought too that he
made out that the Orkneyingers would long little for his coming thither
west;  then they had good peace, and feared, if Hacon came, that from
him would arise strife and uproar;  and Hacon thought it not unlikely
that his kinsmen would hold the realm against him.  He took that counsel
to ask from his kinsman king Magnus, that he would put him into his
realm in the Orkneys.  Hacon egged king Magnus on much to lead a host to
Scotland and Ireland, and after that to England, to avenge there king
Harold Sigurd's son.  The king answers:  "That must thou bear in mind,
Hacon, if I do this for the sake of thy words, to fare with a host
across the sea west, that it shall not take thee unawares though I bore
on with a bold claim to those lands which lie there west across the
main, and make there no distinction of persons."  But when Hacon heard
that he grew cold, and said little more about it;  but king Magnus then
made them call out the levies in full numbers of men and ships over all
Norway.

8.            Now next after this we must turn back to the holy Magnus
the hero of our Saga;  for a little before ye heard how virtuous he was
in all his behaviour, and unlike other young men in his growing up.  But
for that many turn their customs after those with whom they live, and
whosoever toucheth tar is defiled of it;  so when Magnus had come to be
about fullgrown of age, placed among grim and wicked men who were
illwilled against good habits, unstable in the faith, opposed to right
laws, stiff-necked in learning, yielding to evil habits, gainsayers and
disobedient to God's commandments;  he seemed for some winters like
wicked men, and as a viking with robbers and warriors he lived by
robbery and plunder, and stood by at manslaughters along with others. 
But it is to be believed that he did this more from the wickedness and
egging on of bad men than from his own badness.  Men think it likeliest
that Magnus did this at that time when he and Hacon and Erling his
kinsmen were all together in the Orkneys, for afterwards no time can be
found for it.  About this his behaviour master Robert thus speaks, who
has composed the story.

"Ho ho!  I wonder,"  says he, "how unspeakable is the deepness of the
riches of godly knowledge and of the Lord's wisdom;  how inexplicable
are his decrees, and how inscrutable are his ways to the race of man. 
Why did the allruling God allow this his servant to let himself be
greedy for robbery and manslaughter, and to be defiled by so manifold
sins and misdeeds?  Why did God's goodness suffer his knight and martyr
to let himself fall so fearfully, which from the beginning elected to
crown him sublimely in heaven?  With joy and gladness God enriched him,
and turned his dust into heavenly glory, and gave him everlasting
comfort after this world's woe;  the cloak of good fortune and praise
after the stripes of the heart.  What is this?  but that which we have
seen every day as manifestly as gloriously, that God raises up and makes
sons to Abraham out of stones, righteous out of wrong-doers, honest out
of sinners, glorious out of mortals --- (stones) smooth and polished,
and four-cornered, with four main virtues, that they may be made to fit
into the heavenly edifice, as strong and steadfast cornerstones in Jesus
Christ our head stone of the corner;  of one mind with him, and of the
same temper with everlasting affection and the link of endless love. 
For the Lord Jesus is the son of the great builder, who made and makes
the world, and all that is therein, and rules it after his will;  and he
changes the vessels of his wrath into vessels of mercy, polishing them
with the file of the Holy Spirit;  and he receives sinful men into the
widest bosom of his pity and mercy, all those who leave off their
naughtiness and turn to him with their whole heart.  For it belongs to
the great glory and mercy of the Lord that he lets the abundance of his
mercy there be shown, where before the great weight of our wretchedness
is in the way;  and he tendeth and healeth all the more powerfully when
the sickness already more hotly attacks the sick man, and he makes them
all whole and holpen who look to him for help.  See at last, how the
holy Magnus, though he was entangled in such sins, yet came to leave off
those pursuits, and followed his father and brother and the liegemen in
the Orkneys."

9.            At that time which we have reached in the story of king
Magnus barelegs came from the east out of Norway, with a countless
multitude of ships and force of warriors.  Him followed many of his
liegemen;  Vidkun Johnson, Sark of Sogn, Kali of Agdir the son of
Seabear, and Kol his son, and many other chiefs.  The king meant in this
voyage to lay under him and to harry the western lands, England and
Ireland, as was before mentioned.  When king Magnus came to the Orkneys,
he seized the earls Erlend and Paul, and forced them away from the
isles, and sent them east to Norway;  but he set his son Sigurd over the
Orkneys, and gave him councillors, for he was not older than nine
winters.  King Magnus settled that the sons of the earls should fare
with and attend him;  Magnus and Erling the sons of Erlend, and Hacon
Paul's son.  Magnus the son of earl Erlend was a tall man of growth,
quick and gallant, and strong of body, fair to look on, lighthued, and
well-limbed, noble in aspect, and the most courteous in all his
behaviour;  him king Magnus made his waiting-swain, and he always served
at the king's board.  King Magnus fared out of the Orkneys to the
Southern isles, and he won in that voyage all the Southern Isles under
his sway, and seized Logman the son of Godred, king of the Southern
isles.  Thence he fared south under Wales, and had there a great battle
in Anglesea-sound, with two Welch earls, Hugh the stout, and Hugh the
proud.  But when men were getting out their weapons, and busked them to
battle, then Magnus Erlend's son sat him down in the foreroom, where he
was wont to be, and did not arm himself.  The king asked him why he did
so.  Saint Magnus answers, "I have here no quarrel with any man, and
that is why I will not fight."  "Get away then," says the king, "down
under the planks, but do not lie here under the feet of men if thou
darest not to fight, for I do not think that faith drives thee to do
this."  Magnus the earl's son sat in the same place, and took a psalter,
and sung out of it during the battle, but did not shield himself.  This
battle was both hard and long.  But at last Hugh the proud fell, but the
Welchmen fled, and king Magnus got the victory, but he had lost many
good men, and a number were wounded.  Kali Seabear's son had got many
and great wounds.  Magnus the son of Erlend had not been wounded in the
battle, though he had not shielded himself, and all may see that it was
the fairest token that in so thick flights of arrows, and strong showers
of shafts, he should not be wounded, though on all sides of him armed
men fell.  And now this need not be wondered at, for God has kept him
for a greater crown and victory than to fall there.  King Magnus was not
moved by aught of these things, and he laid great feud and dislike on
Magnus the earl's son for this.  And when saint Magnus saw that it would
neither be for his honour nor for his soul's help to be any longer with
king Magnus, then he took another counsel for himself to do that which
God taught him.

10.       It fell on a night when king Magnus lay off Scotland, that
Magnus Erlend's son stole off from the king's ship, and so made up his
berth that it seemed as though a man lay there.  But next morning when
the king was clad, he asked whether Magnus Erlend's son were sick.  Then
enquiry was made for him, and he was missed.  The king made them look
for him, and still he was not found.  Then the king let the slot hounds
run loose on land.  Magnus, the earl's son had hurt his foot when he was
running on land, and the slot-hounds had found the trail at once. 
Magnus had taken to the wood, and he had got up into a tree.  The hounds
came to the oak, and stood upon their hindlegs round it.  Then Magnus
smote one of them with a staff, which he had hold of, but they betook
them to flight at once, and laid their tails behind them, and ran off to
the ships.  Magnus Erlend's son hid himself in the wood while the king's
men hunted for him.  After that he fared up the country, and came forth
at the court of Malcolm, the Scot-king, and stayed there awhile, but
sometimes he was in Wales with a certain bishop.  That same autumn king
Magnus fared back to the Southern isles, and was there the winter over. 
That winter Kali Seabear's son breathed his last of his wounds.  Next
spring, early, king Magnus fared to the Orkneys.  There he heard of the
deaths of the earls out of Norway;  Erlend had died in Drontheim, and
was there buried, but Paul at Bergen.  Then king Magnus gave away in
marriage Gunnhilda, earl Erlend's daughter, the sister of Saint Magnus,
to Kol the son of Kali, as an atonement for the loss of his father,
together with great possessions in the Orkneys.  Then Kol became the
liegeman of the king;  their son was Rognvald-Kali.  Some men say that
Erling, the son of Erlend, brother of Saint Magnus, has fallen in
Anglesea-sound, but Snorri Sturluson says he has fallen in Ulster with
king Magnus.  For when king Magnus had ruled Norway nine winters, he
fared west to Ireland with a great host, and the summer after he fell in
Ulster on the feast of Saint Bartholomew.  But Sigurd his son fared
straightway out of the Orkneys east to Norway, and was there taken to be
king with his brothers Eystein and Olaf.

11.        Now ye heard in the former chapter how Almighty God is ready
to have mercy, whose especial goodness is ever to pity and to turn
trouble to comfort and help;  and how he kept this his chosen champion
from the woes and worry of the world, to reveal to him, and to show him
how great things it behoved him to suffer for his name;  and that he who
had often stood by at great manslayings, should at last become an
offering of the Holy Spirit, and give to God his own blood with life and
body.  And that was why he came out of the power of the greedy king as
was read before.

When the holy Magnus was in Scotland he learnt the death of earl Erlend
his father, and those other tidings which before were written.  And when
he had been such time at the court of the Scot-king as liked him,
honoured of the king with gifts and noble company, he fared to
Caithness, and was there worthily received of all, kept and cared for,
and at once chosen and honoured with the title "earl," beloved and
worshipful to all the friends of God.

12.        And next to that without tarrying the saint earl Magnus
became Paul out of Saul, a preacher out of a manslayer, and he avenged
it on himself that he had lived an ill life.  He fell to weeping himself
dead to sin with daily wailing and steadfast remorse;  and he now took
fitting vengeance in manifold penance on the sinful lusts of his
wretched flesh.  Then he seemed to become a new man, who is changed into
what is honourable to God;  and he turned into another man, into a good
from a bad man, into a sober from a sinful, into a saint from a sinner,
into a blessed and pure man from a defiled man.  This is the conversion
of thy right hand, Almighty God.  Thou art strong to strengthen,
gracious to help, ready to better, excellent to keep.  In this wise was
the holy Magnus changed into a saintly man.  He began to ear the earth
of his heart with the sharp share of confession.  Then he slew his
unlucky adversary and hid him under the sand.  Then he buried Laban's
idols under the treeroots.  He tore up out of himself sins and
defilements, and clad him in sublime strength in godly desires with
manful steadfastness.  Then he began to wax as an olivetree, and was
uplifted in all good things and worthy works.  Just as the cypress is
above other trees, so waxed the holy Magnus, that he might be as
"magnus," that is "great,"  in godliness, as he was in name, uprising in
good fortune and holiness.

13.        One winter or two after the fall of king Magnus barelegs,
Hacon Paul's son came from the west across the sea to Norway, and the
king gave him the title of earl and such power as his birth might
claim.  Then he fared west over the sea, and took under him all the
realm in the Orkneys with so much greed and aggression that he slew the
guiltless steward of the king of Norway, who held and looked after that
half of the isles which Saint Magnus owned, and in that way laid under
him all the Orkneys with violence;  for half the isles fell to Saint
Magnus by inheritance from his father.  Now when Saint Magnus heard of
such tumult, that his first cousin Hacon was taking under him his
inheritance with open wrong, he held counsel with his men what should be
done.  It was agreed with them that he shall bide for a time till the
wrath and greed of his kinsman Hacon were soothed, and that it should
not be shown that he sought his inheritance after warriors' wise, but
rather as the friend and dear lover of law and justice.

14.        But when that time is come that Saint Magnus will seek his
heritage, then he fares with a goodly company from Caithness to the
Orkneys, and friends and kinsmen are alike glad to see him.  Then he
begged to take his father's heritage.  That was well pleasing to the
freemen, for he was blessed with many friends;  he had many kinsmen and
connexions who were ready to support him to power.  His mother Thora was
then married to that man whose name was Sigurd, they had a great
homestead in Paplay.  When earl Hacon heard that Magnus was come into
the isles, he gathered force to him, and would not give up the realm,
but rather defend it.  Then the friends of both came between them and
tried to reconcile them.  Then it so came about by the help of good men
and true, that it was agreed that earl Hacon sould give up half the
realm, if that were the award of the kings of Norway.  Then Magnus
Erlend's son fared at once east to Norway to seek king Eystein, for king
Sigurd had then set out for Jewry.  King Eystein received lord Magnus
excellently well, and gave up to him his father's inheritance, half the
Orkneys, and with that he took the title of earl from the king, together
with the most honourable gifts.  And after that lord Magnus the earl
fared west over the sea to his realm;  and his friends and kinsfolk, and
along with them all the people were fain of him.  Then the kinship of
Hacon and Magnus was very close many winters, so long as their friends
took part in it.  There was then peace and plenty in the Orkneys while
their friendship lasted.  Those kinsmen, lord Magnus the earl and Hacon,
had both together the wardship of the land for some while, so that they
were well agreed.  It is so said in those songs which have been made on
them, that they fought with that viking who harried their realm, whose
name was Dufnjal;  he was one degree further off than the earl's first
cousin, and he fell before them.  Thorbjorn was the name of a man mighty
and noble for family's sake, but poor in good works, whom they cut off
in Burrafirth in Shetland for good cause.  And again they wrought many
tidings which the songs point to, that they shared both together, though
we cannot speak plainly of them.  These things Saint Magnus hath done
not as a viking or robber, but rather as lawful ruler of the realm and a
keeper of the laws, the lover of peace, to restrain bad customs of men
and to chastise wrongdoing, to free and relieve his subjects and his
realm from the pride and onslaughts of wicked men, who aye lay in wait
to spoil the peace.

15.        Lord Magnus was the most famous man in his chieftainship, of
good habits and counsel, a fast friend and bold in fight, well skilled
in arms, and victorious in battle, meek-tempered in peace, and yet fit
to rule, humble in speech and merciful, a sage in wit, and having the
praise of every one.  He was generous of money, and open-handed to
chiefs, he gave daily great help to poor men for God's love.  He
chastised much plunder and stealing, he let vikings and ill-doers be
slain, as well powerful as poor.  He was not given to side with his
friends in his judgments;  he set more store by God's law than the
distinctions of rank.  In all things he kept firmly God's commandments,
and was unsparing towards himself.  Many and famous were his virtues
which he showed to God himself but hid from men.

But for that the earl Saint Magnus had rule and government over worldly
folk, so he would be like worldly chiefs in the customs of this life; 
he took and betrothed unto himself a high-born lady and the purest maid
of the noblest stock of Scotland's chiefs, and brought her home to him,
and entered into wedlock with her.  This the blessed Magnus did, as it
was proved, by the deep-set plan of godly mercy, for the sake of damping
the lusts of his body, for he was holpen by godly mercy, for the sake of
damping the blithe temptations of this world, rather than to fulfil the
lusts of his body, for he was holpen by godly guardianship and heavenly
power.  He abode ten winters by this maid pure and thoroughly lotless of
all sins of defilement.  But when he felt temptation coming on him to
bodily lusts, then he went into cold water and prayed for help from God.

16.        See here the stout champion of God in daily strife, how
wondrously he lived with this maiden so long time.  For that, though he
might lawfully take pleasure with her, he would rather, stayed by the
mercy of God, choose the better lot to live unspoilt, than to fulfil
lawful wedlock;  for they suffer the burning passions of the body who
follow such things.  Because it is better and more steadfast to keep
flowers safe, than to cure those which are already spoilt;  for no wound
is as well healed as that flesh which has been kept whole.  But to live
in the body without the body's lusts, is not of man's power, but rather
of God's gift.  But what temptation and suffering he bore from the heat
of the body, what heavy shafts of unlawful feeling, and in what hard
strife he overcame and steadied the strong desires of glowing flesh, he
knows who tries, but he that is untried doubts.  See my dearest!  this
is that great sight which Moses saw, that bush blazing and not burning; 
that is so to be understood, this young man tempted but not overcome. 
But for that the apostle Paul so says that no one is crowned save he
lawfully strives and manfully works for it, so this courtly chief and
warlike knight chose thy courts, \["Thy courts" i.e. "God's courts."\]
to suffer daily strife, and the constant battle of the burning flesh. 
And he fought stoutly and conquered luckily, for it seemed to him that
he will be too much a carpet knight who will first have the glory ere he
accomplishes some doughty deed;  for might is the way to glory and false
is that fairness which holy strength does not bring forth.  And I
wonder, says the scripture, how fair and desirable is pure begetting
with its brightness and loveliness.  This the exalted knight of God,
girt with the belt of chastity, took pains with all the desire of his
heart to further and fulfil all kinds of loving works to the honour of
his Lord.  For what could he refuse of this world's goods to his God,
who gave his own life and body in pledge, and poured out his own blood
for God's sake?

17.        Now, for that no man can be Abel, save he who tholes and
proves the spite and envy of Cain;  and as the holy Ezekiel dwelt with
venomous men, and the righteous Lot was hard pressed of wrongful men; 
so the foe of the whole human race waked up temptation, and the heat of
persecution on all sides against this knight of God, sowing discord and
hatred between brothers and kinsfolk and dear friends, all that he might
hinder him, and make those wonders of none effect, which then began to
grow with him.  But the branch of the godly vine might be moved, but not
cut off;  for as wood floats on water, and is turned over and over by
the winds and waves, but sinks not, and just as "the Wain" \[i.e.,
'Charles' Wain," the Bear, the well-known constellation.\] turns round
in the heaven, but never sets;  as gold is purified in the furnace, and
burns not;  and as a strong house is shaken of the storm and falls not: 
after that wise was the will and heart of this famous martyr strong and
steadfast, unshaken and fearless amid the hot onslaughts and onset of
manifold temptation, in the midst of storms and great breakers of hidden
envy and guile, as well as of open wickedness and ill-will, against the
shafts of the tempting foe. --- Next after this it must be shown in what
wise this discord came about between the earls.

18.        When those kinsmen, Saint Magnus and earl Hacon, had ruled
the land some winters with peace and good agreement, then that fell
about which can often happen, that ill-willing men set themselves to
spoil their kinship.  Then wicked men gathered themselves around earl
Hacon, for those kinsmen were very unlike in temper.  The lord earl
Magnus was good-hearted and trusty in his promises;  he wished to hold
the power that God had given him, and coveted naught beyond.  For in
what wise could he be proved to be greedy of other men's power or
property, who was so free of his own body, that he spared not his own
life for the love of God?  He schooled and taught his subjects to right
conduct, so that after he had freed and saved his realm from the
onslaughts of wicked vikings, he allowed none of his men to go on
warfare, and sternly restrained all lawlessness and wickedness.  But
earl Hacon was hard-hearted and grim, greedy both of money and power,
and more prone to egg on his men to warfare than to hinder them;  but
wickedness and ill-doing he punished little.  He was very envious at the
friendships and lordliness of saint Magnus;  Hacon would willingly, with
the greediness of his bad counsellors, hinder the honour of earl Magnus,
and lay under him his realm by wrong and robbery, and Hacon began with
his men to plot against his life with guileful schemes.

19.        Now when the blessed Magnus has become thoroughly aware of
this by many proofs, which he thinks cannot be hidden, that Hacon wished
to get at his life and realm, then he took counsel with his advisers,
and it seemed good to him to yield for a while to the envy and wrath of
Hacon.  He chose then out of his men those who were choicest and best
fitted to follow him, and sailed to England and sought a meeting with
king Henry son of William the bastard, who at that time was absolute
king over England.  When saint Magnus was come to this king, then he
laid bare to him all the story and cause of his coming thither.  And the
king received him with great worship.  And he rose up into such great
friendship with the king, that he kept him and all his band at his own
cost a whole twelvemonth nobly, as it beseemed a king to treat a noble
duke.  But this holy martyr kept himself and his followers so wisely
that he was ware of and set his face against all fellowship with wicked
men.  And when the lord king skilled of his wisdom how earl Magnus was a
doer of good works and of honourable habits, and that the Holy Spirit
abode in him, then he listened willingly to his counsels, and had his
foresight in his undertakings;  for he was sound and safe in his
discourse and counsels, blithe-hearted and long-suffering like Chusi,
merry and loveable like Jonathan, a righteous zealot for the law like
Phineas.  He was so dear and so beloved by all, so pleasant and popular,
that there were many who so spoke:  "Blessed are they that saw thee, and
who flourished in thy friendship."  He was gladsome and of good will
towards great men, open-handed and liberal towards the poor,
good-tempered and good-hearted and lowly-minded to all the people.  And
though he took his place at the court with wordly chiefs, still he was
beware of and set his face against all kinds of lust, which spoil the
habits of courtiers.  And that he might not for the future fleck his
chastity by consorting with other men's sins, he made ready to return
home, as soon as those twelve months were past, which he had spent with
king Henry.  May be that God had revealed to him that he should close
his toils within a short time, and so offer to God the pure flower of
his chastity, by the triumphant death of his martyrdom.  For to be set
free from the body, and live with Christ, is far more glorious than to
be here in the defilement of this world.

20.       After that Saint Magnus had taken leave of king Henry,
honoured and esteemed with rich gifts of many kinds, reverenced of the
lord king, then they parted with the greatest love and friendship.  Then
he first visited all those holy shrines which were in the neighbourhood,
and afterwards fared home to his own land.  But during that time when
the holy Magnus was abroad, earl Hacon laid under his rule with great
greed and warfare not only all the Orkneys, but all Caithness as well,
with robbery and wantoness;  whence it came about that Hacon sat at that
time in Caithness when the holy earl Magnus landed in the Orkneys with
five ships well manned with bold and well-armed men, meaning to get back
his realm, albeit with no wrong greed of this world's honour or of
property which did not belong to him;  least of all when he had already
so long yearned for God, and was with the whole joy of his heart taken
up from the greed of mortal things into the desire of eternal joys;  and
so he came now in a little while to close his lifetime all the more
worthily as he went sooner away.  These tidings of his homecoming were
soon heard on all sides.  Earl Hacon eftsoons awakening as a grim
she-bear robbed of her cubs, gathering together and summoning to him the
sons of Belial, wicked ill-doers, and sons of the bad Dohet, who aye and
aye wrought evil from the day they were born of their mother's womb. 
Hacon then meant to come unawares upon the holy Magnus, to work out and
fulfil there and then his evil greed and the treachery which he already
long had kept harboured in his heart.  But the highest Heaven-king, who
from the everlasting beginning determined that he would keep that his
glorious chosen vessel among his treasures, saw in his chosen man still
some rust of worldly behaviour that was to be cleansed away.  For the
God would that he should be cleansed and purified within a few days with
the fire of suffering and insult, and with the frost of temptation and
much opposition, though there were no mortal sins to wash off him.  Then
would God increase his worthiness if aught were lacking in it, that in
the same proportion as his temptation and struggle were more and harder
so the glory and bliss of the conqueror should be higher and more
sublime.  For that, it so came about that the earls sent with messages
between them for peace and atonement their  most trusty counsellors, who
rightly betoken Chusi and Ahitophel, who brought about the atonement
between king David and Absolom his son when they had fallen out.  So at
last this matter, by the intervention of good men, was so settled, that
there an atonement was formed between those kinsmen in this wise, that
the earldom of the Orkneys, Caithness, and Shetland should be equally
divided between earls Magnus and Hacon;  neither of them was to attack
the other's realm with any greed.  When this agreement had been settled
and strengthened with oaths and hansels, then the earls met with the
kiss of peace.  But what saint Magnus thought to be peace, that Hacon
turned to guile and plotting;  and the longer he kept down the venom of
his badness, the more basely he spewed it up;  for his badness and
villainy came forth with great force at the time when he could no longer
hide it.  In the same way as boils on the face give a man by so much the
more pain as they be longer hidden in it, so fares it with all kinds of
badness;  the longer it festers in heart and mind, the grimmer it grows
to do harm.

21.        The holy Magnus then began again to rule his realm with peace
and joy for some time, and that is most in God's sight how holily he
lived in this biding-tide of his death;  how he clothed himself with
sublime force, and in forwarding all kinds of virtue, in prayers and
shedding of tears, and in repentance of heart, in chastity and
soberness, in almsgiving and all goodness towards his subjects, in
almsgiving and all goddness towards his subjects, in penance and
manifold sufferings which he bore on his body, and many more other good
deeds than sinful man can call to mind.  In the way in which God's
saints do, in that way saint Magnus made him ready for his martyrdom,
the telling of which we will next after this begin by God's will.

22.       When the aforesaid atonement and peace had been kept between
the earls for some winters, then Hacon showed himself a traitor, pouring
forth out of his breast great wrongfulness, which he had up to that time
held back.  Hearken how sooth is the judgment of the old poet so saying:
---- "Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas  Inpatiens consortis
erit, totum sitit illa."  Which says this:  "Never can fellowship in
this world's power be safe, for all rulers can bear no rivals, and will
alone have all."  By this ye may skill what kind of fruit guile brings
forth, and what growths spring up of greed.  All sins come of
covetousness, and all unlawful desires proceed from greediness.  That
was proved with Ahab the most wrongful king, who persecuted Elias the
prophet.  That was shown by the most wicked Judas, who sold our Lord for
a price.  The very same showed the traitor earl Hacon, both by examples
and plain proofs in that treachery by which he beguiled his kinsman earl
Magnus who trusted in him, though the events which led to their dealings
and quarrel happened in sundry ways.

23.       Two men were they with earl Hacon who are named as having been
the worst of all in going between those kinsmen;  the one's name was
Sigurd, and the other Sighvat sock.  Sigurd had a brother hight
Thorstein, who was the doughtiest follower of earl Magnus.  There were
many others who had a bad share in those matters, and these were all
with Hacon, for saint Magnus would not keep any backbiters in his
following.  These backbitings came to such a length that the earls drew
force together and fared each against the other with a very great
company.  They both held on for Hrossey, for that was the place of
meeting of the Orkneyingers.  But when they came thither, then either
side drew them up in array and busked them to battle.  Then there had
come together there all the great men with the earls, and many were
friends of both, who did all they could to set them at one, and went
between them with manliness and good will.  This meeting was in Lent. 
But for that many men their well wishers took part in hindering
difficulties between them, but would stand by neither to do the other a
mischief, then they bound this their agreement with oaths and handsels,
at the witness of the best men.  It was so settled that they should meet
in the spring at Egelsha (Egils-ey) after Easter.  At this meeting each
of the earls was to have two ships, and just as many men as the other. 
Both the earls bound that with oaths to have and to hold those terms of
agreement which the best men should settle to utter between them at that
meeting.  And when this had been done each fared back to his home
again.  This preliminary of agreement and concord liked the holy Magnus
right well, as he was thoroughly whole-hearted and of good conscience
without all mistrust.  But earl Hacon at this meeting had veiled his
treachery and covered it with the cloud of falsehood;  for he had made
this agreement with guile and treachery and full deceit, as was
afterwards proved;  for at that time Hacon and his band, who are rightly
called the treasury of hidden wickedness, together with his unworthy
thralls, had conspired together in the counsel of their badness for the
death and murder of the holy Magnus.  For that all evil is mighty and
right dear to shameful company, they determine among themselves that
this mischief shall now no longer be put off, and that now they will
thoroughly slake their cruel thirst in the out-shedding of innocent
blood.  But the highest Lord of all power took care for his dear friend
and chosen martyr that, as at that time ready for the kingdom of heaven,
he should be taken out of this life under the heavy flail of sharp
death.  As the grapes in the winepress by being trodden on and crushed
give off the purest wine in their season with great fragrance and sweet
savour;  so gave this the glorious martyr of God by reason of his death
to all the friends of God and his own, the heavenly sweetness of godly
mercy, from that glory and bliss which he hath obtained in the endless
joy of everlasting life with God and his saints.

24.       As soon as the holy time of Easter day was over, then each
side made them ready to this meeting in unlike wise.  The holy Magnus
summoned to him all those men whom he knew had the best good-will to do
a good turn to those kinsmen.  He had two longships manned with the
bravest men, just as many as were agreed on, and when he was boun he
held on for Egelsha.  But as they were rowing in still water and calm
weather, then there rose a billow close to the ship in which the earl
Magnus was, and broke over the ship where the earl sat.  The chief men
on board the ship of earl Magnus hight thus:  Thorstein, of whom we
spoke before, Arnkell, Grim, and Gilli, and many other doughty men. 
They wondered much at the hap that a billow fell on them in a calm where
no man had ever known a billow to fall before, and where the water under
was deep.  Then saint Magnus said:  "It is not strange though ye wonder
at this, but my thought is, that this hap is a foreboding of my life's
end;  may be that may happen here which was before spaed, that earl
Paul's son would work the greatest wickedness;  may be that Hacon is
plotting treachery against us at this meeting."  The men of earl Magnus
were much afraid at these words, when he said he had so short hope as to
his life's end, and bade him to shelter himself and be wary of his life,
and not go on trusting in earl Hacon.  Saint Magnus answers:  "I will of
a surety fare to this meeting as hath been agreed on, and bring no
reproach that I have broken my word on me for the sake of my foreboding
alone.  And may all be done after God's will as to our voyage.  But if I
may have any choice, then I would much rather thole wrong than do wrong
to another man.  So may God let my kinsman Hacon get forgiveness though
he may do wrong to me."

Now we must tell of earl Hacon that he summoned to him a great band of
warriors.  He had seven or eight warships all large, filled with men; 
all that company were well boun as though they were running out to
battle.  But when the force came together, the earl made it clear to his
men that that meeting should so settle matters between earl Magnus and
him that they should not thenceforth both of them be over the realm. 
Many of the earl's men, who might soothly be called the sons of the
Devil, showed themselves well pleased at this purpose, and added to it
many fearful words;  but they, Sigurd and Sighvat sock, were then still
among the worst in utterance, who aye and aye were egging on to ill. 
Then men fell to rowing hard, and they fared hotly and furiously. 
Havard Gunni's son, of whom we spoke before, ws then with earl Hacon, he
was a dear friend of both earls, Hacon had hidden this bad counsel from
Havard.  But as soon as ever he was aware of it, then he leaped
overboard from the earl's ship and swam to an isle where no man dwelt,
for he would not be a partner in any treachery with Hacon against the
holy Magnus.  That man was with earl Magnus who hight Holdbodi, a
truth-telling householder out of the Southern isles, he was one of the
dearest of earl Magnus' followers;  he was then hard by at all these
tidings, and has afterwards told most fully about all that befell and
all the discourse between earl Hacon and earl Magnus, as may now be
heard next after this.

25.       Earl Magnus the saint came to Egelsha with his men sooner than
earl Hacon.  And when they saw Hacon's eight warships then earl Magnus
thought he knew that foul play must be meant, and all men who had any
clear-sightedness, wondered how such a number of armed men could be
wanted for any peaceful purpose.  Would be revealed, then he went up on
the isle to the church to prayer;  and was there the night, not for
dread or fear's sake, but rather to commit to God all his case.  The men
of earl Magnus offered to defend him and to fight against earl Hacon,
but he answered so:  "I will not lay your life in peril for me, and if
peace cannot be set between us two kinsmen, then God's will be done; 
for I will rather thole hurt and treachery than use them against
others."  For this noble martyr, saying these things, well knew that all
guile and deceit recoil on him who does them.  Now his men thought that
came sooth which he had before said about the treachery of Hacon.  But
for that earl Magnus knew beforehand as to the duration of his life,
whether it were of his own wit or of godly foreshowing, so he would not
fly or fare far from the meeting of his foes, and he sought not the holy
church for other sake than that of faith.  Earl Magnus was awake long in
prayer through the night, and took heed for his soul's help and prayed
for it carefully;  he confided all his business and his own self into
God's hand.  Next morning he made them sing him mass, and in that mass
he received the Lord's Body.  And this his deed was needed for the
highest proof, that on that spot he should become the sacrifice of God,
as the helpful sacrifice of Our Lord Jesus Christ's body and blood was
offered up for the good of the whole world.  But earl Hacon, who at that
time was banished from all fear and love of God, dishonouring the
privileges of the Church, was not afraid to go into the holy church
violating thus her peace and freedom, so that he showed his wickedness
all the more grimly that he did it in a holier place.  For ever is sin
increased by ill deeds and evil by badness;  and the sinner, when he
comes into the deep of sins, throws off all fear of God, and the more he
is wont to sin, the more bold he gets, and the less he cares what ill he
doeth, for then he thinks it little worth however great his misdeeds may
be.  That same morning that earl Hacon had come up on the isle with his
evildoers, he sent four of his men, the worst of his servants, who were
most cruel and readiest to evil deeds, to seize earl Magnus wherever he
might be.  These four, who may rather be called for their cruelty the
most harmful wolves than reasonable men, ever thirsting for the
outshedding of blood, rushed into the church just about the end of the
mass.  They snatched at once earl Magnus the saint with great violence,
noise, and tumult out of the peace and bosom of holy church, as the
gentlest sheep out of the sheep-fold.  The holy one was holden of sinful
thralls, the righteous one was bound and dragged wrongfully by
wrong-doers, and led in that way before the covetous judge earl Hacon. 
But this the strong champion of God showed so much steadfastness in all
these sufferings, that his body neither quaked for fear, nor his heart
for dread or grief, for he left this thorny world with all its fruitless
flowers.  He looked that God would recompence to him his long-suffering
with an unspeakable crown;  but their cruelty and fury with endless
pangs in the hot fire of hell, for such unmanly evil and monstrous
covetousness.  He was as glad and merry when they laid hands on him as
if he were bidden to a banquet, and with such steadfast heart and soul
that he neither spoke to his adversaries with any bitterness, wrath, or
broken voice.

26.       When earl Magnus the saint was come before earl Hacon, he
spoke with much steadfastness to Hacon.  "Thou dost not well, kinsman,"
says he, "that thou holdest not thy oaths, and it is much to be looked
for that thou hast done this more by the ill will of others and their
egging on, than of thy own badness.  Now I will offer thee three
choices, that thou may'st take one of them rather than that thou
shouldst spoil thy oaths, and let me be slain thy kinsman, and guiltless
as some will say."  Earl Hacon said, "I will first hear then what thou
offerest."  Saint Magnus says, "This is the first choice, that I shall
fare away out of the land to Rome, or right out to Jerusalem, to seek
holy places, and so make amends for both of us twain;  I shall have two
ships out of the land manned with good men, and those necessaries which
we need to have.  I shall swear never to come to the Orkneys
afterwards."  That choice was quickly refused by Hacon and his men. 
Then said saint Magnus:  "Now for that our life is in your power, but I
know that I have been guilty in many things against all-ruling God, and
that I therefore need to make amends:  then send me up into Scotland to
the friends of both of us, and let me be kept in ward there with two men
for a passtime to me;  and see thou so to it that I may never come out
of that wardship without thy leave."  To this they said "Nay" quickly,
and found many reasons why it might not be.  Then this steadfast knight
said, "I am in a great strait about the choice," says he.  "Now is that
one alone left, which I will offer thee;  and God knows that about this
I look rather to the salvation of thy soul than to the life of my body; 
for after all it beseems thee less to quench my life.  Let me be maimed
in my limbs, or let my eyes be plucked out, and so set me in a dark
dungeon from which I may never come out."  Then said earl Hacon, "This
atonement I take, nor do I ask for aught more."  Then earl Hacon's men
jumped up and said To this we will not agree, to torture earl Magnus; 
but we will slay either one of you twain;  and ye two shall not from
this day forth both rule the lands."  Then says earl Hacon, "I will
rather rule the lands than die quickly, if ye are so stern in this
matter." --- So said Holdbodi of their parley.  After that saint Magnus
fell to prayers, and looked into the palms of his hands, and poured out
many tears in God's eyesight, giving his cause, his life, and himself
into the Lord's power.

27.        Next to this, when the holy friend of God, earl Magnus, was
done and doomed to death, then earl Hacon bade Ofeig his banner-bearer
to slay earl Magnus;  but he said "Nay" with the greatest wrath.  Then
earl Hacon forced his cook, whose name was Lifolf, to kill earl Magnus,
but he began to weep with a loud voice.  Then earl Magnus the saint
spoke and said to him, "Thou shalt not weep,"  says he, "for there is
fame for thee in doing such deeds.  Be thou of steadfast heart, for thou
shalt have my clothes, as is the wont and law of the men of old.  Thou
shalt not be afraid, for thou doest this by force, and he that forces
thee to do it hath greater sin than thou."  But when he had said this,
then he stripped off him his kirtle, and gave it to Lifolf.  After that
the blessed earl Magnus asked leave to say his prayers, and it was
granted him.  Then he fell flat on the earth and gave himself over into
God's power, bringing himself to Him as an offering.  Nor did he pray
for himself alone, but rather for his foes and banemen as well, and he
forgave them from all his heart what they had misdone towards him;  and
he confessed to God all his offences, and prayed that they might all be
washed off him by the outshedding of his blood;  and he commended his
soul into God's hand, praying God's angels to come to meet it, and bear
it into the rest of Paradise.  Then, when this famous martyr of God had
ended his prayers, he said to Lifolf, "Stand thou before me, and hew me
on the head a great wound, for it beseems not to behead chiefs like
thieves.  Strengthen thee, man, and weep not, for I have prayed God that
he will pardon thee."  After that earl Magnus signed himself with the
cross, and bowed him to the stroke.  But Lifolf hewed him on the head a
great blow with an axe.  Then earl Hacon said, "Hew thou a second
time."  Then Lifolf hewed into the same wound.  Then saint Magnus the
earl fell on his knees, and fared with this martyrdom from the
wretchedness of this world to the everlasting bliss of the kingdom of
heaven.  And this man whom the man-slayer took out of the world,
All-ruling God let rule with him in heaven.  His body fell to earth, but
his soul was loftily lifted up to the heavenly glory of the angels. 
That spot on which saint Magnus was smitten with stony and mossy;  but a
little after his worthiness towards God was revealed, so that since
there is there a green field, fair and smooth;  and God showed by this
token that earl Magnus was slain for righteousness sake, and that he had
gotten the fairness and greenness of Paradise on the land of the
living.  The death-day of earl Magnus the saint is two nights after the
feast of Tiburtius and Valerianus;  it was on the second day of the week
that the worthy earl Magnus was slain, three weeks after Lady Day \[Lady
Day, 25th of March, and St. Magnus' Day, April 16th.\] in Lent.  He had
then been twelve winters earl with Hacon.  Then were kings in Norway
Sigurd Jewry-farer, and his brothers Eystein and Olaf.  Then had passed
since the fall of saint Olaf Harold's son seventy-four \[The figures are
wrong both in the Orkneyingers Saga and here.  They should be
eighty-six.\] winters.  That was in the days of Pope Pascal the second
of that name, and of St. John bishop of Holar in Iceland."  To the
honour of earl Magnus the saint, Master Robert who has written the story
in Latin so speaks:

28.       "This day is revealed to us, dearest brethren, the death day
of the blessed earl Magnus the Martyr, his day of rest and everlasting
bliss.  Let us be glad and joyful on this high day, for that he craves
solemn good-will and special honour of us, who dwell by his halidom
\[From this it appears that Master Robert, who preached the sermon on
the day of the Saint's martyrdom, was an Orkneyinger.\] and under his
patronage and safe-keeping;  and let us look towards his worthiness. 
For that because of his sublime example and holy life, first bloomed in
the reagion of the realm of the Orkneys the fairest dispensations of
pure good will, and from the holiest decrees of this gloryful martyr
sprung manifold increase of the most seemly virtue.  He drove away the
throne of the lordship of the Devil out of the northern airt of the
world, and established in its stead the tabernacle of Almighty God.  He
withered and uprooted all ill weeds with his preaching, but let grow up
the fairest flowers and the sweetest corn crop of the most helpsome
growth.  He turned all the bitterness of the Orkneys into the seemliness
and sweetness of holy habits.  Today he conquered the world and the
world's lords, and he ascended a noble victor over the world, taking
from his holy master, our Lord Jesus Christ, a crown of glory.  Today he
was parted from all the weight of bodily weakness, faring through the
heavens, and he entered into bliss, having become like to holy men in
all glory.  Today he threw off the worldly garb of this changeful life,
uprising higher than human weakness may reckon;  and to him for that is
granted heavenly worship, honour and bliss before the eyes of all the
Saints.  He ascended in truth bright in worthiness, mighty in perfect
blessedness, gloriful from the most seemly victory.  This the exalted
martyr of God, the blessed earl Magnus, adorned with the crown of his
own blood, was tortured when there had passed from the incarnation of
Our Lord Jesus Christ one thousand one hundred and four years, \[It
should be sixteen.\] on a Monday, the sixteenth of the kalends of the
month of May.  Now, my dearest, let us cast away bodily lusts, and keep
us from the love of unlawful things, conquering and rising above the
attacks of blasphemy;  but let us follow the footsteps and life of this
the glorious martyr with all the strength of our minds, so far as our
feebleness may bring us.  Let us follow the ways of his life;  let us
hold to the pattern of his works, let us strive to be like his life,
though it be every day revealed and made plain --- by wondrous miracles
and great and glorious tokens, which Almighty God grants to the Northern
region for his noble intercession and famous worthiness, both on sea and
land, --- that his life and holy virtue is rather more praiseworthy and
wonderful than possible to be imitated by our weakness.  He appeared on
earth that he might became our guardian and intercessor for help and
mercy with Almighty God.  For this it beseems us who are weighed down
with the great load of our sins ever to pay him worship with the special
devotion of bounden obedience and honour, that this the exalted martyr
earl Magnus may deign to beseech for us with his worthiness and prayers
that we may attain to be partakers of the heavenly crown and everlasting
glory, which he obtained on the day of his martyrdom.  May Our Lord
Jesus Christ grant us this, who is honour and bliss, help and health,
gladness and glory of all his saints and righteous men;  who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost liveth and reigneth one God in three persons
world without end.  Amen."  Master Robert wrote this story in Latin to
the worship and honour of saint Magnus the isle-earl, when twenty
winters \[It is impossible to verify this date, but if it be correct
Master Robert must have written his life of St. Magnus in the year
1136.\] were passed from his martyrdom.

29.       Now we must take up the story and tell of those things which
were done after the death of saint Magnus the earl, that so great was
the cruelty and hardness of earl Hacon, and so great his wrath and fury
against the blessed Magnus, that he no less envied earl Magnus dead than
alive.  And though the fury and grimness of most men can be soothed
after an ill deed is done, still neither ill will nor envy was soothed
or sated in the heart of Hacon, for he forbids that earl Magnus should
be buried at the church like Christian men, but rather that he should be
there hidden in the ground where he was slain.

30.       It had been settled at the former meeting of the earls in
Hrossey, that when their agreement had been fully strengthened and made
steadfast after the judgment of the best men, which they had bound with
oaths, that both earls, when they fared from the meeting, which had been
fixed in Egelsha, should go to a feast in Paplay, to Thora the mother of
earl Magnus.  But now after the slaying and death of the earl, then earl
Hacon still went to the feast with his men.  There was the best of
banquets.  But when drink took hold on earl Hacon, then Thora went to
him and said thus: --- "Now art thou alone come here, lord, but I looked
for both of you twain, thee and earl Magnus my son.  Now be so with me
in my prayer, as thou wilt that all ruling God shall be to thee at
doomsday, that thou givest me leave that my son may be buried at
church."  Earl Hacon looked towards her and shed tears, and said, "Bury
thy son, woman, there where it liketh thee."  Saint Magnus was then
brought to church and buried at Birsay in Christchurch, which earl
Thorfinn his grandfather had let be built.  Then eftsoons a heavenly
light was seen to shine over his grave.  Afterwards men who were placed
in peril began to vow to saint Magnus the earl, and their need was
granted as they themselves prayed for it.  At the same time a heavenly
fragrance was perceived at his grave, and there sick men got their
health.  Next to that men made their voyage from the Orkneys and
Shetland who were past hope of cure, and watched over his tomb, and all
got healing for their hurts;  but still men dared not to spread the
miracles of earl Magnus much abroad while earl Hacon lived.  It is is so
said of those men who had been worst in going between the earls, and
were most in treachery against earl Magnus, that they most of them had
quick ends and a short life, and they died an ill death.         After
the slaying of of saint Magnus, Hacon Paul's son took under him all the
rule in the Orkneys;  he made then all men to take oaths of fealty to
him, even those as well who had before served earl Magnus.  Then he
became a great chief, and laid heavy burdens on the friends of earl
Magnus, whom he thought had been most against him in their dealings. 
Some winters after Hacon made him ready for a voyage out of the land; 
he fared south to Rome, and in that voyage he fared right out to Jewry,
as was then palmers' wont;  there he sought holy places, and bathed him
in the river Jordan.  After that he fared back to his own land, and took
under him the rule in the Orkneys.  He became then a good governor, and
kept his realm well at peace.  He laid down then new laws, which the
freemen liked far better than those which had been before.  By such
things his friendships began to wax many.  Then it came about that those
Orkneyingers desired nothing else than to keep earl Hacon in power in
the Orkneys, and his offspring.  And there we make an end of speaking of
Hacon in this book.

31.        The most merciful God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who bids and
leads his friends to everlasting bliss from all the misery of this
world, he the same who looses all those who creep with all their heart
to his mercy, from all the sins and defilement of this sorrowful world,
and makes out of the ignorant the wisest, of low and humble the most
famous, of poor the richest, of ignoble the most noble chiefs, not
indeed of this world's kingdom, but rather of the kingdom of heaven, and
of endless glory, as he did of old by Joseph the patriarch, who was led
out of the dark dungeon, and made at once lord and chief of all the
realm of Egypt --- he, the same who made David out of a shepherd's lad
the highest king over all the tribes of Israel, and led Judas Maccabeus
out of the starvation of the wilderness, that he might attain honour and
renown in victory, and such great glory that he was thought by far to
excel other men;  and Alexander the son of Philip, who was called the
Macedonian, for the sake of the hard mastership of Aristotle \[Here at
least one leaf in the MS. is lost.\]  \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
and furnished in all things, as might be most seemly.  Then the lord
bishop enshrined the halidom of the blessed earl Magnus with honour and
pomp, and the thanksgiving of the whole people;  and then all those were
healed who were in despair of health, and needing mercy, who had come
thither at that time to his halidom.  Saint Magnus the earl was
enshrined on the Feast of Lucy the Virgin, before Yule in the winter. 
And that day is worthily kept far and wide, both to saint Magnus and the
blessed maid of God Lucy;  but the day of his departure to the kingdom
of heaven is in spring.

32.       Now we have gone over, though it be less worthily than should
be, the story of the translation, proving, and enshrining of the halidom
of the blessed earl Magnus, and no less the law which was passed as to
his feast.  And it is to be borne in mind and marked that the Lord God
honours his bosom friends with divers privileges for their
righteousness, some here at once in this life, but others after life. 
But still those prerogatives among saints seem somewhat special and
preeminent which belong to Magnus the martyr of God.  This is to be
understood thus, that when one of his bones was proved at home in the
Orkneys, it turned into the fairest mark of the cross in the eyesight of
men who stood by.  Another mark is this, that this very same cross of
bone was turned afterwards to the brightest hue of gold before the lord
Pope himself in Rome.  Wherefore he takes this the purple martyr into
the catalogue of saints;  but that has been granted to few others in the
North lands, that he (the Pope) himself has done this.  For this we may
behold and wonder, though no man may understand it as it is, how mighty
the all ruling God is in the riches and depth of his mercy;  for he
grants these gifts of love to some of his friends which he doth not
grant to others, and shares them between them in the way that he will; 
and never faileth, though he give the gifts of the Holy Spirit to each
of them.  Therefore be his name eternally praised and blessed for ever
and ever, Amen.

33.       From that time the working of miracles of saint Magnus the
earl was noised and spread far and near over all the western lands, and
the north region of the world;  and men fared from nearlying lands,
burgs, and towns, castles and hundreds, with great hearts and offering
hands to seek his halidom;  but some sent money towards his holy shrine
as an honour to him, but as a means of healing soul and body for
themselves, both in this world and the other.  For that shall here next
be told some miracles, though they be few, of the countless ones which
God grants for his worthiness.

34.       When goodman Bergfinn from the north of Shetland, who was
before named in this matter, \[i.e., in the lost leaves.\] heard these
joyful tidings of the translation of saint Magnus the earl, then he
fared a second time from the north of Shetland with his leprous son,
whose name was Halfdan, to Kirkwall, and they both watched, that father
and son, at the halidom of earl Magnus.  But the saint of God appeared
to Halfdan, and passed his hands over his body, and on the spot all
leprosy fell off him.  Then he arose as whole.  Saint Magnus the earl
also showed himself to goodman Bergfinn in sleep, and said to him, "Now
shalt thou take clear sight, for now hast thou fared hither with right
faith, and not doubted my holiness, and offered me fair vows, both in
prayers and fee-gifts."  Then he made the mark of the cross over
Bergfinn's eyes, and he awoke as sharpsighted as when he had been
sharpest-sighted, and both father and son fared home whole, praising God
and saint Magnus the
earl.                                                                                        
              Thorkell hight a man who abode in the Orkneys, he fell off
his barley-rick and was all lamed on his other side on which he fell on
the earth.  He was borne to the saint earl Magnus, and there he got
speedy cure of his hurts, in healed broken bones, and strengthened
body.  He thanked God and saint Magnus for his healing
gift.                                                                                   
Amundi Illugi's son hight a man, a goodman north from Shetland, he was
leprous and very sick.  He fared to earl Magnus the saint, and watched
at his shrine, and begged him for mercy and cure.  But as he slept then
Magnus the isle-earl appeared to him, and passed his hands over his
body, and gave him healing so speedily that he woke up quite whole;  and
he gave thanks to God for his cure, and to the merciful
Magnus.                                                               
Sigurd Tandri's son hight a man, he abode in Shetland at that farm which
is hight the Dale;  he became mad, so that he was sewn up in hide.  This
man was brought to saint Magnus the earl, and there he got his wit and
full health, and he fared thence quite whole, praising God and the saint
earl
Magnus.                                                                       
                                              Another man hight Sigurd,
from the north of Shetland;  he had cramped hands, so that all the
fingers lay in the palms.  He sought the halidom of the saint earl
Magnus, and there he got his cure with straight and lissom fingers for
all his needs.  He thanked God for the mercies which had been shown him
for the worthiness of earl
Magnus.                                                               
There was a man hight Thorbjorn Olaf's son, from the north of Shetland,
he was devil-mad and witless.  He was brought to the shrine of St.
Magnus the earl, and he became at once whole, and he fared to his own
home, praising and blessing God, and this his blissful
martyr.                                                 Thord hight a
man who was also called "dragonbeak," hireling of the aforesaid goodman
Bergfinn.  He thrashed corn in the barley barn the next day before the
mass-day of saint Magnus the earl.  But when it was about nones in the
day, then Bergfinn bade him to leave off working.  "Tis not very often,"
said Thord, "that thou thinkest overmuch work is done."  Bergfinn said,
"The highday that cometh tomorrow we are bound to keep with all the
reverence that we may and can."  Then Bergfinn went away, but Thord
worked on as before.  But when a short time was over, then Bergfinn went
out the second time, and said to Thord in great wrath,  "It mislikes me
very much that thou workest in holy times;  but leave off at once on the
spot."  Then the goodman went away very wrath, but Thord worked on as
before.  But when men were about full at supper, then in came Thord in
workaday clothes, and fell at once to drinking greedily.  And when he
had drunk one horn of liquor, then he became mad, so that men had once
to throw him into bonds, and he went on so for six days.  Then goodman
Bergfinn vowed for him to give a half a mark of silver towards the
shrine of saint Magnus the earl, and to let Thord watch there three
nights if he became whole.  But Thord got back his health the next night
after the vow was made for him;  and all praised the highest King of
heaven, and this his worthy bosom friend saint Magnus the
earl.                                                                                                 

It is said again that two men broke gold from off the shrine of saint
Magnus the earl, one of them was a Caithness man, and the other an
Orkneyan.  But that Caithness man was lost and drowned in the Pentland
Firth, and his name was Gilli.  But the Orkneyan became mad, and he said
in his ravings what they had done.  Then a pilgrimage to Rome was vowed
for him if he got whole.  After that he was brought to earl Magnus the
saint, and a vow was made for his cure, and he became whole on the spot,
and praised God and saint Magnus the
earl.                                                                                             

Asmund hight a man.  On his head fell a great log, and crushed his
skull, but the oftnamed goodman Bergfinn vowed for him;  and lots were
cast whether it should be vowed for him to go on a pilgrimage to Rome,
or to give money to the church of Magnus.  But the lot came up that he
should seek the halidom of earl Magnus the saint.  Then he got back at
once his speech which he had before lost.  After that he fared to saint
Magnus the earl, and watched there and got the full cure of his hurts. 
But goodman Bergfinn gave earl Magnus half a mark of silver weighed as
he had vowed.                         

There was a woman hight Sigrid;  she was daughter of Sigurd of Sand,
from the north of Shetland.  She was blind from blate babyhood \[i.e.,
from "tender years."\] till she was quite twenty.  Her father carried
her south to the Orkneys, and let her watch at the shrine of saint
Magnus the earl.  e offered there much money.  Sigrid got there clear
sight in both her eyes, and that father and daughter fared thence,
blessing and praising God and earl Magnus the
saint.                                                                                                

 There was yet another woman hight Sigrid, daughter of Arnfrid, from the
north of Shetland, from that farm which is called Unst.  Her leg broke
into two bits, and she was carried to saint Magnus the earl, and she got
speedy cure, and thanked God and earl Magnus the
saint.                                             

Yet a third woman hight Sigrid, from the north of Shetland out of Unst. 
She was at board with that householder whose name was Thorlak;  he abode
at Bollastede.  Sigrid was sewing about evening before the feast of
saint Magnus the earl, after that other men had kept it holy.  Thorlak
asked why she worked so long, but she said she was just going to stop. 
The goodman went away then, but she sewed as before.  Then came Thorlak
the second time to her, and said, "Why dost thou so ill at such a holy
time?  Go away now, and work no longer in my house."  She said it was a
very little fault, and sewed on as before till it was dark night.  But
when men busked them to meat, then Sigrid fell mad, so that she had to
be thrown at once into bonds, and was hardly held until Thorlak vowed
for her, and cast lots whether she should go to Rome or give goods to
saint Magnus the earl.  And that lot came up that she was to go to
Kirkwall to the halidom of earl Magnus the saint.  And afterwards she
was borne thither, and got there the sublime gift of healing for her
loss of wit, and she praised God and his exalted knight earl Magnus; 
but still she fared afterwards to Rome for her (soul's) help.           

 Groa hight a woman out of Hrossey;  she was devil mad, and fared to
Kirkwall to saint Magnus the earl, and there she got good health, and
praised God and the earl saint Magnus.                             
                                         

Ragnhild hight a woman;  she was a cripple when she was four winters
old, and all up to the time she was twenty.  Then she watched three
nights at the halidom of St. Magnus the earl.  And on the third night
there appeared to her in her sleep a bright man and a noble and fairly
clad, and said to her, "Ever and oft hast thou lain here, great is thy
need;  rise thou up now, and be whole, and bear this staff in thy
hand."  After that he vanished from her.  But she woke;  then she had
hold on the lock that was on the aumbry which was on the other side of
the choir of Magnus' (church).  (She) rose up at once quite whole, as
though she had never been bent, with straight legs and sinews, praising
God and saint Magnus the earl.  She was with the bishop many
winters.                              
                                                              
          

Asa hight a woman;  she had been all her days a cripple, but she got
such a sublime cure of her health from the blessed earl Magnus, that she
walked to Rome the same summer that she became whole.
                                                                   

Gudrun hight a woman;  she was a cripple a long time of her life.  She
got quick healing of her hurt and full cure from the worthiness and
intercession of earl Magnus the saint, and praised God and his bosom
friend earl
Magnus.                                                                                                           
          

Sigurd hight a man;  he was an almsman from Knotsand.  He was so very
weakly that he crawled on his knees, and could not stand upright.  He
became quite whole at the shrine of earl Magnus;  he praised God and
saint
Magnus.                                                                                                           
        

Two men from the Southern isles cast dice for silver, and one of them
lost a hundred marks;  then all his goods were at an end, save one barge
that he had left.  Then he laid the barge against all the goods which he
had lost.  Then he threw that had won before two sixes.  The then the
other vowed a vow to earl Magnus the saint for help that he might get
back his goods.  After that he cast, and there turned up six on one of
the dice, but the other split asunder into two bits, and there were
seven spots on both the bits together and thirteen on the three, and so
he won all his goods.                  

That event happened in Norway in the days of Harold Gilli, that some
powerful and high and mighty men laid it against two brothers that they
meant to beguile their kinswomen.  But this charge was not sooth.  But
for all that those powerful men fell on them and laid hands on them,
carrying them to the wood away from other men, and slew him against whom
they gave it out that he was most guilty.  After that they took the
other, and dealt him many and great tortures with great cruelty, so far
that they broke asunder both his legs and his arms too.  After that
those cruel men stabbed out both his eyes, therewith cutting the tongue
away out of his head, and parting from him in such unmanly wise that
they fared away, but he lay there half dead.  Speedily after they were
away, many wolves rushed out of the wood, rending and tearing the flesh
off the bones of him that lay slain, and after that fairing back into
the wood.  But of the wounded one it is to be said that albeit he could
not with his tongue pray for mercy, he still bethought him all at once
that Almighty God might grant him some help.  Especially he turned his
thoughts thither where the earl saint Magnus was, for in that time his
miracle-making flourished most of all.  And when he had vowed his vow he
became aware that a man has come to him, who passes his hands over his
broken legs and arms.  Therewith he takes the stump of the tongue and
brings it to its place at last;  afterwards he lays his hands on the
eye-sockets.  But with this handling wondrous changes came about;  the
eyes were reset with clear sight, the tongue is become useful for all
utterance, the broken limbs were healed, and all his former health
restored to him.  He sees standing by him a man fair of face, to whom he
thus speaks: --- "What is thy name most noble lord?"  The bright man
answers, "Here is earl Magnus, but mind well to keep what thou hast
vowed to God."  At this he was full of joy, and so speaks the second
time: --- "For that, sublime friend of God, that thou hast granted me a
great gift of healing.  I pray again of thy mercy that thou beggest life
for my brother from God."  After he had so spoken the saint earl Magnus
vanished from his sight, answering nothing to the prayer mentioned.  But
that man falls forward, and thanks God for the mercy shown him, meaning
to abide there in that spot two nights in steadfast prayer to help his
brother.  But as time went by he looks around, and sees a flock of many
wolves running out of the wood to where the carcase of the departed one
lay, and there they spew up all that they had eaten of his flesh and
bones, and turn back after that into the wood.  And when a little time
is passed he sees saint Magnus come, and he blesses with his right hand
the whole mass together, the wolves' spew and the bones.  Next to this
the body becomes quite whole by these means.  Saint Magnus blesses the
breathless body a second time, for the sake of which he that before was
slain rose up whole and living, and goes to his brother.  Then each of
them greeted the other, giving thanks to God and to saint Magnus the
earl for such ready mercy as was shown them.  So let also all hearing
such great works yield manifold praise to the true God who grants such
great things to sinful men for the prayers and worthiness of his most
beloved bosom friends.

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Short Magnus Saga](is309)
