[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](is323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

F. --- THE SAGA OF EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.

 

EDWARD'S SAGA.

 

         The saint king Edward in England was the son of Ethelred the
son of Edgar, who was the first sole king over England.  Of him heard
saint Dunstan the bishop the songs of angels in the air when he was
born, with that token that in his days holy Christianity would find
peace and prosperity in England.  The mother of saint Edward was queen
Emma, daughter of Richard, duke of Normandy;  she was sister of Robert
who was called "the Devil";  he left the dukedom and went into hermit's
life.  Saint Edward loved straightway in his youth holy church and
prayers, to visit cloisters, and to love those monks whom he thought
holiest and most virtuous;  and also to give noble alms to those who
were poor and needy.  He had always invocations to Almighty God and his
saints in his prayers;  but he still honoured most of all after God our
Lady, the holy Mary.  Next he had the apostle Peter as his special
foster-father, and John the Evangelist as the guardian of that pure life
which he kept all his days;  for so say men thoroughly learned in the
matter that those three maids whom he took as his wives, one after the
other, kept their virginity at his persuasion all their lives.  But
after Robert, his mother's brother, who had sundered himself from rule,
William his son took the dukedom in Normandy, who was called "bastard"; 
but for all that he was the son of a lawful wife, and his mother's name
was Gunnhilda, daughter of king Edgar, and sister of king Ethelred;  but
all the dukes in Normandy before him were sons of concubines, and for
that he was called "bastard," like all his forefathers.  They made peace
between them William the bastard and Baldwin the gentle count of
Flanders, and the count gave his word to give him his daughter Matilda. 
And when the duke came to the count's house to see the maiden, and he
spoke to her blithely, and called her his "Amie," then the lady answers
"Mad art thou, tramp, when thou thinkest that I, come of a king's stock,
could wish to be wedded to a bastard."  Then this young duke waxed
wrath, and took her by the hair, and felled her to the earth, and trode
her under foot, so speaking "I am not a bastard save by nickname." 
After that he jumped on his horse and rode away in haste.  The count and
his wife comforted the maiden, and prmised her that they would wed her
within a month to a duke of Saxony.  The maiden answers "To no one will
I be wedded in my life save to him to whom I was promised, for to my
mind no one can be compared to him."  After that the count and his wife
sent men after the duke to call him back.  The duke thought that they
would take him back by force, and for that he hewed one of them asunder
at the waist at one blow.  But they said that the count meant him naught
but good, and confirmed that on their word.  Then the duke turned back
with them to the castle, and the count made him good cheer, and at that
meeting he made Matilda, his daughter, the betrothed bride of the duke,
and kept their bridal with the greatest pomp.  And after that the duke
fared home to Normandy.

2.            Now we must tell of the saint king Edward that all
Christains in England were glad at that freedom which they had got,
after king Canute the mighty and his sons, in taking Edward as king, who
was come from the rightful and old royal race in England;  for that in
his crown holy church got freedom, and great men advancement, and the
whole people peace and liberty, vikings and robbers lowering and
chastisement.  Many things were remarkable in his life as to his tokens
and prophecies, though we can tell few of them for lack of knowledge,
and because we are so far off. (1)

         It befell on a Whitsunday, in Peter's Church, at Westminster,
when saint Edward was hearing high mass there, clad in his full royal
robes, that when the priest lifted up our Lord's Body, such a burst of
laughter came upon him that all wondered who were by.  After the mass
men asked him, the king what was the cause of that strange laughter. 
"The king of the Danes" answers the king, "was busking him with a
countless host and a multitude of ships to harry our land, and just as
he was stepping up into his ship from a boat, then he fell overboard and
was drowned by God's rightful doom."  Then messengers were sent most
speedily to Denmark, and all this was proved to be true tha the king had
spoken.  But because this Dane-king is not named, then learned men in
the king of Norway's realm think they cannot know for a surety who this
king was;  except that according to the words of Gizur Hall's son, one
of the wisest men in Iceland, it is said that this king must have been
Sweyn, son of king Canute the mighty and Alfifa.

         It so befell again on a third day of Yule, on the feast of John
the Evangelist, as the king walked in the procession, clad in his royal
robes, then he saw by him as it were a pilgrim come from Jerusalem in a
fair garb, and that pilgrim begged the king to give him something;  but
the king said he had nothing there that he could give him, "Give me
something," said the pilgrim, "for the sake of that holy man whom thou
lovest most."  Then the king called to mind John the Evangelist whose
feast was then kept and gave the pilgrim his coronation ring, and then
the pilgrim went away.  Next night after saint John was revealed to a
noble captive Englishman, who had been nine winters a captive to the
Saracens, and bade him tell the king of the English that it was John the
Evangelist himself who had appeared to him on his highday, and bade him
give the king his ring as a token that this was true, and that he might
the less doubt what he said.  Then saint John bore him at one swoop and
in a short time back to England to his own estates, and he was soon
known by his wife, children, kinsmen, and housefolk;  and he rested that
day by them.  But the morning after he fared to the king, and told the
king, so that all men might hear who were in the house, those words
which saint John had bidden him to tell the king.  He told also exactly
how saint John had borne him and set him free in a moment from the grim
thraldom of the Saracens.  This all wondered at who heard, and men
especially kindled by this unheard of event to praise and love towards
saint John the Apostle and Gospeller, and to saintly obedience towards
the saint king Edward.

         It was on a time on Easterday at Westminster, as the saint king
Edward sat at the board, crowned in the midst of many chiefs;  but these
were the most noble ---- earl Harold and a bishop and a mighty abbot. 
The king cared more for heavenly than earthly things, so that he saw as
in glass those wonderful things which brought on him loud laughter.  And
when the boards had been cleared the chiefs asked at what he had
laughed.  And so when they had long asked, then he answers.  The Seven
Sleepers who rested on the Cælian Hill (2) have now lain two hundred
years on their right sides;  but when I took to laughing they turned on
their left sides, and so must they lie there four and eighty years.  And
this is to mark the great lucklessness of mortal men, for in these four
and eighty years those things will happen which God hath foretold, and
which must be towards the world's end, that nation will rise against
nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be great
earthquakes and pestilences, famines, and terrors in the heavens;  for
now will arise strife and war between heathen and Christian men;  but
the Christian men will win by turns the victory over heathen men."  Many
things saint Edward told them, which they wondered how he could know,
both of the martyrdom of the Seven Sleepers and of their aspect, and
most of things which stand written down before of them in no book;  and
he told them so exactly as though he had often stood by the Seven
Sleepers.  But those chiefs who heard that and were named before, Harold
and the bishop and the abbot, sent their messengers --- the earl a
knight, the bishop a clerk, and the abbot a monk ---- to the emperor at
Micklegarth.  They had with them letters and presents from king Edward
to the emperor in Micklegarth.  The emperor of Micklegarth received them
worthily, and sent them to the bishop of Ephesus with his letters, which
the Greeks called "sacram," that he should show the king of England's
messengers the bodies of those holy Seven Sleepers.  And the bishop did
so, and all was proved to the messengers just as the saint king Edward
had told them.  The Greeks too said they were ready to swear that their
forefathers had said that the Seven Sleepers lay on the right side; but
now, as was proved for the sake of the messengers of those English
chiefs, they lay on the left side.  After that happened speedily what
king Edward had foretold of strife and other troubles in the world;  for
Hagarenes, Arabs, and Turks raised great strife in Syria, Lycia, and
Asia Minor, and wasted there many towns, Ephesus and Jerusalem seven
years;  and after that next in other seven years three Popes died,
Victor, Stephen, Nicholas.

4.            Once on a time on a great highday when king Edward heard
mass, and a bishop stood near.  And when the body of our Lord was lifted
up it seemed to the king as though it were a young swain very fair.  He
pointed this out to the bishop as it appeared to the king and him, but
to no more of those who were near.

         It befell on another time that king Edward sat on his throne,
and that a cripple lay before the door of his lodging and said thus,
that Peter the Apostle had sent him thither, and so spoken that the king
himself should bear him to Peter's church, and then he would be a whole
man.  But when this was told to king Edward he went to him, and heard
himself from his mouth those his words.  And for his faith and
humbleness sake, then he took the cripple up in his arms and bore him to
Peter's church in London, and set him down there.  Then the cripple was
made whole and upright as a leek.  All praised God who saw these
miracles.

         It so befell once on a time when king Edward sat at the board
that three men came into his lodging, and two were blind but one had one
eye, but yet saw little with that.  They begged the king to have pity on
them, and told him their ailments.  King Edward bade them bring him the
water in a bason in which he had washed his hands after meat, and bade
them stroke their eyes with it.  And when they had done this they were
whole on the spot, and went away joyfully, and had for the king's
holiness got five eyes.  In the same way men got cured from the water in
which he washed his hands, and when he passed his hands over them who
were sick.

5.            At that time when two of king Edward's lawful wives were
dead, who both had kept their virginity at his exhortation, he took to
him the third, and she was a daughter of earl Godwin, Ulfnad's son, a
sister of Harold and Tosti and the other sons of Godwin.  Then that
kinsfolk took great honours in England, and they all had the best
earldoms in England.  So say the English men that Harold Godwin's son
has been the boldest man found in England, and that he was the best
knight both of new and old time.  King Edward had a young brother by the
same mother;  but we cannot name the lad's father, but still he was a
noble chief.  But this lad was called next to the kingdom in England
after Edward if he should die sonless.  But when earl Godwin was aware
of this from his daughter that she kept her virginity at the exhortation
of king Edward, and they could have no son to take the realm after him,
then he would lay his plans so that Harold his son should become king,
who was then thought the man of most mark of all the English chiefs. 
And about that time the king's brother took a sudden sickness and died,
and there was then much talk what it was that brought this scathe on the
lad. ---- It was on a highday that king Edward sat at his board, and
earl Godwin sat on one side of him, and on the other sat a bishop.  And
when a man bore in meat before the king, his foot tripped and stumbled
as about to fall, but then he stamped down his other foot, and so
steadied himself.  Then earl Godwin took to speaking, and said, "There
now brother helped brother." (3) "My brother" answers the king "will not
help me so," says he.  "May God," answers Godwin, "so let me thrive on
this morsel which I now eat, as I had no hand in thy brother's death,
though thou art ever misdoubting me of it."  After that he took the
morsel from the dish and meant to eat it.  But the king took him by the
arm at the wrist, and stretched it out to the bishop and said, "Lord
bishop, bless."  The bishop did so.  After that earl Godwin put the bit
into his mouth and ate, but when he wished to swallow it the bit stuck
in his throat, so that it neither went up nor down, and of that he died
there and then, and was dragged out of his highseat backwards, and
thrown to birds of prey.  But still he was buried afterwards at church
by the prayers of his friends and kinsfolk.

6.            King Edward made up his mind after that that he thought
duke William the bastard was next to the kingdom in England after him,
both for this cause that he was come from the kings of the English, and
because of the near kinship which was between them.  Once on a time when
Edward had a conference with all the greatest chiefs, he made all take
an oath to him;  first the sons of Godwin, and all the rest after them,
that they would take no king after him but William the bastard.  But it
was a little after that Harold Godwin's son fared on some business of
his own south over the sea, and could not get back for the sake of foul
winds.  Then he came to visit duke William, and stayed with him awhile. 
Then he took an oath to William also that he would not hold the realm
against him when they lost king Edward.  It is also some men's story
that then he betrothed a daughter of the duke, and broke himself those
bonds.

         When king Edward had ruled England three and twenty years he
was seated in London.  Then he took sickness at Yule, and calls to him
many chiefs, and again gave it out that William was to be king after him
in England.  But when the sickness began to press him so that he had
little voice left, men say that Harold stooped over him and called men
to witness afterwards that the king had given him the kingdom after him
in England.  King Edward died a little after and was buried in London in
Paul's church.  He shone by miracles straightway after his death as he
did before, and lay in earth till saint Thomas the archbishop translated
him and let them lay him in a worthy shrine.

7.            For that Harold, Godwin's son, was of great family in
England, and a very proper man in himself, but the rulers of the land
thought it hard to come under the rule of outlandish lords, then they
took Harold to be king, and he was consecrated under the crown as the
custom was of English chiefs.  In this design his brother Tosti had no
share, but he was older, and so he thought himself nearer to the
kingdom.  Then he went to meet his brother Harold and claimed to be even
with him, but when Harold said "nay" to that, then he fared out of the
land and fled to Denmark to find king Sweyn, Wolf's son, his kinsman,
and bade him fare to England and win the land under his rule "as the
Dane kings of old had done."  But Sweyn was not ready to do that.  Then
Tosti fared north into Norway and egged on king Harold, Sigurd's son, to
fare to England and win the land under him.  And that same summer those
two, king Harold and Tosti, fared to England with a host and slew
Morcar, Godwin's son, but earl Gurth his brother fled out of the
battle.  But a few nights afterwards they fought at Stamford-bridge with
king Harold Godwin's son, and there they both fell, Harold and Tosti, as
is said in the annals of the kings of Norway.

         When William heard of the death of king Edward, and that Harold
had let himself be chosen king in England, it liked him very ill, and he
thought Harold had broken his oath and agreement with him;  then
straightway he summoned all the chiefs he could get and a mighty host
beside.  He made ready that force for England.  He came there just at
the time when the two Harolds had fought.  Then he began to harry the
land where he made the coast, and laid it under him wherever he went. 
But when Harold, Godwin's son, heard that he fared against him, and
their meeting was south by Helsingport, and either side had a very great
host;  then earl Gurth spoke to his brother Harold and said, "I am
afraid that it will not answer for thee to hold a battle against duke
William because thou art bound by oaths to him, and thou hast sworn not
to hold England against him."  King Harold answers, "May be brother thou
art better fitted to fight with William, but I have not been wont to lie
in a lair when other men have fought, and William the bastard shall not
hear this that I dare not look him in the face."  After that king Harold
made them set up his banner before him and went out to battle against
William, and there was the greatest battle, and it seemed uncertain a
long time which side would win the victory.  But as the fight went on
the loss of men turned on the English side, and a great host fell there,
and all fled who chose life.  There fell king Harold and his brother
Gurth, but Valtheof their brother fled out of the fight.  William the
bastard caused him to be burnt afterwards in a wood, and a hundred men
with him.

         It is the story of Englishmen that in the night after the
battle of William and Harold some friends of king Harold fared to the
battlefield and looked for his body, and found him alive, and bore him
off to be healed;  he was cured in secret.  And when he was whole he
would not strive with William for the kingdom.  And it is the story of
many men that he has lived on all up to the days of Henry the old. (4)

9.            William the bastard laid under him all England, and made
himself be taken to be king and consecrated under the crown;  so he
became the greatest prince.  But for all that his rule was very hateful
to many men and chiefs in England;  and then the English chiefs who
would not serve William send messages to Sweyn Wolf's son, the
Dane-king, that he should come to England with a host of Danes, and they
would fight against William, and come under king Sweyn.  But when
William heard of those messages, then he sent south (?) to Denmark
Godwin the young, Godwin's son, (5) and along with him a famous bishop. 
They fared with he should not harry in his realm.  And for that same
king Sweyn was turned back from faring with a host to England.  And so
it went on for some years that William sent the Dane-king gifts, and so
saved his kingdom.  And that is what the Danes rest on when they say
that king Sweyn has ruled England after Hardicanute and Edward the good.

10.       When the English chiefs were sure that the Danes would not
help them against William --- but they had made up their minds that they
would not abide under his rule --- then they left their estates and fled
away from the land with a great host.  There were three earls and eight
barons who were their leaders, and the formost of them was Sigurd earl
of Gloucester.  But they had three hundred and fifty ships, and aboard
them a great force many picked men.  They fared first south over the
sea, and afterwards west off Mathewsness, and so further off
Galicia-land, and thence they fared to Norva-sound and further across
the sound to that capital which is called Septem.  They made an
onslaught on the city and got it won;  they slew there a host of heathen
men, but took so much fee in gold and silver that it was more even than
what they had taken away with them from England;  and yet that was very
great, because they had turned into money all the estates that they had
in England.  Thence they held on east through Norva-sound and came to
the isles, and won both of them, Majorica and Minorea.  After that they
fared to Sicily.  And when they were come there then they heard great
strife out of Micklegarth, and how heathen folk beleaguered the city
both by sea and land.  Then Kirjalax the tall was emperor, and had just
come to power.  That was some winters after the fall of king Harold,
Godwin's son.  But when the Englishmen heard of strife out of
Micklegarth they looked for great advancement, for of a long time ere
that the Northmen had very great honour who went into service there. 
Thence they held on east over the sea, and so north to Micklegarth, and
came to the city in the night, but the stars gave some light.  They ran
into battle at once against those who lay on ship board;  and there
arose the greatest fight, and those who lay before the city had much the
greater host.  But the Englishmen ran in so bravely that they got to
board those ships that lay outermost and lay furthest from the land and
the city walls, but they cleared each ship as they went on, and the
crews were slain, though some jumped overboard.  Some too jumped on
board other ships, and so the flight fared from ship to ship till they
had won all the ships that did not fly away.  That folk which came to
land ran to the tents, and said that an invincible host had come against
which no wight could raise a shield.  Then all who were in the tents
sprang up, and no other plan was taken than that each fled as he stood
with what he could lay hold of.  But in the morning when it was light
the folk of the city saw that all that host was gone which beleaguered
the town;  but that many ships had come and rigged altogether otherwise
than those which had been there before.  Then the men of the city sent
men to the shipmen.  And after that they had a meeting with the king,
and he took wonderfully well to them, and thanked them for that great
victory which they had won to give him peace and safety.  They stayed a
while in Micklegarth, and set the realm of the Greek king free from
strife.  King Kirjalax offered them to abide there and guard his body,
as was the wont of the Varangians who went into his pay, but it seemed
to earl Sigurd and the other chiefs that it was too small a career to
grow old there in that fashion, that they had not a realm to rule over; 
and they begged the king to give them some towns or cities which they
might own and their heirs after them.  But the king thought he could not
strip other men of their estates.  And when they came to talk of this,
king Kirjalax tells them that he knew of a land lying north in the sea,
which had lain in old under the emperor of Micklegarth, but in after
days the heathen had won it and abode in it.  And when the Englishmen
heard that they took a title from king Kirjalax that that land should be
their own and their heirs after them if they could get it won under them
from the heathen men free from tax and toll.  The king granted them
this.  After that the Englishmen fared away out of Micklegarth and north
into the sea;  but some chiefs stayed behind in Micklegarth, and went
into service there.                                                 
         Earl Sigurd and his men came to this land, and had many battles
there, and got the land won, but drove away all the folk that abode
there before.  After that they took the land into possession, and gave
it a name, and called it England.  To the towns that were in the land
and to those which they built they gave the names of the towns in
England.  They called them both London and York, and by the names of
other great towns in England.  They would not have St. Paul's law, which
passes current in Micklegarth, but sought bishops and other clergymen in
Hungary.  The land lies six days and nights' sail across the sea in the
east and northeast from Micklegarth;  and there is the best of land
there;  and that folk has abode there ever since.  Explicit.

 

\_\_\_\_\_\_

1.            "Which truthful men have written in books, but for lack of
knowledge we know hardly what happened first or last in his days, and so
we tell that first which we think most worth telling."

2.            Here the writer places one of the hills at Rome at
Ephesus.

3.            An allusion to the story of Erp, Sörli, and Hamdir in the
Younger Edda.

4.            Fl. gives this more minutely.  "And when he was made
whole, then it was offered him by his friends to make war on William,
and get the land whatever it cost.  But king Harold would not do that,
and said he understood that God in the kingdom of heaven would not grant
him the realm.  And after all, may be it is better so.  Then the king
took a better plan to give up this world's honour, and went into a cell
and was a hermit while he lived, so serving Almighty God unceasingly
both night and day."  Comp. Hemings story.

5.            Fl. "the son of earl Baldwin."

 

 

 

 
