[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](is321)  [Next](is323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

D. ---- HELGI AND WOLF.

 

(From the Flatey Book.)

 

         Earl Sigurd Hlodver's son ruled over the Orkneys, he was a
great chief.  There was a man named Wolf the bad, he abode in Sanday in
the Orkneys, he was a great warrior and followed (did not belie) his
name.  There was a man named Harold who abode in North Ronaldshay;  the
name of his son was Helgi, he was a man of promise and fair of face.  He
spoke to his father and said, "I would thou wouldst find me in ships,
for I wish to harry in Scotland's firths, and see what comes of it."  He
answers, "That I may well do, for that is young men's wont."  After that
Helgi harried, and behaves well in his warfare;  though he were a
heathen, yet then they (the heathens) were not all alike.  And when
Helgi was away out of the Orkneys, then Wolf the bad goes to North
Ronaldsay and meets Harold, and said, "I would like to buy thy lands,
they fall much to my mind;  but I will give thee ready money for them." 
Harold says he would not sell him his estates, and says he does not know
what he should do if he had not his board and lodging there.  Wolf says
that he thinks the next time he comes, that he (Harold) will have to
give up what was asked.  After that they parted.  A few nights
afterwards, came Wolf unawares, and took Harold prisoner, and says he
thinks that things had taken such a turn now that he will lose both
lands and life.  And after that Wolf lets him be slain.  This deed was
ill spoken of, and when earl Sigurd heard of it, he blamed the deed. 
Wolf came to see the earl, and told him of it.  The earl says that he
likes ill such undertakings, "and my will is that thou payest a fitting
atonement to his kinsfolk."  Wolf said that he should have his way in
that;  but said, too, that much mischief had been wrought against him by
Harold.  Now the suit was not very speedily taken up, as Helgi was not
in the isles.  There was a man named Bard the fair, a kinsman of Wolf
the bad, he was a man of many friends and well-behaved, and yet he was
often with Wolf.  Once on a time Bard said to Wolf, "We two shall never
be of one mind;  thou rushest into ill deeds, and that is far from my
turn of mind, and so I will change my abode and go away."  Wolf answers,
"That is only half-wise, so long as the quarrel is not settled, and
Helgi Harold's son, is on a roving cruize."  He said he would go for all
that, and fits him out a ship from South Rondaldsy.  And just as he is
"boun" then Helgi sailed up to the isles, and had heard by that time of
his father's slaying.  And now he calls on his men that they should slay
Bard whom he said was the nearest of kin of any man to Wolf.  Bard
busked him to fight but said he had never done him any harm;  but said
he would not sunder himself from Wolf's kinship.  After that they fight,
and Bard falls there, for Helgi had a great force.  And when Wolf hears
this he gathers force to him.  But when earl Sigurd learned that he
summons Helgi to come to him.  And when they meet the earl said, "Thou
hast done an ill deed in return for thy wrongs, and hast not looked
towards thine own honour with our help;  now this quarrel had been
already settled, and thine honour cared for."  Helgi answers, "Then
everything shall still be placed in your power;  but I knew nothing at
all about that settlement."  The earl said, "It must be my will to bring
about settlements between my men here in the isles."  And after that
Helgi goes his way.  Wolf sends men against him at once with two ships,
but they did not meet;  and Helgi had got home before to his own abode
and heard that and says he thinks that he should have no rest in the
isles.  And sold his lands and busked him to go away, and said that it
were well that he and Wolf should meet if he would not abide by the
earl's doom, as he plainly showed that he would not.  After that he
turns to Wolf's abode, and he was not at home.  Helgi robs there, and
takes away his daughter whose name was Helga, and said such a prize
would just suit him for an atonement for his father.  She bade him not
do that, "for my father will follow you stoutly up."  He said he would
run the risk of that.  After that he fared south among the isles.  But
when Wolf learns that he fares after him with many ships, and said he
had often avenged less insults.  But when they met, then they fell to
fighting, and Helgi was weaker in force and his ships were cleared, but
he made a stout defence, and was wounded.  But when night fell, there
arose a storm of wind, and he takes this device that he leaps overboard
with Wolf's daughter;  and swam with her from the ships;  and so comes
to land in the darkness of night, and makes for the wood;  and there he
saw a fire, and one man by it.  Helgi asks who he may be.  He said he
was a husbandman, "but I know all about thee, and thou behavedst well on
thy cruizes towards us small farmers."  Helgi told him the whole truth
about his affairs.  This husbandman's name was Thorfinn, and he found
Helgi in all that he needed during that winter, and was very kind to
both of them.  Helgi said he should wish to hold his wedding with Helga
in his house.  Thorfinn said that ws quite free to him but not worthy
enough.  But still it came about.  And so the winter slips away.  Then
Helgi said he wished to lease land from the husbandman, and said he
thought that one or other thing would happen, either that Wolf would die
soon, or that he would find him out.  Now he leases the land and builds
him a house.  After that he hears that Wolf was dead.  Helgi had a son
by his wife Helga, and his name was Bard, he was very dutiful and good; 
a handsome man and a proper, both in mind and body.  And when two
winters had gone by, Helgi and his wife and son fare back to the
Orkneys, and take their estates, both those which Wolf had owned, and
those which belonged to Helgi after his father Harold, and now there was
no lack of money.

         And when his son, Bard, was twelve winters old, he wished to go
away, and said he wanted to gather together goods for himself.  Helgi
said he was still too young to travel.  Bard said, "We two are unlike in
temper, father mine," said he, "and I will fare to those peoples, of
whom I have been told that they believe in the God of Heaven himself." 
Helgi said he was unlike Wolf, his mother's father.

         After that he fared away and comes to the house of a husbandman
very far off, and said he wished to work for him.  The farmer said he
would like that well;  he looked after the cattle and worked all alone; 
but the farmer was very rich.  The lad was lightly clad, but still he
did his business well;  and the farmer said he would give him a cow for
his wages, and Bard said he was willing to take it, and now he drives
the cow into the wood one day, and in the wood he met a beggarman.  This
man begged Bard to give him the cow for Peter's thanks.  Bard answers,
"Thou knowest well how to beg, and this Peter ought to be my friend, but
for all that I will give him the cow."  Bard came again to the
husbandman and worked for him, and it fared still better during that
year with the husbandman's cattle, and then he gave him yet another
cow.  Now it fared the same way as before, the beggarman came with the
same story and begged for the cow for Peter's sake, but Bard gave him
the cow.  The husbandman asked what had become of the kine.  Bard said
that those had them who needed them.  With this the husbandman Bard
stayed the third winter, and still tended his cattle, and then there
were near two heads for every one that he had before, and he made over a
third cow to Bard.  That self-same day came the beggarman to him in the
wood, and said he would still wish to beg for this cow in Peter's name. 
He granted him that at once and gave him the cow.  Then this man said to
Bard, "Now will I pass my hands over thee."  And so it was, and it
seemed to him as though numbness passed out of every one of his bones. 
After that he said, "Thou shalt be a man of luck," and then he set a
book on his shoulders, and then Bard saw far and wide over many lands. 
Then the beggarman said, "Thinkest thou that thou art now repaid for the
kine?"  "Of a surety (I think) so,"  said Bard.  After that he saw over
all Ireland.  Then the newly come man said, "Thinkest thou thyself then
repaid for the kine if thou hast power given thee as wide as thou now
seest."  Bard said so it would be.  "Here then," said he, "is now come
Peter the Apostle;"  and he gave him then plenary powers, and so will I
repay thee for the kine, that we shall never be parted."  After that
Bard sought the husbandman, and told him this event.  The husbandman
hardly knew him, he was so bright and lucky-looking, and bade him take
of his goods whatsoever he would.  He bade the husbandman to hew him out
a cell in a rock.  And so it was done.  Then he was baptized;  but he
sat him afterwards in the same rock, and came to very great glory. 
After some years had passed he became a bishop in Ireland, and the
greatest chief.  There came to him his father and his mother, his
brothers and sisters, and he enriched them all with many good things. 
All-ruling God rewarded him as he rewards all for his lowly mindedness. 
As he himself bears witness that whoseover abaseth himself in the eyes
of his maker him shall he himself exalt.  The father and mother of Bard
fared back to the Orkneys, and regained all their estates, and dwelt
there till old age.  And here ends this story.

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix E. The Story of Heming](is323)
