[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm002)  [Next](asm004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE ADORNMENT OF THE SPIRITUAL MARRIAGE

 

 

## HERE BEGINS

# THE FIRST BOOK

 

### PROLOGUE

 

Ecce sponsus venit,  
exile obviam ei.

 

Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him. These words were
written by St Matthew the Evangelist, and Christ spoke them to His
disciples and to all other men in the parable of the virgins. This
Bridegroom is Christ, and human nature is the bride; the which God has
made in His own image and after His likeness. And in the beginning He
had set her in the highest and most beautiful, the richest and most
fertile place in all the earth: that is, in Paradise. And He had given
her dominion over all creatures; and He had adorned her with graces; and
had given her a commandment, so that by obedience she might have merited
to be confirmed and established with her Bridegroom in an eternal troth,
and never to fall into any grief, or any sin.

Then came a beguiler, the hellish fiend, full of envy, in the shape of a
subtle serpent, and he beguiled the woman; and they both beguiled the
man, in whom above all the whole of our nature consists. And the fiend
seduced that nature, the bride of God, with false counsel; and she was
driven into a strange country, poor and miserable and captive and
oppressed, and beset by her enemies; so that it seemed as though she
might never attain reconciliation and return again to her native land.

But when God thought the time had come, and had mercy on the suffering
of His beloved, He sent His Only Begotten Son to earth, in a fair
chamber, in a glorious temple; that is, in the body of the Virgin Mary.
There He was married to this bride, our nature, and He united her with
His own person through the most pure blood of this noble Virgin. The
priest who married the bride was the Holy Ghost; the angel Gabriel
brought the offer; the glorious Virgin gave her consent. Thus Christ,
our faithful Bridegroom, united our nature with His person; and He has
sought us in strange countries, and taught us heavenly customs and
perfect faithfulness, and has laboured for us and fought as our champion
against the adversary. And He has broken open our prison, and won the
victory, and by His death slain our death; and He has redeemed us by His
blood, and made us free through His living waters of baptism, and
enriched us with His sacraments and with His gifts: that we might go out
(as He says) with all the virtues, to meet Him in the house of glory and
to enjoy Him without end in eternity.

Now Christ, the Master of Truth, says: Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go
ye out to meet Him. In these words, Christ our Lover teaches us four
things. First, He gives us a command, in that He says: Behold. Those who
neglect this command and remain blind are all damned. Secondly, He shows
us what we shall see, that is, the coming of the Bridegroom; for He
says, The Bridegroom cometh. In the third place, He teaches and commands
us what we shall do, for He says: Go ye out. And in the fourth place, by
saying: To meet Him, He shows us the use and the purpose of our labour
and of all our life; that is to say, the loving meeting with our
Bridegroom.

These words we shall now declare and set forth in three ways. First,
according to the common way relating to the life of beginners, which is
called the Active Life, and which is necessary for all men who wish to
be saved. Secondly, we will explain these same words in their relation
to the interior, exalted, and God-desiring life, at which many men may
arrive by their virtues and by the grace of God. Thirdly, we will
expound them in respect of a superessential, God-seeing life, which few
men can attain or taste, by reason of the sublimity and high nobility of
that life.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Of the Active Life](asm004.md)
