[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm037)  [Next](asm039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VIII

 

### HOW THE FIRST COMING HAS FOUR DEGREES

 

The first coming of Christ in the exercise of desire is, as we have
said, an inward and sensible thrust of the Holy Ghost, urging and
driving us towards all virtues. This coming may be likened to the
splendour and the power of the sun, which, from the moment when it
rises, enlightens and brightens and warms the whole world. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](asm132.htm#fn_42) So likewise Christ, the eternal
Sun, beams and shines, dwelling above the summit of the spirit; and
enlightens and enkindles the lowest part of man, namely, the fleshly
heart and the sensible powers. And this happens in a moment of time,
shorter than the twinkling of an eye; for God's work is swift. But that
man in whom this should take place must be inwardly seeing, with the
eyes of the understanding.

In the higher lands, in the middle region of the world, the sun shines
upon the mountains, bringing an early summer there, with good fruits and
strong wine, and filling that land with joy. The same sun gives its
splendour to the lower lands, at the utmost part of the earth. There the
country is colder, and the power of the heat less; nevertheless, there
too it produces many good fruits, though little wine. The men who dwell
in the lower parts of themselves, in their outward senses, yet with a
good intention, in moral virtues, in outward work, and in the grace of
God: they too produce the good fruits of virtue, in great numbers and in
many ways; but of the wine of inward joy and ghostly consolation they
taste little.

Now the man who wishes to feel within himself the glow of the Eternal
Sun, which is Christ Himself, he should be seeing, and should dwell on
the mountains in the higher lands, by a gathering together of all his
powers, and lifting up his heart towards God, free and careless of joy
and grief, and of all created things. There Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, shines upon the free and uplifted heart: and these are
the mountains that I mean.

Christ, the glorious Sun, the Divine Brightness, by His inward coming
and by the power of His Spirit, enlightens and brightens and enkindles
the free heart and all the powers of the soul. And this is the first
work of the inward coming in the exercise of desire. Like as the power
and the nature of fire enkindles everything which is offered to the
flames, so Christ, by the fiery ardour of His inward coming, enkindles
every ready, free and uplifted heart; and in this coming He says: Go ye
out by exercises according to the way of this coming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Of Unity of Heart](asm039)
