[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm088)  [Next](asm090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LIX

 

### SHOWING HOW ONE POSSESSES GOD IN UNION AND REST, ABOVE ALL LIKENESS THROUGH GRACE

 

This meeting and this union, which the loving spirit achieves in God and
possesses without means, must take place in the essential intuition,
deeply hidden from our understanding; unless it be an effective
understanding according to the way of simplicity <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](asm132.htm#fn_59). In the fruition of this unity
we shall rest evermore, above ourselves and above all things. From this
unity, all gifts, both natural and supernatural, flow forth, and yet the
loving spirit rests in this unity above all gifts; and here there is
nothing but God, and the spirit united with God without means. In this
unity we are taken possession of by the Holy Ghost, and we take
possession of the Holy Ghost and the Father and the Son, and the whole
Divine Nature: for God cannot be divided. And the fruitive tendency of
the spirit <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](asm132.htm#fn_60), which seeks
rest in God above all likeness, receives and possesses in a supernatural
way, in its essential being, all that the spirit ever received in a
natural way. All good men experience this; but how it is, this remains
hidden from them all their life long if they do not become inward and
empty of all creatures. In that very moment in which man turns away from
sin, he is received by God in the essential unity of his own being, at
the summit of his spirit, that he may rest in God, now and evermore. And
he also receives grace, and likeness unto God, in the proper source of
his powers, that he may evermore grow and increase in new virtues. And
as long as this likeness endures in charity and in virtues, so long also
endures the union in rest. And this cannot be lost save only by mortal
sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX. Showing How We Have Need of the Grace of God, Which
Makes Us Like Unto God and Leads Us to God Without Means](asm090)
