[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm059)  [Next](asm061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXX

 

### A PARABLE: HOW ONE MAY BE HINDERED IN THIS FOURTH DEGREE

 

At this season of the year, so soon as the equinox is come, the sun
begins to descend and the weather becomes cooler. And then some
imprudent men become full of noxious humours, which enter into the
stomach, and spoil the health and bring many diseases: and these destroy
the appetite and the taste of good food, and bring many to death. And
some men are corrupted by these noxious humours, so that they get
dropsy, and have therefrom long torments and sometimes die. And from the
super-abundance of these humours come sickness and fever from which many
men suffer, and of which some die. And so likewise it is, when men of
good-will, who once tasted God, have swerved from Him and from truth,
and have gone astray; these either sicken in the way of perfection, or
wither away as regards virtue, or fall into eternal death, through one
of these maladies, and some through all three. Especially when he is
forsaken a man has need of much strength, and must exercise himself in
the way I have just taught you: thus he shall not be deceived. But the
unwise man, who rules himself ill, falls easily into these maladies; for
in him the weather has grown cooler. For this reason his nature becomes
slow in virtue and in good works, and craves for comfort and softness of
the body; often without discretion and more than is needful. And other
men would like well to receive solace from God, if they might partake of
Him without pains and labour. And some seek for solace in creatures,
wherefrom great harm often ensues. And some think themselves sick and
feeble and that their powers are exhausted, and believe that they have
need of all that they can get, and that they must cherish their bodies
in comfort and repose. When a man yields himself in such a way, and
seeks without discretion after bodily things and comforts; then all such
things are noxious humours which fulfil the stomach, that is to say, the
man's heart, and take from him the taste and the enjoyment of good food,
that is to say, of all the virtues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. Of Another Hindrance](asm061.md)
