[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm021)  [Next](asm023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XIX

 

### OF GENEROSITY

 

From this compassion springs generosity; for none can be generous in a
supernatural way, with faithfulness and goodwill towards all, save him
who has a pitiful heartthough a man may often show generosity to a
particular person without charity and without supernatural generosity.

Generosity is a liberal flowing forth of the heart which has been
touched by charity and pity. When a man considers with compassion the
sufferings and the sorrows of Christ, therefrom springs generosity;
which makes him offer to Christ, for His pains and for His love, praise
and thanks, worship and adoration, with a joyful and humble surrender of
body and soul, in time and in eternity. If a man considers himself with
compassion, and has pity on himself, and thinks upon the good which God
has done to him, and his own failings: then he must pour himself forth
into the generosity of God, taking refuge in His faithfulness and His
mercy, turning to Him with trust and with a perfect and free intention
to serve Him for evermore. And the generous man who sees the errors and
disorders of others, and their unrighteousness, beseeches and prays God,
with ardent faith, that He will let His Divine gifts flow forth, that He
will show His generosity to all men, and they may know Him and turn to
the Truth. The generous man also marks with compassion the bodily needs
of all men, and he serves, and he gives, and he lends, and he consoles
everyone, according to the needs of each, in so far as he is able, with
prudent discretion.

Because of this generosity men are wont to practise the seven works of
mercy; the rich do them by their alms and because of their riches, the
poor by their good-will and by their hearty desire to do as the rich if
they could. And thus the virtue of generosity is made perfect.

By generosity of heart all other virtues are increased, and all the
powers of the soul are adorned; for the generous man is always blithe in
spirit and untroubled of heart, and he flows forth with desire and in
his works of virtue, to all men in common. Whosoever is generous, and
loves not earthly goods how poor soever he be, he is like God: for all
that he has in himself, and all that he feels, flow forth and are given
away. And in this way he has cast out the fourth mortal sin, which is
covetousness or Avarice. Of all such Christ says: Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy in that day when they shall hear
these words: Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for youbecause of your mercy,from the foundation of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of Zeal and Diligence](asm023)
