[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm094)  [Next](asm096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LXV

 

### OF THREE KINDS OF MOST INWARD PRACTICES

 

This most inward life is practised in three ways.

At times, the inward man performs his introspection simply, according to
the fruitive tendency, above all activity and above all virtues, through
a simple inward gazing in the fruition of love. And here he meets God
without intermediary. And from out the Divine Unity, there shines into
him a simple light and this light shows him Darkness and Nakedness and
Nothingness. <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](asm132.htm#fn_63) In the
Darkness, he is enwrapped and falls into somewhat which is in no wise,
even as one who has lost his way. In the Nakedness, he loses the
perception and discernment of all things, and is transfigured and
penetrated by a simple light. In the Nothingness, all his activity fails
him, for he is vanquished by the working of God's abysmal love, and in
the fruitive inclination of his spirit he vanquishes God, and becomes
one spirit with him. And in this oneness with the Spirit of God, he
enters into a fruitive tasting and possesses the Being of God. And he is
filled, according to the measure in which he has sunk himself in his
essential being with the abysmal delights and riches of God. And from
these riches an envelopment and a plenitude of sensible love flow forth
into the unity of the higher powers. And from this plenitude of sensible
love, a savoury and penetrating satisfaction flows forth into the heart
and the bodily powers. And through this inflow the man becomes immovable
within, and helpless as regards himself and all his works. And in the
deeps of his ground he knows and feels nothing, in soul or in body, but
a singular radiance with a sensible well-being and an all-pervading
saviour. This is the first way, and it is the way of emptiness; for it
makes a man empty of all things, and lifts him up above activity and
above all the virtues. And it unites the man with God, and brings about
a firm perseverance in the most interior practices which he can
cultivate. When, however, any restlessness, or working of the virtues,
puts intermediaries, or images, between the inward man and the naked
introversion which he desires, then he is hindered in this exercise; for
this way consists in a going out, beyond all things, into the Emptiness.
This is the first form of the most inward exercise.

 

At times such an inward man turns towards God with ardent desire and
activity; that he may glorify and honour Him, and offer up and
annihilate in the love of God, his selfhood and all that he is able to
do. And here he meets God through an intermediary. This intermediary is
the gift of Savouring Wisdom, the ground and origin of all virtues;
which enkindles and moves all good men according to the measure of their
love, and at times so greatly stirs and enkindles the inward man through
love, that all the gifts of God, and all that God may give, except the
gift of Himself, seem too little to him, and cannot satisfy him, but
rather increase his impatience. For he has an inward perception or
feeling in his ground; where all the virtues begin and end, where love
dwells, and where with ardent desire he offers up all his virtues to
God. And here the hunger and thirst of love become so great that he
perpetually surrenders himself, and gives up his own works, and empties
himself, and is noughted in love, for he is hungry and thirsty for the
taste of God; and, at each irradiation of God, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](asm132.htm#fn_64) he is seized by God, and more
than ever before is newly touched by love. Living he dies, and dying he
lives again. And in this way the desirous hunger and thirst of love are
renewed in him every hour.

This is the second way, which is the way of longing, in which love
dwells in the Divine likeness, and longs and craves to unite itself with
God. This way is more profitable and honourable to us than the first,
for it is the source of the first; for none can enter into the rest
which is above all works save the man who has loved love with desire and
with activity. And this is why the grace of God and our active love must
both go before and follow after; that is to say, they must be practised
both before and after. For without acts of love we cannot merit
anything, neither achieve God, nor keep the possession of that which we
have acquired through the works of love. And for this reason no one who
has power over himself, and can practise love, should be idle. When,
however, a good man lingers in any gift of God, or any creature, he will
be hindered in this most inward exercise; for this exercise is a hunger
which nothing can still, save God alone.

 

From these two ways the third way arises; and this is an inward life
according to justice. Now understand this: God comes to us without
ceasing both with means and without means, and demands of us both action
and fruition, in such a way that the one never impedes, but always
strengthens, the other. And therefore the most inward man lives his life
in these two ways: namely, in work and in rest. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](asm132.htm#fn_65) And in each he is whole and
undivided; for he is wholly in God because he rests in fruition, and he
is wholly in himself because he loves in activity: and he is perpetually
called and urged by God to renew both the rest and the work. And the
justice of the spirit desires to pay every hour that which is demanded
of it by God. And therefore, at each irradiation of God, the spirit
turns inward, in action and in fruition; and thus it is renewed in every
virtue, and is more deeply immersed in fruitive rest. For God gives, in
one gift, Himself and His gifts; and the spirit gives, at each
introversion, itself and all its works. For by means of the simple
irradiation of God and the fruitive tendency and melting away of love,
the spirit has been united with God, and is incessantly transported into
rest. And through the gifts of Understanding and Savouring Wisdom, it is
touched in an active way, and perpetually enlightened and enkindled in
love. And there is shown and presented to it in the spirit all that one
may desire. It is hungry and thirsty, for it beholds the food of the
angels and the heavenly drink. It works diligently in love, for it
beholds its rest. It is a pilgrim; and it sees its country. In love it
strives for victory; for it sees its crown. Consolation, peace, joy,
beauty and riches, and all that can delight it, are shown without
measure in ghostly images to the reason which is enlightened in God. And
through this showing and the touch of God, love remains active. For this
just man has established a true life in the spirit, in rest and in work,
which shall endure eternally; but, after this life, it shall be changed
into a higher state. Thus the man is just; and he goes *towards* God
with fervent love in eternal activity; and he goes *in* God with
fruitive inclination in eternal rest. And he dwells in God, and yet goes
forth towards all creatures in universal love, in virtue, and in
justice. And this is the supreme summit of the inward life. All those
men who do not possess both rest and work in one and the same exercise,
have not yet attained this justice. This just man cannot be hindered in
his introversion, for he turns inward both in fruition and in work; but
he is like to a double mirror, which receives images on both sides. For
in his higher part, the man receives God with all His gifts; and, in his
lower part, he receives bodily images through the senses. Now he can
enter into himself at will, and can practise justice without hindrance.
But man is unstable in this life, and that is why he often turns
outwards, and works in the senses, without need and without the command
of the enlightened reason; and thus he falls into venial sins. But in
the loving introversion of the just man all venial sins are like to
drops of water in a glowing furnace.

And with this I leave the inward life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI. Showing How Some Men Live Contrary to These
Exercises](asm096)
