[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm004)  [Next](asm006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

###  

### SHOWING HOW WE SHALL CONSIDER THE COMING OF CHRIST IN THREE WAYS

 

Now, by saying: The Bridegroom cometh, He shows us further what we shall
see. Christ, our Bridegroom, spoke this word in Latin: Venit. And this
word implies two tenses, the past and the present; and yet here it
denotes the future too.

And that is why we shall consider three comings of our Bridegroom, Jesus
Christ. In the first coming He became man, for man's sake, out of love.
The second coming takes place daily, often and many times, in every
loving heart, with new graces and with new gifts, as each is able to
receive them. The third coming we shall see as the coming in the
Judgment, or at the hour of death. And in all these comings there are
three things to be considered: the why and the wherefore, the inward
way, and the outward work.

The reason why God created the angels and man, was His unfathomable
goodness and nobleness whereby He willed to do it; that the bliss and
the richness which He is Himself might be revealed to rational
creatures, so that they might taste Him in time, and enjoy Him outside
time in eternity.

The reason why God became man was His incomprehensible love, and the
need of all men; for man had been corrupted by the Fall, and could not
amend himself.

But the reason why Christ, according to His Godhead and according to His
manhood, wrought all His works on earth, this reason is fourfold: His
Divine love which is without measure; the created love, called charity,
which He had in His soul through union with the Eternal Word and through
the perfect gift of His Father; the great need of man; and the glory of
His Father. These are the reasons for the coming of Christ our
Bridegroom, and for all His works, both outward and inward.

Now, if we would follow Christ our Bridegroom in virtue, so far as we
are able, we must consider in what wise He was inwardly and the works
which He wrought outwardly; that is to say, His virtues and the deeds of
these virtues.

In what wise He was according to His Godhead, this is inaccessible and
incomprehensible to us; for it is that according to which He is born of
the Father without ceasing, and wherein the Father, in Him and through
Him, knows, creates, orders and rules all things in heaven and on earth.
For He is the Wisdom of the Father, and they breathe forth one Spirit,
that is, one Love, which is a common bond between Them and all saints,
and all good men in heaven and on earth. Of this condition we shall not
speak any more; but we shall speak of that condition which He had
through Divine gifts and according to His created manhood. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](asm132.htm#fn_38.md) And this condition was
manifold. For as many inward virtues as Christ possessed, so many were
His inward conditions: for every virtue has its special condition. The
sum of the virtues and conditions in the soul of Christ, this is above
the understanding and above the comprehension of all creatures. But we
shall take three of them: namely, humility, charity, and patient
suffering, in inward and outward things. These are the three chief roots
and beginnings of all virtues and all perfection.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of Humility](asm006.md)
