[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm001)  [Next](asm003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

## INTRODUCTION

 

### I

 

Jan van Ruysbroeck—three of whose most important works are here for the
first time presented to English readers—is the greatest of the Flemish
mystics, and must take high rank in any list of Christian contemplatives
and saints. He was born in 1273, at the little village of Ruysbroeck or
Ruusbroeck between Brussels and Hal, from which he takes his name; and
spent his whole life within his native province of Brabant. At eleven
years old, he is said to have run away from home and found his way to
Brussels; where he was received by his uncle Jan Hinckaert, a canon of
the Cathedral of St Gudule. Hinckaert, who was a man of great piety,
lived with another devout priest named Francis van Coudenberg in the
most austere fashion; entirely devoted to prayer and good works. The two
ecclesiastics brought the boy up, and gave him a religious education,
which evidently included considerable training in theology and
philosophy: subjects for which he is said to have shown, even in
boyhood, an astonishing aptitude. In 1317 he took orders, and obtained
through his uncle's influence a prebend's stall in St Gudule; a position
which he occupied for twenty-six years.

During youth and early middle-age, then, Ruysbroeck lived in Brussels,
fulfilling the ordinary duties of a cathedral chaplain: and here some of
his earlier works may have been written. Here no doubt he developed that
shrewd insight into human character to which his books bear witness; and
here gained his experience of those "false mystics" and self-sufficient
quietists so vividly described and sternly condemned in the second book
of *The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, in *The Book of Truth*,
and other places. In the early fourteenth century a number of heretical
sects, of which the Brethren of the Free Spirit were typical, flourished
in the Low Countries. Basing their doctrine on a pantheistic and
non-Christian conception of the Godhead, they proclaimed the "divinity
of man," and preached a quietism of the most soul-destroying kind,
together with an emancipation from the fetters of law and custom which
often resulted in actual immorality. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](asm132.htm#fn_0) As Ruysbroeck grew in knowledge of
the true contemplative life, the dangers attending on its perversion
became ever more clear to him: and he entered upon that vigorous
campaign against the heretical quietists which was the chief outward
event of his Brussels period.

As to his spiritual development during these years, we can have no
certain knowledge: since none of his works are exactly dated, and the
order in which they should be arranged is a matter of inference. But it
is inherently probable that he was experiencing the early stages of that
mysterious growth of the soul which he describes so exactly in the first
two books of *The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*: the hard
self-discipline, the enlightenment, raptures, and derelictions, of the
"active" and "interior" life. At this period, he had made little
impression on his contemporaries. The Augustinian canon Pomerius, who
had known in their old age some of Ruysbroeck's friends and followers,
and who wrote his Life <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](asm132.htm#fn_1) in
the year 1420, describes him as a simple, quiet, rather shabby-looking
person, who "went about the streets of Brussels with his mind lifted up
into God." Yet it is certain that great force of character, much shrewd
common sense, and remarkable intellectual qualities lay behind this meek
appearance. We know how greatly he disliked "singular conduct" in those
who had given themselves to the spiritual life. They should be, he
thought, like "other good men"; <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](asm132.htm#fn_2) and this ideal found expression in
his own life. A devout and orthodox Catholic, well read in scholastic
theology and philosophy, on the mental and social side at least, he was
a thorough man of his time; apparently accepting without criticism its
institutions and ideas. Many passages in his works indicate this: for
instance, his constant and unquestioning use of the categories of
mediaeval psychology, or his quiet assumption <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](asm132.htm#fn_3) that "putting to the torture" is
part of the business of a righteous judge. But on the spiritual side his
period influenced him little. There, his concern was with truths which
lie, as he says, "outside Time" in the Eternal Now; and when he is
trying to interpret these to us the Middle Ages and their limitations
fall away. Then we catch fragments which Plato or Plotinus on one hand,
Hegel on the other, might recognise as the reports of one who had known
and experienced the Reality for which they sought. "My words," said
Ruysbroeck, "are strange, but those who love will understand": and this
indeed is true, for he possessed in an extraordinary degree the
power—which so many great mystics have lacked—of giving verbal and
artistic expression to his soaring intuitions of Eternity.

In 1343, when he was fifty years old, the growing sense of contrast
between those intuitions and the religious formalism and unreality of
the cathedral life, the distracting bustle of the town, reached a point
at which it seems to have become unendurable to him. Together with
Hinckaert and Coudenberg—both now old men—he left Brussels for ever; all
three intending to settle in some lonely country place, where they could
devote themselves to the life of prayer and contemplation. They were
given the old hermitage of Groenendael, or the Green Valley, in the
forest of Soignes outside Brussels. There they were presently joined by
disciples, and formed a small community, which was eventually placed
under the rule of the Augustinian canons. Coudenberg became the provost
and Ruysbroeck the prior; and under their government the priory of
Groenendael soon became known as the home of a special holiness.

We shall probably be right if we identify his thirty-eight years,
sojourn in the forest with the "God-seeing" stage of Ruysbroeck's
mystical life. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](asm132.htm#fn_4) Here without
doubt all his greatest works were written. *The Adornment of the
Spiritual Marriage* must have been composed soon after his retreat from
Brussels, for we know that in 1350 he sent a copy of it to the group of
Rhenish mystics who called themselves the Friends of God. *The Sparkling
Stone* and *The Book of* *Truth*—both written at the request of friends,
to explain difficult points in his earlier books—belong to a later date.
We need not feel surprised that the full flowering of his genius should
coincide with his abandonment of the world. In one form or another such
abandonment has been found imperative by all the great explorers of
Eternity; whose inward quest of the One nearly always entails some
withdrawal from the multiplicity of things. But beyond this, there was
in Ruysbroeck's mysticism—at once so intimate in its feeling so vast in
its reach—a deeply poetic strain. The silence and growing beauty of the
forest ministered to this: and many passages in his books show how
easily he discovered intimations of divinity through the loving
contemplation of natural things. A beautiful tradition tells us that he
would go out alone into the woods when he felt that the inspiration of
God was upon him; and there, sitting under his favourite tree, would
write as the Holy Ghost dictated. The brethren used to declare that
once, having been absent many hours from the priory, he was at last
found in this place, rapt in ecstacy and surrounded by a brilliant
*aura* of divine lighta legend which closely resembles many similar
stories in the lives of the saints.

Such ecstatic absorption in God, however, formed only one side of
Ruysbroeck's religious life. True to his own doctrine of the "balanced
career" of action and contemplation as the ideal of the Christian
soul <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](asm132.htm#fn_5) his rapturous ascents
towards Divine Reality were compensated by the eager and loving interest
with which he turned towards the world of men. In the daily life of the
priory he sought perpetually for opportunities of service, especially
those of the most menial kind. As time passed, and his great mystical
gifts became known, many disciples came to him: amongst them Gerard
Groot, afterwards the founder of the Brothers of the Common Life and
hence spiritual ancestor of Thomas Kempis. To all these he gave patient
help and robust advice; initiating them, so far as it was possible, into
the secrets of the true spiritual life, and ruthlessly exposing the
pious pretensions of those who sought only a reputation for sanctity. It
is clear even from his writings that he possessed to a remarkable degree
the "gift of the discernment of spirits"—in other words, that his shrewd
judgment of humanity seldom failed him. All know the story of the two
priests, who came from Paris to ask his opinion of their spiritual
state: merely to receive the truthful but disconcerting reply, "You are
as holy as you wish to be!"

The thirty-eight years which Ruysbroeck passed at Groenendael were, from
the point of view of the earthly biographer, almost devoid of incident.
True, he formed many friendships with the most spiritual men of his
time, and seems occasionally to have left his priory in order to visit
them. We possess a charming account of one such visit; that to Gerard
Naghel, the Prior of Hérines, at whose suggestion The Book of Truth was
written. "His peaceful and joyful countenance, his humble good-humoured
speech," says Gerard, made him loved by all with whom he came into
contact: a sentence which brings to mind Ruysbroeck's own picture of
those happy men who walk in the way of love.

 

"Those who follow the way of love  
Are the richest of all men living:  
They are bold, frank, and fearless,  
They have neither travail nor care,  
For the Holy Ghost bears all their burdens.  
They seek no outward seeming,  
They desire nought that is esteemed of men,  
They affect not singular conduct,  
They would be like other good men." <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](asm132.htm#fn_6)

 

Further, he saw during these years the rapid growth of the community—now
swiftly becoming one of the chief centres of spiritual life in the Low
Countries—and the wide dissemination of his own works. He even lived to
see certain passages in those works criticised, as supporting a
pantheistic and heretical view of the union of the soul with God. The
Book of Truth was written to refute this accusation. But the true events
of these years took place for him in that supernal world of high
contemplation which it was his special province to disclose to his
fellow-men. There his real life was fixed. There his loving ardour was
for ever young. Thither he drew those treasures of mystical knowledge
which he is said to have poured forth to his brethren in long ecstatic
discourses when the Spirit impelled him to speak: for he never taught or
spoke unless he felt himself inspired thereto by God. When old age came
upon him, though his ghostly vision never lost its keenness his earthly
eyes grew dim: and his later works were dictated, when the Spirit moved
him, to one of the younger brothers of the house. At eighty-eight years
of age his strength failed: and after a short illness, which never
clouded the radiance of his spirit, he died upon December 2nd, 1381.

 

### II

 

Ruysbroeck wrote all his works in the dialect of his native province of
Brabant: which stands in much the same relation to modern Flemish as
Chaucer's English stands to our own speech. Eleven of these works have
come down to us in various MS. collections; and all of them, with one or
two others of doubtful authenticity, are included in the great standard
Latin translation made in the sixteenth century by the Carthusian monk
Laurentius Surius. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](asm132.htm#fn_7)

The authentic writings are these:

1\. The Spiritual Tabernacle: a long symbolic treatise on the tabernacle
of the Israelites, considered as a type of the spiritual life.

2\. The Twelve Points of True Faith: a short mystical interpretation of
the Creed.

3\. The Book of the Four Temptations: an oblique attack on false
mystics.

These are probably early works.

4\. The Kingdom of God's Lovers.

5\. The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage.

Two elaborate and orderly treatises on the threefold life and
development of the soul, which probably belong to the first years at
Groenendael.

6\. The Mirror of Eternal Salvation: written before 1359.

7\. The Seven Cloisters: written before 1363.

8\. The Seven Degrees of Love: written before 1372.

This group of works, forming a graduated instruction on the ascetic and
mystical life, seems to have been written for Dame Margaret Van
Meerbeke, a nun in the Convent of Poor Clares at Brussels.

9\. The Book of the Sparkling Stone.

10\. The Book of Supreme Truth.

11\. The Twelve Béguines.

These three books, the substance of which is now accessible to English
readers, <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](asm132.htm#fn_8) contain the finest
fruit of Ruysbroeck's genius. *The Twelve Béguines* is partly written in
the rough rhymed verse which he uses in many parts of *The Kingdom of
God's Lovers* and other places; as if at times his ecstatic
apprehensions presented themselves to the surface mind in a rhythmic
form and "prayer into song was turned." There is a short example of this
in *The Book of Truth*. Such verse, however, though its uncouth
strangeness gives to it an impressive quality, is a far less successful
medium for the expression of his subtle mystical perceptions than the
vigorous prose style of his best passages; for instance, the wonderful
ninth chapter of *The Sparkling Stone*. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](asm132.htm#fn_9)

When we come to examine the character of these mystical perceptions, we
find that Ruysbroeck was one of the few mystics who have known how to
make full use of a strong and disciplined intellect, without ever
permitting it to encroach on the proper domain of spiritual intuition.
An orderly and reasoned view of the universe is the ground plan upon
which the results of those intuitions are set out: yet we are never
allowed to forget the merely provisional character of the best
intellectual concepts where we are dealing with ultimate truth. Ultimate
truth, he says, is not accessible to the human reason: "the What-ness of
God" we can never know. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](asm132.htm#fn_10)
Yet this need not discourage us from exploring, and describing as well
as we can, those rich regions of approximate truth and life-giving
experience which await us beyond the ramparts of the sensual world. The
intellectual ideas and symbols which he uses most often are taken to a
large extent from the Bible and the Liturgy, and the works of his great
predecessors and contemporaries; and conform to the main lines of the
Christian mystical tradition. St Paul and St Augustine, in particular,
have influenced his thought. The notion popularised by M. Maeterlinck,
that Ruysbroeck was an "ignorant monk" who became in his ecstacies a
profound philosopher, is contradicted by the reminiscences of Plato,
Aristotle, and Plotinus, the many quotations from Dionysius the
Areopagite, St Augustine, Richard of St Victor, St Bernard, and other
mystical authors, which we find in his works. Indeed, only those
familiar with these great seers and thinkers are in a position to
recognise the sources and unravel the meaning of his more difficult
passages. He was in fact almost as well equipped on the intellectual as
on the contemplative side: and hence was enabled to interpret to others,
in language with which all educated Christians in his day were more or
less familiar, something at least of the adventures of his spirit in the
fathomless Ocean of God.

Those intellectual concepts, however, of which he availed himself, are
constantly used by him in an original way: and always as a means of
expressing the results of direct personal inspiration and experience.
Particularly characteristic is the living quality with which he invests
theological formulae that for us have become fixed and sterile. As
Dante, without deviating from the narrow path of scholastic philosophy,
brings us at last into the presence of "that Eternal Light which loves
and smiles," <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](asm132.htm#fn_11) so
Ruysbroeck leads us back by way of the most orthodox Trinitarian
doctrine to the very heart of Reality: the eternal and abysmal Fountain
of life-giving life.

In the three books which are now translated we shall find all his most
characteristic ideas, though here it is only possible to touch upon a
few of them. <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](asm132.htm#fn_12) For
Ruysbroeck, as for St Augustine, Reality is both Being and Becoming:
one-fold and changeless in essence, active and diverse in expression—a
dualism aptly represented by the theological dogma of the Trinity in
Unity. So too man, the image of God, is a unity who manifests himself in
diversity; "made trinity, like to the unmade Blessed Trinity," as our
own mystic Julian of Norwich has it. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](asm132.htm#fn_13) The ultimate truth is the
Godhead: the Divine Unity of religion, the Absolute of philosophy. It is
Simple, not with the simplicity of negation but with the simplicity of
complete affirmation: gathering up into its unity all the rich
complexities of power, wisdom, and love. In its essence it is "dark,"
"naked," "wayless"; inaccessible to all the processes of thought. Yet it
is alive through and through; the eternal "lifegiving ground" from which
all comes. The ideas of "Fatherhood", and "Sonhood" represent its
quickening fruitfulness; <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](asm132.htm#fn_14)
the Holy Ghost is the name of the Divine energy and love which pours
forth into the created world, and thence, like a strong ebb-tide, draws
all things back into their Origin. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](asm132.htm#fn_15) Though the soul plunged in God,
"sunk in His unity," seems to itself to experience a profound rest and
stillness, yet it is really surrendered to the movement of this mighty
power: for "God is an ocean that ebbs and flows."

The ideas, then, of movement, effort, and growth are central for
Ruysbroeck's thought. Again and again we are impressed by his almost
modern sense of life and action as the substance of the real: his
freedom from merely static conceptions. Therefore we find that the theme
of all his more important books is the growth and development of the
soul: the forms in which God's energy plays upon it, the forms which
should be taken by its response. The goal of this development is the
unified state of "pure simplicity" in which it is able to "lose itself
in the Fathomless Love" and enter into the complete and beatific
enjoyment, possession, or use of God—for all these meanings are included
in the word ghebruken, usually translated "fruition," which is his
favourite term for the consummation of the mystical life. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](asm132.htm#fn_16)

In *The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage* this growth is divided into
the three stages of the Active, Interior, and Superessential Life:
called in *The Sparkling Stone* by the old names of the state of
Servant, Friend, and Son. Man, we know, has a natural, active life; the
only one that he usually recognises. This he may "adorn with the
virtues" and make well-pleasing to God (Book I.). But beyond this he has
a spiritual or "interior" life, which is susceptible of grace, the
Divine energy and love; and by this can be remodelled in accordance with
its true pattern or archetype, the Spirit of Christ (Book II.). Beyond
this, again, he has a superessential or "God-seeing life," in virtue of
the spark of Divine life implanted in him. By the union of his powers of
reason will and feeling with this spark a welding of the several
elements of his being into unity he may enter into his highest life; the
dual and God-like existence of fruition in God and work for God,
alternate action and rest (Book III.). The correspondences of the active
life are with that moral order which we recognise as binding on all men
of good will. Those of the interior life are with the experiences which
we usually recognise as religious and spiritual. But the correspondences
of the superessential life are with a plane of being which lies beyond
thought, and has, so far as our intellectual perceptions go, no
condition. It is a wayless state, "above reason, not without
reason"; <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](asm132.htm#fn_17) dark with excess
of light. This state is the Being of God; but for us it is "beyond
being."

The *First Book*, then, is almost wholly concerned with the development
of the Christian character: the only solid and enduring foundation of
the mystical life. It treats of the virtues which adorn our human nature
and make it ready for the coming of the Spirit of Christ; and of the
primary importance of intention, the stretching out of the loving will
toward God, "having Him in mind" in all things. "Mean only God," said
the old English mystics. So for Ruysbroeck *meyninghe en minnen*will and
lovesum up the obligations of the soul at this stage of its growth, and
prepare it for the greater experiences of the interior life. Though he
never uses the traditional formula of the Mystic Way, we may regard this
active life as more or less equivalent to the Way of Purgation. The same
stage is treated in the 1st and 6th chapters of *The Sparkling Stone*
and the 3rd chapter of *The Book of Truth*.

The *Second Book* goes on from moral training to spiritual training, and
includes all that ascetic writers mean by the "Illuminative Way." It
deals with those "ghostly exercises," the deliberate responses of the
soul to the invitation of God, which form the first degrees of our
interior life, and with the dawning of the true mystical consciousness.
It falls into three chief divisions, treating of three ways in which the
Spirit of God comes into our inner man (caps. 5, 6, and 7).

In the first division (caps. 8-32) Ruysbroeck treats of the action of
grace on the "lower powers," or sense life. In the allegory of the
Seasons, he describes the normal development of the illuminated life in
its emotional aspect: its joys and ardours, reactions and despairs. The
Holy Ghost "hunting the spirit of man" (cap. 3) has seized and
transfigured those "desirous, affective and irascible" powers of the
soul which, according to the doctrine of medieval psychology, make up
natural life of normal men. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](asm132.htm#fn_18)

In the second division (caps. 35-38) this process is extended to the
"higher powers" of the soul: the memory or mind, the understanding, and
the will. The experience of God is, for these higher powers, an
experience of fresh enlightenment and fresh ardour; in Ruysbroeck's
favourite imagery, of light and fire. Grace, which dwells like a living
fountain at the heart of our personality the "unity of the
spirit"—thence pours forth into each faculty in three streams of
radiance: *claerheit*, a word expressive at once of pervading brightness
and limpid clearness, which occurs on almost every page of his writings.
The sense of this supernal clarity, veritably experienced a *viva luce*,
a quickening light, of which we become aware when we open the soul's
eyes—is found in nearly every mystical writer from the time of St John,
and probably originates in that consciousness of enhanced lucidity which
frequently accompanies spiritual exaltation. It was crystallised by the
schoolmen in the doctrine of the *lumen gloriae—*the Divine light which
transfigures the soul and makes it like to God <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](asm132.htm#fn_19)and much of Ruysbroeck's work is
really a poetic elaboration of this idea. As a "simple light" this
Radiance now frees the mind from the teasing complexity of distracting
images: as a "spreading light" it illuminates the understanding: as a
burning flame, it enkindles the will. The self thus becomes capable of
the first form of contemplation, adherence to God by means of the
purified reason and will: responding to the "loving drawing-nigh" of
God*dat minlike neyghen Gods*with an ardent outstretching of himself
towards that seeking and compelling power.

The powers of the soul, then, in the second stage of illumination,
become inundated by the divine *claerheit*. It "drenches them"; and the
result of this is seen in the state of perfect charity to which the self
now attains: the condition of equable outflowing love to God and all
manner of men (caps. 39-43). In the third and highest stage (caps.
49-65), we pass beyond the enhancement and enlightenment of the separate
powers of our nature to the "essential being" of the self: that unity of
the spirit of which Ruysbroeck is always speaking, and wherefrom the
powers proceed, as the Divine Persons proceed from the Unity of
God. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](asm132.htm#fn_20) Whether our mental
and emotional powers as such participate in the spiritual life, is for
him a secondary consideration. They may do so, if they be wholly
surrendered to God. But our true union with Him takes place in the
abysmal deeps of our being—our "ground"and ever abides there: for here
our life, as it were, buds out from the Divine life, and here God dwells
eternally "according to His essence." If we learn to enter within,
passing beyond the powers to the unity of the spirit, we become
conscious of this. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](asm132.htm#fn_21) There
we experience His mysterious touch and stirrings; feel and respond to
the thrust and invitation of His love, as He drives each created spirit
forth to work His will, and draws it home again towards His heart.
There, outside Time, the Eternal Birth takes place (caps. 57-61).

As a result of this practice in introversion, this simplification of
consciousness, the self now first becomes capable of the second form of
contemplation, described in *The Twelve Béguines* as

"A knowing which is in no wise;  
For ever abiding above the reason." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](asm132.htm#fn_22)

and enters upon that profound yet simple communion with God which
Ruysbroeck calls the most inward of all exercises. For this his
favourite image is that of feeding: the soul tastes God (cap. 65), eats,
devours, assimilates Him, and in her turn is eaten and consumed <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](asm132.htm#fn_23)language which probably reflects
his great personal devotion to the Eucharist. With this mystical
savouring and feeding upon Reality, the self reaches the term of the
interior life, and the full stature of that "secret friend of God"
described with such marvellous subtlety in the 8th chapter of *The
Sparkling Stone*.

It is at this point that the dangers of a false mysticism make
themselves felt. Here, then, Ruysbroeck enters upon a vigorous and acute
criticism of Quietism (caps. 66-67): especially valuable to us at the
present day, when so many irresponsible apostles of "new mysticism" are
recommending voluntary passivity of this type as a substitute for the
stern discipline and perpetual willed effort involved in the Christian
science of prayer. Ruysbroeck describes the interior blankness and
silence of the quietist as a psychic trick: a deliberate sinking down
into the subconsciousthe subsoil of human naturewhere it is true that
the Divine Life dwells and supports our created life, but where we are
below instead of above the levels of normal consciousness. Here, indeed,
the soul experiences a sensation of rest and peace: but it is merely
resting in its own emptiness, a false repose which demands no exercise
of virtue, no tension of the will, and is a caricature of the active and
loving surrender taught by the Christian saints. The true emptiness and
idleness of which Ruysbroeck speaks as an essential preparation of the
contemplative state, is a condition of meek and passive attentiveness to
God, which excludes consciousness of the ordinary objects of perception
and thought; sweeps and garnishes the interior castle. Here the virtue
is not in the emptiness and idleness, but in the humble and eager
yielding of ourselves. Although man cannot by his own effort reach God,
yet without such deliberate loving effort we shall never possess
Him. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](asm132.htm#fn_24)

Beyond even the highest point of this interior life, in which the
contemplative feels himself to be living "in God," <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](asm132.htm#fn_25) is that transfigured or deified
life, as the Platonic mystics named it, which Ruysbroeck calls
*overwesen*superessentialthe life of the "God-seeing man" (Book III).
Whereas in the interior life we may be said to re-discover the lost
inheritance of our spirit, in *this* life there is a genuine
transcendence, a passing beyond that spirit's created being: for the
Being of God, in which this consummation is found, is "more than being"
to us. It abides beyond all the concepts of reason, beyond anything that
we can name or describe, outside Time, in the bosom of Divine Reality:
that deep Quiet of the Godhead which cannot be moved. Those who ascend
thereto have passed from the state of "secret friends" to that of the
"hidden sons" of God, and completed the soul's journey to its
home. <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](asm132.htm#fn_26) Then they find
themselves, so far as their separate consciousness persists, in a place
that is placeless and a way that is wayless: in the abysmal *Onwise* of
God, a word for which we have no exact equivalent, but which embodies
one of Ruysbroeck's most important conceptions, and is the occasion of
some of his most mysterious utterances. It represents that world of
spiritual reality which is beyond all attributes and conditions; which
is neither This nor That, which is "in no wise"—the Absolute wherein all
ways and modes of being, all wise, are swallowed up, and all our finite
perceptions die into ignorance and darkness (cap. 4). <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](asm132.htm#fn_27)

"The splendour of That which is in no wise is as a fair mirror  
Wherein shines the everlasting light of God:  
It has no attributes,  
And in it all the activities of reason fail.  
It is not God  
But it is the light whereby we see Him:  
Those who walk in the divine light thereof  
Discover in themselves the Unwalled." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](asm132.htm#fn_28)

Seen from the synthetic and spiritual point of view, this supernal world
of experience is the Essential Unity, wherein the richness of Eternal
Life consists, and where the surrendered soul enjoys the peaceful
fruition of God. But seen from the analytic and intellectual point of
view it is the Essential Nudity, the "nought" or "divine dark" of
Dionysius the Areopagite: for it has been stripped of every character of
which we can think. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](asm132.htm#fn_29) Here
the mystic feels himself, as regards his essential being, to be poured
out into God, melted and merged in Him as a river in the sea: and, as
regards his own separate consciousness, apprehends Him in one simple act
of absorbed attention "seeing and staring" with wide-open eyes. It is in
this one act, sometimes felt by us as a passing beyond ourselves,
sometimes as a fixed ecstatic vision, "beholding that which we are, and
becoming that which we behold" that the self at last knows itself to be
one life and one spirit with God. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](asm132.htm#fn_30)

The mystic has now entered into union with the three wise, the three
modes or ways, under which Divine Love imparts itself in the spirit of
man: characteristically distinguished by Ruysbroeck as three forms of
movement. First this energetic love pours itself out from the Godhead
into us as grace: and we, in receiving it and making it ours by our
virtues and good works, are united to God "through means." This is the
function of the active life harmonising man's work with God's work.
Then, as a compelling tide, it draws us within its own flood back
towards God. This is the union "without means"' wherein we are wholly
surrendered to His love: it is the proper condition of the interior
life. But when we have reached the superessential life, and seem to our
own feeling to be lost in the Darkness, burned up in the Brightness, and
sunk in the Eternal Stillness of God—that "dark silence where all lovers
lose themselves," <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](asm132.htm#fn_31)then the
circle is complete. We are made part of His divine fruition or "content
the eternal satisfaction and eternal activity of Perfect Love; achieving
thus the "union without distinction," though not union without
"otherness." <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](asm132.htm#fn_32) Henceforward
we can participate in God's dual life of rest and work, transcendent
fruition and immanent fruitfulness: abiding in restful possession of
Him, yet perpetually sent down from the heights to serve the whole
world. <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](asm132.htm#fn_33)

The final state of the Christian mystic, then, is not annihilation in
the Absolute. It is a condition wherein we dwell wholly in God, one life
and truth with Him; yet still "feel God *and* ourselves," as the lover
feels his beloved, in a perfect union which depends for its joy on an
invincible otherness. The soul, transfused and transfigured by the
Divine Love as molten iron is by the fire, becomes, it is true, "one
simple blessedness with God" <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](asm132.htm#fn_34) yet ever retains its
individuality: one with God beyond itself, yet other than God within
itself. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](asm132.htm#fn_35) The "deified man"
is fully human still, but spiritualised through and through; not by the
destruction of his personality, but by the taking up of his manhood into
God. There he finds, not a static beatitude, but a Height, a Depth, a
Breadth of which he is made part, yet to which he can never attain: for
the creature, even at its highest, remains finite, and is conscious that
Infinity perpetually eludes its grasp and leads it on. So heaven itself
is discovered to be no mere passive fulfillment, but rather a
forward-moving life: <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](asm132.htm#fn_36) an
ever new loving and tasting, new exploring and enjoying of the Infinite
Fulness of God, that inexhaustible Object of our knowledge and delight.
It is the eternal voyage of the adventurous soul on the vast and stormy
sea of the Divine.

EVELYN UNDERHILL

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue](asm003)
