[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm026)  [Next](asm028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXIV

 

### OF THE KINGDOM OF THE SOUL

 

Whosoever wishes to obtain and to keep these virtues should adorn and
possess and rule his soul like a kingdom. Free-will is the king of the
soul. It is free by nature and still more free by grace. It shall be
crowned with a crown that is called charity. The crown and the kingdom
shall be received from the Emperor, Who is Lord and Master and King of
kings; and the kingdom should be possessed, ruled, and maintained in His
name. This king, free-will, should dwell in the chief city of the
kingdom; namely, in the desirous power of the soul. And he should be
clad and adorned with a garment of two parts. The right side of his
garment should be a virtue called strength, that therewith he may be
strong and mighty to overcome all hindrances, and to ascend up to
heaven, into the palace of the most high Emperor, and to bow down his
crowned head before the most high King, with love, and with
self-surrendered desire. This is the proper work of charity: through it
the crown is received, through it the crown is adorned, through it the
kingdom is maintained and possessed in eternity. The left side of the
garment should be a cardinal virtue called moral force. Through it,
free-will, the king, shall quell all immorality, and fulfil all virtues,
and shall possess his kingdom in power, even unto death.

This king should also choose councillors in his kingdom: the wisest in
the country. These should be two divine virtues: knowledge and
discretion, enlightened by the light of Divine grace. They should dwell
near the king, in a palace called the rational power of the soul, and
they should be clad and adorned with a moral virtue called temperance,
so that the king may always do or leave undone according to their
counsels. By means of knowledge our conscience shall be cleansed of all
its failings and adorned with all virtues; and by help of discretion we
shall give and take, do and leave undone, be silent and speak, fast and
eat, listen and reply, and act in all things according to knowledge and
discretion, clad in the moral virtue called temperance or sobriety.

This king, free-will, should also appoint in his kingdom a judge: that
is, righteousness. This is a divine virtue when it springs from love,
and it is one of the highest of moral virtues. This judge should dwell
in the heart, in the midst of the kingdom, in the irascible power. And
he should be adorned with a moral virtue called prudence; for
righteousness cannot be perfect without prudence. This judge,
righteousness, should travel through the kingdom with the king's own
power and majesty, and furnished with the wisdom of the councillors, and
with his own prudence. And he should set up and cast down, judge and
condemn, kill and leave alive, put to the torture, blind and restore
sight, raise and suppress, scourge and chastise, extirpate all vices,
and order all things according to righteousness.

The common people of the kingdom are all the other powers of the soul,
which should be grounded in humility and godly fear, and should be
subject to God in all virtues, each power according to its own
character.

Whosoever possesses, maintains, and has ordered, the kingdom of his soul
in this way, has gone out with love and with virtue towards God, towards
himself and towards his neighbour.

And this is the third of the four principal points which we would
consider.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Of a Spiritual Meeting of God and Ourselves](asm028.md)
