[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm082)  [Next](asm084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LIII

 

### OF AN ETERNAL HUNGER FOR GOD

 

Here there begins an eternal hunger, which shall never more be
satisfied; it is an inward craving and hankering of the loving power and
the created spirit after an untreated Good. And since the spirit longs
for fruition, and is invited and urged thereto by God, it must always
desire its fulfilment. Behold, here there begins an eternal craving and
continual yearning in eternal insatiableness. All such are the poorest
of all men living; for they are avid and greedy, and their hunger is
insatiable. Whatever they eat or drink, they shall never be satisfied,
for this hunger is eternal. For a created vessel cannot contain an
uncreated Good: and hence there is here an eternal, hungry craving
without satisfaction, and God poured forth above all and yet staying it
not. Here are great dishes of food and drink, of which no one knows save
he who tastes them: but full satisfaction in fruition is the dish which
is lacking there, and therefore this hunger is ever renewed. Yet, in the
touch, rivers of honey, full of all delights, flow forth; for the spirit
tastes these riches in all the ways which it can conceive and apprehend;
but all this is in a creaturely way and below God, and hence there
remains an eternal hunger and impatience. Though God gave to such a man
all the gifts which are possessed by all the saints, and everything that
He is able to give, but withheld Himself, the gaping desire of the
spirit would remain hungry and unsatisfied. The inward stirring and
touching of God makes us hungry and yearning; for the Spirit of God
hunts our spirit: and the more it touches it, the greater our hunger and
our craving. And this is the life of love in its highest working, above
reason and above understanding; for reason can here neither give nor
take away from love, for our love is touched by the Divine love. And as
I understand it, here there can never more be separation from God. God's
touch within us, forasmuch as we feel it, and our own loving craving,
these are both created and creaturely; and therefore they may grow and
increase as long as we live.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV. Of A Loving Strife Between the Spirit of God and Our
Spirit](asm084)
