[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm062)  [Next](asm064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXXIII

 

### SHOWING HOW THESE FOUR DEGREES IN THEIR PERFECTION ARE FOUND IN CHRIST

 

If we wish to progress rightly in the four aforesaid degrees of the
inward exercise which adorn a man's bodily powers and the lower part of
his nature, we should mark Christ, Who taught us these four ways and has
gone before us therein. Christ, the bright Sun, rose in the heavens of
the most high Trinity, and in the dawn of His glorious mother, the
Virgin Mary; who was, and is, the dawn and daybreak of all those graces
in which we shall rejoice eternally.

Now mark this: Christ had, and still has, the first degree; for he was
one and in oneness. In Him were, and are, gathered and united all the
virtues that ever were, and ever shall be, practised; moreover all the
creatures who ever practised, and ever shall practise, these virtues.
Thus He was the Father's Only Begotten Son, and was united with human
nature. And He was inward; for He brought to earth the fire that
inflamed all the saints and all good men. And He yielded a sensible love
and loyalty to His Father, and to all those who shall enjoy Him in
eternity. And His devotion and His loving and aspiring heart burned and
groaned before His Father because of the miseries of all men. His whole
life, and all His works, from without and from within, and all His
words, were thanksgiving and praise, and glorifying of His Father. This
is the first degree.

Christ, the Sun of Love, sparkled and shone brighter still, and more
ardently; for in Him was, and is, the fulness of all graces and gifts.
And for this reason the heart of Christ and His way of life, and His
conduct, and His service, over-flowed in mercy, in gentleness, in
humility, and in generosity; and He was so gracious and so lovable that
His ways and His person drew all men of goodwill. He was the unspotted
lily amidst the flowers of the field, wherefrom all the just may suck
the honey of eternal sweetness and eternal consolation. For all the
gifts which were ever bestowed upon the manhood of Christ, Christ
thanked and praised, according to His manhood, His Eternal Father, Who
is the Father of all gifts; and He rested, as regards the highest powers
of His soul, above all gifts, in the most high Unity of God, from which
all gifts flow forth. Thus He possessed the second degree.

Christ the glorious Sun sparkled and shone higher still, and brighter,
and more ardently; for all the days of His life long His bodily powers
and His senses, His heart and His mind, were called and destined of His
Father to that most high glory and beatitude which He now enjoys,
according to His senses and His bodily powers. And He Himself was both
naturally and supernaturally inclined thereto, according to His
affections; nevertheless He was willing to abide in this exile until the
time that His Father had foreseen and ordained from eternity. Thus He
possessed the third degree.

When the due time had come wherein Christ should reap, and carry into
the Eternal Kingdom, the fruits of all those virtues which ever had
ripened, or ever should ripen, then the Eternal Sun began to descend;
for then Christ humbled Himself, and delivered His bodily life into the
hands of His enemies. And in this distress He was denied and forsaken of
His friends, and from His human nature there was withdrawn all inward
and outward consolation; and there was laid on it misery and sorrow,
buffettings, blasphemies, and heavy burdens, and it paid the price of
all our sins according to justice. And He bore these things in humble
patience, and, whilst He was thus forsaken, He wrought the greatest work
of love. And, thereby He has bought back and redeemed our eternal
heritage. Thus is He adorned in the lower part of His noble manhood; for
in it He suffered these pains for our sins. And this is why He is called
the Saviour of the world, and why He is glorified, honoured, and
exalted, and set on the right hand of His Father, where He reigns in
mightiness; and all creatures, in heaven, and on earth, and in hell, bow
the knee eternally before His most high Name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. Showing How a Man Should Live if He Would be
Enlightened](asm064)
