[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm056)  [Next](asm058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXVII

 

### A PARABLE OF THE ANT

 

A brief parable I will give to those who dwell in the tumult of love,
that they may endure this state nobly and becomingly, and may attain to
higher virtues. There is a small insect called the ant. It is strong and
sagacious, and very loth to die. It lives by choice amongst the
congregation of its fellows, in hot and dry soil. The ant works during
summer, and gathers grain for food for the winter. And it splits the
grain in two lest it should sprout and be spoiled, and be of no use when
nothing can be gathered anymore. And it seeks no strange ways, but
always goes forth by the same way. And if it abides its time, it shall
be able to fly.

Thus should these men do. They should be strong in abiding the coming of
Christ, sagacious against the communications and inspirations of the
devil. They should not desire death; but God's glory alone, and for
themselves new virtues. They should dwell in the congregation of their
heart and of their powers, and should follow the drawing and the
inviting of the Divine Unity. They should dwell in warm and dry soil,
that is, in the fierce tumult of love and in a great restlessness. And
they should labour during the summer of this life, and gather the fruits
of virtue for eternity; and they should split these fruits in two. The
one part is, that they should ever desire the most high fruition of
Eternity; and the other part is that, by means of the reason, they
should always restrain themselves as much as they can, and abide the
time which God has ordained to them, and thus the fruit of virtue is
preserved unto eternity. And they should not follow strange paths or
singular ways; but they should follow the track of love through all
storms to that place whither love shall lead them. And if they abide the
time, and persevere in all virtues, they shall behold the Mystery of God
and take flight towards It.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. Of the Fourth Degree of the Coming of
Christ](asm058.md)
