[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm075)  [Next](asm077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XLVI

 

### REPROVING ALL THOSE WHO LIVE ON SPIRITUAL GOODS IN AN INORDINATE MANNER

 

Now Christ left His treasure and His revenue here on earth. These are
the seven sacraments and the outward goods of Holy Church, which He has
gotten through His death, and which, therefore, should be in common. And
His servants, who live thereon, should therefore be in common. All those
who live on alms and are in the ecclesiastical state, should be in
common at least in their prayers: and especially all religious who live
in cloisters and in cells. In the beginning of Holy Church and of our
Faith, popes, bishops, and priests, were all in common; for they went
out and converted the folk, and established Holy Church and our Faith,
and sealed them with their blood and with their death. These men were
simple and onefold, and they had steadfast peace in the unity of the
spirit. And they were enlightened with godly wisdom, rich and
overflowing with faith and with love towards God and towards all men.
But now, notwithstanding it is become wholly otherwise; for those who
to-day possess the heritage and the revenue which were given to those
others out of love and because of their holiness, are unstable of soul,
and restless, and in multiplicity; for they have altogether turned
towards the world, and do not thoroughly apprehend in their ground those
things and that business which they have in hand. That is why they pray
with their lips, but their heart does not savour the meaning, that is to
say, it does not feel the secret wonder which is hidden in Scripture,
and in the sacraments, and in their office. And therefore they are
coarse and dull, and are not enlightened by the Divine truth, and they
often seek food and drink and ease of body without moderation: would to
God they were at least clean of fleshly sins! As long as they live thus,
they shall never be enlightened; and whereas those others were generous,
and overflowing with charity, and kept nothing for themselves, these are
now greedy and avaricious, and deny themselves nothing. All this is
contrary and unlike to the saints, and to that common way of which we
have spoken. I speak of the general state of things: let each prove
himself, and teach and reprove himself, if needs be; and, if not, let
him rejoice and rest in peace in his clean conscience, and serve and
praise God, for the good of himself and of all men, and for the glory of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII. Showing How Christ Has Given Himself to all in
Common in the Sacrament of the Altar](asm077)
