[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm069)  [Next](asm071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XL

 

### HE SHALL GO OUT TOWARDS GOD AND TOWARDS ALL SAINTS

 

Now understand this: this man shall go out and observe God in His glory
with all saints. And he shall behold the rich and generous outflowing of
God, with glory, and with Himself, and with inconceivable delights
towards all the saints, according to the longing of all spirits; and how
these flow back, with themselves, and with all that they have received
and can achieve, towards that same rich Oneness from which all bliss
comes forth.

This flowing forth of God always demands a flowing back; for God is a
Sea that ebbs and flows, pouring without ceasing into all His beloved
according to the need and the merits of each, and ebbing back again with
all those who have been thus endowed both in heaven and on earth, with
all that they have and all that they can. And of some He demands more
than they are able to bring, for He shows Himself so rich and so
generous and so boundlessly good: and in showing Himself thus He demands
love and adoration according to His worth. For God wishes to be loved by
us according to the measure of His nobility, and in this all spirits
fail; and therefore their love becomes wayless and without manner, for
they know not how they may fulfil it, nor how they may come to it. For
the love of all spirits is measured: and for this reason their love
perpetually begins anew, so that God may be loved according to His
demand and to the spirit's own desires. And this is why all blessed
spirits perpetually gather themselves together and form a burning flame
of love, that they may fulfil this work, and that God may be loved
according to His nobility. Reason shows clearly that to creatures this
is impossible; but love always wills the fulfilment of love, or else
will be consumed, burned up, annihilated in its own failure. Yet God is
never loved according to His worth by any creatures. And to the
enlightened reason this is a great delight and satisfaction: that its
God and its Beloved is so high and so rich that He transcends all
created powers, and can be loved according to His merits by none save
Himself.

This rich and enlightened man shall distribute gifts to all the angelic
choirs, and all spirits, each in particular according to its merits, out
of the richness of his God and out of the generosity of his own ground;
which is illuminated and overflowing with great and wonderful gifts. He
passes through all choirs, through all hierarchies and orders, and
beholds how God dwells in all according to the merit of each. This
enlightened man goes swiftly and in ghostly wise round and through all
the heavenly hosts, rich and overflowing with charity, and enriching and
inundating the whole celestial company with fresh glory out of the
Richness and Abundance of the Trinity and Unity of the Divine Nature.

This is the first going out, towards God and towards all saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI. He Shall Go Out Towards All Sinners](asm071)
