[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm048)  [Next](asm050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XIX

 

### OF SPIRITUAL INEBRIATION

 

From this rapturous delight <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](asm132.htm#fn_43) springs spiritual inebriation.
Spiritual inebriation is this; that a man receives more sensible joy and
sweetness than his heart can either contain or desire. Spiritual
inebriation brings forth many strange gestures in men. It makes some
sing and praise God because of their fulness of joy, and some weep with
great tears because of their sweetness of heart. It makes one restless
in all his limbs, so that he must run and jump and dance; and so excites
another that he must gesticulate and clap his hands. Another cries out
with a loud voice, and so shows forth the plenitude he feels within;
another must be silent and melt away, because of the rapture which he
feels in all his senses. At times he thinks that all the world must feel
what he feels: at times he thinks that none can taste what he has
attained. Often he thinks that he never could, nor ever shall, lose this
well-being; at times he wonders why all men do not become God-desiring.
At one time he thinks that God is for him alone, or for none other so
much as for him; at another time he asks himself with amazement of what
nature these delights can be, and whence they come, and what has
happened to him. This is the most rapturous life (as regards our bodily
feelings) which man may attain upon earth. Sometimes the excess of joy
becomes so great that the man thinks that his heart must break. And for
all these manifold gifts and miraculous works, he shall, with a humble
heart, thank and praise and honour and reverence the Lord, Who can do
all this; and thank Him with fervent devotion because it is His will to
do all this. And the man shall always keep in his heart and speak
through his mouth with sincere intention: "Lord, I am not worthy of
this; yet I have need of Thy boundless goodness and of Thy support." In
such humility he may grow and rise into higher virtues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. What May Hinder a Man in this Inebriation](asm050)
