[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm073)  [Next](asm075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XLIV

 

### SHOWING HOW WE MAY RECOGNISE THOSE MEN WHO FAIL IN CHARITY TO ALL

 

There are some men who are very subtle in words, and skilful in showing
forth high things, and yet do not enjoy this enlightened condition,
neither this common and generous charity. In order that these men may
learn to know themselves, and also may be known of others, I will
distinguish them by three signs. By the first sign they may be known of
themselves, and by the two others they may be recognised of all men of
understanding.

The first sign: Whereas the enlightened man, by virtue of the Divine
light, is simple and stable and free from curious considerations, these
others are manifold and restless and full of subtle reasonings and
reflections, and they do not taste inward unity, nor the satisfaction
which is without images. And by this they may know themselves.

The second sign: Whereas the enlightened man possesses a wisdom inpoured
by God, wherein he knows and distinguishes the truth without effort,
these men have shrewd and sudden notions, with which they work in their
imagination, and which they display and develop with much cunning. But
their ground is barren and they cannot bring forth fruitful doctrine.
Their doctrines are manifold, they are concerned with outward things and
addressed to the understanding. And thereby inward men are troubled,
hindered, and led astray. They neither lead nor point to unity; but they
teach subtle observations in multiplicity. Such people hold obstinately
to their own doctrine and opinion, even though another opinion be as
good as their own. And they are idle and careless as regards all
virtues. Spiritual pride is in all their being. This is the second sign.

The third sign: Whereas the enlightened and loving man flows forth in
love towards all in heaven and on earth, as you have heard, this other
man sets himself apart in all things. He thinks himself to be the wisest
and the best of all; and desires that others should think highly of him
and his teaching. All those whom he does not teach and advise, all those
who do not follow his way of life and do not cling to him as their
master, these seem to him to be sunk in error. He is large and spacious
in satisfying his bodily needs, and little faults do not count heavily
with him. This man is neither just, nor humble, nor generous, nor a
servant of the poor, nor inward, nor fervent, nor does he feel the love
of God. He knows neither God, nor his own being, in the way of true
virtue. This is the third sign.

Mark these, and study them, and cast them out of yourselves, and out of
all men in whom you remark them; but condemn no one for such things
unless it be that they have proved it by their deeds, for this would
soil your heart and would hinder it in the knowledge of Divine truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. How Christ Was, Is, and Ever Will Be the Lover of
All](asm075.md)
