[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm095)  [Next](asm097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LXVI

 

### SHOWING HOW SOME MEN LIVE CONTRARY TO THESE EXERCISES

 

Now some men, who seem to be righteous, yet live contrary to these three
ways and to every virtue. Let every one observe and prove himself! Every
man who is not drawn and enlightened of God is not touched by love, and
has neither the active cleaving with desire <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](asm132.htm#fn_66.md) nor the simple and loving
tendency to fruitive rest. And therefore such a one cannot unite himself
with God; for all those who live without supernatural love are inclined
towards themselves and seek their rest in outward things. For all
creatures by their nature tend towards rest: and therefore, rest is
sought both by the good and by the evil, in divers ways.

Now mark this: when a man is bare and imageless in his senses, and empty
and idle in his higher powers, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](asm132.htm#fn_67.md) he enters into rest through
mere nature; and this rest may be found and possessed within themselves
in mere nature by all creatures, without the grace of God, whenever they
can strip themselves of images and of all activity. But in this the
loving man cannot find his rest, for charity and the inward touch of
God's grace will not be still: and so the inward man cannot long remain
in natural rest within himself.

But now mark the way in which this natural rest is practised. It is a
sitting still, without either outward or inward acts, in vacancy, in
order that rest may be found and may remain untroubled. But a rest which
is practised in this way is unlawful; for it brings with it in men a
blindness and ignorance, and a sinking down into themselves without
activity. Such a rest is nought else than an idleness, into which the
man has fallen, and in which he forgets himself and God and all things
in all that has to do with activity. This rest is wholly contrary to the
supernatural rest, which one possesses in God; for that is a loving
self-mergence joined to a simple gazing into the Incomprehensible
Brightness. This rest in God, which is actively sought with inward
longing, and is found in fruitive inclination, and is eternally
possessed in the self-mergence of love, and which, when possessed, is
sought none the less: this rest is exalted above the rest of mere nature
as greatly as God is exalted above all creatures. And that is why all
those men are deceived who have self in mind and sink down in the
natural rest, and neither seek God in desire, nor find Him in fruitive
love; for the rest which they find consists in their own idleness, to
which they are inclined by nature and by habit. And in this natural rest
one cannot find God, but it certainly leads a man into a bare vacancy,
which may be found by Pagans and Jews and all men, how wicked soever
they may be, if they can live in their sins without the reproach of
their conscience, and can empty themselves of every image and of all
activity. In this bare vacancy the rest is pleasant and great. This rest
is in itself no sin; for it exists in all men by nature, whenever they
make themselves empty. But when a man wishes to practise and possess it
without acts of virtue, he falls into spiritual pride and a
self-complacency, from which he seldom recovers. And he sometimes
fancies himself to have and to be that to which he shall never attain.
When a man thus possesses this rest in false quietude, and all loving
adherence seems a hindrance to him, he clings to himself in his rest,
and lives contrary to the first way in which man is united with God: and
this is the beginning of all ghostly error.

Now consider a similitude of this: the angels who turned inward towards
God in love and fruition, with all that they had received from Him,
found beatitude and eternal rest; but those who turned towards
themselves, and sought rest in themselves with self-complacency in the
natural light, their rest was short and was unlawful. And they were
blinded, and there was a wall of separation between them and the
external light, and they fell into darkness and eternal restlessness.
This is the first contrary way; which one possesses by resting in false
quietude.

 

Now mark this: when a man wishes to possess inward rest in idleness,
without inward and desirous cleaving to God, then he is ready for all
errors; for he is turned away from God, and inclined towards himself, in
natural love, seeking and desiring consolation and sweetness and
everything that pleases him. And such a man is like to a merchant, for
in all his activity he is turned only towards himself, and seeks and
means his own rest and his own profit, more than the glory of God. A man
who thus lives in mere natural love, always possesses himself in
self-love without self-renunciation. Such men often lead a hard life
with great works of penitence, that they may become known and renowned
for their great sanctity, and also that they may merit a great reward;
for all natural love is favourably disposed to itself and likes to
receive great honours in time and a great reward in eternity. And these
men have many special desires, and pray and beseech God for many
particular things. And thus they are often deceived; for sometimes,
through the work of the devil, those things which they desire happen to
them, and then they ascribe this to their sanctity, and hold themselves
worthy of them all; for such people are proud, and neither touched nor
enlightened by God. And therefore they dwell within themselves, and a
small consolation may greatly rejoice them, for they know not what they
lack. And they are wholly attached, in their desire, to inward savours
and the spiritual refreshment of their nature. And this is called
spiritual lust; for it is an inordinate attachment in natural love,
which is always directed towards itself, and seeks its own profit in all
things.

Such men are always spiritually proud and self-willed; and this is why
their desires and lusts are sometimes so vehemently set upon the things
which they desire, and wilfully strive to acquire from God, so that they
are often deceived, and some of them also become possessed by the devil.
All these men live contrary to charity and to the loving introversion in
which a man offers himself up, with all that he can achieve, for the
honour and love of God; and in which nothing can give him rest or
satisfaction but a single incomprehensible Good, which is God alone. For
charity is a bond of love, in which we are drawn up to God, and through
which we renounce ourselves, and whereby we are united with God and God
is united with us. But natural love turns back towards itself, and
towards its own profit, and ever abides alone. Nevertheless, in its
outward works, natural love is as like unto charity as two hairs from
the same head; but the intentions are different. For the good man always
seeks and means and desires, with an aspiring heart, to glorify God; but
in natural love a man has always himself and his own profit in mind.
Therefore, when natural love opposes and conquers true charity the man
falls into four sins; namely, spiritual pride, avarice, gluttony, and
lust. And in this way Adam fell in Paradise, and all human nature with
him, for he loved himself inordinately with natural love, and so he
turned away from God, and scorned in his pride the commandment of God.
And he desired knowledge and wisdom in his avarice; and he sought
pleasant tastes and satisfactions in gluttony; and after that he was
moved by lust. But Mary was a living Paradise. She found the grace which
Adam lost, and much more besides, for she is the Mother of Love. She
turned in active charity towards God, and conceived Christ in humility.
And she offered Him up to the Father with all His sufferings in
generosity; and she never tasted of consolation, nor of any gift, in
gluttony; and her whole life was in purity. Whosoever follows her shall
conquer all that is contrary to the virtues, and shall enter into the
kingdom where she reigns with her Son in eternity.

 

So, when a man possesses the natural rest in bare vacancy, whilst in all
his works he has himself in mind, and he continues obstinately
disobedient in his self-will, he cannot be united with God; for he lives
without charity in unlikeness to God. And here begins the third contrary
way, which is the most noxious of all; and this is an unrighteous life,
full of ghostly error and of all perversity.

Now mark well what follows, lest you should not understand it well. All
these men are, in their own opinion, God-seeing men, and believe
themselves the holiest of all men living. Yet they live contrary and
unlike to God and all saints and all good men. Observe the following
marks: thus you will be able to recognise them both by their words and
their works. By means of the natural rest which they feel and possess in
themselves in bare vacancy, they believe themselves to be free, and to
be united with God without means, and to be above all the customs of
Holy Church, and above the commandments of God, and above the law, and
above every work of virtue which can in any way be done. For they think
their idleness to be so great a thing that it may not be troubled by any
work, how good soever it be; for this idleness is nobler than any
virtue. And therefore they maintain themselves in pure passivity,
without any activity towards above or towards below; like a loom, which
does not work of itself, but awaits its master, and the time when he
wishes to work. For they deem that if they worked themselves, God would
be hindered in His work. And therefore they are empty of every virtue;
and indeed so empty, that they will neither praise nor thank God. They
have no knowledge and no love, no will, no prayer, no desire; for they
believe that all that they could pray for, and desire, is already
possessed of them. And so they are poor of spirit, for they are without
will, and have forsaken everything, and live without any personal
preferences: and thus it seems to them that they are empty, and have
overcome everything, and have in their possession all those things for
which the customs of Holy Church have been instituted and ordained. And
so, they say, no one, not even God, can give them anything, or can take
away anything from them; for they have, in their own opinion,
transcended all customs and all virtues, and have entered into the pure
emptiness, and are released from every virtue. And this release from all
virtues in emptiness needs, they say, more labour than the acquisition
of the virtues. And therefore they would be free, and obedient to none;
neither pope, nor bishop, nor parson. Even though outwardly they seem to
be so, inwardly they are submissive to none, neither in will nor in
works; for they are in every respect empty of all that Holy Church
practises. And therefore they say, as long as a man strives after
virtue, and desires to fulfil the good pleasure of God, he is still
imperfect; for he is still amassing virtues, and knows not this
spiritual poverty and emptiness. But they are themselves, in their own
opinion, lifted up above all the choirs of saints and angels, and above
every reward which one can in any way merit. And therefore they say that
their virtues can nevermore increase, nor can they themselves deserve a
greater reward, nor commit any sin any more; for, they say, they live
without will, and have surrendered their spirit to God in rest and
bareness, and are one with God, and in themselves have become nothing.
And therefore they can do without hindrance all that the bodily nature
desires, for they have attained to the state of innocence, and no law
has sway over them. When therefore it happens that their emptiness of
spirit is troubled or hindered by any natural lust, they yield to
nature, that their emptiness of spirit may remain untroubled. And that
is why they do not keep Lent or Ember-days, or any other commandment,
save when they do it for the sake of their neighbours; for they live
without conscience in all things. I hope that of such folk not many are
to be found; but those who are like them are the most wicked and vile of
all men living. And they are sometimes possessed of the Fiend; and then
they are so cunning that one cannot vanquish them on the grounds of
reason. But through Holy Scripture and the teaching of Christ and our
Faith, we may prove that they are deceived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII. Of Another Kind of Perverted Men](asm097.md)
