[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm114)  [Next](asm116.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XIII

 

### HOW WE OUGHT TO HAVE FRUITION OF GOD

 

If a man would have fruition of God, three things are needful thereto;
these are, true peace, inward silence, and loving adherence.

Whosoever would find true peace between himself and God must love God in
such a way that he can, with a free heart, renounce for the glory of God
everything which he does or loves inordinately, or which he possesses,
or can possess, contrary to the glory of God. This is the first thing
which is needful to all men.

The second thing is an inward silence; that is, that a man should be
empty and free from images of all things which he ever saw or of which
he ever heard.

The third thing is a loving adherence to God, and this adherence is
itself fruition; for whosoever cleaves to God out of pure love, and not
for his own profit, he enjoys God in truth, and feels that he loves God
and that God loves him.

There are still three other points, which are higher still, and which
establish a man and make him able to enjoy and to feel God continually,
if it be His good will to have it so.

The first of these points is to rest in Him Whom one enjoys; that is,
where love is overcome by the lover, and love is taken possession of by
the lover, in bare Essential Love. There love has fallen in love with
the lover, and each is all to the other, in possession and in rest.

From this there follows the second: and this is called a falling asleep
in God; that is, when the spirit immerses itself, and knows not how, nor
where, nor in what it is.

And therefrom follows the last point that can be put into words, that
is, when the spirit beholds a Darkness into which it cannot enter with
the reason. And there it feels itself dead and lost to itself, and one
with God without difference and without distinction. And when it feels
itself one with God, then God Himself is its peace and its enjoyment and
its rest. And this is an unfathomable abyss wherein man must die to
himself in blessedness, and must live again in virtues, whenever love
and its stirring demand it. Lo! if you feel these six points within you,
then you feel all that I have, or could have, said before. And
introversion is as easy to you, and contemplation and fruition are as
ready to you, as your life according to nature. And from these riches
there comes that common life of which I promised to speak to you at the
beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of that Common Life Which Comes from the
Contemplation and Fruition of God](asm116.md)
