[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm119)  [Next](asm121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

 

### OF THE UNION THROUGH MEANS

 

And next, I will say that all good men are united with God through
means. These means are the grace of God, and the sacraments of Holy
Church, and the Divine virtues, faith, hope and charity, and a virtuous
life according to the commandments of God; and to these there belongs a
death to sin and to the world and to every inordinate lust of nature.
And through these, we remain united with Holy Church, that is, with all
good men; and with these, we obey God, and are one will with Him, even
as an orderly convent is united with its Superior: and without this
union none can please God nor be saved. Whosoever keeps this union
through these means unto the end of his life, he shall be one of those
of whom Christ says unto His Father in heaven in the Gospel of St John:
Father, I will that they also whom Thou hast given Me be with Me where I
am: that they may behold My glory which Thou hast given Me. And in
another place He says that His servants shall sit down to meat—that is,
in the richness and the fulness of those virtues which they have
exercised—and He will go one to another and will minister unto them of
His glory which He has achieved. And He will generously impart and
reveal to His beloved, to each one specially and separately—more or less
according as he is worthy of it and can lay hold of it—the loftiness of
His glory and honour which He alone has earned by the merits of His life
and His death. Thus all saints shall be forever with Christ, each in his
own order and in the degree of glory which he has earned through God's
help by his works. And Christ, according to His manhood shall be set
above all saints, and above all angels, as a prince of all glory and all
honour; the which pertain to His manhood alone above all creatures.
Behold, thus you may understand how we are united with God through
means, both here in grace and hereafter in glory. But there is a great
distinction and a great difference in these means, and this is true both
as regards life and reward, as I have told you. And this was well
understood by St Paul, when he said that he had A desire to depart and
to be with Christ. But he did not say that he had a desire to be Christ
Himself or God; as is done by some unbelieving and perverse men, who say
that they have no God, but that they are so wholly dead to themselves,
and united with God, that they have themselves become God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Of The Men Who Practise A False Vacancy](asm121.md)
