[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm115)  [Next](asm117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XIV

 

### OF THAT COMMON LIFE WHICH COMES FROM THE CONTEMPLATION AND FRUITION OF GOD

 

The man who is sent down by God from these heights into the world is
full of truth and rich in all virtues. And he seeks not his own but the
glory of Him Who has sent him. And hence he is just and truthful in all
things, and he possesses a rich and a generous ground, which is set in
the richness of God: and therefore he must always spend himself on those
who have need of him; for the living fount of the Holy Ghost, which is
his wealth, can never be spent. And he is a living and willing
instrument of God, with which God works whatsoever He wills and
howsoever He wills; and these works he reckons not as his own, but gives
all the glory to God. And so he remains ready and willing to do in the
virtues all that God commands, and strong and courageous in suffering
and enduring all that God allows to befall him. And by this he possesses
a universal life, for he is ready alike for contemplation and for
action, and is perfect in both of them. And none can have this universal
life save the God-seeing man; and none can contemplate and enjoy God
save he who has within himself the six points, ordered as I have
described heretofore. And therefore, all those are deceived who fancy
themselves to be contemplative, and yet inordinately love, practice, or
possess, some creaturely thing; or who fancy that they enjoy God before
they are empty of images, or that they rest before they enjoy. All such
are deceived; for we must make ourselves fit for God with an open heart,
with a peaceful conscience, with naked contemplation, without hypocrisy,
in sincerity and truth. And then we shall mount up from virtue unto
virtue, and shall see God, and shall enjoy Him, and in Him shall become
one with Him, in the way which I have shown to you. That this be done in
all of us, so help us God. Amen.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue](asm117.md)
