[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm120)  [Next](asm122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

 

### OF THE MEN WHO PRACTISE A FALSE VACANCY

 

Behold, such folk, by means of a onefold simplification and a natural
tendency, are turned in upon the bareness of their own being; and
therefore they think eternal life is and shall be nought else but an
enduring state of beatitude, without distinction in order in holiness or
in reward. Yea, all such are so deep in error that they say that the
Persons shall pass away into the Godhead, and that nought else shall
remain in eternity than the essential substance of the Godhead; and that
all blessed spirits shall be so simply absorbed with God in the
Essential Blessedness that nothing shall remain beside it, neither
willing nor working, nor the discerning knowledge of any creature
whatsoever. Behold, these men have gone astray into the vacant and blind
simplicity of their own being, and they seek for blessedness in bare
nature; for they are so simply and so idly united with the bare essence
of their souls, and with that wherein God always is, that they have
neither zeal, nor cleaving to God, neither from without, nor from
within. For in the highest part into which they have entered, they feel
nothing but the simplicity of their own proper being, depending upon the
Being of God. And the onefold simplicity which they there possess, they
take to be God, because they find a natural rest therein. And so they
think themselves to be God in their simple ground; for they lack true
faith, hope and charity. And, because of the naked emptiness which they
feel and possess, they say that they are without knowledge and without
love, and are exempt from the virtues. And so they endeavour to live
without heeding their conscience, what wickedness soever they commit.
And they are careless of the sacraments, and of all virtues, and of all
the practices of Holy Church, and believe that they have no need of
them: for they fancy in their folly that they have passed beyond all
these things, but imperfect men, they say, have need of them. And some
men have become so accustomed to and deep-rooted in this simplification
that they would know and heed as little of all the works which God has
wrought, and all that Scripture teaches, as though not one line had ever
been written; for they believe themselves to have found and to possess
that for the sake of which all Scriptures have been made, namely, the
blind essential rest which they feel. But in fact they have lost God and
all the ways which may lead to Him; for they have no more inwardness,
nor more devotion, nor holy practices, than a dead beast has. Yet they
sometimes approach the sacraments, and at times they quote the
Scriptures, that thus they may the better dissimulate and cover
themselves; and they like to take some dark saying of Scripture, which
they can falsely turn to their own sense, so that they may please other
simple men, and may draw them into the false vacancy which they
themselves feel. Behold, these folk think themselves wise and subtle
beyond any one else, and yet they are the most coarse and crude of all
men living; for that which even Pagans and Jews and bad Christians,
learned and unlearned, find and understand through their natural reason,
these wretched men neither can nor will attain. You may cross yourselves
against the devil, but beware earnestly of these perverted men, and take
care lest you should not recognise them in their words and works. For
they would teach, and be taught of none; they would reprove, and be
reproved of none; they would command, and obey none. They would oppress
others, but no one may oppress them; they wish to say whatever they
like, but will endure no contradiction; they recognise only their own
self-will and are subject to no one; and this they take to be ghostly
freedom. They practise the liberty of the flesh, for they give to the
body whatsoever it lusts after; and this they take to be natural
freedom. They have unified themselves in a blind and dark vacancy of
their own being; and there, they think, they are one with God, and they
take this for the Eternal Blessedness. And they have entered into this,
and have taken possession of it, through self-will and their natural
tendency; and therefore they imagine themselves to be set above the law
and above the commandments of God and Holy Church. For, above that
essential rest which they possess, they feel neither God nor any
otherness; for the Divine light has not shone into their dimness. And
this is because they have neither sought after it through active love
nor through supernatural freedom. And thus they have lost truth and
every virtue, and have fallen into a perverted unlikeness; for they make
it a part of the highest holiness that a man should yield to all that
concerns his nature, and be without restraint, so that he may abide,
with an inclined spirit, in vacancy; and that as regards the lusts of
the flesh whenever they move him, he should turn outwards, that the
flesh being satisfied, he may quickly escape from the image and may
return once more unencumbered into the bare vacancy of his spirit. Lo!
this is a fruit of hell, which grows from their unbelief; and therewith
shall unbelief be nourished even in death. For, when the time has come
and their nature is weighed down with bitter woe and the sorrow of
death, then they are filled with images and unrest and inward fear; and
they lose their vacant introversion in quietude, and fall into such
despair that none can console them, and they die like mad dogs. And
their vacancy shall bring them no reward, and those who worked wicked
works, and died in them shall go to the eternal flames, as our faith
teaches.

I have shown to you the evil and the good side by side, so that you may
so much the better understand the good and be able to guard against the
evil. You shall abhor and fly from such folk, for, how holy soever they
seem in their conduct, in works, in dress and demeanour, they are the
mortal enemies of your soul. For they are the devil's ministers, and the
most noxious of all who now live to simple and unlearned men of
good-will. But I will leave this subject, and go back again to the
matter with which I first began.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Of the Union Without Means](asm122)
