[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm099)  [Next](asm101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

 

### HOW OUR SPIRIT IS CALLED TO GO OUT IN CONTEMPLATION AND FRUITION

 

Now the Spirit of God says in the secret outpouring of our spirit: Go ye
out, in an eternal contemplation and fruition, according to the way of
God. All the riches which are in God by nature we possess by way of love
in God, and God in us, through the unmeasured love which is the Holy
Ghost, for in this love one tastes of all that one can desire. And
therefore through this love we are dead to ourselves, and have gone
forth in loving immersion into Waylessness and Darkness. There the
spirit is embraced by the Holy Trinity, and dwells for ever within the
superessential Unity, in rest and fruition. And in that same Unity,
according to Its fruitfulness, the Father dwells in the Son, and the Son
in the Father, and all creatures dwell in Both. And this is above the
distinction of the Persons; for here by means of the reason we
understand Fatherhood and Sonhood as the life-giving fruitfulness of the
Divine Nature.

Here there arise and begin an eternal going out and an eternal work
which is without beginning; for here there is a beginning with
beginning. For, after the Almighty Father had perfectly comprehended
Himself in the ground of His fruitfulness, so the Son, the Eternal Word
of the Father, came forth as the second Person in the Godhead. And,
through the Eternal Birth, all creatures have come forth in eternity,
before they were created in time. So God has seen and known them in
Himself, according to distinction, in living ideas, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](asm132.htm#fn_72.md) and in an otherness from
Himself; but not as something other in all ways, for all that is in God
is God. <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](asm132.htm#fn_73.md) This eternal
going out and this eternal life, which we have and are in God eternally,
without ourselves, is the cause of our created being in time. And our
created being abides in the Eternal Essence and is one with it in its
essential existence. And this eternal life and being, which we have and
are in the eternal Wisdom of God, is like unto God. For it has an
eternal immanence in the Divine Essence, without distinction; and
through the birth of the Son it has an eternal outflowing in a
distinction and otherness, according to the Eternal Idea. And through
these two points it is so like unto God that He knows and reflects
Himself in this likeness without cessation, according to the Essence and
according to the Persons. For, though even here there are distinction
and otherness according to intellectual perception, yet this likeness is
one with that same Image of the Holy Trinity, which is the wisdom of God
and in which God beholds Himself and all things in an eternal Now,
without before and after. In a single seeing He beholds Himself and all
things. And this is the Image and the Likeness of God, and our Image and
our Likeness; for in it God reflects Himself and all things. In this
Divine Image all creatures have an eternal life, outside themselves, as
in their eternal Archetype, and after this eternal Image, and in this
Likeness, we have been made by the Holy Trinity. And therefore God wills
that we shall go forth from ourselves in this Divine Light, and shall
reunite ourselves in a supernatural way with this Image, which is our
proper life, and shall possess it with Him, in action and in fruition,
in eternal bliss.

For we know well that the bosom of the Father is our ground and origin,
in which we begin our being and our life. And from our proper ground
that is from the Father and from all that lives in Him there shines
forth an eternal brightness, which is the birth of the Son. And in this
brightness, that is, in the Son, the Father knows Himself and all that
lives in Him; for all that He has, and all that He is, He gives to the
Son, save only the property of Fatherhood, which abides in Himself. And
this is why all that lives in the Father, unmanifested in the Unity, is
also in the Son actively poured forth into manifestation: and the simple
ground of our Eternal Image ever remains in darkness and in waylessness,
but the brightness without limit which streams forth from it, this
reveals and brings forth within the Conditioned the hiddenness of God.
And all those men who are raised up above their created being into a
God-seeing life are one with this Divine brightness. And they are that
brightness itself, and they see feel, and find, even by means of this
Divine Light, that, as regards their uncreated essence, they are that
same onefold ground from which the brightness without limit shines forth
in the Divine way, and which, according to the simplicity of the
Essence, abides eternally onefold and wayless within. And this is why
inward and God-seeing men will go out in the way of contemplation, above
reason and above distinction and above their created being, through an
eternal intuitive gazing. By means of this inborn light they are
transfigured, and made one with that same light through which they see
and which they see. <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](asm132.htm#fn_74.md) And
thus the God-seeing men follow after their Eternal Image, after which
they have been made; and they behold God and all things, without
distinction, in a simple seeing, in the Divine brightness. And this is
the most noble and the most profitable contemplation to which one can
attain in this life; for in this contemplation, a man best remains
master of himself and free. And at each loving introversion he may grow
in nobility of life beyond anything that we are able to understand; for
he remains free and master of himself in inwardness and virtue. And this
gazing at the Divine Light holds him up above all inwardness and all
virtue and all merit, for it is the crown and the reward after which we
strive, and which we have and possess now in this wise; for a God-seeing
life is a heavenly life. But were we set free from this misery and this
exile, so we should have, as regards our created being, a greater
capacity to receive this brightness; and so the glory of God would shine
through us in every way better and more nobly. This is the way above all
ways, in which one goes out through Divine contemplation and an eternal
intuitive gazing, and in which one is transfigured and transmuted in the
Divine brightness. This going out of the God-seeing man is also in love;
for through the fruition of love he rises above his created being, and
finds and tastes the riches and the delights which are God Himself, and
which He causes to pour forth without interruption in the hiddenness of
the spirit, where the spirit is like unto the nobility of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Of A Divine Meeting Which Takes Place in the
Hiddenness of Our Spirit](asm101.md)
