[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm108)  [Next](asm110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VII

 

### OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE FAITHFUL SERVANTS AND THE SECRET FRIENDS OF GOD

 

We must now observe the great difference which there is between the
faithful servants and the inward friends of God. For through grace and
the help of God, the faithful servants have chosen to keep the
commandments of God, that is, to be obedient to God and Holy Church in
all virtues and goodly behaviour: and this is called the outward or
active life. But the inward friends of God choose to follow, besides the
commandments, the quickening counsels of God, and this is a loving and
inward cleaving to God for the sake of His eternal glory, with a willing
abandonment of all that one may possess outside God with lust and love.
All such friends God calls and invites inwards, and He teaches them the
distinctions of inward exercises and many a hidden way of ghostly life.
But He sends His servants outwards, that they may be faithful to Him and
to His House in every service and in every kind of outward good works.

Behold, thus God gives His grace and His help to each man according to
his fitness; that is, according to the way in which he is in tune with
God, whether in outward good works or in the inward practice of love.
But none can do and feel the inward exercises unless he be wholly turned
inward to God. For as long as a man is divided of heart, so long he
looks outwards, and is unstable of mind, and is easily swayed by joy and
grief in temporal things, for these are still alive within him. And
though he may live according to the commandments of God, inwardly he
abides in darkness, and knows not what inward exercises may be, nor how
these should be practised. But, since he knows and feels that he has God
in mind, and in all his works desires to fulfil His dearest will, with
this he may be content; for then he knows himself to be free from
hypocrisy in his intention, and faithful in his service. And by these
two things he contents himself; and it seems to him that outward good
works done with a pure intention are more holy and more profitable than
any inward exercise whatever, for by the help of God, he has chosen an
outward active way of virtue. And therefore he had rather exercise
himself in the diversity of outward works than serve with inward love
that same One for Whom he works. And that is the cause why his mind is
more filled with the works which he does, than with God, for Whom he
does them. And through this tendency to images in his works, he remains
an outward man, and is not able to follow the counsels of God; for his
exercise is more outward than inward, more of the senses than of the
spirit. Though he is indeed a faithful servant of God in outward works,
yet that which the secret friends of God experience remains hidden from,
and unknown to him. And this is why certain gross and outward men always
condemn and blame the inward and contemplative men, because they have in
mind that these are idle. And this was also the reason why Martha
complained to our Lord of her sister Mary, because she did not help her
in serving; for she believed that she was doing much service and much
usefulness, and that her sister was sitting idle and doing nothing. But
our Lord gave His judgment and decided between them: He did not blame
Martha for her diligence, for her service was good and useful; but He
blamed her for her care, and because she was troubled and cast down by a
multitude of outward things. And He praised Mary for her inward
exercise, and said that One Thing was needful, and that she had chosen
the better part, which should not be taken away from her.

That One Thing which is needful for all men is Divine love. The better
part is an inward life, with loving adherence to God. This Mary Magdalen
had chosen, and this is chosen by the secret friends of God. But Martha
chose an outward, unenclosed, and active life; and that is the other
part, in which one may serve God, but which is neither so perfect nor so
good. And this part is chosen out of love by the faithful servants of
God.

But there are found some foolish men who would be so inward that they
would neither act nor serve, even in those things of which their
neighbour has need. Behold, these are neither secret friends nor
faithful servants of God; but they are altogether false and deceived.
For no man can follow the counsels of God who will not keep His
commandments. And therefore all secret friends of God are also at the
same time faithful servants, wherever this is needful; but all the
faithful servants are not secret friends, for the exercise which belongs
thereto is unknown to them.

This is the difference between the faithful servants and the secret
friends of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Difference Between the Secret Friends and
the Hidden Sons of God](asm110.md)
