[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm126)  [Next](asm128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER X

###  

### OF THE MUTUAL CONTENTMENT OF THE DIVINE PERSONS, AND THE MUTUAL CONTENTMENT BETWEEN GOD AND GOOD MEN

 

And so you may perceive that the Divine Nature eternally works according
to the Persons, and is eternally idle and wayless according to the
simplicity of Its Essence. All therefore that God has chosen and laid
hold of with eternal personal love, has already been essentially and
fruitively possessed of Him in unity with essential love. For the Divine
Persons are enfolded within the Unity in a mutual embrace in an eternal
contentment, in abysmal active love. And this is perpetually renewed in
the lifegiving life of the Trinity; for here there takes place a
perpetual new birth in new knowledge new contentment and new
outbreathing; in a new embrace with new torrents of Eternal Love. In
this contentment all the chosen are enfolded: angels and men, from the
first even to the last. Upon this contentment depend heaven and earth,
and life and being and the activity and preservation of all creatures,
save only the tendency to turn from God in sin: this comes from the
wilful and blind wickedness of the creatures. From the Divine
contentment grace and glory and all gifts pour forth in heaven and on
earth, and into each creature separately, according to its needs and its
receptivity. For God's grace is made ready for all men, and awaits the
conversion of every sinner, and whenever a sinner, urged by grace,
renounces himself and will call upon God with faith, he finds pardon.
And likewise, whosoever through grace with loving contentment turns
towards the Eternal Contentment of God, he is enwrapped and embraced in
the abysmal love which is God Himself. And thereby he is perpetually
renewed in love and in the virtues; for, between our contentment in God
and God's contentment in us there abides an activity of love and of
eternal life. But God has eternally loved us and established us within
His contentment, and if we rightly observe this, our love and our
contentment shall be wakened anew. For, in the mutual relations of the
Persons in the Godhead, this contentment perpetually renews itself, in a
new gushing forth of love, in an ever new embrace within the Unity. And
this takes place beyond Time; that is, without before and after, in an
eternal NOW. For, in this embrace in the Unity, all things are
consummated; and in the gushing forth of love, all things are wrought;
and in the life-giving and fruitful Nature lie the power and
possibilities of all things. For in the life-giving and fruitful Nature,
the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and the Holy Ghost
in Both. For It is a life-giving and fruitful Unity, which is the home
and the beginning of all life and of all becoming. And so all creatures
are therein, beyond themselves, one Being and one Life with God, as in
their Eternal Origin. But in the precession of the different Persons,
the Son proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from Both: and it
is there that God has made and ordained all creatures according to their
proper being, and has re-made man, through His grace and His death,
inasmuch as he cleaves to Him. And He has adorned His own with love and
with the virtues; and has turned back with them, towards His Origin.

There the Father and the Son and all the beloved are enfolded and
embraced in the bonds of love; that is, in the unity of the Holy Ghost.
And this is that same unity which is fruitful in the outgoing activity
of the Persons, and forms in Their return an eternal bond of love which
shall never be untied: and all who know themselves to be bound up in it
shall be blessed throughout eternity, and they are rich in virtue, and
clear in contemplation, and simple in fruitive rest. For in their
introversion, the Love of God is revealed to them, pouring forth with
all good, and drawing back again into the Unity, and above all being and
beyond all conditions abiding in eternal rest. And so they are all
united with God, through means, and without means, and also without
distinction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. How Good Men in Their Contemplation Have the Love of
God Before Them, and How They are Lifted Up INTO God](asm128.md)
