[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm116)  [Next](asm118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE BOOK OF SUPREME TRUTH

 

 

## PROLOGUE

 

The prophet Samuel mourned for King Saul, though he knew well that God
had rejected him and his issue from being kings in Israel: this was
because of his pride, and because he did not obey God and the prophet
who spoke in His name. We may also read in the Gospel, that the
disciples of our Lord pleaded with Him for the Gentile woman of Canaan,
to send her away, that is, to do unto her that which she desired; for
she cried after Him. So likewise I might say that we must mourn for all
such deceived men as think themselves to be kings in Israel; for they
believe themselves to be lifted up above other good men, into a lofty
and God-seeing life. And yet they are proud and wittingly and willingly
disobedient to God and the law and the Holy Church and every virtue. And
like as Saul rent the mantle of the prophet Samuel, they endeavour to
rend asunder the unity of the Christian faith, and all true doctrine and
virtuous life. Whosoever persist herein, they are separated and shut out
from the kingdom of eternal contemplation, even as Saul was shut out
from the kingdom of Israel. But that humble little woman of Canaan,
though she was Gentile and a stranger, had faith and hope in God, and
acknowledged and confessed her littleness before Christ and His
apostles: and so she received grace and health and all that she desired.
For God exalts the humble, and fills them with grace and all virtues;
and He resists the proud, and these remain empty of all good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Wherefore this Book was Written](asm118)
