[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm125)  [Next](asm127.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IX

 

###  

 

Behold, this Eternal Love, which lives within the spirit, and with which
it is united without means, gives its light and its grace to all the
powers of the soul; and becomes thereby the cause of all the virtues.
For the grace of God touches the highest powers of the soul, and from
this touch there spring charity and the knowledge of truth, the love of
all righteousness, the practice of the counsels of God according to
discretion, freedom from images, the overcoming of all things without
effort, and the death into the Unity through love. As long as a man can
maintain himself in this exercise, he is able to contemplate, and to
feel the union without means; and he feels the touch of God within
himself, which is a renewal of grace and all virtues. You must further
know that the grace of God also pours forth even through the lowest
powers, and touches a man's heart; and from this there comes forth a
heart-felt love towards God and a sensible joy in Him; and the love and
delight pierce through heart and senses, through flesh and blood, and
the whole bodily nature, and cause a pressure and restlessness in all
his members, so that he is often at his wit's end. For he feels like a
man full of wine, who is no longer master of himself. And from this
there come many a strange state, wherein men of tender heart cannot well
govern themselves. Sometimes through impatient longing, they lift up
their heads and gaze with wide-opened eyes towards heaven; now joying,
now weeping; now singing, now crying; now in weal, now in woe, and often
both together; running and jumping, laughing, clapping their hands,
kneeling, bowing down: and many other like gestures are seen in them. So
long as a man remains thus, and lifts himself up with an open heart
towards those riches of God which live in his spirit, he feels ever anew
the stirring of God, and the impatience of love; and then all these
things are renewed in him. And so this man through this bodily feeling
may sometimes pass into a ghostly feeling which is according to reason;
and through this ghostly feeling, he may pass into a godly feeling,
which is above reason; and, through this godly feeling, he may drown
himself in an unchangeable and beatific feeling. This feeling is our
superessential blessedness, which is a fruition of God and all His
beloved: and this blessedness is that Dark Quiet which ever abides in
idleness. To God it is essential, and to all creatures superessential.
And there we may behold how the Persons give place and abide in the
Essential Love, that is, in the Fruitive Unity and yet they dwell for
ever, according to Their personal nature, in the working of the Trinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of the Mutual Contentment of the Divine Persons, and
the Mutual Contentment Between God and Good Men](asm127.md)
