[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm122)  [Next](asm124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VI

 

### OF HEAVENLY WEAL AND HELLISH WOE

 

The most profitable stirrings which such a man can feel, and for which
he is best fitted, are heavenly weal and hellish woe, and the ability to
respond to these two with fit and proper works. For heavenly weal lifts
a man up above all things into an untrammelled power of praising and
loving God in every way that his heart and his soul desire. After this
comes hellish woe, and casts him down into a misery, and into a lack of
all the comfort and consolation that he experienced before. In this woe,
weal sometimes shows itself, and brings with it a hope which none can
gainsay. And then the man falls back again into a despair in which he
can find no consolation. When a man feels God within himself with rich
and full grace, this I call heavenly health; for then he is wise and
clear of understanding, rich and outflowing with heavenly teachings,
ardent and generous in charity, drunken and overflowing with joy, strong
in feeling, bold and ever ready in all the things which he knows to be
well pleasing to God; and such-like things without number, which may
only be known by those who feel them. But when the scale of love goes
down, and God hides Himself with all His graces, then the man falls back
into dereliction and torment and dark misery, as though he should never
more recover: and then he feels himself to be nought else but a poor
sinner, who knows little or nothing of God. He scorns every consolation
that creatures may give him; and the taste and consolation of God he
does not receive. And then his reason says within him: Where is now thy
God? What hath become of all that thou didst receive from God? Then his
Tears are his meat day and night, as the Prophet says. Now if that man
is to recover from this misery, he must observe and feel that he does
not belong to himself, but to God; and therefore he must freely abandon
his own will to the will of God, and must leave God to work in him in
time and in eternity. So soon as he can do this, with untroubled heart,
and with a free spirit, at that very moment he recovers his health, and
brings heaven into hell, and hell into heaven. For howsoever the scales
of love go up and down, all things to him are even or alike. For
whatsoever love gives or takes away, he who abandons himself and loves
God finds peace in all. For his spirit remains free and unmoved, who
lives in all pains without rebellion; and he is able to feel the
unmediated union with God. For he has achieved the union through means
by the richness of his virtues. And after this, because he is one aim
and one will with God, he feels God within himself together with the
fulness of His grace, as the quickening health of his being and all his
works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Showing Wherefore All Good Men Do Not Attain to the
Unmediated Union with God](asm124)
