[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm113)  [Next](asm115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XII

 

### OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF CHRIST ON MOUNT THABOR

 

And so, that the Name of Christ may be exalted and glorified in us, we
should follow Him up the mountain of our bare intelligence, <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](asm132.htm#fn_83.md) even as Peter, James and John
followed Him on to mount Thabor. Thabor means in our tongue an increase
of light. So soon as we are like Peter in knowledge of truth, and like
James in the overcoming of the world, and like John in fulness of grace
possessing the virtues in righteousness; then Jesus brings us up on to
the mountain of our bare intelligence to a hidden solitude, and reveals
Himself to us in glory and in Divine brightness. And, in His name, His
Father in heaven opens to us the living book of His Eternal Wisdom. And
the Wisdom of God enfolds our bare vision and the simplicity of our
spirit in a wayless, simple fruition of all good without distinction;
and here there are indeed seeing and knowing, tasting and feeling,
essence and life, having and being: and all this is one in our
transcendence in God. And before this transcendence we are all set, each
in his own particular way; and our heavenly Father, of His wisdom and
goodness, endows each one in particular according to the nobility of his
life and his practice. And therefore, if we ever remained with Jesus on
mount Thabor, that is, upon the mountain of our bare thought, we should
continually experience a growth of new light and new truth; for we
should ever hear the voice of the Father, Who touches us, pouring forth
with grace, and drawing us inward into the unity. The voice of the
Father is heard by all who follow our Lord Jesus Christ, for He says of
them all: "These are My chosen sons, in whom I am well pleased." And,
through this good pleasure, each one receives grace, according to the
measure and the way in which God is well-pleasing unto him. And
therefrom, between our pleasure in God, and God's pleasure in us, there
arises the practice of true love. And so each one tastes of his name and
his office and the fruit of his exercise. And here all good men abide,
hidden from those who live in the world; for these are dead before God
and have no name, and therefore they can neither feel nor taste that
which belongs to those who live indeed.

The outpouring touch of God quickens us with life in the spirit, and
fulfills us with grace, and enlightens our reason, and teaches us to
know truth and to discern the virtues, and keeps us stable in the
Presence of God, with such a great strength that we are able to endure
all the tasting, all the feeling, and all the outpouring gifts of God
without our spirits failing us. But the indrawing-touch of God demands
of us, that we should be one with God, and go forth from ourselves, and
die into blessedness, that is, into the Eternal Love Which embraces the
Father and the Son in one fruition. And therefore when we have climbed
with Jesus on to the mountain of our bare thought; and if, then, we
follow Him with a single and simple gaze, with inward pleasure, and with
fruitive inclination, we feel the fierce heat of the Holy Ghost, burning
and melting us into the Unity of God. For when we are one with the Son,
and lovingly return towards our Beginning, then we hear the voice of the
Father, touching us and drawing us inward; for He says to all His chosen
in His Eternal Word: This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased.
For you should know that the Father with the Son, and the Son with the
Father, have conceived an eternal satisfaction in regard to this: that
the Son should take upon Himself our manhood, and die, and bring back
all the chosen to their Beginning.

And so soon as we are uplifted through the Son into our Origin, we hear
the voice of the Father, which draws us inward, and enlightens us with
eternal truth. And truth shows to us the wide-opened good-pleasure of
God, in which all good-pleasure begins and ends. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](asm132.htm#fn_84.md) There all our powers fail us,
and we fall from ourselves into our wide-opened contemplation, and
become all One and one All, in the loving embrace of the Threefold
Unity. Whenever we feel this union, we are one being and one life and
one blessedness with God. And there all things are fulfilled and all
things are made new; for when we are baptized into the wide embrace of
the Love of God, the joy of each one of us becomes so great and so
special that he can neither think of nor care for the joy of anyone
else; for then each one is himself a Fruition of Love, and he cannot and
dare not seek for anything beyond his own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How We Ought to Have Fruition Of God](asm115.md)
