[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott07)  [Next](wott09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### Personal Morality in the Talmud

<span class="smallcaps">The Talmud</span> is concerned with man himself,
and not only with the social consequences of his actions. Scattered
throughout Talmudic literature, we have therefore a description of the
ideal in human character. It is inspired by the religious and moral
values which are taught in Talmudic Judaism.

#### CONFIDENCE IN LIFE

The basic attitude which the Talmudists prized in people is a
disposition of confidence in life. Such confidence flows directly from
faith in God. For if God's providence extends to all His creatures, then
we may be certain that whatever transpires is for the best—at least for
the best of creation. A well-known Talmudic maxim reads: "Whatever the
Lord does is for the best."

There are occasions when events transpire that we judge injurious to
ourselves. In many instances, however, they are really to our advantage,
though we may not be aware of it at the time. The Talmud cites an
anecdote from the career of Rabbi Akiba which illustrates this truth.
While on a journey he sought hospitality in a certain town, but he was
turned down, and he had to spend the night in the field. That very night
robbers came and plundered the entire town. "He thereupon said to the
inhabitants, 'Did I not tell you that whatever the Holy One, blessed be
He, does is for the best!'"<span
id="an_r_06_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_06_1)

The rabbis urged a man to labor diligently in order to provide for
himself and his family. "One must not depend on miracles," is a familiar
maxim in the Talmud.<span
id="an_r_06_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_06_2) But once

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

a person assumes his obligations and acts on them he need not be unduly
anxious about his livelihood. "A person who has today's bread in his
basket and is worried, 'What will I eat tomorrow?'—is a man of little
faith," declared Rabbi Eliezer.<span
id="an_r_06_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_06_3) The Lord stands behind
our own endeavors, and as He provides for the raven in the field, He
provides for man also. In the words of the rabbis: "He who created each
day provides for the needs thereof."<span
id="an_r_06_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_06_4)

The portions allotted to us in life will of course differ. Some attain
riches and some struggle for subsistence. But ultimately there is no
objective standard for affluence. Affluence is only in one's art of
being content with what one has. As the ethical tractate Abot declared
it: "Who is rich? He who is content with his lot."<span
id="an_r_06_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_06_5)

#### ENVY, JEALOUSY AND PRIDE

The rabbis decried envy and jealousy, in which a person, out of
discontent with his portion, begrudges the good fortune that has come to
others. Envy and hatred of one's fellow-man were cited by the rabbis as
vices that "take a man from the world."<span
id="an_r_06_6"></span>[6](wott11.htm#an_n_06_6) One of the rabbis was
accustomed to offer a daily prayer: "May it be acceptable before Thee O
Lord my God and God of my fathers, that no hatred against us may enter
the heart of any man, that no hatred of any man enter our heart, that no
envy of us enter the heart of any man, nor the envy of any man enter our
heart …"<span id="an_r_06_7"></span>[7](wott11.htm#an_n_06_7)

The rabbis were equally emphatic in denouncing pride. "Humility," one of
the rabbis said, "is the greatest of all virtues."<span
id="an_r_06_8"></span>[8](wott11.htm#an_n_06_8) A person who is puffed
up with an arrogant spirit is as though "he had worshipped idols, denied
the basic principles of religion, and committed every kind of immorality
…"<span id="an_r_06_9"></span>[9](wott11.htm#an_n_06_9) Arrogance is not
only an evil trait because it hurts other people. It is equally
injurious to its own possessor for it sends him on a road that will
inevitably lead to

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

frustration. The rabbis generalized thus: "Whoever runs after greatness,
greatness will elude him; whoever flees from greatness, greatness will
pursue him."<span id="an_r_06_10"></span>[10](wott11.htm#an_n_06_10)

#### THE MEANING OF GOOD WILL

The proper disposition of man toward his neighbor is an unreserved good
will. The ethical tractate Abot reiterates this demand repeatedly.
Matthew ben Heresh taught: "Be the first to offer cordial greetings to
every man." Shammai was the author of a similar maxim: "Receive every
person with a glad disposition." Ben Zoma was wont to say: "Who is
deserving of honor? He who honors other people." Rabbi Eliezer urged:
"Let the honor of your friend be as dear to thee as thine own." Rabbi
Hanina ben Dosa declared: "He who pleases the spirit of man, will also
please the spirit of God; and he who does not please the spirit of his
fellowman, will not please the spirit of God either."<span
id="an_r_06_11"></span>[11](wott11.htm#an_n_06_11)

The Talmud tells many anecdotes to illustrate the need of being ever
vigilant to maintain one's good will toward others. One of these is the
case of Rabbi Elazar ben Simeon who had become corrupted with pride
because of his great learning and then came to look with disdain on
other people. He once rode leisurely on his donkey at the edge of the
river and felt especially pleased with himself, when he noticed a very
ugly-looking person coming his way. The latter greeted him but he did
not reply. Instead he asked whether all his townsmen were as ugly as he.
The stranger's comeback was: "I don't know, but I suggest you go to my
Maker and tell him: 'How ugly is this vessel you have made!'" At once
the rabbi was aware that he had sinned. He descended from his donkey and
bowed before the stranger and asked his forgiveness. The latter refused
and he followed him with his entreaties to the entrance of the town. The
people turned out in large numbers to welcome Rabbi Elazar and the
stranger reported to them the incident. They joined in the entreaties,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

and the latter then agreed to accept the apology, on the understanding
"that he shall never again act thus."<span
id="an_r_06_12"></span>[12](wott11.htm#an_n_06_12)

Even if one have a genuine grievance toward his neighbor, he ought not
to respond with hatred. The Talmud cited the case of a man cutting with
one hand and inadvertently hurting the other hand. "Shall he in
retaliation cut the hand that wielded the knife?" We are all part of one
another and the hurts we inflict on others really strike at ourselves,
since our lives are interdependent.<span
id="an_r_06_13"></span>[13](wott11.htm#an_n_06_13) There are other ways
of coping with grievances—to speak with candor and through honest
voicing of our grievances to bring about a reconciliation. Indeed, a
lasting friendship depends on the regular rebukes that one administers
to the other. "A love without rebuke is no real love."<span
id="an_r_06_14"></span>[14](wott11.htm#an_n_06_14) It takes much in
self-control to act with such magnanimity toward those who have wronged
us. But it is in such self-control that true character reveals itself.
The true hero, teaches the Talmud, is "one who converts an enemy into a
friend."<span id="an_r_06_15"></span>[15](wott11.htm#an_n_06_15)

One's good will should be extended without limits. Even the sinner is
entitled to it. A Talmudic anecdote illustrates this. "There were some
lawless men living in the neighborhood of Rabbi Meir and they used to
vex him sorely. Once Rabbi Meir prayed for their death. His wife,
Beruriah, thereupon exclaimed: 'What do you take as the sanction for
your prayer? Is it because it is written, Let sinners cease out of the
earth? (Ps. 104:35) But the verse may also be rendered to mean, Let sin
cease out of the earth. Consider, moreover, the conclusion of the verse:
And let the wicked be no more. When sins shall cease, the wicked will be
no more. Rather should you pray that they repent and be no more wicked.'
Rabbi Meir offered prayer on their behalf and they repented."<span
id="an_r_06_16"></span>[16](wott11.htm#an_n_06_16)

The Talmud includes many anecdotes to illustrate the extent to which one
ought to be patient with people. The hero in one such anecdote is
Hillel. "Our masters have taught: A

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

person should always be patient like Hillel and not quick-tempered like
Shammai. Two men once made a wager that whoever would succeed in getting
Hillel to lose his temper would win four hundred *zuz*. That day
happened to be the eve of the Sabbath and Hillel was then washing his
head. One of the men came to the door of the house and shouted, 'Is
Hillel here? Is Hillel here?' Hillel wrapped himself, came out and asked
him, 'What do you want, my son?' 'I have a question to put to you.' 'Ask
it, my son.' 'Why are the Babylonians round-headed?' 'You have put an
important question to me,' Hillel answered. 'The reason is that they
have no skilled midwives.'

"The man left and after a short while returned, shouting, 'Is Hillel
here? Is Hillel here?' The Rabbi wrapped himself, came out to him and
asked, 'What do you want, my son?' 'I have a question to put to you.'
'Ask it, my son.' 'Why are the inhabitants of Palmyra bleary-eyed?' 'You
asked an important question,' Hillel again replied. 'The reason is that
they live in sandy districts.'

"The man went away, waited a brief while and again returned, shouting,
'Is Hillel here? Is Hillel here?' The Rabbi wrapped himself, came out to
him and inquired, 'What is it, my son?' 'I have a question to put to
you.' 'Ask it, my son.' 'Why are the Africans broad-footed?' 'You have
asked an important question,' Hillel once more responded. 'The reason is
that they live in marshy districts.'

"The man said, 'I have many more questions to ask, but I am afraid of
provoking your anger.' Hillel folded the wrap about himself, sat down
and said, 'Ask all that you desire.' 'Are you Hillel whom people call
Prince in Israel?' 'I am.' 'If so, may there not be many like you in
Israel.' 'Why, my son?' 'Because through you I have lost four hundred
*zuz*.' The Rabbi then told him, 'Be careful, Hillel is worthy that you
should lose through him four hundred *zuz* and still another four
hundred *zuz*. But Hillel will not lose his temper.'"<span
id="an_r_06_17"></span>[17](wott11.htm#an_n_06_17)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

A good man is a peace-loving man. It was Hillel who extolled the virtue
of peace in these words: "Be of the disciples of Aaron, a lover of peace
and a pursuer of peace, one who loves mankind and draws them nearer to
the Torah." According to Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel, peace is one of the
three pillars that sustain civilization, the other two being justice and
truth.<span id="an_r_06_18"></span>[18](wott11.htm#an_n_06_18) Peace is
the condition for the enjoyment of all other blessings. There may be
food, there may be drink, but "if there is no peace there is nothing."
Thus the rabbis advised people to shun quarreling. One who can exercise
such restraint "will escape a hundred evils." The quarrelsome person who
readily gives vent to his anger "will destroy his home."<span
id="an_r_06_19"></span>[19](wott11.htm#an_n_06_19)

The strife between people arises often through misunderstandings. If we
only knew all the circumstances under which our neighbor acted, we might
understand and readily forgive that which caused our resentment. The
rabbis accordingly recommend that we be cautious in judgment and that we
accord each person the full benefit of our doubt. Hillel said: "Do not
judge your neighbor unless you have been put in his place." Joshua ben
Perahyah generalized: "Judge every man by the scale of merit."

As a helpful attitude to the maintenance of good relations with people,
the rabbis suggested: "If you have done your neighbor a little wrong,
let it be in your eyes great; if you have done him much good, let it be
in your eyes little; if he has done you a little good, let it be in your
eyes great; if he has done you a great wrong, let it be in your eyes
little."<span id="an_r_06_20"></span>[20](wott11.htm#an_n_06_20)

The admiration of the rabbis for the peacemaker is clearly revealed in
the following story: "A rabbi was standing in the marketplace when
Elijah appeared to him. The rabbi asked him, 'Is there anybody in this
marketplace who will have a share in the life of the world to come?'
Elijah answered that there was not. Then two men appeared, and Elijah
said, 'These two will have a share in the world to

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

come.' The Rabbi asked them what they had done to earn such distinction.
They answered, 'We are merrymakers; when we see people troubled in mind
we cheer them, and when we see two men quarreling we make peace between
them.'"<span id="an_r_06_21"></span>[21](wott11.htm#an_n_06_21)

#### THE IMITATION OF GOD

A person should actively pursue the welfare of his neighbor. The rabbis
rooted this demand in man's duty to imitate God's providence. Thus the
Talmud expounds: "What is the meaning of the verse, 'Ye shall walk after
the Lord your God' (Deut. 13:4)? It is to follow the attributes of the
Holy One blessed be He: As He clothed the naked (Gen. 3:21), so do you
clothe the naked; as He visited the sick (Gen. 18:1), so do you visit
the sick; as He comforted mourners (Gen. 25:11), so do you comfort those
who mourn; as He buried the dead (Deut. 34:6), so do you bury the dead."
The same thought is expressed in the Midrash: "As the All-present is
called compassionate and gracious so be you also compassionate and
gracious and offering thy gifts freely to all. As the Holy One, blessed
be He, is called righteous (Ps. 145: 17) be you also righteous; and as
He is called loving (ibid), be you also loving."<span
id="an_r_06_22"></span>[22](wott11.htm#an_n_06_22)

#### THE MEANING OF BENEVOLENCE

The active concern for another person's welfare finds many expressions,
but none is prized as much as *gemilut hasadim*, acts of loving-kindness
or benevolence. Among the typical acts of loving-kindness mentioned in
the Talmud are visiting the sick, hospitality to strangers, providing a
proper outfit and dowry for a poor bride, caring for the orphaned.
Highest of all is what we do for the departed such as attending a
funeral and comforting the mourners.<span
id="an_r_06_23"></span>[23](wott11.htm#an_n_06_23)

Talmudic literature abounds in the request to relieve the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

poor in their distress. But acts of benevolence are greater than
almsgiving. The rabbis contrasted benevolence from almsgiving: "Greater
is the benevolence than alms in three respects—almsgiving is performed
with money and benevolence with personal service or money; almsgiving is
restricted to the poor and benevolence applies to the poor as well as to
the affluent; almsgiving applies only to the living and benevolence
applies both to the living and the dead."<span
id="an_r_06_24"></span>[24](wott11.htm#an_n_06_24)

The obligation to help the poor was an axiomatic element in Jewish
morality. To the Romans it seemed strange, however. They treated the
destitute with contempt, holding them in some ways responsible for their
own distress. Occasionally Romans challenged the Jewish emphasis on the
duty of helping the poor. The Talmud quotes one such discussion between
Rabbi Akiba and Tineius Rufus, the Roman governor of Palestine: "Tineius
Rufus asked, 'If your God loves the poor, why does He not provide for
them? To cite a parable: Suppose a human king was angry with his slave,
imprisoned him and ordered that he was not to be provided with food and
drink; and then a person goes and feeds him and offers him to drink.
When the king hears of it, will he not be angry with him?' Akiba
replied, 'I will offer you a more appropriate parable: Suppose a human
king was angry with his son, imprisoned him and ordered that he was not
to be provided with food or drink; and then a person goes and feeds him
and offers him to drink. When the king hears of it, will he not reward
him?' We are called God's children, as it is said, 'You are the children
of the Lord your God' (Deut. 14:1). Behold it was He who declared, 'Is
it not to deal thy bread to the hungry and that thou bring the poor that
are cast out to thy house?'" (Is. 58:7)<span
id="an_r_06_25"></span>[25](wott11.htm#an_n_06_25)

Rabbi Akiba is the hero in another story which likewise extols our
responsibility for the poor. "It was said of Rabbi Tarphon that he was
exceedingly rich but did not give to the poor. Once Rabbi Akiba met him
and asked, 'Would

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

you like me to buy a town or two for you?' He agreed and offered him
four thousand golden denarii. Akiba took them and distributed them to
the poor. After a while, Rabbi Tarfon met him and asked, 'Where are the
towns you bought for me?' Akiba took him by the hand and led him to the
House of Study; he then brought a copy of the Psalms, placed it before
the two of them, and they continued to read till they reached the verse,
'He hath dispersed, he bath given to the needy; his righteousness
endureth forever' (Ps. 112: 9). Akiba exclaimed, 'This is the City I
bought for you!' Tarphon arose, kissed him, and said, 'My master and
guide, my master in wisdom, and my guide in right conduct.' He handed
him an additional sum to distribute in charity."<span
id="an_r_06_26"></span>[26](wott11.htm#an_n_06_26)

#### TRUTH IS THE SEAL OF GOD

Another great virtue extolled by the rabbis is truthfulness. "Truth,"
taught Rabbi Hanina, "is the seal of God Himself." Those who simulate in
their speech were looked upon by the rabbis as idolators. Not merely
fraud itself, but misleading a person in his opinions is condemned by
the rabbis. The rule of the Talmud is: "It is forbidden to mislead a
fellow-creature, including a non-Jew." "The Holy One, blessed be He," a
Talmudic statement generalizes, "hates a person who says one thing with
his mouth and is of another opinion in his heart." According to Rabban
Simeon ben Gamaliel, truth is one of the three pillars on which the
world rests; the other two are justice and peace.<span
id="an_r_06_27"></span>[27](wott11.htm#an_n_06_27)

The rabbis condemned even the innocent lies which parents tell their
children. These lies set an example in untruthfulness which children
will in due time imitate. As one rabbi put it: "A person should not
promise his child that he will give him something without giving it to
him, for thus he teaches him to lie."<span
id="an_r_06_28"></span>[28](wott11.htm#an_n_06_28)

The Talmud recounted with much admiration the exemplary honesty of some
of its heroes. Rabbi Pinhas ben Yair

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

and Rabbi Simeon ben Shetah figure in some of these stories. "It
happened that Phineas ben Yair was living in one of the cities of the
South, and some men who came there on business left two measures of
barley in his possession and departed, forgetting all about the barley.
He sowed the barley and each year stored the produce. After seven years
had elapsed the same men returned to the town, and asked for their
barley. He recognized them and asked them to take the entire produce."
Another incident is related concerning Simeon ben Shetah. He had
purchased a donkey from an Arab. His disciples noticed a gem hung from
its neck, and they said, 'O, master, in you has been fulfilled, The
blessing of the Lord maketh rich' (Prov. 10:22). He replied to them: 'I
bought the donkey and not the gem.' He then proceeded to return it to
its owner. The Arab, on getting it back, exclaimed, 'Blessed be the God
of Simeon ben Shetah.'"<span
id="an_r_06_29"></span>[29](wott11.htm#an_n_06_29)

#### THE PLEA FOR MODERATION

The man idealized by the rabbis is not the ascetic who shuns the world
and its pleasures. It is rather the one who knows how to live within it
in moderation. The world in all its fulness is a divine creation.
Enjoying it is therefore a person's privilege, nay, his duty. The rabbis
declared that a person is destined to give account to his Maker for all
the good things his eyes beheld that he did not partake of. The rabbis
commended the person who possessed "a beautiful home, a beautiful wife,
fine furnishings." These put a person into "a happy frame of mind."<span
id="an_r_06_30"></span>[30](wott11.htm#an_n_06_30)

The rabbis decried the ascetic's assumption of voluntary fasts as evil.
According to the Babylonian teacher Samuel, he who indulges in fasting
"is called a sinner." Another teacher, Resh Lakish, forbade fasting
because it weakens one's body and thus lessens his services to God's
kingdom. As a mark of disapproval, another teacher suggested giving

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the food shunned by the ascetics, to the dogs. The *nazirite* whose vow
to reject wine is recognized as binding in the Bible (Nu. 6:1–4), the
rabbis held to be a sinner, and they added: "If a person who withholds
himself from wine is called a sinner, how much more so is one a sinner
who withdraws from all of life's enjoyments."<span
id="an_r_06_31"></span>[31](wott11.htm#an_n_06_31)

The rabbis were not unmindful of the dangers in indulgence to excess.
Wine especially may be taken to excess and then it is injurious. Thus
they warned: "Do not become intoxicated and you will not sin"; "when
wine enters, sense leaves, when wine enters, the secret blurts out";
"one cup of wine is good for a woman, two are degrading, three make her
act like a lewd woman and four cause her to lose all self-respect and
shame."<span id="an_r_06_32"></span>[32](wott11.htm#an_n_06_32)

A rabbinic story portrays vividly the steps in degradation which a man
walks when he gives himself to excessive drinking: "When Noah came to
plant a vineyard (Gen. 9:20), Satan appeared before him and asked, 'What
are you planting?' 'A vineyard,' Noah replied. 'What is its nature?'
Satan continued. 'Its fruits are sweet whether fresh or dry, and wine is
made of them, which gladdens the heart,' Noah answered. 'Come now, let
us two form a partnership in this vineyard,' Satan proposed. 'Very
well,' said Noah. What did Satan do? He brought a sheep and slew it
under the vine; then he brought in turn a lion, a pig and a monkey, slew
each of them and let their blood drip into the vineyard and drench the
soil. Thus he hinted that before a person drinks wine he is simple like
a sheep and quiet like a lamb before his shearers. When he has drunk in
moderation, he is strong like a lion and feels as though there is none
to equal him in the world. When he has drunk more than enough, he
becomes like a pig, wallowing in filth. When he is intoxicated he
becomes like a monkey, dancing about, uttering obscenities before all,
and unaware of what he is doing."<span
id="an_r_06_33"></span>[33](wott11.htm#an_n_06_33)

The study of Torah was regarded by the rabbis as the

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

supreme good of life, and yet they cautioned that even our preoccupation
with Torah must not displace our concern with our worldly obligations.
"Torah is good," said the rabbis, "when combined with a worldly
occupation."

The Talmud tells of Rabbi Simeon ben Yahai who had hidden in a cave for
twelve years in order to elude the Romans who sought to arrest him. When
he finally emerged from his hiding place, he noticed that people about
him were going on with their usual affairs, plowing and sowing, and
exclaimed: "They forsake the life of eternity and busy themselves with
the life that is transitory!" A heavenly voice finally rebuked him:
"Have you left your cave to destroy my world? Go back to it!"<span
id="an_r_06_34"></span>[34](wott11.htm#an_n_06_34)

#### CLEANLINESS AND HEALTH

The Talmud urged the proper care of the body as an obligation which one
owes toward himself. Cleanliness they held a basic prerequisite to good
health. "Rinse the cup before and after drinking," recommended the
rabbis. Similarly they cautioned, "A person should not drink from a cup
and hand it to another, for it is dangerous to health." The Talmudists
lived among people who were especially troubled with eye disease, still
a common affliction in oriental countries. But the Talmudists blamed it
principally on the lack of sanitary habits among the people. "Better a
drop of cold water in the morning, and the washing of hands and feet in
the evening than all the eye salves in the world."<span
id="an_r_06_35"></span>[35](wott11.htm#an_n_06_35)

The rabbis looked upon the maintenance of bodily health as a religious
obligation. This is made clear in the following anecdote, in which
Hillel is once more the hero. When Hillel had finished a session of
study with his pupils, "he accompanied them part of the way. They said
to him, 'Master, where are you going?' 'To perform a religious duty,' he
replied. 'Which religious duty?' they asked. 'To

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

bathe in the bath-house.' 'Is that a religious duty?' they wondered. He
answered them: 'One who is designated to scrape and clean the statues of
the king which are set up in theatres and circuses is paid for the work
and he associates with nobility. Surely must I who am created in the
divine image and likeness, take care of my body!"<span
id="an_r_06_36"></span>[36](wott11.htm#an_n_06_36)

The Talmud abounds in rules of health, some of which will continue to
interest the modern reader. The rabbis cautioned against overeating:
"Restrain yourself from the meal you especially enjoy, and do not delay
answering nature's call." They urged sufficient sleep, which will do its
best however only at night; late morning sleep was regarded as
injurious. Above all they urged general moderation in living: "In eight
things excess is harmful and moderation beneficial: travel, sexual
intercourse, wealth, work, wine, sleep, hot water (for drinking and
bathing) and blood-letting." It is interesting that the rabbis
recognized that bodily illness often derives from psychic causes. Thus
they listed fear and sin among the things which "weaken a man's
strength." In the event of illness the rabbis urged that a physician be
consulted, and they forbade people making their homes in communities
that were without the services of a competent physician: "It is
forbidden to live in a city that is without a physician."<span
id="an_r_06_37"></span>[37](wott11.htm#an_n_06_37)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Jurisprudence of the Talmud](wott09)
