[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott05)  [Next](wott07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### The Theological Elements in the Talmud

#### THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

<span class="smallcaps">The Talmudists</span>, like their Biblical
predecessors, assert the existence of God, and from the perspective of
that assertion interpret all life in the universe. They do not engage in
any formal efforts to prove God's existence. Yet there are passages in
their writings which show that they could follow the logic of the
philosophers and reason from nature to a first cause. Such reasoning is
put by the rabbis into the mind of Abraham as they trace the odyssey of
his own faith, from idolatry to monotheism. According to one account
Abraham inferred the existence of God by contemplating the universe as
one may infer the existence of some master when viewing a palace
brilliantly illuminated within. "Can it be that the universe and all
that exists within it is without a directing mind?" Abraham is quoted as
speculating. The universe in itself did not, however, answer Abraham's
quest. God met him halfway, and rewarded his groping by revealing
Himself to him with the reassuring word of His presence. "The Lord
looked upon him and said: 'I am the master of the universe.'"<span
id="an_r_04_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_04_1)

The assertion that the universe is the creation of God does not make
clear the many varied and intriguing problems that the contemplation of
existence presents to alert minds. What, for instance, was before
creation? And how did creation itself really transpire to fashion a
universe out of nothing? But the Talmudists discouraged the
preoccupation with such problems. They held the ultimate mysteries of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the world beyond human comprehension, and they felt that the
concentration upon them, a futile enterprise, in the long run, would
only have the immediate effect of distracting men's minds from the more
pressing tasks of religious and moral duty.

Their apprehensions were reinforced by the tragic experiences of the
famous four teachers who had studied the ultimate mysteries: Akiba, Ben
Azzai, Ben Zoma and Elisha ben Abuyah. A cryptic passage tells of their
fate: "Ben Azzai gazed and died; Ben Zoma gazed and became demented;
Acher (Elisha) cut the plants (turned apostate); R. Akiba departed in
peace." The Talmudists therefore warned their people with the well-known
citation from Ben Sira: "Seek not out the things that are too hard for
thee, and into the things that are too hidden inquire thou not. In what
is permitted to thee instruct thyself; thou hast no business with secret
things."

The distinction between "what is permitted" and the "secret things"
which are not permitted, is set forth in the Talmudic observation as to
why Scripture commences with the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
the Beth, rather than with the first. The explanation is seen in the
symbolism which that letter's shape, a square open on the left side,
suggests: "As the letter *beth* is closed on all sides and only open in
front, you are to regard as closed to inquiry what was before creation
or what is behind; what is open begins from the actual time of
creation."<span id="an_r_04_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_04_2)

The rabbis, following the style of the Bible, frequently spoke of God as
though He were a person. They ascribe to Him bodily attributes. It is
clear however, on the basis of their own declarations, that these
"corporeal" references to God were often intended only to make vivid the
sense of His existence and activity. All such references are to be taken
as figurative expressions. Even the story of God's revelation at Sinai
is taken in the Talmud by one teacher in a figurative way. "Moses never
ascended to heaven," declared

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabbi Jose and
"God never descended on earth." The Biblical narrative is to be taken as
a poetic elaboration of the doctrine that God was the inspiration for
the truths which Israel pledged itself to uphold at Sinai. It must not
be taken literally.

The rabbis insisted repeatedly that God is not a concrete being, with
tangible form, occupying a specific magnitude in space. Such a being
would be part of the universe, not its master. Indeed, one of the
epithets by which God is referred to in the Talmud is "The Place", for
God is the "place" or the ground of creation; the universe exists in Him
not He in the universe. In the words of the Midrash "The Holy One,
blessed be He, is the place of His universe, but His universe is not His
place."<span id="an_r_04_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_04_3)

But by a paradox of the divine mystery God, though transcending the
universe, is yet ever present, and men can enter into close and intimate
communication with Him, wherever they are. This is the significance of
the revelation of God perceived by Moses at the burning bush—it is to
teach us that there is no place which is devoid of God's presence, not
even so humble an object as a thorn bush. Another rabbi declared: "At
times the universe and its fulness are insufficient to contain the glory
of God's presence; at other times He speaks with man in intimate
discourse."<span id="an_r_04_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_04_4)

The assertion that God is invisible made him unreal for people
accustomed to identify reality with concreteness. But the rabbis
disputed this. Thus it is related in a Talmudic anecdote that the
Emperor Hadrian had said to Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah: "I desire to
behold your God." Rabbi Joshua explained to him that it was impossible.
When the emperor persisted, the rabbi asked him to stand in a fixed gaze
at the sun. The emperor found the sun too strong. Thereupon the rabbi
exclaimed: "You admit that you are unable to look at the sun, which is
only one of the ministering servants of the Holy One, blessed be He; how
much more beyond your power of vision is God Himself." Rabban

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gamaliel explained
the reality of God by analogy to the soul whose specific abode we do not
know and of which we have no direct concrete experience. That, however,
does not make it unreal.<span
id="an_r_04_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_04_5)

God's ultimate essence must elude human comprehension. We may, however,
see manifestations of divine activity throughout creation.

The Talmudists saw a manifestation of God in the dynamism of the world.
The universe is not a mass of inert matter. It is an enterprise of
tremendous dynamic activity. "The universe is filled with the might and
power of our God.… He formed you and infused into you the breath of
life. He stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the
earth. His voice blows out flames of fire, rends mountains asunder, and
shatters rocks. His bow is fire and His arrows flames. His spear is a
torch, His shield the clouds, and His sword the lightning. He fashioned
mountains and hills and covered them with grass. He makes the rains and
dew to descend, and causes the vegetation to sprout. He also forms the
embryo in the mother's womb and enables it to issue forth as a living
being."<span id="an_r_04_6"></span>[6](wott11.htm#an_n_04_6)

In this vast panorama of existence, moreover, there is the evidence of a
purposeful Intelligence at work. No organism is superfluous. A close
scrutiny of the world shows everywhere an all-permeating intelligence
and purpose. We see the evidence of that design in the vastness of the
planetary system, in the individuality of each rain drop, in the majesty
of trees that renew their garb of green in spring, in the mysteries of
love which bind men and women in the unity of marriage. "Even such
things as you deem superfluous in the world, such as flies and gnats are
necessary parts of the cosmic order and were created by the Holy One,
blessed be He, for His purpose—yes even serpents and frogs." Indeed,
every creature in its own way, by its mere existence, and by the
precision with which it functions in the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

world, offers eloquent testimony to the divine source from which it is
derived.<span id="an_r_04_7"></span>[7](wott11.htm#an_n_04_7)

It is in man that the design of creation shows itself most forcefully.
The Talmudists admired the marvellous construction of the human body in
which every organ seemed so perfectly designed for the well-being of the
individual and the furtherance of life. "Come and see how many miracles
the Holy One, blessed be He, performed with man, and he is unaware of
it. Were he to eat a piece of bread which is hard, it would descend into
the intestines and scratch them; but the Holy One, blessed be He,
created a fountain in the middle of the throat, which enables the bread
to move down safely." "If the bladder is pricked by only a needle, all
the air in it comes out; but man is made with numerous orifices, and yet
the breath in him does not come out."

How unlike the work of man is the handiwork of God! The best of man's
work has the mark of his imperfection, but what the Lord has wrought is
beyond criticism. "When a human being builds a palace, people often come
and criticize. If the pillars were taller, they say, if the roof were
only higher, it would be better! But has man ever come and said, If I
had three eyes or three hands or three legs, if I walked on my head or
my head were turned backward, I should have preferred it? … The Holy One
… decided upon every limb which you have and set it in its proper
place."<span id="an_r_04_8"></span>[8](wott11.htm#an_n_04_8)

#### MIRACLES

The conception of the universe as the offspring of a plan, as the
perfect embodiment of God's design, implied a certain order in its
actions. A universe that behaved capriciously would reflect adversely on
the plan by which it was fashioned. Thus the rabbis were moved to affirm
uninterrupted regularity as one of the characteristics of life in the
universe. This did not rule out miracles for them, however. According to
one interpretation miracles were provided for

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

at the very time when God brought the universe into being. These events
seem deflections from the norm to us, but they are not breaks in the
plan which actually made room for them. As the Midrash put it: "At the
creation God made a condition with the sea that it should be divided to
permit the children of Israel to pass, with the sun and the moon to
stand still at the bidding of Joshua, with the ravens to feed Elijah …"

The age of miracles was not altogether past, however. Some of the
leading Talmudists were described as miracle workers. Such stories were
associated especially with Rabbi Pinhas ben Yair and Rabbi Haninah ben
Dosa. For those who had the sensitivity to see, moreover, there were
miracles transpiring daily throughout creation. "Greater is the miracle
that occurs when a sick person escapes from perilous disease than that
which happened when Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah escaped from the
fiery furnace." And the tortuous manner in which a family in distress
manages to eke out an existence is as great a miracle as the parting of
the Red Sea for the Israelites.<span
id="an_r_04_9"></span>[9](wott11.htm#an_n_04_9)

#### THE PURPOSE OF HUMAN EXISTENCE

What is the purpose of human life? Why did God bring man upon the arena
of existence? It is that he might glorify his Maker through the
cultivation of virtue and the continued perfection of his life. The
Talmud abounds in discussions as to what is meant by the perfection of
life. In the fullest elaboration of their thinking we are offered a vast
body of ideals and rules of action by which a person would please his
Maker and thus justify his own existence. The principal demand is
ethical—to act with compassion and loving-kindness towards God's
creatures. Thus Rabbi Akiba pointed to the golden rule as the most
comprehensive teaching of the Torah. "This is the most fundamental
principle enunciated in the Torah," he taught, "'Love thy neighbor as

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

thyself'" (Lev. 19:18). Ben Azzai made the Torah's fundamental teaching
not the golden rule but the doctrine on which it is ultimately
based—that man is made in the divine image: "This is the book of the
generations of man … in the likeness of God made He him" (Gen.
5:1).<span id="an_r_04_10"></span>[10](wott11.htm#an_n_04_10)

The Talmudists saw, however, that the anchor on which all the elements
of the good life rest, is the recognition of God's sovereignty. It is
the reverence for God that ultimately inspires the attitudes and the
actions that spell ethical living.

This conception of the relationship between belief in God and the moral
life is conveyed in a number of Talmudic discussions. There is the
well-known homily by Rabbi Simlai: "Six hundred and thirteen
commandments were addressed to Moses—three hundred and sixty-five
prohibitions corresponding to the days of the solar year, and two
hundred and forty-eight positive commandments corresponding to the
number of limbs in the human body. David came and reduced them to eleven
principles, which are listed in Psalm 15. Isaiah came and reduced them
to six as is said, 'He that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly,
he that despiseth the gain of oppression, that shaketh his hands from
holding bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and
shutteth his eyes from looking upon evil' (Is. 33:15). Micah came and
reduced them to three, as it is written, 'What does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God'
(Micah 6:8). Isaiah subsequently reduced them to two, as it is said,
'Thus saith the Lord, keep ye justice and do righteousness' (Is. 56:1).
Lastly came Habakkuk and reduced them to one, as it is said, 'The
righteous shall live by his faith'" (Hab. 2:4).<span
id="an_r_04_11"></span>[11](wott11.htm#an_n_04_11)

#### GOD AS THE SOURCE OF MORALITY

Because faith in God is the source of the moral life, the rabbis
regarded a morality that is not rooted in piety as

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

precariously insecure. And while they placed the love of man at the
climax of human virtue, they summoned people to cultivate the love of
God as the source from which all other virtues flow.

This is taught by Rabbi Reuben who had been asked to define the most
reprehensible act a man may be guilty of. His answer was that it is the
denial of God's existence. "For no man violates the commandments, 'Thou
shalt not murder', 'Thou shalt not steal', till he has renounced his
faith in God."<span id="an_r_04_12"></span>[12](wott11.htm#an_n_04_12)

The same doctrine is conveyed in the famous homily by Raba. As the
Talmud relates it, "Raba said: when a person is brought for judgment on
Judgment Day he is asked 'Did you do your business honestly, did you set
aside time for the study of Torah, did you raise a family, did you
maintain our faith in the Messianic redemption, did you pursue wisdom,
did you attain to the level of being able to reason inferentially from
one proposition to another?' All this will suffice provided he be a
God-fearing man, too, for the fear of God is the treasury in which all
else is stored. If he be not a God-fearing man, the other virtues will
prove insufficient."<span
id="an_r_04_13"></span>[13](wott11.htm#an_n_04_13)

#### THE TOOLS OF HUMAN PERFECTION

The acquisition of a virtuous character and the attainment of life's
perfection do not come easily to a man. He must work for them hard and
persistently throughout the years, and his gains, such as they are, will
always be partial and relative. But God has given man the tools with
which he is to make his quest a profitable enterprise. Into his very
nature God has poured certain drives which spur him on and guide him on
his way. There is the impulse to look after one's self. This is
sometimes called the evil impulse, because when carried beyond its
legitimate limits the preoccupation with one's self becomes a
destructive force in

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

human life. But in its essential character this impulse is no more evil
than anything else which the Lord has made. Balancing this impulse,
moreover, is the drive to goodness, the *yezer tob*, which spurs us on
to acts of self-denial in furtherance of every noble endeavor. In
present circumstances the so-called evil impulse dominates life, but as
men mature in their development the good impulse gains ascendency and
the proper balance is achieved between those two basic drives of our
natures. The Talmudists pronounce their judgment on the two impulses in
a comment on Genesis 1:31: "And God saw everything which He had made and
behold it was very good." "Very good," say the rabbis, applies to those
two impulses. "But," it is asked, "is the evil impulse very good?" And
the answer is given that it is. For "were it not for that impulse, a man
would not build a house, marry a wife, beget children or conduct
business affairs."<span
id="an_r_04_14"></span>[14](wott11.htm#an_n_04_14)

The person in whom the drive for self has been integrated in a sound
pattern of character has made of the so-called evil impulse also a tool
of goodness. The Talmud makes this clear in the comment on Deut. 6:5:
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." "Thy heart" is
taken as meaning "with the two impulses—the good and the evil."<span
id="an_r_04_15"></span>[15](wott11.htm#an_n_04_15)

#### THE TORAH AND THE COMMANDMENTS

God moreover did not thrust man into the world to grope entirely on his
own for the right course he must pursue in life. He has given man a
chart by which he can steer himself. This chart is contained in the
Torah and the commandments.

The Talmudists believed firmly that God revealed Himself to man, that
having formed human life, He is also concerned with guiding it toward
the knowledge of virtue and truth in which man finds his true happiness.
Not every person is ready to receive the divine revelation. But there
are

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

some who are ready, and to them God reveals Himself. Those chosen few
are, however, chosen not for their own edification, but that they might
become His prophets, the instruments for disseminating the fruits of
that revelation among all mankind.

The most important manifestation of prophecy was in Israel, but not
exclusively so. The rabbis saw the evidence of prophetic inspiration in
the lives of men outside the Jewish people. Thus they declared: "Seven
prophets prophesied for the pagans:<span
id="an_r_04_16"></span>[16](wott11.htm#an_n_04_16) Balaam and his
father, and Job and his four friends." But prophecy, in its highest
expression, appeared in Israel solely.

The most important permanent fruit of prophecy in Israel were the
various books that make up the Holy Scriptures, commencing with the
Pentateuch which is traced back to the authorship of Moses. In the words
of the famous statement of the Talmud: "Who wrote the Scriptures? Moses
wrote his own book and the parables of Balaam (Nu. 23, 24) and Job;
Joshua wrote the book which bears his name and the last eight verses of
the Pentateuch; Samuel wrote the book which bears his name and the Book
of Judges and Ruth; David wrote the Book of Psalms … Jeremiah wrote the
book which bears his name, the Book of Kings and Lamentations; Hezekiah
and his colleagues wrote Isaiah, Proverbs, the Song of Songs, and
Ecclesiastes; the men of the Great Assembly wrote Ezekiel, the Twelve
minor Prophets, Daniel and the Scroll of Esther. Ezra wrote the book
that bears his name and the genealogies of the Book of Chronicles up to
his own time …"

The degree of divine inspiration bestowed on individual prophets varied
greatly. Moses was supreme among them, and the quality of his
inspiration was surpassed by none. But even among the other prophets
there were individual differences. Isaiah, for instance, was held
superior to the others. Thus the Midrash suggests: "The Holy Spirit
descends

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

on the prophets in degrees. Some prophesied to the extent of one book,
others of two books. Beeri only prophesied two verses, which, being
insufficient for an independent book, were included in Isaiah."<span
id="an_r_04_17"></span>[17](wott11.htm#an_n_04_17)

The Divine plan could not, however, fulfill itself through the
individual prophets. It was essential that the prophets be given a
particular society which would be most responsive to their call and that
would be prepared to dedicate its common life to the implementation of
their ideals.

For that special duty God chose Israel. A Talmudic homily relates how
God sought out the society that was best prepared to be the custodian of
the Torah. "When the All-present revealed Himself to give the Torah to
Israel, not to them alone did He manifest Himself, but to all the
nations. He first went to the sons of Esau, and said to them, 'Will you
accept the Torah?' They asked what was written in it and God told them:
'Thou shalt not murder.' They replied, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The
very nature of our ancestors was bloodshed …' He then went to the sons
of Ammon and Moab and said to them, 'Will you accept the Torah?' They
asked what was written in it and He replied, 'Thou shalt not commit
adultery!' They said to Him, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The very
existence of this people is rooted in unchastity.' He went and found the
children of Ishmael and said to them, Will you accept the Torah?' They
asked what was written in it and He replied: 'Thou shalt not steal.'
They said unto Him, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The very life of our
ancestors depended upon robbery …' There was not a single nation to whom
He did not go and offer the Torah …" The selection of Israel, in other
words, was not arbitrary. God selected Israel "because all the peoples
repudiated the Torah and refused to receive it; but Israel agreed and
chose the Holy One, blessed be He, and His Torah." Israel was the chosen
people in a double sense. Israel had chosen God even as God had chosen
Israel.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Israel's function in history, then, was to serve as a witness to the
truths of the Torah. For the Torah of which Israel was the custodian was
ultimately intended for all mankind. It is for this reason that the
original promulgation of the Torah took place in the desert, a no-man's
land, rather than in the land of Israel. This was to suggest that its
treasures were not meant to belong to any particular people exclusively;
the Torah was God's message through Israel to all humanity.<span
id="an_r_04_18"></span>[18](wott11.htm#an_n_04_18)

In projecting the goal of sharing the Torah with the rest of mankind,
the rabbis did not call for the conversion of the rest of the world to
Judaism. They distinguished between a universal element in their faith
which all men must adopt and a more particular element which applied to
the more specific facts of the Jewish group itself. This universal
element of Judaism to which all men were summoned could be integrated
with any culture and with whatever formal expression had developed in
the religious life of a people. Its provisions are known as the "Seven
Noahite laws" and they include the practices of equity in human
relations, the prohibition of blaspheming God's name, the prohibition of
idolatry, sexual unchastity, bloodshed, robbery, and cruelty to animals,
such as tearing a limb from the animal when it is still alive.<span
id="an_r_04_19"></span>[19](wott11.htm#an_n_04_19)

Proselytes were of course accepted in Judaism, when they proved their
sincere desire to become part of Israel and to share in its destiny. But
that, the rabbis made it clear, was not a prerequisite for earning
divine approval. "A pagan," declared Rabbi Meir, "who studies the Torah
and practices it is the equal of a high priest in Israel."<span
id="an_r_04_20"></span>[20](wott11.htm#an_n_04_20) Rabbi Meir clearly
refers to a pagan who practices the universal principles of religion and
morality as embodied in the so-called "Seven Noahite laws". If he
practiced the Torah in its entirety he would no longer be a pagan.

The Talmud makes the study of Torah a cardinal virtue

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

in Judaism and summons all men to engage in it. "Whoever labors in the
Torah for its own sake," declares the Mishnah, "merits many things; and
not only so, but all creation is vindicated through him. He may be
acclaimed as friend, beloved, a lover of the All-Present, a lover of
mankind. It clothes him in meekness and reverence; it enables him to
become just, pious, upright, and faithful; it keeps him far from sin,
and brings him near to virtue. Through him the world enjoys counsel and
sound knowledge, understanding and strength. … It also gives him
sovereignty and dominion and discerning judgment. The secrets of the
Torah are revealed to him. He is made like a never-failing fountain, and
like a river that flows on with ever sustained vigor. He becomes modest,
long-suffering, and forgiving of insults; and it magnifies and exalts
him above all things."<span
id="an_r_04_21"></span>[21](wott11.htm#an_n_04_21)

Life's highest goal which is attainable by man must be sought by living
according to the teachings of the Torah. The study of Torah must
therefore be the great preoccupation of mankind. "The ignorant man
cannot be pious," as Hillel puts it, and ignorance here refers clearly
to ignorance of Torah. In poverty, in wealth, in youth and old age, a
person must ever give himself to the mastery of Torah. It is the only
sure compass by which he can guide himself amid the turbulence and
uncertainty of life about him.<span
id="an_r_04_22"></span>[22](wott11.htm#an_n_04_22)

The rabbis saw the educational service of the Torah reinforced by the
disciplines which are enjoined by it. Some of the commandments enjoined
in the Torah are clearly ends in themselves. Thus the many prescriptions
in civil and criminal law aim at creating a just order of human
relations. Many of those commandments, however, were enjoined for
pedagogic reasons—to teach certain truths through the more dramatic
affirmation of action. They were meant to teach as reminders of vital
truths, like the *mezuzah*, the receptacle attached to the door post of
the house and the phylacteries worn on arm and head during prayer. Both

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

contain parchments on which is written the text of the most important
injunction of Scripture—to "love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and all thy soul and all thy might" (Deut. 6:5). By the continued
exposure to these symbols man was to be reminded vividly of his
relationship to God. As the rabbis put it: "Whoever has phylacteries on
his head and arm, the fringe on his garment and the mezuzah on his door
may be presumed to be safe from committing sin."<span
id="an_r_04_23"></span>[23](wott11.htm#an_n_04_23)

The performance of the commandments was seen as serving man in a deeper
sense. It gave him the opportunity to do something concrete in
implementation of his love of God, thereby ennobling his own character.
As one rabbinic comment expressed it: "The commandments were only given
for the purpose of refining human beings; what, for example, does it
matter to the Holy One, blessed be He, whether an animal's neck is cut
in the front or the rear (as prescribed in the dietary laws)! But the
ordinances He gave us have as their purpose the purification of human
beings."<span id="an_r_04_24"></span>[24](wott11.htm#an_n_04_24)

#### FREEDOM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

The conquest of human lives for the truths of the Torah is a painfully
slow process. Even Israel, who carries the special responsibility of
being the servant of the Lord in the propagation of the Torah,
frequently falls so far short of its ideal. And sin, the defiance of
God's word, seems to be the all-pervasive failing among human beings. No
doubt, God could have made men without the capacity to err. That.
however, would have destroyed human freedom. Instead. God has made man a
free agent, which involves the uncoerced exercise of the will in any
direction, regardless of its moral consequences. As an oft-quoted
Talmudic maxim: "All is in the hands of Heaven except the fear of
Heaven."<span id="an_r_04_25"></span>[25](wott11.htm#an_n_04_25) God, in
other words, is master of the Universe, but He is not master over man's
moral decisions, which he must learn to make himself.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

But man is not left to his own initiative exclusively. God aids him in
learning to exercise his freedom in ever wiser decisions. For whenever
men defy the truths of the Torah and build patterns of personal and
group life in violation of its teachings, God passes judgment upon them;
and the discipline of suffering reinforces the native appeal of truth
itself in leading man to repentance. It is in this spirit that the
Midrash interprets verse in Psalm 23: "Thy rod and Thy staff they
comfort me"; rod is applied to suffering while staff is applied to the
Torah. Suffering is therefore not an evil to be avoided but an
opportunity that points to a better life. "Whoever rejoices in the
sufferings that come upon him in this life brings salvation to the
world."<span id="an_r_04_26"></span>[26](wott11.htm#an_n_04_26)

The Talmudists did not advise people to seek suffering. One of them put
it quite bluntly: "I desire neither the suffering nor the rewards which
it brings in its train." But when suffering comes, we are to see it as
the prodding of God who is displeased with us for having committed sin,
and who is bestowing upon us the favor of pushing us toward new
religious and moral growth. In the words of the Talmud: "Should a man
see suffering come upon him, let him scrutinize his actions; as it is
said, 'Let us search and try our ways, and return unto the Lord'
(Lament. 3:40). If he has scrutinized his actions without discovering
the cause, let him attribute them to the neglect of Torah, as it is
said, 'Happy is the man whom Thou chastenest, and teachest out of Thy
Law' (Ps. 94:12). If he attributed them to neglect of Torah without
finding any justification, it is certain that his chastenings are
chastenings of love; as it is said, 'For whom the Lord loveth He
correcteth'" (Prov. 3:12).<span
id="an_r_04_27"></span>[27](wott11.htm#an_n_04_27)

The so-called suffering inflicted because of "love" is the highest kind
of suffering. For it comes not to expiate for some wrong done but to
disturb life's stagnation and to initiate a new spiritual advance. It is
the irritant that stimulates spiritual progress.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

It was no doubt because he viewed life from this perspective that one
rabbi paid tribute to God for the very sufferings He had inflicted on
Israel: "Because God loved Israel He multiplied sufferings for him." For
through such sufferings Israel would achieve a new vitality in its
spiritual life. "As the olive does not give of its precious oil except
under pressure, so Israel does not bring forth its highest virtues
except through adversity."<span
id="an_r_04_28"></span>[28](wott11.htm#an_n_04_28)

In their trials no less than in their triumphs, therefore, God is
guiding mankind toward their destiny. But its fulfillment is a long
process toward which men climb slowly in their varied vicissitudes of
history. When the theme of history reached its climax, the Talmudists
were confident there would be ushered in a state of unusual human
perfection. Then men will become completely reconciled with God and
surrender unreservedly in loving obedience to His will. Oppression and
hatred will then disappear and a new order of righteousness and love
will be established in the world. It will involve the full realization
of the hopes of the prophets and the fulfillment of Israel's mission in
history. And it is to be brought about through a human instrument, the
Messianic deliverer.

#### THE MESSIANIC HOPE

There is a wealth of varied details with which different rabbis
surrounded the belief in the Messiah. But certain essential features
stand out. The term Messiah means anointed, an allusion to the
installation ceremony of kings and priests in their respective offices.
But the Davidic dynasty carried so many fond associations among the
Jewish people and recalled a glorious period in Jewish history, it was
generally assumed that "The anointed" would be a scion of the house of
David. His arrival will take place after a great suffering will have
regenerated the hearts of men; they will have to suffer the pangs that
are attendant

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

upon every new birth, pangs that are therefore designated the "travail
of the Messiah". The human regeneration which is to usher in the
Messianic fulfillment, moreover, will not be complete. There will be men
who will hold on defiantly to the error of their life and endeavor to
impede the dawn of the new day. And those men will have to be vanquished
in a bloody contest of arms.<span
id="an_r_04_29"></span>[29](wott11.htm#an_n_04_29)

As for the time when this consummation was to take place, it was
generally held to depend on the degree of progress men will have
achieved in their development. This is well illustrated in the
well-known Talmudic parable. "Rabbi Joshua ben Levi met Elijah standing
at the entrance of Rabbi Simeon ben Johai's tomb. … He then said to him,
'When will the Messiah come?' 'Go and ask him' was the reply. 'Where is
he sitting?'—'At the entrance of the city.' … So he went to him and
greeted him, saying, 'Peace be upon thee, Master and Teacher.' 'Peace be
upon thee, O son of Levi,' he replied. 'When will thou come, Master?'
asked he. 'Today' was his answer." When the Messiah failed to appear
that day, a deeply disappointed Joshua returned to Elijah with the
complaint: "He spoke falsely to me, stating that he would come today,
but has not!" Elijah then enlightened him that the Messiah had really
quoted Scripture (Ps. 95:7): "Today, if ye hearken to His voice."<span
id="an_r_04_30"></span>[30](wott11.htm#an_n_04_30)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Social Ethics in the Talmud](wott07)
