[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott04)  [Next](wott06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### The Talmud In Its Historical Setting

#### THE AFTERMATH OF WAR

<span class="smallcaps">The fall</span> of the Temple had left a void in
Jewish religious life. Gladly, the Jews would have labored at its
reconstruction, but that was banned by the Romans. Jerusalem which was a
symbol of all that was glorious in Jewish history was an armed camp,
where Jews were forbidden to enter. They could come as tolerated
pilgrims to visit ruined shrines and shed tears over their departed
national glory, but they could no longer make their homes there. The
half shekel which the Jews had always contributed to the upkeep of the
Temple was now collected by the Romans as the *fiscus judaicus*, a
special tax upon the vanquished people to be devoted to the maintenance
of Roman pagan shrines. There were large scale confiscations of Jewish
property, particularly land, which Jews could now occupy only as tenant
farmers; and Rome added humiliations to injury by erecting an arch of
triumph to Titus and issuing special coins to commemorate the Jewish
disaster. "Judaea capta", "Judaea devicta", "captured, vanquished
Judea", these coins proclaimed, and they carried, as an illustration of
the slogan, the image of a decrepit, broken woman, bowing before her
proud conqueror.

These conditions distilled a great spiritual depression in Jewry.
Asceticism became widespread. There were those who shunned the use of
meat and wine because these had at one time been offered on the
sacrificial altar which was now in ruins. Large numbers refused to raise
families and beget children, apprehensive of life's uncertainties in a
cruel world. And the seemingly unchallenged march of brute power
undermined

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

for many the faith in their people's way of life, their beliefs in
divine providence, the election of Israel and the supreme worth of the
Torah. "If there is a God Who cares for justice, why does He allow all
this wrong to go unchallenged in the world?" came the constant cry of
questioning multitudes.

#### RECONSTRUCTION AT JABNEH

The basis of Jewish rehabilitation in this all pervasive crisis had been
laid by Johanan ben Zaccai. He shifted the center of Judaism from
Jerusalem to Jabneh and launched the new Sanhedrin and the rabbinic
movement, rescuing the most important element in the life of a people,
centralized direction and authoritative leadership. The nominal head of
the Jewish community had been the High Priest whose office perished with
the Temple, but he was not indispensable; and the Nasi, the head of the
Sanhedrin, stepped forth to replace him. The nasi's office lacked the
glamour of the High Priesthood, but he more than made up for it by his
piety and scholarship and by his devotion to Pharisaic principles. And
he had one more important virtue to recommend him: he was a direct
descendant of the famous sage Hillel, and, on his mother's side, of
Judah's royal family, going back to King David. Johanan remained the
acting head of the Sanhedrin until arrangements could be made for its
legitimate occupant to succeed him. Gamaliel II, the legitimate heir of
the *nasi*, finally received the recognition of the Roman officials in
Syria, and, with the collaboration of a grimly determined but hopeful
group of rabbis, including Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, Joshua ben Hananiah and
Akiba ben Joseph, he inaugurated a new and colorful chapter in the
history of Judaism.

The new *nasi* was well suited for his position. He was a man of
independent means, having inherited his family estates in land and
slaves, which enabled him to devote himself

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

freely to scholarship and communal work. He was educated in the
traditional culture of his people as well as in the worldly knowledge of
his day. He was a fine mathematician and astronomer and he had a good
command of the Greek language. The Talmud records many anecdotes
illustrating his kind and sympathetic character. The joy of having his
colleagues as guests in his home was unbounded; and he insisted on
taking the place of his servants in waiting on them. He was touchingly
devoted to his slave Tebi. Members of his household were trained to call
the slave "father" and the slave's wife, "mother". And when Tebi died
Gamaliel sat in mourning as for a departed member of the family. "Tebi
was not like other slaves," he explained; "he was a worthy man." "Let
this be a token unto thee," he once exclaimed, "so long as thou art
compassionate, God will show thee mercy; but if thou hast no compassion,
God will show thee no mercy."<span
id="an_r_03_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_03_1)

We do not know the date of his death. Before his passing he left a will
which was to convert even his burial into an important lesson for his
people. It had been customary to bury the dead in lavish outfits and
funeral costs weighted heavily on poor families. Gamaliel therefore
ordained that he be buried in simple linen shrouds in the hope that his
example would be imitated by others. Thus began a tradition which has
endured in Jewry to this very day.

The achievements of the rabbis at Jabneh were varied and far-reaching.
To give expression to the universal gloom over the national disaster,
they ordained formal rites of grief and remembrance. People were to
leave patches of unpainted wall space in their homes; they were to omit
some dish from their customary meals; women were to reduce their use of
cosmetics and jewelry. This was to remind them that without the Temple
their lives were incomplete and that they must ever strive for its
restoration.

But there was to be no despair. The rabbis denounced the growing
asceticism as inconsistent with the national interest.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To abstain from
procreating, Rabbi Eliezer ruled comparable to the shedding of human
blood. Rabbi Joshua argued with those who were avoiding meat and wine in
mourning for the destruction of the altar, by explaining that to be
consistent they would have to renounce fruit, bread, and water as well,
since they were also used upon the altar.<span
id="an_r_03_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_03_2)

The destruction of the Temple was a tragic blow to Judaism, but it was
not to interfere with an active religious life. Pending the Temple's
rebirth, the rabbis proceeded to displace the sacrificial cult with new
disciplines for communing with God. They promulgated the famous Eighteen
Benedictions as the nucleus of a formalized prayer service which was to
be recited thrice daily in private as well as congregational devotions.
Some of these benedictions were old and had been recited in the Temple
as well as in many synagogues that flourished side by side with it. But
they were now re-edited so as to include references to the hoped for
resurgence of Jewish freedom and the restoration of the Temple. These
prayers, moreover, were now to be recited by every individual worshipper
and not alone by the public reader who led in the service. The
initiation of a proselyte into Judaism was reorganized, omitting the
customary sacrificial offering. The Haggadah, a ritual of narration and
dramatic re-enactment of the Exodus, was developed to take the place of
the solemn Passover rites in the Temple at Jerusalem.

The rabbis were equally active in counteracting schismatic and heretical
tendencies which were making their appeal among the people. They induced
Aquila, the Greek proselyte from Pontus, to undertake a new and more
literal translation of the Bible which would bring the Greek text into
closer harmony with Jewish tradition. The current Greek translation,
known as the Septuagint, was too free and inaccurate, making it
frequently an easy weapon for Christian and other sectarian propaganda.
And they introduced into the religious service a special prayer in
denunciation of

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

heresy and heretics. Prayers of denunciation were repugnant to the
rabbis who taught the virtues of universal love. To make sure that this
prayer would not be inspired by hate or bitterness toward other men,
that it would be directed against error rather than against the erring,
they entrusted its composition to the saintliest and humblest of their
members, Samuel the Modest.

By fearless and searching self-criticism they met the challenge of those
who had lost faith in the moral order. The disaster was not an
indication of a morally lawless universe, but on the contrary, of the
workings of a moral law which cannot be evaded with impunity. Like the
prophets of old, they blamed their people's tragedies upon their own
mistakes and failures. Jerusalem was destroyed because men hated one
another, because her people were not united in the national crisis,
because they permitted grave injustices to prevail in their midst.<span
id="an_r_03_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_03_3) Rome, like Assyria and
Babylonia of old, was only the rod of God's indignation, smiting and
healing a sinful people. And the disaster itself pointed to the way of
redemption. It was for them to repent. to purge themselves of their
imperfections, to rebuild their lives on more wholesome foundations,
and, in due time, they would be restored to freedom.

Perhaps the most important achievement of the rabbis was the creation of
an authoritative Jewish law. The supplementation of the Torah had
proceeded ever since the days of the sopherim and a variety of men had
contributed to it. The inevitable differences in social and ideological
orientation prevailing among men had naturally led to differences in
Torah supplementation. But now how was the Torah to guide life if its
official interpreters could not agree?

The Pharisees had solved this problem by developing a fine tolerance.
All views that developed in the course of their deliberations were
regarded as equally sincere attempts to understand and apply the ideals
of the Torah to the necessities of life. Men were therefore advised to
exercise their

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

own discretion and follow the particular school of thought that best
expressed their own conception of right and wrong. "Although," the
Mishnah relates<span id="an_r_03_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_03_4),
"one group permitted marriages which the other prohibited, and declared
pure what the other considered impure, they freely intermarried and did
not scruple to use each other's food." To signalize this tolerance, the
leadership of the Sanhedrin was divided between the representatives of
the majority and minority. The spokesman of the majority became the
*nasi*, President, while the leader of the minority group became the *ab
bet din*, the chief justice.

After the destruction of the Temple when the Torah was the only
surviving institution that could unify Jewish life, the old arrangement
was changed. The new Sanhedrin at Jabneh repudiated the old formula of
tolerance, except in the field of doctrine. On questions of theology and
ethics, individuals remained essentially free to formulate their own
doctrines in accordance with the dictates of their own conscience. In
the field of action, however, the minority was now to give way to the
majority whose views alone were to be promulgated as authoritative law.

The new formula was first applied to the disputes between the School of
Shammai and the School of Hillel. By a majority vote, the rabbis,
deliberating at the new Sanhedrin in Jabneh, repudiated the Shammaites
and declared the views of the Hillelites alone authoritative.

These reforms were not achieved without struggle. One such struggle
developed between Rabbi Eliezer and his colleagues. Rabbi Eliezer was
one of the pioneers in post-war reconstruction. Together with his
colleague Joshua ben Hananiah, he had helped smuggle Johanan ben Zaccai
out of the besieged city of Jerusalem and had participated in the
organization of the new Sanhedrin. But as the deliberations at Jabneh
proceeded, a serious cleavage developed between him and his colleagues.
In the general unfolding of his ideology, Rabbi Eliezer followed
consistently the general

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

point of view of the Shammaite system of Torah interpretation which had
been rejected by a decisive vote of the great majority of rabbis.

The hostility which had been gathering for some time finally culminated
in an open break during a discussion about the so-called "Akhnai" stove.
According to Biblical law (Lev. 11:33), earthenware, pots and ovens,
which had become unclean, for example, through contact with a dead body,
were to be broken. The "Akhnai" stove had become exposed to
uncleanliness, but the owner cut it into tiles which were separated from
each other by sand and externally plastered over with a layer of cement.
This was a loose arrangement, but it could still be used as a stove. At
the same time, as a "broken" vessel, it would no longer be susceptible
to uncleanliness. Rabbi Eliezer's colleagues objected to the
arrangement. What was important to them was not so much the objective
fact that the stove was "broken", as the manifest intention of the owner
who continued to use it. The owner's intention made it again into a
"whole" vessel, and its impurity, therefore, persisted. Rabbi Eliezer,
who, like the Shammaites, was generally more concerned with objective
facts rather than with the intentions behind them, regarded the stove as
actually broken, and, therefore, no longer subject to laws dealing with
whole vessels. The controversy that raged over this question was
prolonged and bitter. Finally the matter was put to a vote, and Rabbi
Eliezer was dramatically defeated by a great majority. But Rabbi Eliezer
refused to yield. He counselled his followers to defy the majority, and
in his judicial decisions continued to formulate the law in accordance
with his own views. Behind this impasse stood not only a difference in
attitude toward the Akhnai stove, but a challenge to the concept of a
disciplined Jewish life.

To break the impasse, the rabbis finally responded with excommunication.
In demonstration, they held a public burning of certain types of food
which they had pronounced

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

impure, but which he, in defiance of their opinions, persisted in
considering pure. Rabbi Akiba, his own disciple, carried the news of the
decision to him. Seated in mourning dress, at some distance from him,
Akiba spoke: "My master, it appears to me that thy colleagues keep aloof
from thee." Rabbi Eliezer understood the message, but remained
unyielding to the end.<span
id="an_r_03_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_03_5)

Rabbi Eliezer felt his isolation most keenly. The terms of his
excommunication apparently left him free to continue teaching in his
school at Lydda, but he realized that the centre of Jewish learning and
authority was at Jabneh. From his pupils, who occasionally attended the
sessions at Jabneh, he sought to learn what went on there, but such
conversations would only pain him, reminding him that he was an outcast.
Once, when he was told that the council at Jabneh had deliberated on a
question concerning which he felt himself qualified to speak
authoritatively, he actually shed tears, and although the decision of
the scholars was in accordance with his own opinion, he dispatched to
Jabneh a message of acquiescence. Moved, no doubt, by his own
experience, he warned his disciples: "Be as careful about the respect
due to your colleagues as about the respect due to yourselves—and do not
permit yourselves to become easily provoked to anger"; "Warm yourselves
before the hearths of scholars, but see that you are not burnt, for when
they bite, it is the bite of a fox, and when they sting, it is the sting
of a scorpion."<span id="an_r_03_6"></span>[6](wott11.htm#an_n_03_6)

Rabbi Eliezer was not reconciled with his colleagues until his dying
moments. Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Akiba, and a number of other scholars,
hearing of his illness, had come to pay him a visit. They could not draw
close—he was still under the ban—and they, therefore, stood at some
distance. But he recognized them. "Why have you come?" he demanded
summarily. "To study Torah," they replied. "And why have you not come
until now?" he continued. Embarrassed, they apologized that they had
been busy. Rabbi Eliezer recalled

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the days when he was still the great teacher in Israel, and looked back
upon the time when Rabbi Akiba was still his devoted disciple. To erase
the pain induced by these recollections, the visiting scholars drew him
into legal discussion. In the midst of it he expired. Forgotten now were
all the dissensions; only Rabbi Eliezer's great sincerity, his profound
learning and his piety remained. Overwhelmed with grief, Rabbi Joshua
arose and formally dissolved the sentence of excommunication that had
been between them. Rabbi Akiba applied the verse spoken by Elisha at the
passing of Elijah (II Kings 2:12): "My father, my father, the chariots
of Israel and the horsemen thereof." A great but turbulent personality
had passed from Israel.<span
id="an_r_03_7"></span>[7](wott11.htm#an_n_03_7)

There were similar rifts between Rabbi Joshua and the patriarch Rabban
Gamaliel II. Exercising his prerogatives as *nasi* to arrange the
calendar, Rabban Gamaliel announced the date of the New Year Day. A
number of scholars, including Rabbi Joshua who was chief justice of the
court, made calculations of their own which led them to different
conclusions and they recommended that the date be changed. Rabban
Gamaliel, however, refused, regarding the matter as closed. Whereupon
Rabbi Joshua proceeded to plan celebrating the Holidays not on the date
officially designated, but on the date supported by his own
calculations.

Rabban Gamaliel saw the threat of a schism and, to maintain the
authority of the court, he ordered his associate "to appear before me
with thy cane and thy purse, on the day which is the Day of Atonement
according to thy reckoning." Rabbi Joshua was in a dilemma and he came
to consult some of his colleagues and friends. Rabbi Akiba advised him
to obey, for the authority of the court must be upheld even if its
decision was based on technically inadequate testimony. He cited the
text describing the jurisdiction of the court in the determination of
the calendar. "These are the appointed seasons of the Lord, even holy
convocations which ye shall proclaim in their appointed seasons" (Lev.
23:4); their holiness

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

is not inherent, but derived from the proclamation of *the court*.
Another colleague, Rabbi Dosa, likewise recommended compliance. "If we
are to review the decisions made by Rabban Gamaliel's court," he
explained, "we might as well reconsider every decision which was
promulgated from the days of Moses to our own." With a heavy heart Rabbi
Joshua finally obeyed. The patriarch was overjoyed at this recognition
of his authority, and exultantly greeted him: "Peace on thee, my master
and my disciple; my master in learning, and my disciple in acknowledging
the authority of my office."<span
id="an_r_03_8"></span>[8](wott11.htm#an_n_03_8)

On another occasion, Rabbi Joshua and the patriarch clashed over a
question of ritual procedure. Rabban Gamaliel ruled religious worship in
the evening obligatory. It was an innovation in tradition, but he
apparently judged it necessary because the Temple had been destroyed and
formalized prayer was to replace the cult of sacrifice as an organized
and authoritative expression of Jewish piety. Rabbi Joshua wanted more
spontaneity in religious life, and to a student who had consulted him,
he expressed himself that the evening service ought to remain voluntary.
The patriarch heard of this, and he decided to make another
demonstration of his authority. When the Sanhedrin gathered for a formal
session, Gamaliel had the question submitted for formal consideration,
and then he repeated his ruling that the evening service is obligatory,
asking whether there were any dissenting opinions. Rabbi Joshua, who was
chief justice, announced that there were none. Whereupon Rabban Gamaliel
ordered, "Joshua, stand up and a witness will testify that you
dissented." Rabbi Joshua confessed his guilt, but the patriarch, as a
mark of displeasure, left him standing throughout the day's proceedings.

There was shock among the rabbis at the overbearing and dictatorial
manner of the patriarch. When the memorable session broke up and Rabban
Gamaliel departed. the members of the Sanhedrin reassembled. After
gravely considering

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the difficult situation that had developed, a motion was made and
carried impeaching the patriarch from his office as head of the academy.
He remained patriarch but he was shorn of the academic prerogatives
which had gone with the office. A younger member of the court, Rabbi
Eleazar ben Azaryah was elected head of the Academy. Rabban Gamaliel
accepted the verdict calmly and took his place as a lay member of the
court, bearing no grudge and carrying no vindictiveness. Duly humbled,
moreover, he apologized to Rabbi Joshua for having treated him with
discourtesy. A reconciliation followed and Rabban Gamaliel was finally
reinstated, but since Rabbi Eleazar had held the high office, he was to
share some of the prerogatives of the office with Rabban Gamaliel. Thus
he was to deliver the public lecture on the Sabbath every third
week.<span id="an_r_03_9"></span>[9](wott11.htm#an_n_03_9)

#### REBELLION RENEWED

The program of reconstruction as inaugurated at Jabneh was interrupted
by a new uprising against Rome. Scattered remnants of the old army of
zealots who had challenged Rome in 70 C.E. fled Palestine to settle in
various other centers of Jewish population within the empire, including
Egypt, North Africa and Cyprus. There they had sown the spirit of
discontent and rebellion. And in 116 when Trajan launched a campaign of
new conquest in the East, the Jews renewed the old struggle. Palestine
played a minor role in the uprising. Jabneh exerted an influence of
moderation. the rabbis seeking to dissuade their people from resuming
the struggle on the military level. But the rebellion was pursued with
unprecedented bitterness and determination in the Jewish diaspora.
Fierce battles raged in such cities as Alexandria, Cyrene and in Cyprus,
with casualties running in the hundreds of thousands. But it was not a
clear-cut struggle between the Jews and the Romans. For many of the
natives in each of these conquered provinces bore willingly the yoke of
Roman imperialism. And when the crisis

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

was precipitated the native collaborators of the Romans struck out
against their Jewish populations who alone battled for freedom. The
civil wars which thus ensued doomed the rebellion to failure. There were
new executions, new persecutions, and new despair. Most of the Jewish
communities in the diaspora were destroyed. But an embassy of rabbis
under the leadership of Rabban Gamaliel hurried to Rome and succeeded in
warding off a series of retaliatory measures which had also been
projected against Palestine.

A new storm broke after Hadrian came to power (117–138). Content to mark
time within the old frontiers and temporarily not to encroach upon the
domains of the sturdy Parthians, who maintained a free and flourishing
kingdom in what is present-day Iraq, Hadrian became a reformer, devoting
his energy to the inner needs of his vast empire in preparation for the
next Roman bid for world conquest. One of the most vital of these needs,
as he saw it, was the strengthening of imperial unity which he tried to
achieve through the cultivation of a common culture. What culture other
than Hellenism enjoyed the prestige qualifying it to become the imperial
culture? The experiment of Antiochus IV, King of the Syrians, was to be
tried again, though on a minor scale. The heterogeneous territories of
Rome were to be molded into a national state, linked together by the
culture of old Hellas. His program included the restoration of
Jerusalem, but as a pagan city, its crowning edifice to be a Greek
Temple dedicated to Jupiter.

There was consternation among the Jews when this program was announced.
For it held out its threat not merely to Jewish social and political
institutions, but to the Jewish way of life, to the Jewish religion.
With the Torah in jeopardy, the rabbis now joined the camp of open
rebellion. The youthful but brilliant Talmudist, Rabbi Akiba ben Joseph,
a leader of the Jabneh Sanhedrin, gave his blessings to a new anti-Roman
rebellion which was proclaimed by Bar Kokba.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

The new insurrection broke out in 132, and it registered some initial
success. For 2½ years the Jews held the recaptured city of Jerusalem.
They even made attempts to restore the sacrificial cult at an improvised
altar. Coins were struck proudly marked in honor of the First, Second
and Third Year after the Liberation of Jerusalem. The Romans, however,
soon reasserted their power. Jerusalem was retaken. The Jews entrenched
themselves in the fort of Bethar, southwest of Jerusalem, but were
forced to surrender in 135. Half a million Jews are said to have
perished in the struggle. Judea was practically turned into a desert;
its cities and villages were in ruins.

The Romans had paid dearly for their victories. So huge were the Roman
losses that the emperor omitted the usual reassuring formula from his
report to the Senate: "I and my army are well." But they could at last
proceed with their plans. Jerusalem was plowed up to dramatize the new
foundations of the city, to be called Aelia Capitolina. Temples were
built to Bacchus, Serapis, Venus and Jupiter. No Jew could set foot into
the new city. The practices of Judaism were forbidden on the pain of
death. There was to be no observance of the Sabbath, no performance of
the rite of circumcision, no study of Torah, and, to break the
continuity of an authoritative religious leadership, they outlawed the
ordination of new rabbis. Stricken at the source of its vitality, this
dissident people was at last to give way and the totalitarian empire was
to pursue unchallenged its ambitions of building a new world state.

In the contest of arms, Rome had once more emerged victorious. But brute
power, no matter how overwhelming, has generally proven impotent in the
face of a people that was actuated by a profound will to live, and was
prepared to pay the cost of survival in suffering. There were Jews. in
all layers of society who no longer had the strength to suffer and whose
morale was waning. Elisha ben Abuyah, a famous figure in the rabbinical
academies, some of whose

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

moral maxims have been preserved in the ethical treatise Abot, turned
renegade and offered himself as a willing collaborator to the Roman
officialdom. He helped the Roman police in ferreting out leaders of
Jewish resistance and in closing schools where the old way of life was
being taught. Rabbi Jose ben Kisma who had once claimed, "If all the
precious metals in the world were offered me, I would not live but in an
atmosphere of Torah," saw in the repeated successes of Rome the evidence
of divine favor. Rome was apparently invincible and it was folly to
resist the sweep of the future.<span
id="an_r_03_10"></span>[10](wott11.htm#an_n_03_10)

But there were others, of sterner stuff, who did not lose themselves in
the crisis. Rabbis Akiba, Tarfon, and Jose the Galilean held a secret
conclave and issued a joint statement to their people, urging them
generally to comply with Roman edicts but to resist unto death any
orders involving the commission of idolatry, murder, or unchastity.<span
id="an_r_03_11"></span>[11](wott11.htm#an_n_03_11) And a company of
distinguished teachers openly defied the Roman police by continuing to
meet with their students for the study of Torah. Their attitude was best
summarized in Akiba's famous parable of the fishes and the fox. Warned
that his open defiance of Roman law would lead to imprisonment, he
replied with the story of the fox who invited the fishes to seek safety
from the fishermen on dry land. But the fishes replied, "If the water
which is our normal habitat hold out no safety, what will happen to us
on the dry land which is not our habitat?" "So, too," expounded Akiba,
"if our existence is precarious when we persist in the study of Torah,
how shall we survive if we abandon it?"<span
id="an_r_03_12"></span>[12](wott11.htm#an_n_03_12)

The forebodings came true soon enough. The Romans unleashed a reign of
terror against the obdurate Jews; many were imprisoned, banished or sold
into slavery. There were numerous executions. Intimidated by the terror,
many fled Palestine to neighboring countries, particularly Babylonia,
where a more tolerant government offered these political refugees a
ready welcome.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

The records of some of those who perished in the terror have been
preserved and they recount a memorable story of steadfast faith and
heroic struggle. The Midrash Eleh Ezkerah is the vivid description of a
mass execution of ten renowned rabbis. It has been rendered into verse
and included in the liturgy of the Day of Atonement.

Among those arrested by the Romans was Rabbi Akiba. From his prison
cell, he continued to defy his captors, dispatching secret messages to
his followers. A hurried trial was held and the Romans condemned him to
death. According to tradition, they executed him by tearing the flesh
from his living body. Rabbi Akiba remained steadfast to the very last,
expiring with a resolute confession of his outlawed faith: "Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One."<span
id="an_r_03_13"></span>[13](wott11.htm#an_n_03_13)

Akiba's work was immediately taken up by Rabbi Judah ben Baba. Gathering
Akiba's five most gifted disciples, Meir, Judah ben Ilai, Simeon ben
Johai, Jose ben Halafta and Eleazar ben Shammua, he officially conferred
upon them rabbinical ordination and charged them with the task of
continuing the tradition of a courageous and devoted leadership amidst
confusion and terror. The meeting was raided by the Romans before its
conclusion. The five younger men were able to escape, but Rabbi Judah
ben Baba was stabbed to death.<span
id="an_r_03_14"></span>[14](wott11.htm#an_n_03_14)

#### THE RABBIS AT THE HELM

Hadrian's experiment in totalitarianism came to an end with his death in
140, when he was succeeded by Antoninus Pius. The Sanhedrin was at once
reorganized, but it now abandoned Jabneh for Usha in Galilee. As one
Midrash relates it, "At the termination of the persecutions, our
teachers met in Usha. They were Rabbis Judah ben Ilai, Nehemiah, Meir,
Jose, Simeon ben Johai, Eliezer (the son of Rabbi Jose the Galilean),
and Eleazar ben Jacob. They sent to the elders in Galilee saying, 'Those
who have already

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

learnt, come and teach; those who have not yet learnt, come and be
taught.' They met and arranged everything that was necessary."<span
id="an_r_03_15"></span>[15](wott11.htm#an_n_03_15)

One of the things which they finally arranged was the selection of
another scion of the Hillel family as their leader, Simeon, the son of
Gamaliel II. Simeon, the new nasi, had been in Bethar, the last Jewish
stronghold, during the Bar Kokba rebellion, and had witnessed its fall
to the Romans. A narrow escape saved him from the massacre that followed
in the city.

Having experienced the horrors of war, Simeon extolled the virtues of
peace. "The fabric of civilization rests on three moral
foundations—truth, justice and peace." "Great is peace, for Aaron the
High Priest acquired fame only because he promoted peace." He is also
the author of the famous maxim: "It is unnecessary to erect monuments to
the righteous; their deeds are their monuments." Rabban Simeon advocated
equal justice to Jews and pagans. In one instance he declared it
obligatory to ransom pagan slaves who had been kidnapped. And he was
lavish in his admiration for those semi-Jews, the Samaritans, for
loyally observing those elements in the Torah which they recognized. He
was so highly esteemed by the Sanhedrin that in all but three instances
his opinion was accepted as authoritative law.

The achievement of the rabbis at Usha extended over a varied field and
continued the precedents established at Jabneh. They defended the
supremacy of Palestine as the center of Judaism against the claims of
the rising Jewish community in Babylonia. An attempt had been made to
found a Sanhedrin in Babylonia during the Hadrianic persecutions of
Judaism in Palestine. It threatened to start a schism in Israel. When
the Usha Sanhedrin was reorganized, a delegation of two rabbis was sent
to Babylonia and they succeeded, after a struggle with the local
authorities, in inducing the Babylonians to continue to heed Palestinian
leadership.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

They reorganized the procedure of the Sanhedrin to invest its sessions
with new pomp and dignity. In addition to the nasi and chief justice, a
new office was created, the *hakam*, literally a "wise" or learned man.
The new functionary seems to have been in charge of the academic
functions of the Sanhedrin.

They continued the process of literary reorganization in traditional law
as well as the application of that law to new situations; and they
enacted a number of reforms dealing with various aspects of religious,
domestic, and social life. They ordained that parents were to maintain
their children throughout their minority, and that where parents deeded
their property to their children, they must be supported from the
estate; a person was to contribute a fifth of his income to charity; a
father must be patient in teaching his children till the age of twelve,
but thereafter he may take severe measures with them.<span
id="an_r_03_16"></span>[16](wott11.htm#an_n_03_16) Perhaps the most
important reform was the declaration of immunity for members of the
Sanhedrin who could not be excommunicated for their views, regardless of
circumstances.

Judah I, who succeeded his father Simeon to the patriarchate, was born
about 135. He received his education at Usha under his father and from
intimate contact with the various members of the Sanhedrin. It is
uncertain when he assumed the office of his father or when the seat of
the Sanhedrin was transferred from Usha to Bet Shearim, also in Galilee.
He was not of very good health and for the last seventeen years of his
life he lived in Sepphoris, a section of the country renowned for its
high altitude and pure air. He died in 217.

Judah was a man of very great wealth and was held in high esteem by Jews
as well as by Romans. His universal recognition as a master of tradition
and leader in Israel is well attested by his popular designation
"Rabbi," without his name, the master par excellence, or Rabbenu
ha-Kadosh, "our holy master." The Sanhedrin over which Judah presided

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

had no chief justice or hakam; he himself fulfilled the varied functions
for which the other two offices had been created.

A number of his aphorisms have been preserved in the Talmud. "I have
learned much from my masters, more from my colleagues, but most of all
from my pupils." "Do not consider the vessel but its contents; many a
new vessel is full of old wine and many an old vessel is without even
new wine." To the question, "Which is the right path that a man is to
choose in life?" he offered the following answer: "That which will be a
source of pride to him, before his own conscience, and which will also
bring him honor from mankind." He held that children must revere both
parents equally.

Under Judah's leadership the Sanhedrin enacted a number of important
social reforms. Those who purchased property twelve months after its
seizure by the Roman government were required to compensate the original
owners by a fourth of its purchase price, but the transfer of possession
was declared valid. Certain frontier districts of Palestine were
exempted from tithing their crops or leaving their land fallow on a
sabbatical year. The theory on which these exemptions were made was that
those had not been part of the country regions originally invaded by the
Israelites under Joshua. But their purpose was obviously to alleviate
conditions among the Jewish masses upon whom the tithes and the seventh
year loss of the harvest had proven a very heavy burden.

Rabbi Judah sought to abolish the fast of the ninth day of Ab, when Jews
mourned for the fall of the Temple. There was no point in maintaining
the fast, he felt, since the Jews were free of persecution and were
living everywhere as a free community within the Roman Empire. Indeed,
the continued commemoration of that fast day fostered ill-will between
Jews and Romans. But Rabbi Judah's colleagues opposed the move and the
fast remained.

The most important achievement of Judah was the completion of the great
literary enterprise that had been started

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

in Jabneh—the compilation of the Mishnah. Judah synthesized in his work
all that had been accomplished before him. He relied particularly on the
compilations of Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Meir. But he ultimately made them
all his own and what he produced was a succinct and comprehensive record
of Jewish legal tradition from the dawn of Pharisaism until his own
times. The opinions that he recognized as authoritative law are
generally presented anonymously, but the views of the dissenting masters
are given as well. With some minor variations, the product that left the
hand of Judah is the classic text of the Mishnah which has been
preserved to our own day.

With the passing of Judah I, the old lustre departed from the office of
nasi. A number of more or less inconspicuous personalities succeeded
him, but they made little mark for themselves as teachers and leaders in
Israel. The most important of them was Judah's grandson, Judah II. Judah
was a close friend of the Roman Emperor Alexander Severus. To facilitate
more cordial relations between Jews and Romans, he sought to abolish
some of the restrictions against free relations with pagans. He
succeeded in lifting an old ban against the use of oil bought from
pagans. This was also an important economic amelioration for the Jewish
community which used oil as a staple in the common diet. In his own
home, the patriarch allowed himself certain deviations from Jewish
custom, yielding to the influence of Roman manners to which he was
freely exposed. He was openly criticized for this, but the rabbis
rationalized that as representative of Jewry he was obliged to mingle
with Roman officials which made such accommodations inevitable.<span
id="an_r_03_17"></span>[17](wott11.htm#an_n_03_17)

The rabbis who functioned after the compilation of the Mishnah were
called *amoraim*, expositors, to distinguish them from their
predecessors who were called *tannaim*, teachers. The Mishnah had
greatly simplified their labors, for they now had an authoritative
record of tradition on which to base their interpretations and
decisions.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

The pioneer of amoraic activity was Rabbi Johanan (199–279), who headed
the academy in Tiberias and who has frequently been called the compiler
of the Palestine Talmud. Johanan had studied under Judah I and he
extolled the value of his Mishnah. "I base all things on the Mishnah,"
he declared. Johanan established the principle that no amora could
contradict a tanna unless he had tannaitic support for his position.
"Whatever is written in the Mishnah has been communicated to Moses on
Mount Sinai."

Six commandments he extolled with particular emphasis: hospitality to
strangers, visiting the sick, careful prayer, rising early to go to the
academy, raising children to the knowledge of the Torah, and judging
everyone according to his good deeds. Johanan was a great humanitarian.
He treated his slave as an equal and served him regularly the same food
eaten by the rest of the household. "The slave," he explained, "is the
same child of God that I am." He suspended all laws proscribing labor on
the sabbath to save a sick person who could then live to observe many
sabbaths. He ruled that the injunction to return a straying ox or sheep
(Deut. 22:1) applied even if the owner was a Jew who had renounced his
Judaism, and he called upon people to give full recognition to whatever
truths pagan wise men might discover.

He complained bitterly about the oppressive taxations levied by the
Romans. "Such is the way of an evil kingdom when it proposes to seize
people's property," he once explained. "It appoints one to be an
overseer and another a tax collector. By these devices it takes away the
possessions of people." He was hopeful that the Parthians would finally
prevail and make good their challenge to Roman supremacy, thereby
liberating Jewish Palestine. But, in spite of prevailing persecutions,
he sought to discourage the emigration of Jews from Palestine. The
national cause demanded that Jews hold on to every position in their
native land.

Johanan did not edit the Palestinian Gemara, as has

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

sometimes been asserted. Johanan died in 279, and the Palestinian Gemara
quotes scholars who lived in the fourth and early fifth centuries. But
Johanan's work was the most important contribution to the making of this
Palestinian supplement to the Mishnah.<span
id="an_r_03_18"></span>[18](wott11.htm#an_n_03_18)

After the passing of Johanan, there set in a continuous decline in
Palestinian scholarship. The conversion of the Roman Empire to
Christianity under Constantine (311–337)—another experiment in unifying
a heterogeneous empire with a common faith and a common way of
life—brought new disabilities upon the Jewish community. In 351, the
Jews attempted another uprising against Rome and brutal retaliations
followed. The most important centers of Jewish life and learning,
including Tiberias and Sepphoris, were destroyed. The Roman Empire
itself was weakening, moreover, under the weight of constant warfare
with the Parthians and neo-Persians in the East. In the early fifth
century, the west was invaded by the Goths and Vandals, and chaotic
conditions spread throughout the empire. In Palestine, as in the other
provinces, the population was constantly diminishing, through natural
decline, as well as through emigration and social and cultural life
gradually came to a standstill.

The decline of Palestinian Jewry is perhaps best illustrated by the
patriarchs who succeeded Judah II. They were essentially figureheads as
far as their functions in Jewish life were concerned. Their knowledge of
tradition was mediocre. They were the political representatives of Jewry
before the Roman officialdom and assisted the Government in the
collection of taxes. The leadership in cultural life passed into the
hands of the amoraim, who carried on their work more or less
independently, without centralized direction from the patriarchal
office.

As nominal heads of the Sanhedrin, the most important function of these
patriarchs was the annual promulgation of the calendar. Even this ceased
in 359 when the patriarch,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hillel II,
formulated a mathematically calculated fixed calendar, doing away with
the periodic calendar determination on the basis of the observed
position of the new moon. The inertia of a long and colorful past kept
the office going for another sixty years, but its usefulness had long
since ended. And in 425 when the patriarch Gamaliel VI died childless,
the patriarchate was officially abolished.

The abolition of the patriarchate marked the termination of Palestine's
role as a center of Judaism. We do not know whose hands put the
finishing touches upon the literature of Mishnah supplementation, the
Gemara, which had grown up in the various schools. Together with the
Mishnah, it proved to be a rich legacy that a fruitful and creative
epoch had left to its posterity.

#### A NEW DAWN IN BABYLONIA

Babylonia, the modern Iraq, ranks second only to Palestine as a center
of classical Judaism. Situated along the lower reaches of the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers, the country is rich in alluvial soil, and was one of
the most fertile regions of the ancient world.

There had been a Jewish community in Babylonia ever since the Babylonian
King Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed the independence of Judah in 586
B.C.E. and deported to Babylonia a large part of the Judean population.
including the leaders of political and religious life. The deportees
were given their freedom and were allowed to settle on the land or to
engage in any other pursuits of their liking. Babylonia's rich soil
rewarded their labors with a lavish bounty; and they grew and prospered
in the new land.

The political convulsions of the ancient world repeatedly bore their
full weight upon Babylonian life. Cyrus, the Persian, conquered the
country in 539 B.C.E., and his dynasty maintained its domination for
more than two centuries. Persian power was broken by Alexander the Great

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

in 331 B.C.E. In the division of empire which followed Alexander's
death, Babylonia was joined to Syria as part of the kingdom falling to
the general Seleucus.

In one essential respect did the fate of Babylonia differ from the rest
of the Near East: she never succumbed to Roman conquest. In 160 B.C.E.,
a Parthian King, Mithridates I, established himself in the country and
the new dynasty, which reigned until 226 C. E., built a powerful
military machine that was repeatedly able to hurl back the Roman legions
seeking to invade it.

The Jews suffered all the repercussions of the various wars that ravaged
the country, but their freedom remained intact. And with the benevolent
cooperation of the government, they evolved an ingenious pattern of
community life. The Jews were recognized as a national minority,
governed by a hereditary prince, called the *Resh Galuta*, the head of
the captivity. This prince who was a descendent of the royal house of
David, was the fourth highest ranking noble of the state, representing
the Jewish population. As far as the Jewish community was concerned, he
was vested with the right to supervise trade and commerce, to appoint
judges and to direct the various other tasks of regional government.
including the collection of taxes.

The autonomous organization of the Jewish community was made possible by
the compact character of the Jewish settlements. Such cities as
Nehardea, Nares, Sura, Mehoza, and Pumbedita, had predominantly Jewish
populations. The contact between Jews and native Babylonians was free
and unrestrained; and the impact of mutual influence was evident on both
cultures. The Jews adopted the Aramaic vernacular spoken in Babylonia.
Many Babylonians, on the other hand, embraced the Jewish faith and were
welcomed into the synagogue. Among the greatest triumphs to Jewish
proselytising in Babylonia was the conversion of the royal family of
Audiabne, a vassal state in northern Mesopotamia.

Pursuing their own culture, the Jews of Babylonia had

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

developed important centers for the study of the Torah. The pioneer of
the sopheric movement in Palestine, Ezra, had received his training in
Babylonia. The venerable teacher, Hillel, received his preliminary
education in the Babylonian schools, before migrating to Palestine. The
chief justice of the Palestinian Sanhedrin under Simeon ben Gamaliel III
was a Babylonian scholar, Nathan. a member of the family of the Resh
Galuta.

But the Jews of Babylonia realized that the central authority in Jewish
life must be directed from Palestine. Most of them did not want to leave
their new homes to take advantage of the Persian edict allowing them to
return to Palestine. But they organized an expedition of pioneers who
were willing to return; and they helped the new Palestinian settlement
with material and moral support until it could get on its feet to resume
once again a normal national life. And when Palestine was prepared to
offer leadership, they gladly followed. They sent their annual
contributions for the maintenance of the Temple and went on pilgrimages
to Jerusalem. They respected the authority of the Sanhedrin and its
hierarchy of teachers and leaders who directed Jewish religious and
cultural life.

The Roman invasion sent a new wave of immigration from Palestine to
Babylonia. This was augmented particularly after the Jewish uprisings of
70 C.E. and 135 C.E. when the Romans devastated Judea and destroyed the
Temple. As a Babylonian teacher, after witnessing the tragedy of
Palestine, under Rome, remarked: "The Lord, knowing the Jews would not
be able to bear the hard decrees of Rome, exiled them to Babylonia."

Among these new Palestinian emigres who came to Babylonia was Hananiah,
a nephew of Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah, and also a distinguished scholar.
Apprehensive that the Romans would completely uproot Palestinian Jewry,
Hananiah attempted to organize a Sanhedrin in Babylonia. He organized a
school at Nehar Pekod for advanced study of the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Torah, and, as its
head, proclaimed his competence to promulgate the calendar of Jewish
festivals, without reference to the Palestinian authorities. He won
local Jewish support, and Babylonian Jewry thus seceded from its
dependence on Palestine.

Hananiah's attempt was, however, premature. Babylonia's time had not as
yet come. For in 140, peace was restored in Palestine and the Sanhedrin
reconstituted at Usha. To recover the loyalty of Babylonia, the Usha
Sanhedrin sent a delegation of rabbis to Hananiah, who, however,
remained obdurate. The delegates finally appealed, over Hananiah's head,
to the Jewish laity.

The Talmudic story relates that one of these delegates when called upon
to read the Torah at a synagogue service on a festival date fixed by
Hananiah's calendar, substituted "These are the holidays of Hananiah"
for "These are the holidays of God." Members of the congregation, of
course, corrected him, but he replied, "It is we in Palestine who may
read, 'These are the holidays of God'; here in Babylonia one must
substitute the name of Hananiah since he fixes the holidays as he
chooses and not as God commanded." The second delegate then arose to
read and he recited the verse, "Out of Zion shall go forth the Torah,"
as "Out of Babylonia shall go forth the Torah." When corrected, he
replied similarly: "In Palestine we may read as written, but judging by
your conduct the amended reading appears justified." Public pressure
finally forced Hananiah to yield; and Jewish life was once again under a
unified centralized leadership, the Palestinian Sanhedrin.<span
id="an_r_03_19"></span>[19](wott11.htm#an_n_03_19)

The Jews in Babylonia continued to heed the Palestinian Jewish
leadership until the fifth century when the Sanhedrin was abolished. But
as Jewish life in Palestine declined and Babylonian Jewry grew with ever
more accretions from Palestine, the active enterprises of Jewish culture
were increasingly transferred to Babylonia. By the third century, a
series of schools of higher Torah studies sprang up in Babylonia

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

which conducted for centuries an active intellectual life, the choicest
product of which is the Babylonian Gemara.

The pioneer in this intellectual development was Rabbi Abba Areka, or as
he was popularly designated *Rab*, master par excellence. He had studied
in Palestine under Rabbi Judah I, where he distinguished himself in his
studies, winning the plaudits of a scholar like Rabbi Johanan who
acclaimed him as his own superior. It was at Judah's school that he
probably acquired the epithet Areka, tall, to differentiate him from
another scholar by the same name, the father of the famous Babylonian
amora, Samuel.

In spite of his high standing as a scholar, Rab could not achieve full
ordination from Judah or his successor, Gamaliel III. The patriarchs
were apparently unwilling to invest Abba with full authority because
they did not want to see a self-sufficient religious life established
among the Babylonian Jews, with a rival academy under Abba's leadership.
The hegemony of Palestine remained unbroken so long as it remained the
only Jewish community with a fully ordained religious leadership.
Nevertheless he was recognized as an equal in rank to the great teachers
who were active before the compilation of the Mishnah and privileged
freely to dispute their opinions, a distinction accorded to him alone
among all the amoraim, as the rabbis of post-Mishnaic times were called.

Rab returned to Babylonia in 219 with a widely recognized reputation as
a great scholar. The Resh Galuta at once appointed him commissioner of
markets in Nehardea and he was invited to lecture in the local academy
which was then headed by a certain Shila. But neither office proved an
adequate outlet for his independent spirit and creative intellect. When
Shila died, he was offered the rectorship of the Nehardea academy, but
he turned it down, with the recommendation that it be offered to a local
scholar, Samuel, who had a greater claim to it.

Rab's final decision was to become a pioneer, to found

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

a new academy with new traditions and in a region where there was little
knowledge of the Torah and a widespread neglect of Jewish religious
life—the city of Sura. As the Talmud puts it, he entered "an open and
neglected field and fenced it in." With his own funds he erected a
school building, and he offered scholarships to needy students,
providing tuition and maintenance, and before long 1200 students had
enrolled to study under him.

Rab had brought with him from Palestine the text of the Mishnah, edited
by Judah I, and he based all his lectures on it, supplementing it,
however, with explanations, illustrations, and various new applications.
But he was equally interested in the exposition of moral lessons. The
Talmud has preserved a number of his moral maxims and they are among the
choicest ethical expressions in all literature: "The rituals of the
Torah were given only to discipline men's morals." "Whatever may not
properly be done in public is forbidden even in the most secret
chamber." "It is well that people occupy themselves with the study of
Torah and the performance of charitable deeds even when inspired by
ulterior motives; for the habit of right doing will finally ennoble
their intentions as well." "Man will be held to account for having
deprived himself of the enjoyment of good things which the world has
offered him." "When necessary, flay dead carcasses in the street and do
not say, I am a priest, I am a great man." "It is better to throw one's
self into the fiery furnace than to humiliate one's fellow-man."

Rab did not confine his interests to the classroom alone. He was one of
the most active and influential communal leaders in his day. He enriched
the Jewish liturgy with a number of beautiful prayers which still offer
the most inspiring motifs of the synagogue service. His compositions
include the prayers on the occasion of the new month, a good deal of the
New Year and Day of Atonement liturgy, and the Adoration, Alenu
Leshabeah, with which every Jewish religious service, private or
congregational, is concluded.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

He interested himself in elementary education, ordaining that pupils
shall not begin their studies before the age of six; that teachers must
create discipline through the winning of the interests and affection of
children rather than through corporal punishment; and that no children
shall be deemed unworthy of instruction because of mental backwardness.
He also contributed immeasurably to the reformation of Jewish family
life. Thus, he ruled against child marriages and advocated a period of
courtship to enable the boy and girl to discover their own preferences
and to choose their own mates without parental dictation.

Rab started his school at the age of 64; and he continued as its active
head for 28 years. When he died, all the Jews in Babylonia mourned him
for a full year, observing all the rites of mourning which are followed
at the loss of a member of the family. He had made himself immortal by
raising the religious and cultural life of Babylonian Jewry and by
establishing a great institution of high learning which was destined to
endure, with minor interruptions, for seven centuries.<span
id="an_r_03_20"></span>[20](wott11.htm#an_n_03_20)

The academy at Nehardea which had invited Rab to its leadership after
the passing of Shila was presided over by the local scholar, Samuel, or
as he was often called, Mar (Master) Samuel. Like Rab, he had studied in
Palestine, but he did not receive even partial ordination. In addition
to his studies of Jewish tradition, he had an excellent scientific
training. He was a practicing physician and a well-known astronomer. It
is interesting that he traced many diseases to the unhygienic conditions
under which people lived. He was especially famous for his skill in
treating the eye. He denounced the then, and, in many circles, still
prevalent superstition ascribing diseases to the evil eye. He attributed
a great deal of therapeutic value to air and climate.

As head of the Nehardea academy, Samuel distinguished himself
particularly in the field of civil law. He was the author of the famous
principle of Jewish law that the legal

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

system of any country where Jews are residing is binding upon them, even
when it is in conflict with their own system of law. And though the
Babylonian Jews enjoyed an autonomous court system, he demanded that
Jewish judges reckon with the prevailing Babylonian law in reaching
their decisions.<span id="an_r_03_21"></span>[21](wott11.htm#an_n_03_21)

Between Rab and Samuel there was constant intellectual commerce, and the
two men frequently disagreed. Samuel's leadership was followed to the
full in his specialty, civil law, while Rab remained supreme on
questions of ritual law. Samuel survived his colleague by ten years, and
during that time Sura was without a successor to Rab. The Nehardea
academy was looked upon as the supreme center of Jewish scholarship and
religious authority in Babylonian Judaism. The city of Nehardea was
sacked in 261 as one of the incidents in the constant warfare between
the Babylonians and the Romans. But the famous academy was transferred
to a neighboring city, Pumbedita, by a pupil of both Rab and Samuel,
Judah ben Ezekiel. This famous academy now remained in Pumbedita
throughout the Talmudic period, except for a brief interlude between 339
and 352 when the new rector, Raba, had it transferred to his native
city, Mahoza.

The Babylonian academies developed an ingenious educational institution
which enabled them to reach large numbers of non-professional students.
During the two months, Adar and Elul, when the average farmer is free
from his work in the fields, special educational sessions, called
*Kalla* were held in the schools of Sura and Pumbedita. The subject to
be taken up at each of these sessions was announced in advance, and
laymen were encouraged to spend their hours of leisure in preparation.
The lectures of the rector of the academy were supplemented with the
discourses of special lectures. The basic text discussed in all these
gatherings was the Mishnah; and one tractate was generally covered each
month. 12,000 students are reported to have

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

been enrolled in one such Kalla session.<span
id="an_r_03_22"></span>[22](wott11.htm#an_n_03_22) This institution
brought the academies into close contact with life, and closed the gap
between the professional scholar and the layman. And more than anything
else, it helped raise the cultural level of Babylonian Jewry.

The two academies continued their parallel development, under various
heads, until the end of the fifth century. There were other schools
similarly dedicated to the advanced study of the Torah, but Sura and
Pumbedita were the supreme centers of intellectual life, where the
Mishnaic utterances, so succinctly formulated by Judah I, were enriched
with a supplement of new legal discussions and where the doctrines of
Jewish theology and ethics were expounded to offer inspiration and
guidance to a new community in Israel.

The turning point in this cultural enterprise was the new domestic
policy adopted by Kings Yezdegerd II (438–57) and his son Peroz
(459–86). Celebrating a respite from the constant warfare with the
Romans, these kings entered upon a policy of the intensive
nationalization of their realm. Zoroastrianism as the official religion
of the country was proclaimed the medium of national integration as
well, and all dissident religions were proscribed as treason to the
state. The blow of the new nationalism fell with particular severity
upon the Jews. The observance of the Sabbath was prohibited. Synagogues
were destroyed and schools closed. Jewish children were caught and
delivered to the priests of Zoroaster to raise them as devotees of the
national religion. Under these severe persecutions, the once proud Jewry
of Babylon began to crumble. There began a mass flight of Jews to
friendlier shores, to Arabia, India and the Caucasus.

The accumulated cultural achievements of the Babylonian academies were,
however, preserved for posterity through the timely labors of
principally two men, Rab Ashi (d. 427) and Rabina (d. 500). Ashi headed
the Sura academy for

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

more than 50 years of peace, and he had begun the organization of the
vast literature which had grown up in the different academies, around
that unique classic of Jewish tradition, the Mishnah. What Ashi started
as a leisurely work of detached scholarship became a pressing necessity
after his death when the Jewish community was overwhelmed with a great
disaster. And his successors at the Sura academy continued his work,
finally completing it and, it seems, also reducing it to writing. The
final job of editorial revision was rendered by Rabina, the last of the
rectors of the Sura academy in Talmudic times. Babylonian Jewry
eventually recovered from these persecutions and the schools were
reopened for another five centuries of cultural leadership. But the
*Gemara* which had been completed by the close of the fifth century was
the apex of its cultural life and its chief contribution to the Judaism
of the future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Theological Elements in the Talmud](wott06)
