[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trt18)  [Next](trt20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### VIII

### THE ADVENTURE OF SIR BORS

When Sir Bors left Camelot on his quest he met a holy man riding on an
ass, and Sir Bors saluted him. Then the good man knew him to be one of
the Knights who were in quest of the Holy Graal. 'What are you?' said
he, and Sir Bors answered, 'I am a Knight that fain would be counselled
in the quest of the Graal, for he shall have much earthly worship that
brings it to an end.' 'That is true,' said the good man, 'for he will be
the best Knight in the world, but know well that there shall none attain
it but by holiness and by confession of sin.' So they rode together till
they came to the hermitage, and the good man led Sir Bors into the
chapel, where he made confession of his sins, and they ate bread and
drank water together. 'Now,' said the hermit, 'I pray you that you eat
none other till you sit at the table where the Holy Graal shall be.'
'Sir,' answered Sir Bors, I agree thereto, but how know you that I shall
sit there?' 'That know I,' said the holy man, 'but there will be but few
of your fellows with you. Also instead of a shirt you shall wear this
garment until you have achieved your quest,' and Sir Bors took off his
clothes, and put on instead a scarlet coat. Then the good man questioned
him, and marvelled to find him pure in life, and he armed him and bade
him go. After this Sir Bors rode through many lands, and had many
adventures, and was often sore tempted, but remembered the words of the
holy man and kept his life clean of wrong. And once he had by mischance
almost slain his own brother, but a voice cried, 'Flee, Bors, and touch
him not,' and he hearkened and stayed his hand. And there fell between
them a fiery cloud, which

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

burned up both their shields, and they two fell to the earth in a great
swoon; but when they awakened out of it Bors saw that his brother had no
harm. With that the voice spoke to him saying, 'Bors, go hence and bear
your brother fellowship no longer; but take your way to the

<span id="img_89"></span> ![](img/089.jpg)

sea, where Sir Percivale abides till you come.' Then Sir Bors prayed his
brother to forgive him all he had unknowingly done, and rode straight to
the sea. On the shore he found a vessel covered with white samite, and
as soon as he stepped in the vessel it set sail so fast it might have

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

been flying, and Sir Bors lay down and slept till it was day. When he
waked he saw a Knight lying in the midst of the ship, all armed save for
his helm, and he knew him for Sir Percivale, and welcomed him with great
joy; and they told each other of their adventures and of their
temptations, and had great happiness in each other's company. 'We lack
nothing but Galahad, the good Knight,' Sir Percivale said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX: Adventure of Sir Galahad](trt20.md)
