[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trt10)  [Next](trt12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

# The Quest of the Holy Graal

THIS is a mysterious part of the adventures of King Arthur's Knights. We
must remember that parts of these stories are very old; they were
invented by the heathen Welsh, or by the ancient Britons, from whom the
Welsh are descended, and by the old pagan Irish, who spoke Gaelic, a
language not very unlike Welsh. Then these ancient stories were
translated by French and other foreign writers, and Christian beliefs
and chivalrous customs were added in the French romances, and, finally,
the French was translated into English about the time of Edward IV. by
Sir Thomas Malory, who altered as he pleased. The Story of the Holy
Graal, in this book, is mostly taken from Malory, but partly from 'The
High History of the Holy Graal,' translated by Dr. Sebastian Evans from
an old French book.

What was the Holy Graal? In the stories it is the holy vessel used by
our Lord, and brought to Britain by Joseph of Arimathea. But in the
older heathen Irish stories there is a mysterious vessel of a magical
sort, full of miraculous food, and probably the French writers of the
romances confused this with the sacred vessel brought from the Holy
Land. On account of the sins of men this relic was made invisible, but
now and then it appeared, borne by angels or floating in a heavenly
light. The Knights, against King Arthur's wish, made a vow to find it,
and gave up their duties of redressing wrongs and keeping order, to
pursue the beautiful vision. But most of them, for their sins, were
unsuccessful, like Sir

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lancelot, and the Round Table was scattered and
the kingdom was weakened by the neglect of ordinary duties in the search
for what could never be gained by mortal men, This appears to be the
moral of the story, if it has any moral. But the stories are confused
almost like a dream, though it is a beautiful dream.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I: How The King Went on Pilgrimage, and his Squire was Slain in a
Dream](trt12.md)
