[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trt12)  [Next](trt14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### II

### THE COMING OF THE HOLY GRAAL

It was on the eve of Pentecost that all the Knights of the Table Round
met together at Camelot, and a great feast was made ready for them. And
as they sat at supper they heard a loud noise, as of the crashing of
thunder, and it seemed as if the roof would fall on them. Then, in the
midst of the thunder, there entered a sunbeam, brighter by seven times
than the brightest day, and its brightness was not of this world. The
Knights held their peace, but every man looked at his neighbour, and his
countenance shone fairer than ever it had done before. As they sat dumb,
for their tongues felt as if they could speak nothing, there floated in
the hall the Holy Graal, and over it a veil of white samite, so that
none might see it nor who bare it. But sweet odours filled the place,
and every Knight had set before him the food he loved best; and after
that the Holy Vessel departed suddenly, they wist not where. When it had
gone their tongues were loosened, and the King gave thanks for the
wonders that they had been permitted to see. After that he had finished,
Sir Gawaine stood up and vowed to depart the next morning in quest of
the Holy Graal, and not to return until he had seen it. 'But if after a
year and a day I may not speed in my quest,' said he, 'I shall come
again, for I shall know that the sight of it is not for me.' And many of
the Knights there sitting swore a like vow.

But King Arthur, when he heard this, was sore displeased. 'Alas!' cried
he unto Sir Gawaine, you have undone me by your vow. For through you is
broken up the fairest fellowship, and the truest of knighthood, that

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

ever the world saw, and when they have once departed they shall meet no
more at the Table Round, for many shall die in the quest. It grieves me
sore, for I have loved them as well as my own life.' So he spoke, and
paused, and tears came into his eyes. 'Ah, Gawaine, Gawaine! you have
set me in great sorrow.'

'Comfort yourself,' said Sir Lancelot, 'for we shall win for ourselves
great honour, and much more than if we had died in any other wise, since
die we must.' But the King would not be comforted, and the Queen and all
the Court were troubled also for the love which they had to these
Knights. Then the Queen came to Sir Galahad, who was sitting among those
Knights, though younger he was than any of them, and asked him whence he
came, and of what country, and if he was son to Sir Lancelot. And King
Arthur did him great honour, and he rested him in his own bed. And next
morning the King and Queen went into the Minster, and the Knights
followed them, dressed all in armour, save only their shields and their
helmets. When the service was finished the King would know how many of
the fellowship had sworn to undertake the quest of the Graal, and they
were counted, and found to number a hundred and fifty. They bade
farewell, and mounted their horses, and rode through the streets of
Camelot, and there was weeping of both rich and poor, and the King could
not speak for weeping. And at sunrise they all parted company with each
other, and every Knight took the way he best liked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventure of Sir Galahad](trt14)
