[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trt13)  [Next](trt15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### III

### THE ADVENTURE OF SIR GALAHAD

Now Sir Galahad had as yet no shield, and he rode four days without
meeting any adventure, till at last he came to a White Abbey, where he
dismounted and asked if he might sleep there that night. The brethren
received him with great reverence, and led him to a chamber, where he
took off his armour, and then saw that he was in the presence of two
Knights. 'Sirs,' said Sir Galahad, 'what adventure brought you hither?'
'Sir,' replied they, 'we heard that within this Abbey is a shield that
no man may hang round his neck without being dead within three days, or
some mischief befalling him. And if we fail in the adventure, you shall
take it upon you.' 'Sirs,' replied Sir Galahad, 'I agree well thereto,
for as yet I have no shield.'

So on the morn they arose and heard Mass, and then a monk led them
behind an altar where hung a shield white as snow, with a red cross in
the middle of it. 'Sirs,' said the monk, 'this shield can be hung round
no Knight's neck, unless he be the worthiest Knight in the world, and
therefore I counsel you to be well advised!'

'Well,' answered one of the Knights, whose name was King Bagdemagus, 'I
know truly that I am not the best Knight in the world, but yet shall I
try to bear it,' and he bare it out of the Abbey. Then he said to Sir
Galahad, 'I pray you abide here still, till you know how I shall speed,'
and he rode away, taking with him a squire to send tidings back to Sir
Galahad.

After King Bagdemagus had ridden two miles he entered a fair valley, and
there met him a goodly Knight

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

seated on a white horse and clad in white armour. And they came together
with their spears, and Sir Bagdemagus was borne from his horse, for the
shield covered him not at all. Therewith the strange Knight alighted and
took the white shield from him, and gave it to the squire, saying, 'Bear
this shield to the good Knight Sir Galahad that thou hast left in the
Abbey, and greet him well from me.'

'Sir,' said the squire, 'what is your name?'

'Take thou no heed of my name,' answered the Knight, 'for it is not for
thee to know, nor for any earthly man.'

'Now, fair Sir,' said the squire, 'tell me for what cause this shield
may not be borne lest ill befalls him who bears it.'

'Since you have asked me,' answered the Knight, 'know that no man shall
bear this shield, save Sir Galahad only.'

Then the squire turned to Bagdemagus, and asked him whether he were
wounded or not. 'Yes, truly,' said he, 'and I shall hardly escape from
death'; and scarcely could he climb on to his horse's back when the
squire brought it near him. But the squire led him to a monastery that
lay in the valley, and there he was treated of his wounds, and after
long lying came back to life. After the squire had given the Knight into
the care of the monks, he rode back to the Abbey, bearing with him the
shield. 'Sir Galahad,' said he, alighting before him, 'the Knight that
wounded Bagdemagus sends you greeting, and bids you bear this shield,
which shall bring you many adventures.'

'Now blessed be God and fortune,' answered Sir Galahad, and called for
his arms, and mounted his horse, hanging the shield about his neck.
Then, followed by the squire, he set out. They rode straight to the
hermitage, where they saw the White Knight who had sent the shield to
Sir Galahad. The two Knights saluted

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span id="img_72"></span> ![](img/073.jpg)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

each other courteously, and then the White Knight told Sir Galahad the
story of the shield, and how it had been given into his charge.
Afterwards they parted, and Sir Galahad and his squire returned unto the
Abbey whence they came.

The monks made great joy at seeing Sir Galahad again, for they feared he
was gone for ever; and as soon as he was alighted from his horse they
brought him unto a tomb in the churchyard where there was night and day
such a noise that any man who heard it should be driven nigh mad, or
else lose his strength. 'Sir,' they said, 'we deem it a fiend.' Sir
Galahad drew near, all armed save his helmet, and stood by the tomb.
'Lift up the stone,' said a monk, and Galahad lifted it, and a voice
cried, 'Come thou not nigh me, Sir Galahad, for thou shalt make me go
again where I have been so long.' But Galahad took no heed of him, and
lifted the stone yet higher, and there rushed from the tomb a foul
smoke, and in the midst of it leaped out the foulest figure that ever
was seen in the likeness of a man. 'Galahad,' said the figure, 'I see
about thee so many angels that my power dare not touch thee.' Then
Galahad, stooping down, looked into the tomb, and he saw a body all
armed lying there, with a sword by his side. 'Fair brother,' said
Galahad, 'let us remove this body, for he is not worthy to be in this
churchyard, being a false Christian man.'

This being done they all departed and returned unto the monastery, where
they lay that night, and the next morning Sir Galahad knighted Melias
his squire, as he had promised him aforetime. So Sir Galahad and Sir
Melias departed thence, in quest of the Holy Graal, but they soon went
their different ways and fell upon different adventures. In his first
encounter Sir Melias was sore wounded, and Sir Galahad came to his help,
and left him to an old monk who said that he would heal him of his
wounds in the space of seven weeks, and that he was

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

thus wounded because he had not come clean to the quest of the Graal, as
Sir Galahad had done. Sir Galahad left him there, and rode on till he
came to the Castle of Maidens, which he alone might enter who was free
from sin. There he chased away the Knights who had seized the castle
seven years agone and restored all to the Duke's daughter, who owned it
of right. Besides this he set free the maidens who were kept in prison,
and summoned all those Knights in the country round who had held their
lands of the Duke, bidding them do homage to his daughter. And in the
morning one came to him and told him that as the seven Knights fled from
the Castle of Maidens they fell upon the path of Sir Gawaine, Sir
Gareth, and Sir Lewaine, who were seeking Sir Galahad, and they gave
battle; and the seven Knights were slain by the three Knights. 'It is
well,' said Galahad, and he took his armour and his horse and rode away.

So when Sir Galahad left the Castle of Maidens he rode till he came to a
waste forest, and there he met with Sir Lancelot and Sir Percivale; but
they knew him not, for he was now disguised. And they fought together,
and the two Knights were smitten down out of the saddle. 'God be with
thee, thou best Knight in the world,' cried a min who dwelt in a
hermitage close by; and she said it in a loud voice, so that Lancelot
and Percivale might hear. But Sir Galahad feared that she would make
known who he was, so he spurred his horse and struck deep into the
forest before Sir Lancelot and Sir Percivale could mount again. They
knew not which path he had taken, so Sir Percivale turned back to ask
advice of the nun, and Sir Lancelot pressed forward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV: How Sir Lancelot Saw a Vision, and Repented of His
Sins](trt15)
