[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trt25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

# THE END OF IT ALL

Now when King Arthur left England to fight with Sir Lancelot he ordered
his nephew Sir Mordred to govern the land, which that false Knight did
gladly. And as soon as he thought he might safely do so he caused some
letters to be written saying that King Arthur had been slain in battle,
and he had himself crowned King at Canterbury, where he made a great
feast which lasted fifteen days. After it was over, he went to
Winchester and summoned Queen Guenevere, and told her that on a certain
day he would wed her and that she should make herself ready. Queen
Guenevere's soul grew cold and heavy as she heard these words of Sir
Mordred's, for she hated him with all her might, as he hated her; but
she dared show nothing, and answered softly that she would do his
bidding, only she desired that first she might go to London to buy all
manner of things for her wedding. Sir Mordred trusted her because of her
fair speech, and let her go. Then the Queen rode to London with all
speed, and went straight to the Tower, which she filled in haste with
food, and called her men-at-arms round her. When Sir Mordred knew how
she had beguiled him he was wroth out of measure, and besieged the
Tower, and assaulted it many times with battering rams and great
engines, but could prevail nothing, for the Queen would never, for fair
speech nor for foul, give herself into his hands again.

The Bishop of Canterbury hastened unto Sir Mordred, and rebuked him for
wishing to marry his uncle's wife.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'Leave such desires,' said the Bishop, 'or else
I shall curse you with bell, book, and candle. Also, you noise abroad
that my lord Arthur is slain, and that is not so, and therefore you will
make ill work in the land.' At this Sir Mordred waxed very wroth, and
would have killed the Bishop had he not fled to Glastonbury, where he
became a hermit, and lived in poverty and prayed all day long for the
realm, for he knew that a fierce war was at hand. Soon word came to Sir
Mordred that King Arthur was hurrying home across the seas, to be
avenged on his nephew, who had proved traitor. Wherefore Sir Mordred
sent letters to all the people throughout the kingdom, and many followed
after him, for he had cunningly sown among them that with him was great
joy and softness of life, while King Arthur would bring war and strife
with him. So Sir Mordred drew with a great host to Dover, and waited for
the King. Before King Arthur and his men could land from the boats and
ships that had brought them over the sea Sir Mordred set upon them, and
there was heavy slaughter. But in the end he and his men were driven
back, and he fled, and his people with him. After the fight was over the
King ordered the dead to be buried; and there came a man and told him
that he had found Sir Gawaine lying in a boat, and that he was sore
wounded. And the King went to him, and made moan over him: 'You were
ever the man in the world that I loved most,' said he; 'you and Sir
Lancelot.' 'Mine uncle King Arthur,' answered Sir Gawaine, 'my death day
has come, and all through my own fault. Had Sir Lancelot been with you
as he used to be this unhappy war had never begun, and of that I am the
cause, for I would not accord with him. And therefore, I pray you, give
me paper, pen, and ink that I may write to him.' So paper and ink were
brought, and Sir Gawaine was held up by King Arthur, and a letter was
writ wherein Sir Gawaine confessed that he was dying of an old wound
given him

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

by Sir Lancelot in the siege of one of the cities across the sea, and
thus was fulfilled the prophecy of Merlin. 'Of a more noble man might I
not be slain,' said he. 'Also, Sir Lancelot, make no tarrying, but come
in haste to King Arthur, for sore bested is he with my brother Sir
Mordred, who has taken the crown, and would have wedded my lady Queen
Guenevere had she not sought safety in the Tower of London. Pray for my
soul, I beseech you, and visit my tomb.' And after writing this letter,
at the hour of noon, Sir Gawaine gave up his spirit, and was buried by
the King in the chapel within Dover Castle. Then was it told King Arthur
that Sir Mordred had pitched a new field upon Barham Down, and the next
morning the King rode hither to him, and there was a fierce battle
between them, and many on both sides were slain. But at the last King
Arthur's party stood best, and Sir Mordred and his men fled to
Canterbury.

After the Knights which were dead had been buried, and those that were
wounded tended with healing salves, King Arthur drew westwards towards
Salisbury, and many of Sir Mordred's men followed after him, but they
that loved Sir Lancelot went unto Sir Mordred. And a day was fixed
between the King and Sir Mordred that they should meet upon a down near
Salisbury, and give battle once more. But the night before the battle
Sir Gawaine appeared unto the King in a vision and warned him not to
fight next day, which was Trinity Sunday, as he would be slain and many
of his Knights also; but to make a truce for a month, and at the end of
that time Sir Lancelot would arrive, and would slay Sir Mordred, and all
his Knights with him. As soon as he awoke the King called the Bishops
and the wisest men of his army, and told them of his vision, and took
counsel what should be done. And it was agreed that the King should send
an embassage of two Knights and two Bishops unto Sir Mordred, and offer
Min as much goods and lands as

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

they thought best if he would engage to make a treaty for a month with
King Arthur.

So they departed, and came to Sir Mordred, where he had a grim host of
an hundred thousand men. For a long time he would not suffer himself to
be entreated, but at the last he agreed to have Cornwall and Kent in
King Arthur's days, and after all England. Furthermore, it was decided
that King Arthur and Sir Mordred should meet in the plain between their
hosts, each with fourteen persons. 'I am glad of this,' said King
Arthur, when he heard what had been done; but he warned his men that if
they were to see a sword drawn they were to come on swiftly and slay
that traitor, Sir Mordred, 'for I in no wise trust him.' And in like
wise spake Sir Mordred unto his host. Then they two met, and agreed on
the truce, and wine was fetched and they drank, and all was well. But
while they were drinking an adder crept out of a bush, and stung one of
the fourteen Knights on his foot, and he drew his sword to slay the
adder, not thinking of anything but his pain. And when the men of both
armies beheld that drawn sword, they blew trumpets and horns and shouted
grimly, and made them ready for battle. So King Arthur leaped on his
horse, and Sir Mordred on his, and they went back to their own armies,
and thus began the fight, and never was there seen one more doleful in
any Christian land. For all day long there was rushing and riding,
spearing and striking, and many a grim word was there spoken, and many a
deadly stroke given. And at the end full an hundred thousand dead men
lay upon the down, and King Arthur had but two Knights left living, Sir
Lucan and his brother, Sir Bedivere. 'Alas! that I should have lived to
see this day,' cried the King, 'for now I am come to mine end; but would
to God that I knew where were that traitor Sir Mordred that hath caused
all this mischief.' Then suddenly he saw Sir Mordred leaning on his
sword among a great heap of dead men.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

'Give me my spear,' said King Arthur unto Sir Lucan.

'Sir, let him be,' answered Sir Lucan. 'Remember your dream, and leave
off by this. For, blessed be God, you have won the field, and we three
be alive, and of the others none is alive save Sir Mordred himself. If
you leave off now, the day of destiny is past.'

'Tide me death, tide me life,' said the King, 'he shall not escape my
hands, for a better chance I shall never have,' and he took his spear in
both hands and ran towards Sir Mordred, crying 'Traitor! now is your
death day come,' and smote him under the shield, so that the spear went
through his body. And when Sir Mordred felt he had his death wound, he
raised himself up and struck King Arthur such a blow that the sword
clave his helmet, and then fell stark dead on the earth again. When Sir
Lucan and Sir Bedivere saw that sight they carried the King to a little
chapel, but they hoped not to leave him there long, for Sir Lucan had
noted that many people were stealing out to rob the slain of the
ornaments on their armour. And those that were not dead already they
slew.

'Would that I could quit this place to go to some large town,' said the
King, when he had heard this, 'but I cannot stand, my head works so. Ah,
Lancelot, sorely have I missed thee.' At that Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere
tried to lift him, but Sir Lucan had been grievously wounded in the
fight, and the blood burst forth again as he lifted Arthur, and he died
and fell at the feet of the King.

'Alas!' said the King, 'he has died for my sake, and he had more need of
help than I. But he would not complain, his heart was so set to help me.
And I should sorrow yet more if I were still to live long, but my time
flieth fast. Therefore, Sir Bedivere, cease moaning and weeping, and
take Excalibur, my good sword, and go with it to yonder water side, and
when thou comest there, I charge thee, throw my sword in that water, and
come again and tell me what thou hast seen.'

<span id="img_164"></span> ![](img/165.jpg)

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

'My lord,' answered Sir Bedivere, 'your commandment shall be done,' and
he departed. But when he looked at that noble sword, and beheld the
jewels and gold that covered the pommel and hilt, he said to himself,
'If I throw this rich sword into the water no good will come of it, but
only harm and loss'; so he hid Excalibur under a tree, and returned unto
the King and told him his bidding was done. 'What did you see there?'
asked the King.

'Sir,' answered Sir Bedivere, 'I saw nothing but the winds and waves.'

'You have not dealt truly with me,' said the King.

'Go back, and do my command; spare not, but throw it in.' But again Sir
Bedivere's heart failed him, and he hid the sword, and returned to tell
the King he had seen nothing but the wan water.

'Ah, traitor!' cried King Arthur, 'this is twice you have betrayed me.
If you do not now fulfil my bidding, with mine own hands will I slay
you, for you would gladly see me dead for the sake of my sword.' Then
Sir Bedivere was shamed at having disobeyed the King, and drew forth the
sword from its hiding place, and carried it to the water side, and with
a mighty swing threw it far into the water. And as it flew through the
air, an arm and hand lifted itself out of the water, and caught the
hilt, and brandished the sword thrice, and vanished with it beneath the
water. So Sir Bedivere came again unto the King, and told him what he
saw.

'Alas!' said the King, 'help me hence, for I have tarried overlong,' and
Sir Bedivere took him on his back, and bare him to the water side. And
when they stood by the bank, a little barge containing many fair ladies
and a Queen, all in black hoods, drew near, and they wept and shrieked
when they beheld King Arthur.

'Now put me into the barge,' said the King, and Sir Bedivere laid him
softly down, and the ladies made great mourning and the barge rowed from
the land.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

'Ah, my lord Arthur!' cried Sir Bedivere, 'what shall become of me now
you go from me, and I am left here alone with my enemies?'

'Comfort yourself,' replied the King, 'and do as well as you may, for I
go unto the valley of Avilion, to be healed of my grievous wound. And if
you never more hear of me, pray for my soul.' But Sir Bedivere watched
the barge till it was beyond his sight, then he rode all night till he
came to a hermitage. Now when Queen Guenevere heard of the battle, and
how that King Arthur was slain and Sir Mordred and all their Knights,
she stole away, and five ladies with her, and rode to Amesbury; and
there she put on clothes of black and white, and became a nun, and did
great penance, and many alms deeds, and people marvelled at her and at
her godly life. And ever she wept and moaned over the years that were
past, and for King Arthur.

As soon as the messenger whom the King had sent with Sir Gawaine's
letter reached Sir Lancelot, and he learned that Sir Mordred had taken
for himself the crown of England, he rose up in wrath, and, calling Sir
Bors, bid him collect their host, that they should pass at once over the
sea to avenge themselves on that false Knight. A fair wind blew them to
Dover, and there Sir Lancelot asked tidings of King Arthur. Then the
people told him that the King was slain, and Sir Mordred, and an hundred
thousand men besides, and that the King had buried Sir Gawaine in the
chapel at Dover Castle. 'Fair Sirs,' said Sir Lancelot, 'show me that
tomb'; and they showed it to him, and Sir Lancelot kneeled before it,
and wept and prayed, and this he did for two days. And on the third
morning he summoned before him all the great Lords and leaders of his
host, and said to them, 'Fair Lords, I thank you all for coming here
with me, but we come too late, and that will be bitter grief to me as
long as I shall live. But since it is so, I will myself ride and seek my
lady Guenevere in the west country, where they say she has

<span id="img_168"></span> ![](img/169.jpg)

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

gone, and tarry you here, I entreat you, for fifteen days, and if I
should not return take your ships and depart into your own country.'

Sir Bors strove to reason with him that the quest was fruitless, and
that in the west country he would find few friends; but his words
availed nothing. For seven days Sir Lancelot rode, and at last he came
to a nunnery, where Queen Guenevere was looking out from her lattice,
and was wave of his presence as he walked in the cloister. And when she
saw him she swooned, and her ladies and gentlewomen tended her. When she
was recovered, she spoke to them and said, 'You will marvel, fair
ladies, why I should swoon. It was caused by the sight of yonder Knight
who stands there, and I pray you bring him to me.' As soon as Sir
Lancelot was brought she said to her ladies, 'Through me and this man
has this war been wrought, for which I repent me night and day.
Therefore, Sir Lancelot, I require and pray you never to see my face
again, but go back to your own land, and govern it and protect it; and
take to yourself a wife, and pray that my soul may be made clean of its
ill doing.'

'Nay, Madam,' answered Sir Lancelot, 'that shall I never do; but the
same life that you have taken upon you, will I take upon me likewise.'

'If you will do so,' said the Queen, 'it is well; but I may never
believe but that you will turn to the world again.'

'Well, Madam,' answered he, 'you speak as it pleases you, but you never
knew me false to my promise, and I will forsake the world as you have
done. For if in the quest of the Sangreal I had forsaken its vanities
with all my heart and will, I had passed all Knights in the quest,
except Sir Galahad my son. And therefore, lady, since you have taken you
to perfection, I must do so also, and if I may find a hermit that will
receive me I will

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

pray and do penance while my life lasts. Wherefore, Madam, I beseech you
to kiss me once again.'

'No,' said the Queen, that I may not do,' and Sir Lancelot took his
horse and departed in great sorrow. All that day and the next night he
rode through the forest till he beheld a hermitage and a chapel between
two cliffs, and heard a little bell ring to Mass. And he that sang Mass
was the Bishop of Canterbury, and Sir Bedivere was with him. After Mass
Sir Bedivere told Sir Lancelot how King Arthur had thrown away his sword
and had sailed to the valley of Avilion, and Sir Lancelot's heart almost
burst for grief. Then he kneeled down and besought the Bishop that he
might be his brother. 'That I will, gladly,' said the Bishop, and put a
robe upon him.

After the fifteen days were ended, and still Sir Lancelot did not
return, Sir Bors made the great host go back across the sea, while he
and some of Sir Lancelot's kin set forth to seek all over England till
they found Sir Lancelot. They rode different ways, and by fortune Sir
Bors came one day to the chapel where Sir Lancelot was. And he prayed
that he might stay and be one of their fellowship, and in six months six
other Knights were joined to them, and their horses went where they
would, for the Knights spent their lives in fasting and prayer, and kept
no riches for themselves.

In this wise six years passed, and one night a vision came to Sir
Lancelot in his sleep charging him to hasten unto Amesbury. 'By the time
that thou come there,' said the vision, I thou shalt find Queen
Guenevere dead; therefore take thy fellows with thee and fetch her
corpse, and bury it by the side of her husband, the noble King Arthur.'

Then Sir Lancelot rose up. and told the hermit, and the hermit ordered
him to make ready and to do all as the vision had commanded. And Sir
Lancelot and seven of the other Knights went on foot from Glastonbury to

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

Amesbury, and it took them two days to compass the distance, for it was
far and they were weak with fasting. When they reached the nunnery Queen
Guenevere had been dead but half an hour, and she had first summoned her
ladies to her, and told them that Sir Lancelot had been a priest for
near a twelvemonth. 'And hither he cometh as fast as he may,' she said,
'to fetch my corpse, and beside my lord King Arthur he shall bury me.
And I beseech Almighty God that I may never have power to see Sir
Lancelot with my bodily eyes.' 'Thus,' said the ladies, 'she prayed for
two days till she was dead.' Then Sir Lancelot looked upon her face and
sighed, but wept little, and next day he sang Mass. After that the Queen
was laid on a bier drawn by horses, and an hundred torches were carried
round her, and Sir Lancelot and his fellows walked behind her singing
holy chants, and at times one would come forward and throw incense on
the dead. So they came to Glastonbury, and the Bishop of Canterbury sang
a Requiem Mass over the Queen, and she was wrapped in cloth, and placed
first in a web of lead, and then in a coffin of marble, and when she was
put into the earth Sir Lancelot swooned away.

'You are to blame,' said the hermit, when he awaked from his swoon, 'you
ought not make such manner of sorrow.'

'Truly,' answered Sir Lancelot, 'I trust I do not displease God, but
when I remember her beauty, and her nobleness, and that of the King, and
when I saw his corpse and her corpse lie together, my heart would not
bear up my body. And I remembered, too, that it was through me and my
pride that they both came to their end.'

From that day Sir Lancelot ate so little food that he dwined away, and
for the most part was found kneeling by the tomb of King Arthur and
Queen Guenevere. None could comfort him, and after six weeks he was too
weak to rise from his bed. Then he sent for the hermit

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

and to his fellows, and asked in a weary voice that they would give him
the last rites of the Church; and begged that when he was dead his body
might be taken to Joyous Gard, which some say is Alnwick and others
Bamborough. That night the hermit had a vision that he saw Sir Lancelot
being carried up to heaven by the angels, and he waked Sir Bors and bade
him go and see if anything ailed Sir Lancelot. So Sir Bors went and Sir
Lancelot lay on his bed, stark dead, and he smiled as he lay there. Then
was there great weeping and wringing of hands, more than had been made
for any man; but they placed him on the horse bier that had carried
Queen Guenevere, and lit a hundred torches, and in fifteen days they
reached Joyous Gard. There his body was laid in the choir, with his face
uncovered, and many prayers were said over him. And there, in. the midst
of their praying, came Sir Ector de Maris, who for seven years had
sought Sir Lancelot through all the land.

'Ah, Lancelot,' he said, when he stood looking beside his dead body, I
thou wert head of all Christian Knights. Thou wert the courtliest Knight
that ever drew sword, and the faithfulest friend that ever bestrode a
horse. Thou wert the goodliest Knight that ever man has seen, and the
truest lover that ever loved a woman.'
