[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc250)  [Next](ffcc270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

# SECTION II

## THE RECORDED FAIRY-FAITH

## CHAPTER VI

### CELTIC OTHERWORLD <span id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_321)

In Ireland this world and the world we go to after death are not far
apart.'--W. B. YEATS.

'Many go to the Tir-na-nog in sleep, and some are said to have remained
there, and only a vacant form is left behind without the light in the
eyes which marks the presence of a soul.'--A. E.

General ideas of the Otherworld: its location; its subjectivity; its
names; its extent; Tethra one of its kings--The Silver Branch and the
Golden Bough; and Initiations--The Otherworld the Heaven. World of all
religions--Voyage of Bran--Cormac in the Land of Promise--Magic
Wands--Cuchulainn's Sick-Bed--Ossian's return from Fairyland--Lanval's
going to Avalon--Voyage of Mael-Duin--Voyage of Teigue--Adventures of
Art--Cuchulainn's and Arthur's Otherworld Quests--Literary Evolution of
idea of Happy Other-world.

### GENERAL DESCRIPTION

THE Heaven-World of the ancient Celts, unlike that of the Christians,
was not situated in some distant, unknown region of planetary space, but
here on our own earth. As it was necessarily a subjective world, poets
could only describe it in terms more or less vague; and its exact
geographical location, accordingly, differed widely in the minds of
scribes from century to century. Sometimes, as is usual to-day in
fairy-lore, it was a subterranean world entered through caverns, or
hills, or mountains, and inhabited by many races and orders of invisible
beings, such as demons, shades, fairies, or even gods. And the
underground world

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

of the *Sidhe-*folk*,* which cannot be separated from it, was divided
into districts or kingdoms under different fairy kings and queens, just
as the upper world of mortals. We already know how the Tuatha De Danann
or *Sidhe*-folk*,* after their defeat by the Sons of Mil at the Battle
of Tailte, retired to this underground world and took possession of its
palaces beneath the green hills and vales of Ireland; and how from
there, as gods of the harvest, they still continued to exercise
authority over their conquerors, or marshalled their own invisible
spirit-hosts in fairy warfare, and sometimes interfered in the wars of
men.

More frequently, in the old Irish manuscripts, the Celtic Otherworld was
located in the midst of the Western Ocean, as though it were the
'double' of the lost Atlantis; <span id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_322) and
Manannan Mac Lir, the Son of the Sea--perhaps himself the 'double' of an
ancient Atlantean king--was one of the divine rulers of its fairy
inhabitants, and his palace, for he was one of the Tuatha De Danann, was
there rather than in Ireland; and when he travelled between the two
countries it was in a magic chariot drawn by horses who moved over the
sea-waves as on land. And fairy women came from that mid-Atlantic world
in magic boats like spirit boats, to charm away such mortal men as in
their love they chose, or else to take great Arthur wounded unto death.
And in that island world there was neither death nor pain nor

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

scandal, nought save immortal and unfading youth, and endless joy and
feasting.

Even yet at rare intervals, like a phantom, Hy Brasil appears far out on
the Atlantic. No later than the summer of 1908 it is said to have been
seen from West Ireland, just as that strange invisible island near
Innishmurray, inhabited by the invisible 'gentry', is seen--once in
seven years. And too many men of intelligence testify to having seen Hy
Brasil at the same moment, when they have been together, or separated,
as during the summer of 1908, for it to be explained away as an ordinary
illusion of the senses. Nor can it be due to a mirage such as we know,
because neither its shape nor position seems to conform to any known
island or land mass. The Celtic Otherworld is like that hidden realm of
subjectivity lying just beyond the horizon of mortal existence, which we
cannot behold when we would, save with the mystic vision of the Irish
seer. Thus in the legend of Bran's friends, who sat over dinner at
Harlech with the Head of Bran for seven years, three curious birds acted
as musicians, the Three Birds of Rhiannon, which were said to sing the
dead back to life and the living into death;--but the birds were not in
Harlech, they were out over the sea in the atmosphere of Rhiannon's
realm in the bosom of Cardigan Bay. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_323) And though we might say of that
Otherworld, as we learn from these Three Birds of Rhiannon, and as
Socrates would say, that its inhabitants are come from the living and
the living in our world from the dead there, yet, as has already been
set forth in chapter iv, we ought not to think of the *Sidhe*-folk, nor
of such great heroes and gods as Arthur and Cuchulainn and Finn, who are
also of its invisible company, as in any sense half-conscious shades;
for they are always represented as being in the full enjoyment of an
existence and consciousness greater than our own.

In Irish manuscripts, the Otherworld beyond the Ocean bears many names.
It is *Tír-na-nog*, 'The Land of Youth'; *Tír-Innambéo*, 'The Land of
the Living'; *Tír Tairngire*,

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'The Land of
Promise'; *Tír N-aill*, 'The Other Land (or World)'; *Mag Már*, 'The
Great Plain'; and also *Mag Mell*, 'The Plain Agreeable (or Happy).'

But this western Otherworld, if it is what we believe it to be--a
poetical picture of the great subjective world--cannot be the realm of
any one race of invisible beings to the exclusion of another. In it all
alike--gods, Tuatha De Danann, fairies, demons, shades, and every sort
of disembodied spirits--find their appropriate abode; for though it
seems to surround and interpenetrate this planet even as the X-rays
interpenetrate matter, it can have no other limits than those of the
Universe itself. And that it is not an exclusive realm is certain from
what our old Irish manuscripts record concerning the Fomorian
races. <span id="fr_355"></span>[1](#fn_324) These, when they met defeat
on the battle-field of Moytura at the hands of the Tuatha De Danann,
retired altogether from Ireland, their overthrow being final, and
returned to their own invisible country--a mysterious land beyond the
Ocean, where the dead find a new existence, and where their god-king
Tethra ruled, as he formerly ruled in this world. And the fairy women of
Tethra's kingdom, even like those who came from the Tuatha De Danann of
Erin, or those of Manannan's ocean-world, enticed mortals to go with
them to be heroes under their king, and to behold there the assemblies
of ancestors. It was one of them who came to Connla, son of Conn,
supreme king of Ireland; and this was her message to him:--'The
immortals invite you. You are going to be one of the heroes of the
people of Tethra. You will always be seen there, in the assemblies of
your ancestors, in the midst of those who know and love you.' And with
the fairy spell upon him the young prince entered the glass boat of the
fairy woman, and his father the king, in great tribulation and wonder,
beheld them disappear across the waters never to return. <span
id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_324)

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

### THE SILVER BRANCH <span id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_325) AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH

To enter the Otherworld before the appointed hour marked by death, a
passport was often necessary, and this was usually a silver branch of
the sacred apple-tree bearing blossoms, or fruit, which the queen of the
Land of the Ever-Living and Ever-Young gives to those mortals whom she
wishes for as companions; though sometimes, as we shall see, it was a
single apple without its branch. The queen's gifts serve not only as
passports, but also as food and drink for mortals who go with her. Often
the apple-branch produces music so soothing that mortals who hear it
forget all troubles and even cease to grieve for those whom the fairy
women *take*. For us there are no episodes more important than those in
the ancient epics concerning these apple-tree talismans, because in them
we find a certain key which unlocks the secret of that world from which
such talismans are brought, and proves it to be the same sort of a place
as the Otherworld of the Greeks and Romans. Let us then use the key and
make a few comparisons between the Silver Branch of the Celts and the
Golden Bough of the Ancients, expecting the two symbols naturally to
differ in their functions, though not fundamentally.

It is evident at the outset that the Golden, Bough was as much the
property of the queen of that underworld called Hades as the Silver
Branch was the gift of the Celtic fairy queen, and like the Silver Bough
it seems to have been the symbolic bond between that world and this,
offered as a tribute to Proserpine by all initiates, who made the mystic
voyage in full human consciousness. And, as we suspect, there may be
even in the ancient Celtic legends of mortals who make that strange
voyage to the Western Otherworld and return to this world again, an echo
of initiatory rites--perhaps druidic--similar to those of Proserpine as
shown in the journey of Aeneas, which, as Virgil records it, is
undoubtedly a poetical rendering of an actual psychic experience of a
great initiate.

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

In Virgil's classic poem the Sibyl commanded the plucking of the sacred
bough to be carried by Aeneas when he entered the underworld; for
without such a bough plucked near the entrance to Avernus from the
wondrous tree sacred to Infernal Juno (i. e. Proserpine) none could
enter Pluto's realm. <span id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_326) And when
Charon refused to ferry Aeneas across the Stygian lake until the
Sibyl-woman drew forth the Golden Bough from her bosom, where she had
hidden it, it becomes clearly enough a passport to Hades, just as the
Silver Branch borne by the fairy woman is a passport to *Tír N-aill;*
and the Sibyl-woman who guided Aeneas to the Greek and Roman Otherworld
takes the place of the fairy woman who leads mortals like Bran to the
Celtic Other-world. <span id="fr_359"></span>[2](#fn_327)

### THE OTHERWORLD IDEA LITERALLY INTERPRETED

With this parallel between the Otherworld of the Celts and that of the
Ancients seemingly established, we may leave poetical images and seek a
literal interpretation for the animistic idea about those realms. The
Rites of Proserpine as conducted in the Mysteries of Antiquity furnish
us with the means; and in what Servius has written we have the material
ready. <span id="fr_360"></span>[3](#fn_328) Taking the letter Υ, which
Pythagoras said is like life with its dividing ways of good and evil, as
the mystic symbol of the branch which all initiates like Aeneas offered
to Proserpine in the subjective world while there out of the physical
body, he says of the initiatory rites:--'He (the poet) could not join
the Rites of Proserpine without having the branch to hold up. And by
"*going to the shades*" *he* (the poet) *means celebrating the Rites of
Proserpine*.' <span id="fr_361"></span>[3](#fn_328) This passage is
certainly capable of but one meaning; and

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

we may perhaps assume that the invisible realm of the Ancients, which is
called Hades, is like the Celtic Other-world located in the Western
Ocean, and is also like, or has its mythological counterpart in, the
Elysian Fields to the West, reserved by the Greeks and Romans for their
gods and heroes, and in the Happy Otherworld of Scandinavian, Iranian,
and Indian mythologies. It must then follow that all these
realms--though placed in different localities by various nations,
epochs, traditions, scribes, and poets (even as the under-ground world
of the Tuatha De Danann in Ireland differs from that ruled over by one
of their own race, Manannan the Son of the Sea)--are simply various ways
which different Aryan peoples have had of looking at that one great
invisible realm of which we have just spoken, and which forms the
Heavenworld of every religion, Aryan and non-Aryan, known to man. And if
this conclusion is accepted, and it seems that it must be, merely on the
evidence of the literary or recorded Celtic Fairy-Faith, our
Psychological Theory stands proven.

The Rites of Proserpine had many counterparts. Thus, to pass on to
another parallel, in the Mysteries of Eleusis the disappearance of the
Maiden into the under-world, into Hades, the land of the dead, was
continually re-enacted in a sacred drama, and it no doubt was one of the
principal rites attending initiation. In our study of the Celtic
Doctrine of Re-birth, we shall return to this subject of Celtic
Initiation.

### THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL

We are well prepared now to enjoy the best known voyages which men,
heroes, and god-men, are said to have made to Avalon, or the Land of the
Living, through the invitation of a fairy woman or else of the god
Manannan himself; and probably the most famous is that of the *Voyage of
Bran*, *Son of Febal*, as so admirably translated from the original old
Irish saga by Dr. Kuno Meyer. <span id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_329)
Perhaps in all Celtic

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

literature no poem surpasses this in natural and simple beauty.

One day Bran heard strange music behind him as he was alone in the
neighbourhood of his stronghold; and as he listened, so sweet was the
sound that it lulled him to sleep. When he awoke, there lay beside him a
branch of silver so white with blossoms that it was not easy to
distinguish the blossoms from the branch. Bran took up the branch and
carried it to the royal house, and, when the hosts were assembled
therein, they saw a woman in strange raiment standing on the floor.
Whence she came and how, no one could tell. And as they all beheld her,
she sang fifty quatrains to Bran:--

A branch of the apple-tree from Emain  
I bring, like those one knows;  
Twigs of white silver are on it,  
Crystal brows with blossoms.

There is a distant isle,  
Around which sea-horses glisten:  
A fair course against the white-swelling surge,--  
Four feet uphold it.

.        .        .        .        .        .

When the song was finished, 'the woman went from them while they knew
not whither she went. And she took her branch with her. The branch
sprang from Bran's hand into the hand of the woman, nor was there
strength in Bran's hand to hold the branch.' The next day, with the
fairy spell upon him, Bran begins the voyage towards the setting sun. On
the ocean he meets Manannan riding in his magic chariot over the
sea-waves; and the king tells Bran that he is returning to Ireland after
long ages. Parting from the Son of the Sea, Bran goes on, and the first
island he and his companions reach is the 'Island of Joy', where one of
the party is set ashore; the second isle is the 'Land of Women', where
the queen draws Bran and his followers to her realm with a magic clew,
and then entertains them for what seems no more than a year, though 'it
chanced to be many years', After a while, home-sickness seizes the
adventurers and they

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

come to a unanimous decision to return to Ireland; but they depart under
a taboo not to set foot on earth, or at least not till holy water has
been sprinkled on them. In their coracle they arrive before a gathering
at Srub Brain, probably in West Kerry, and Bran (who may now possibly be
regarded as an apparition temporarily returned from the Otherworld to
bid his people farewell) announces himself, and this reply is made to
him:--'We do not know such a one, though the Voyage of Bran is in our
ancient stories.' Then one of Bran's party, in his eagerness to land,
broke the taboo; he 'leaps from them out of the coracle. As soon as he
touched the earth of Ireland, forthwith he was a heap of ashes, as
though he had been in the earth for many hundred years. . . . Thereupon,
to the people of the gathering, Bran told all his wanderings from the
beginning until that time. And he wrote these quatrains in Ogam, and
then bade them farewell. And from that hour his wanderings are not
known.'

### CORMAC'S ADVENTURE IN THE LAND OF PROMISE <span id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_330)

In *Cormac's Adventure in the Land of Promise*, there is again a magic
silver branch with three golden apples on it:--'One day, at dawn in
May-time, Cormac, grandson of Conn, was alone on Múr Tea in Tara. He saw
coming towards him a sedate (?), grey-headed warrior. . . . A branch of
silver with three golden apples on his shoulder. Delight and amusement
to the full was it to listen to the music of that branch, for men sore
wounded, or women in child-bed, or folk in sickness, would fall asleep
at the melody when that branch was shaken.' And the warrior tells Cormac
that he has come from a land where only truth is known, where there is
'neither age nor decay nor gloom nor sadness nor envy nor jealousy nor
hatred nor haughtiness'. On his promising the unknown warrior any three
boons that he shall ask, Cormac is given the magic branch. The
grey-headed

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

warrior disappears suddenly; 'and Cormac knew not whither he had gone.'

'Cormac turned into the palace. The household marvelled at the branch.
Cormac shook it at them, and cast them into slumber from that hour to
the same time on the following day. At the end of a year the warrior
comes into his meeting and asked of Cormac the consideration for his
branch. "It shall be given," says Cormac. "I will take \[thy daughter\]
Ailbe to-day," says the warrior. So he took the girl with him. The women
of Tara utter three loud cries after the daughter of the king of Erin.
But Cormac shook the branch at them, so that he banished grief from them
all and cast them into sleep. That day month comes the warrior and takes
with him Carpre Lifechair (the son of Cormac). Weeping and sorrow ceased
not in Tara after the boy, and on that night no one therein ate or
slept, and they were in grief and in exceeding gloom. But Cormac shook
the branch at them, and they parted from \[their\] sorrow. The same
warrior comes again. "What askest thou to-day?" says Cormac. "Thy wife,"
saith he, "even Ethne the Longsided, daughter of Dunlang king of
Leinster." Then he takes away the woman with him.' Thereupon Cormac
follows the messenger, and all his people go with him. But 'a great mist
was brought upon them in the midst of the plain of the wall. Cormac
found himself on a great plain alone'. It is the 'Land of Promise'.
Palaces of bronze, and houses of white silver thatched with white birds'
wings are there. 'Then he sees in the garth a shining fountain, with
five streams flowing out of it, and the hosts in turn a-drinking its
water. Nine hazels of Buan grow over the well. The purple hazels drop
their nuts into the fountain, and the five salmon which are in the
fountain sever them, and send their husks floating down the streams. Now
the sound of the falling of those streams is more melodious than any
music that \[men\] sing.' <span id="fr_364"></span>[1](#fn_331)

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

Cormac having entered the fairy palace at the fountain beholds 'the
loveliest of the world's women'. After she has been magically bathed, he
bathes, and this, apparently, is symbolical of his purification in the
Otherworld. Finally, at a feast, the warrior-messenger sings Cormac to
sleep; and when Cormac awakes he sees beside him his wife and children,
who had preceded him thither to the Land of Promise. The
warrior-messenger who *took* them all is none other than the great god
Manannan Mac Lir of the Tuatha De Danann.

There in the Otherworld, Cormac gains a magic cup of gold richly and
wondrously wrought, which would break into three pieces if 'three words
of falsehood be spoken under it', and the magic silver branch; and
Manannan, as the god-initiator, says to Ireland's high king:--'Take thy
family then, and take the Cup that thou mayest have it for discerning
between truth and falsehood. And thou shalt have the Branch for music
and delight. And on the day that thou shalt die they all will be taken
from thee. I am Manannan, son of Ler, king of the Land of Promise; *and
to see the Land of Promise was the reason I brought \[thee\] hither*. .
. . The fountain which thou sawest, with the five streams out of it, is
the Fountain of Knowledge, and the streams are the five senses through
which knowledge is obtained (?). And no one will have knowledge who
drinketh not a draught out of the fountain itself and out of the
streams. The folk of many arts are those who drink of them both.'

'Now on the morrow morning, when Cormac arose, he found himself on the
green of Tara, with his wife and his son and daughter, and having his
Branch and his Cup. Now that was afterwards \[called\] "Cormac's Cup",
and it used to distinguish between truth and falsehood with the Gael.
Howbeit, as had been promised him \[by Manannan\], it remained not after
Cormac's death.' <span id="fr_365"></span>[1](#fn_332)

This beautiful tale evidently echoes in an extremely poetical and
symbolical manner a very ancient Celtic initiation of a king and his
family into the mystic cult of the mighty god Manannan, Son of the Sea.
They enter the

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Otherworld in a
trance state, and on waking are in Erin again, spiritually enriched. The
Cup of Truth is probably the symbol of having gained knowledge of the
Mystery of Life and Death, and the Branch, that of the Peace and Joy
which comes to all who are truly Initiated; for to have passed from the
realm of mortal existence to the Realm of the Dead, of the Fairy-Folk,
of the Gods, and back again, with full human consciousness all the
while, was equivalent to having gained the Philosopher's Stone, the
Elixir of Life, the Cup of Truth, and to having bathed in the Fountain
of Eternal Youth which confers triumph over Death and unending
happiness. Thus we may have here a Celtic poetical parallel to the
initiatory journey of Aeneas to the Land of the Dead or Hades.

### THE MAGIC WAND OF GODS, FAIRIES, AND DRUIDS

Manannan of the Tuatha De Danann, as a god-messenger from the invisible
realm bearing the apple-branch of silver, is in externals, though not in
other ways, like Hermes, the god-messenger from the realm of the gods
bearing his wand of two intertwined serpents. <span
id="fr_366"></span>[1](#fn_333) In modern fairy-lore this divine branch
or wand is the magic wand of fairies; or where messengers like old men
guide mortals to an underworld it is a staff or cane with which they
strike the rock hiding the secret entrance.

The Irish Druids made their wands of divination from the

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

yew-tree; and, like the ancient priests of Egypt, Greece, and Rome, are
believed to have controlled spirits, fairies, daemons, elementals, and
ghosts while making such divinations. It will help us to understand how
closely the ancient symbols have affected our own life and age--though
we have forgotten their relation with the Otherworld--by offering a few
examples, beginning with the ancient Irish bards who were associated
with the Druids. A wand in the form of a symbolic branch, like a little
spike or crescent with gently tinkling bells upon it, was borne by them;
and in the piece called *Mesca Ulad* or 'Inebriety of the
Ultonians' <span id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_334) it is said of the chief
bard of Ulster, Sencha, that in the midst of a bloody fray he 'waved the
peaceful branch of Sencha, and all the men of Ulster were silent,
quiet'. In *Agallamh an dá Shuadh* or the 'Dialogue of the two
Sages', <span id="fr_368"></span>[2](#fn_335) the mystic symbol used by
gods, fairies, magicians, and by all initiates who know the mystery of
life and death, is thus described as a Druid symbol:--'Neidhe' (a young
bard who aspired to succeed his father as chief poet of Ulster), 'made
his journey with a silver branch over him. The *Anradhs*, or poets of
the second order, carried a silver branch, but the *Ollamhs*, or chief
poets, carried a branch of gold; all other poets bore a branch of
bronze.' <span id="fr_369"></span>[3](#fn_336) Modern and ancient
parallels are world-wide, among the most civilized as among the least
civilized peoples, and in civil or religious life among ourselves. Thus,
it was with a magic rod that Moses struck the rock and pure water gushed
forth, and he raised the same rod and the Red Sea opened; kings hold
their sceptres no less than Neptune his trident; popes and bishops have
their croziers; in the Roman Church there are little wandlike objects
used to perform benedictions; high civil officials have their mace of
office; and all the world over there are the wands of magicians and of
medicine-men.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

### THE SICK-BED OF CUCHULAINN

We turn now to the story of the *Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn*. <span
id="fr_370"></span>[1](#fn_337) And this is how the great hero of Ulster
was fairy-struck. Manannan Mac Lir, tiring of his wife Fand, had
deserted her, and so she, wishing to marry Cuchulainn, went to Ireland
with her sister Liban. Taking the form of two birds bound together by a
chain of red gold, Fand and Liban rested on a lake in Ulster where
Cuchulainn should see them as he was hunting. To capture the two birds,
Cuchulainn cast a javelin at them, but they escaped, though injured.
Disappointed at a failure like this, which for him was most unusual,
Cuchulainn went away to a menhir where he sat down and fell asleep. Then
he saw two women, one in a green and one in a crimson cloak; and the
woman in green coming up to him laughed and struck him with a whip-like
object. The woman in crimson did likewise, and alternately the two women
kept striking him till they left him almost dead. And straightway the
mighty hero of the Red Branch Knights took to his bed with a strange
malady, which no Druid or doctor in all Ireland could cure.

Till the end of a year Cuchulainn lay on his sick-bed at Emain-Macha
without speaking to any one. Then--the day before *Samain* (November
Eve)--there came to him an unknown messenger who sang to him a wonderful
song, promising to cure him of his malady if he would only accept the
invitation of the daughters of Aed Abrat to visit them in the
Otherworld. When the song was ended, the messenger departed, 'and they
knew not whence he came nor whither he went.' Thereupon Cuchulainn went
to the place where the malady had been put on him, and there appeared to
him again the woman in the green cloak. She let it be known to
Cuchulainn that she was Liban, and that she was longing for him to go
with her to the Plain of Delight to

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

fight against Labraid's enemies. And she promised Cuchulainn as a reward
that he would get Fand to wife. But Cuchulainn would not accept the
invitation without knowing to what country he was called. So he sent his
charioteer Laeg to bring back from there a report. Laeg went with the
fairy woman in a boat of bronze, and returned; and when Cuchulainn heard
from him the wonderful glories of that Otherworld of the *Sidhe* he
willingly set out for it.

After Cuchulainn had overthrown Labraid's enemies and had been in the
Otherworld a month with the fairy woman Fand, he returned to Ireland
alone; though afterwards in a place agreed upon, Fand joined him. Emer,
the wife of Cuchulainn, was overcome with jealousy and schemed to kill
Fand, so that Fand returned to her husband the god Manannan and he
received her back again. When she was gone Cuchulainn could not be
consoled; but Emer obtained from the Druids a magic drink for
Cuchulainn, which made him forget all about the Otherworld and the fairy
woman Fand. And another drink the Druids gave to Emer so that she forgot
all her jealousy; and then Manannan Mac Lir himself came and shook his
mantle between Cuchulainn and Fand to prevent the two ever meeting
again. And thus it was that the Sidhe-women failed to steal away the
great Cuchulainn. The magic of the Druids and the power of the Tuatha De
Danann king triumphed; and the Champion of Ulster did not go to the
Otherworld until he met a natural death in that last great fight. <span
id="fr_371"></span>[1](#fn_338)

### OSSIAN'S RETURN FROM FAIRYLAND <span id="fr_372"></span>[2](#fn_339)

Ossian too, like Cuchulainn, was enticed into Fairyland by a fairy
woman:--She carries him away on a white horse, across the Western Ocean;
and as they are moving

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

over the sea-waves they behold a fair maid on a brown horse, and she
holding in her right hand a golden apple. After the hero had married his
fairy abductress and lived in the Otherworld for three hundred years, an
overpowering desire to return to Ireland and join again in the councils
of his dearly beloved Fenian Brotherhood took possession of him, and he
set out on the same white horse on which he travelled thence with the
fairy princess, for such was his wife. And she, as he went, thrice
warned him not to lay his 'foot on level ground', and he heard from her
the startling announcement that the Fenians were all gone and Ireland
quite changed.

Safe in Ireland, Ossian seeks the Brotherhood, and though he goes from
one place to another where his old companions were wont to meet, not one
of them can he find. And how changed is all the land! He realizes at
last how long he must have been away. The words of his fairy wife are
too sadly true.

While Ossian wanders disconsolately over Ireland, he comes to a
multitude of men trying to move an enormous slab of marble, under which
some other men are lying. 'Ossian's assistance is asked, and he
generously gives it. But in leaning over his horse, to take up the stone
with one hand, the girth breaks, and he falls. Straightway the white
horse fled away on his way home, and Ossian became aged, decrepit, and
blind.' <span id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_340)

### THE GOING OF LANVAL TO AVALON

The fairy romances which were recorded during the mediaeval period in
continental Europe report a surprisingly large number of heroes who,
like Cuchulainn and Ossian, fell under the power of fairy women or
*fées*, and followed one of them to the Apple-Land or Avalon. Besides

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arthur, they
include Sir Lancelot, Sir Gawayne, Ogier, Guingemor and Lanval (see pp.
[325](ffcc250.htm#page_325)-6). The story of Lanval is told by Marie de
France in one of her *Lais*, and is so famous a one that we shall
briefly outline it:--

Lanval was a mediaeval knight who lived during the time of King Arthur
in Brittany. He was young and very beautiful, so that one of the fairy
damsels fell in love with him; and in the true Irish fashion--himself
and his fairy sweetheart mounted on the same fairy horse--the two went
riding off to Fairyland:--

On the horse behind her  
With full rush Lanval jumped.  
With her he goes away into Avalon,  
According to what the Briton tells us,  
Into an isle, which is very beautiful. <span
id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_341)

 

### THE VOYAGE OF TEIGUE, SON OF CIAN

There is another type of *imram* in which through adventure rather than
through invitation from one of the fairy beings, men enter the
Otherworld; as illustrated by the *Voyage of Mael-Duin*, <span
id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_342) and by the still more beautiful *Voyage
of Teigue, Son of Cian*. This last old Irish story summarizes many of
the Otherworld elements we have so far considered, and (though it shows
Christian influences) gives us a very clear picture of the Land of Youth
amid the Western Ocean--a land such as Ponce De Leon and so many brave
navigators sought in America:--

Teigue, son of Cian, and heir to the kingship of West Munster, with his
followers set out from Ireland to recover his wife and brethren who had
been stolen by Cathmann and his band of sea-rovers from Fresen, a land
near Spain. It was the time of the spring tide, when the sea was rough,
and storms coming on the voyagers they lost their way. After about nine
weeks they came to a land fairer than any land they had ever beheld--it
was the Happy Otherworld. In

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

it were many 'red-laden apple-trees, with leafy oaks too in it, and
hazels yellow with nuts in their clusters'; and a wide smooth plain clad
in flowering clover all bedewed with honey'. In the midst of this plain
Teigue and his companions descried three hills, and on each of them an
impregnable place of strength. At the first stronghold, which had a
rampart of white marble, Teigue was welcomed by 'a white-bodied lady,
fairest of the whole world's women'; and she told him that the
stronghold is the abode 'of Ireland's kings: from Heremon son of
Milesius to Conn of the Hundred Battles, who was the last to pass into
it'. Teigue with his people moved on till they gained the middle *dún*,
the *dún* with a rampart of gold. There also 'they found a queen of
gracious form, and she draped in vesture of a golden fabric', who tells
them that they are in the Earth's fourth paradise.

At the third *dún*, the *dún* with a silver rampart, Teigue and his
party met Connla, the son of Conn of the Hundred Battles. 'In his hand
he held a fragrant apple having the hue of gold; a third part of it he
would eat, and still, for all he consumed, never a whit would it be
diminished.' And at his side sat a young woman of many charms, who spake
thus to Teigue:--'I had bestowed on him (i.e. felt for him) true
affection's love, and therefore wrought to have him come to me in this
land; where our delight, both of us, is to continue in looking at and in
perpetual contemplation of one another: above and beyond which we pass
not, to commit impurity or fleshly sin whatsoever.' Both Connla and his
friend were clad in vestments of green--like the fairy-folk; and their
step was so light that hardly did the beautiful clover-heads bend
beneath it. And the apple 'it was that supported the pair of them and,
when once they had partaken of it, nor age nor dimness could affect
them'. When Teigue asked who occupied the *dún* with the silver rampart
the maiden with Connla made this reply:--'In that one there is not any
one. For behoof of the righteous kings that after acceptance of the
Faith shall rule Ireland it is that yonder *dún* stands ready; and we
are they who,

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

until such those virtuous princes shall enter into it, keep the same: in
the which, Teigue my soul, thou too shalt have an appointed place.'
'Obliquely across the most capacious palace Teigue looked away' (as he
was observing the beauty of the yet uninhabited *dun*), 'and marked a
thickly furnished wide-spreading apple-tree that bare blossoms and ripe
fruit both. "What is that apple-tree beyond?" he asked \[of the
maiden\], and she made answer:--"That apple-tree's fruit it is that for
meat shall serve the congregation which is to be in this mansion, *and a
single apple of the same it was that brought (coaxed away) Connla to
me*."'

Then the party rested, and there came towards them a whole array of
feminine beauty, among which was a lovely damsel of refined form who
foretold to Teigue the manner and time of his death, and as a token she
gave him 'a fair cup of emerald hue, in which are inherent many virtues:
for \[among other things\] though it were but water poured into it,
incontinently it would be wine'. And this was her farewell message to
Teigue:--'From that (the cup), let not thine hand part; but have it for
a token: when it shall escape from thee, then in a short time after
shalt thou die; and where thou shalt meet thy death is in the glen that
is on Boyne's side: there the earth shall grow into a great hill, and
the name that it shall bear will be *croidhe eisse*; there too (when
thou shalt first have been wounded by a roving wild hart, after which
Allmarachs will slay thee) I will bury thy body; but thy soul shall come
with me hither, where till the Judgement's Day thou shalt assume a body
light and ethereal.'

As the party led by Teigue were going down to the seashore to depart,
the girl who had been escorting them asked 'how long they had been in
the country'. 'In our estimation,' they replied, 'we are in it but one
single day.' She, however, said: 'For an entire twelvemonth ye are in
it; during which time ye have had neither meat nor drink, nor, how long
soever ye should be here, would cold or thirst or hunger assail you.'
And when Teigue and his party had entered their *currach* they looked
astern, but 'they saw

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

not the land from which they came, for incontinently an obscuring magic
veil was drawn over it'. <span id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_343)

### THE ADVENTURES OF ART, SON OF CONN

This interesting *imram* combines, in a way, the type of tale wherein a
fairy woman comes from the Otherworld to our world--though in this tale
she is banished from there--and the type of tale wherein the Otherworld
is found through adventure:--

Bécuma Cneisgel, a woman of the Tuatha De Danann, because of a
transgression she had committed in the Other-world with Gaidiar,
Manannan's son, was banished thence. She came to Conn, high king of
Ireland, and she bound him to do her will; and her judgement was that
Art, the son of Conn, should not come to Tara until a year was past.
During the year, Conn and Bécuma were together in Tara, 'and there was
neither corn nor milk in Ireland during that time.' The Tuatha De Danann
sent this dreadful famine; for they, as agricultural gods, thus showed
their displeasure at the unholy life of Ireland's high king with the
evil woman whom they had banished. The Druids of all Ireland being
called together, declared that to appease the Tuatha De Danann 'the son
of a sinless couple should be brought to Ireland and slain before Tara,
and his blood mingled with the soil of Tara' (cf. [p.
436](ffcc309.htm#page_436)). It was Conn himself who set out for the
Otherworld and found there the sinless boy, the son of the queen of that
world, and he brought him back to Tara. A strange event saves the
youth:--'Just then they (the assembly of people and Druids, with Conn,
Art, and Finn) heard the lowing of a cow, and a woman wailing
continually behind it. And they saw the cow and the woman making for the
assembly.' The woman had come from the Otherworld to save Segda; and the
cow was accepted as a sacrifice in place of Segda, owing to the wonders
it disclosed; for its two bags when opened contained two birds--one with
one leg and one with twelve legs, and 'the one-legged

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

bird prevailed over the bird with twelve legs'. Then rising up and
calling Conn aside, the woman declared to him that until he put aside
the evil woman Bécuma 'a third of its corn, and its milk, and its mast'
should be lacking to Ireland. 'And she took leave of them then and went
off with her son, even Segda. And jewels and treasures were offered to
them, but they refused them.'

In the second part of this complex tale, Bécuma and Art are together
playing a game. Art finally loses, because' the men of the *sidh* (like
invisible spirits) began to steal the pieces 'with which he and the
woman play; and, as a result, Bécuma put on him this taboo:--'Thou shalt
not eat food in Ireland until thou bring with thee Delbchaem, the
daughter of Morgan.' 'Where is she?' asked Art. 'In an isle amid the
sea, and that is all the information that thou wilt get.' 'And he put
forth the coracle, and travelled the sea from one isle to another until
he came to a fair, strange island,' the Otherworld. The blooming women
of that land entertain the prince of Ireland during six weeks, and
instruct him in all the dangers he must face and the conquests he must
make.

Having successfully met all the ordeals, Art secures Delbchaem, daughter
of Morgan the king of the 'Land of Wonders', and returns to Ireland.
'She had a green cloak of one hue about her, with a gold pin in it over
her breast, and long, fair, very golden hair. She had dark-black
eyebrows, and flashing grey eyes in her head, and a snowy-white body.'
And upon seeing the chaste and noble Delbchaem with Art, Bécuma, the
banished woman of the Tuatha Dc Danann, lamenting, departs from Tara for
ever. <span id="fr_377"></span>[1](#fn_344)

OTHERWORLD QUESTS OF CUCHULAINN AND OF ARTHUR

There is yet the distinct class of tales about journeys to a fairy world
which is a Hades world beneath the earth, or in some land of death,
rather than amid the waves of the Western Ocean. Thus there is a curious
poem in the *Book* 

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

of the Dun Cow describing an expedition led by Cuchulainn to the
stronghold of Scáth in the land of Scáth, or, as the name means, land of
Shades, where the hero gains the king's cauldron. <span
id="fr_378"></span>[1](#fn_345) And the poem suggests why so few who
invaded that Hades world ever returned--perhaps why, mystically
speaking, so few men could escape either through Initiation or re-birth
the natural confusion and forgetfulness arising out of death.

In the *Book of Taliessin* a weird poem, *Preiddeu Annwfn*, or the
'Spoils of Annwn', describes, in language not always clear, how the
Brythonic Arthur made a similar journey to the Welsh Hades world named
Annwn, where he, like Cuchulainn in Scáth, gained possession of a magic
cauldron--a pagan Celtic type of the Holy Grail--which furnishes
inexhaustible food though 'it will not boil the food of a coward'. But
in stanzas iii and iv of *Preiddeu Annwfn*, Annwn, or Uffern as it is
otherwise called, is not an underground realm, but some world to be
reached like the Gaelic Land of Promise by sea. Annwn is also called
Caer Sidi, which in another poem of the *Book of Taliessin* (No. XIV) is
thought of as an island of immortal youth amid 'the streams of the
ocean' where there is a food-giving fountain. <span
id="fr_379"></span>[2](#fn_346)

### LITERARY EVOLUTION OF THE HAPPY OTHERWORLD IDEA

We have now noticed two chief classes of Otherworld legends. In one
there is the beautiful and peaceful *Tír Innambéo* or' Land of the
Living' under Manannan's rule across the seas, and its fairy inhabitants
are principally women who lure away noble men and youths through love
for them; in the other there is a Hades world--often confused with the
former--in which great heroes go on some mysterious quest. Sometimes
this Hades world is inseparable from the underground palaces or world of
the Tuatha De Danann. Again, it may be an underlake fairy-realm like
that entered by Laeghaire and his fifty companions (see [p.
302](ffcc240.htm#page_302)); or, as in

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Gilla
Decair*, <span id="fr_380"></span>[1](#fn_347) of late composition, it
is an under-well land wherein Dermot has adventures. And, in a similar
tale, Murough, on the invitation of a mysterious stranger who comes out
of a lake and then disappears 'like the mist of a winter fog or the
whiff of a March wind', dives beneath the lake's waters, and is escorted
to the palace of King Under-Wave, wherein he sees the stranger as the
water-king himself sitting on a golden throne (cf. pp.
[63](ffcc121.htm#page_63)-4). In continual feasting there Murough passes
a day and a year, thinking the time only a few days. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[2](#fn_348)

As a rule the Hades world, or underground and under-wave world, is
unlike Manannan's peaceful ocean realm, being often described as a place
of much strife; and mortals are usually induced to enter it to aid in
settling the troubles of its fairy inhabitants.

All the numerous variations of Otherworld tales now extant in Celtic
literature show a common pre-Christian origin, though almost all of them
have been coloured by Christian ideas about heaven, hell, and purgatory.
From the earliest tales of the over-sea Otherworld type, like those of
Bran, Maelduin, and Connla, all of which may go back to the early eighth
century as compositions, the christianizing influence is already clearly
begun; and in the *Voyage of Snedgus and of Mac Riagla*, of the late
ninth century, this influence predominates. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[3](#fn_349) Purely Christian texts of about the same
period or later describe the Christian heaven as though it were the
pagan Otherworld. Some of these, like the Latin version of the tale of
*St. Brandan's Voyage*, greatly influenced European literature, and
probably contributed to the discovery of the New World. <span
id="fr_383"></span>[3](#fn_349)

The combination of Christian and pagan Celtic ideas is well shown in the
*Voyage of the Húi Corra* <span
id="fr_384"></span>[4](#fn_350):--'Thereafter

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

a wondrous island was shown to them. A psalm-singing venerable old man,
with fair, builded churches and beautiful bright altars. Beautiful green
grass therein. A dew of honey on its grass. Little ever-lovely bees and
fair, purple-headed birds a-chanting music therein, so that \[merely\]
to listen to them was enough of delight.' But in another passage the
Christian scribe describes Otherworld birds as souls, some of them in
hell:--'"Of the land of Erin am I," quoth the bird, "and I am the soul
of a woman, and I am a monkess unto thee," she saith to the elder. ...
"Come ye to another place," saith the bird, "to hearken to yon birds.
The birds that ye see are the souls that come on Sunday out of hell."'
Still other islands are definitely made into Christian hells full of
fire, wherein wailing and shrieking men are being mangled by the beaks
and talons of birds.

But sometimes, like the legends about the Tuatha De Danann, the legends
about the Otherworld were taken literally and most seriously by some
early Irish-Christian saints. Professor J. Loth records a very
interesting episode, how St. Malo and his teacher Brandan actually set
out on an ocean voyage to find the Heaven-world of the pagan
Celts:--'Saint Malo, when a youth, embarks with his teacher Brandan in a
boat, in search of that mysterious country; after some days, the waves
drive him back rebuffed and discouraged upon the seashore. An angel
opens his eyes: the land of eternal peace and of eternal youth is that
which Christianity promises to its elect.' <span
id="fr_385"></span>[1](#fn_351)

Not only was the Celtic Otherworld gradually changed into a Christian
Heaven, or Hell, from the eighth century onward, but its divine
inhabitants soon came to suffer the rationalization commonly applied to
their race; and the transcribers began to set them down as actual
personages of Irish history. As we have already observed, the Tuatha De
Danann were shorn of their immortality, and were given in exchange all
the passions and shortcomings of men, and made subject to disease and
death. This perhaps was a

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

natural anthropomorphic process such as is met with in all mythologies.
Celtic myth and mysticism, wherein may yet be read the deepest secrets
of life and death, supplied names and legends to fill out a
christianized scheme of Irish chronology, which was made to begin some
six thousand years ago with Adam.

A few of the pagan legends, however, met very fair treatment at the
hands of poetical and patriotic Christian transcribers. Thus in
*Adamnan's Vision*, <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_352) though the
Celtic Otherworld has become 'the Land of the Saints', its primal
character is clearly discernible: to reach it a sea voyage is necessary;
and it is a land where there is no pride, falsehood, envy, disease or
death, 'wherein is delight of every goodness.' In it there are singing
birds, and for sustenance while there the voyagers need only to hear its
music and 'sate themselves with the odour which is in the Land'.

Again, in the *Book of Leinster*, and in later MSS., there is a
*dinnshenchas* of almost primal pagan purity. It alludes to *Clidna's
Wave*, that of Tuag Inbir:--To Tuag, daughter of Conall, Manannan the
sea-god sent a messenger, a Druid of the Tuatha De Danann in the shape
of a woman. The Druid chanted a sleep spell over the girl, and while he
left her on the seashore to look for a boat in which to embark for the
'Land of Everliving Women', a wave of the flood tide came and drowned
her. But the Oxford version of the same tale doubts whether the maiden
was drowned, for it suggests, 'Or maybe it (the wave) was Manannan
himself that was carrying her off.' <span
id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_353) Thus the scribe understood that to go to
Manannan's world literally meant entering a sleep or trance state, or,
what is equivalent in the case of the maiden whom Manannan summoned, the
passage through death from the physical body. And still, to-day, the
Irish peasant believes that the 'good people' take to their invisible
world all young men or maidens who meet death; or that

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

one under a fairy spell may go to their world for a short-time, and come
back to our world again.

We have frequently emphasized how truly the modern Celtic peasant in
certain non-commercialized localities has kept to the faith of his pagan
ancestors, while the learned Christian scribes have often departed
widely from it. The story of the voyage of Fionn to the
Otherworld, <span id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_354) which Campbell found
living among Scotch peasants as late as the last century, adds a
striking proof of this assertion. So does Michael Comyn's peasant
version of Ossian in the 'Land of Youth' (as outlined above, [p.
346](#page_346)), which, though dating from about 1749, has all the
natural character of the best ancient tales, like those about Bran and
Cormac. We are inclined, therefore, to attach a value even higher than
we have already done to the testimony of the living Fairy-Faith which
confirms in so many parallel ways, as has been shown, the Fairy-Faith of
the remote past. Mr. W. B. Yeats, the Irish poet, adequately sums up
this matter by saying, 'But the Irish peasant believes that the utmost
he can dream was once or still is a reality by his own door. He will
point to some mountain and tell you that some famous hero or beauty
lived and sorrowed there, or he will tell you that Tir-na-nog, the
Country of the Young, the old Celtic paradise--the Land of the Living
Heart, as it used to be called--is all about him.' <span
id="fr_389"></span>[2](#fn_355)

At the end of his long and careful study of the Celtic Otherworld,
Alfred Nutt arrived at the tentative conclusion which coincides with our
own, that 'The vision of a Happy Otherworld found in Irish mythic
romances of the eighth and following centuries is substantially
pre-Christian', that its closest analogues are in Hellenic myth, and
that with these 'it forms the most archaic Aryan presentation of the
divine and happy land we possess'. <span id="fr_390"></span>[3](#fn_356)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_321"></span>[332:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_352) Chief general
references: H. D'Arbois de Jubainville, *L'Epopée celtique en Irlande*,
*Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais*; Kuno Meyer and Alfred Nutt, *The
Happy Otherworld and the Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth*. Chief sources:
the *Leabhar na h-Uidhre* (A.D. 1100); the *Book of Leinster* (twelfth
century); the *Lais* of Marie de France (twelfth to thirteenth century);
the *White Book of Rhyderch*, Hengwrt Coll. (thirteenth to fourteenth
century); the *Yellow Book of Lecan* (fifteenth century); the *Book of
Lismore* (fifteenth century); the *Book of Fermoy* (fifteenth century);
the *Four Ancient Books of Wales* (twelfth to fifteenth century).

<span id="fn_322"></span>[333:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_353) One of the
commonest legends among all Celtic peoples is about some lost city like
the Breton Is, or some lost land or island (cf. Rhy^s, *Arth. Leg.*, c.
xv, and *Celtic Folk-Lore*, c. vii); and we can be quite sure that if,
as some scientists now begin to think (cf. Batella, *Pruebas geológicas
de la existencia de la Atlántida*, in *Congreso internacional de
Americanistas*, iv., Madrid, 1882; also Meyers, *Grosses
Konversations-Lexikon*, ii. 44, Leipzig and Wien, 1903) Atlantis once
existed, its disappearance must have left from a prehistoric epoch a
deep impress on folk-memory. But the Other-world idea being in essence
animistic is not to be regarded, save from a superficial point of view,
as conceivably having had its origin in a lost Atlantis. The real
evolutionary process, granting the disappearance of this island
continent, would seem rather to have been one of localizing and
anthropomorphosing very primitive Aryan and pre-Aryan beliefs about a
heaven-world, such as have been current among almost all races of
mankind in all stages of culture, throughout the two Americas and
Polynesia as well as throughout Europe, Asia, and Africa. (Cf. Tylor,
*Prim. Cult.*,<sup>4</sup> ii. 62, 48, &c.)

<span id="fn_323"></span>[334:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_354) *White Book of
Rhyderch*, folio 291a; cf. Rhy^s, *Arth. Leg.*, pp. 268-9.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[335:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_356) From *Echtra
Condla*, in the *Leabhar na h-Uidhre*. Cf. *Le Cycle Myth. Irl.*, pp.
192-3.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[336:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_357) Cf. Eleanor Hull,
*The Silver Bough in Irish Legend*, in *Folk-Lore*, xii.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[337:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_358) Cf. Eleanor Hull,
op. cit., p. 431.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[337:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_359) Classical parallels
to the Celtic Otherworld journeys exist in the descent of Dionysus to
bring back Semele, of Orpheus to recover his beloved Eurydike, of
Herakles at the command of his master Eurystheus to fetch up the
three-headed Kerberos--as mentioned first in Homers *Iliad* (cf. Tylor,
*Prim. Cult.*,<sup>4</sup> ii. 48); and chiefly in the voyage of
Odysseus across the deep-flowing Ocean to the land of the departed
(Homer, *Odyss*. xi).

<span id="fn_328"></span>[337:3](ffcc260.htm#fr_361) Servius, *ad Aen.*,
vi. 136 ff.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[338:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_362) *Voy. of Bran*, i,
pp. 2 ff. The tale is based on seven manuscripts ranging in age from the
*Leabhar na h-Uidhre* of about A.D. 1100 to six others belonging to the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries (cf. ib., p. xvi).

<span id="fn_330"></span>[340:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_363) This tale exists in
several manuscripts of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; i. e.
*Book of Ballymote*, and *Yellow Book of Lecan*, as edited and
translated by Stokes, in *Irische Texts*, III. i. 183-229; cf. *Voy. of
Bran*, i*.* 190 ff.; cf. *Le Cycle Myth. Irl.*, pp. 326-33.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[341:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_364) The fountain is a
sacred fountain containing the sacred salmon; and the nine hazels are
the sacred hazels of inspiration and poetry. These passages are among
the most mystical in Irish literature. Cf. pp.
[432](ffcc309.htm#page_432)+-3.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[342:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_365) Cf. Stokes's trans.
in *Irische Text*. (Leipzig, 1891), III. i. 211-16.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[343:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_366) The Greeks saw in
Hermes the symbol of the Logos. Like Manannan, he conducted the souls of
men to the Otherworld of the gods, and then brought them back to the
human world. Hermes holds a rod in his hands, beautiful, golden,
wherewith he spellbinds the eyes of men whomsoever he would, and wakes
them again from sleep '--in initiations; while Manannan and the fairy
beings lure mortals to the fairy world through sleep produced by the
music of the Silver Branch.--Hippolytus on the Naasenes (from the Hebrew
*Nachash*, meaning a 'Serpent '), a Gnostic school; cf. G. R. S. Mead,
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, pp. 198, 201. Or again, 'the Caduceus,
or Rod of Mercury (Hermes), and the Thyrsus in the Greek Mysteries,
which conducted the soul from life to death, and from death to life,
figured forth the serpentine power in man, and the path whereby it would
carry the "man" aloft to the height, if he would but cause the "Waters
of the Jordan" to "flow upwards".'--G. R. S. Mead. ib., p. 185.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[344:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_367) Cf. Hennessy's ed.
in *Todd Lectures*, ser. I. i. 9.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[344:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_368) Among the early
ecclesiastical manuscripts of the so-called *Prophecies*. See E.
O'Curry, *Lectures*, p. 383.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[344:3](ffcc260.htm#fr_369) Cf. Eleanor Hull,
op. cit., pp. 439-40.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[345:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_370) Now in three
versions based on the *L. U.* MS. Our version is collated from O'Curry's
translation in *Atlantis*, i. 362-92, ii. 98-124, as revised by Kuno
Meyer, *Voy. of Bran*, i. 152 ff.; and from Jubainville's translation in
*L'Ép. celt. en Irl.*, pp. 170-216.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[346:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_371) As Alfred Nutt
pointed out, 'There is no parallel to the position or to the sentiments
of Fand in the post-classic literature of Western Europe until we come
to Guinevere and Isolt, Ninian and Orgueilleuse' *(Voy. of Bran*, i.
156n.).

<span id="fn_339"></span>[346:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_372) See poem *Tír na
nog* (Land of Youth), by Michael Comyn, composed or collected about the
year 1749. Ed. by Bryan O'Looney, in *Trans. Ossianic Soc.*, iv. 234-70.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[347:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_373) Laeghaire, who also
came back from Fairyland on a fairy horse, and fifty warriors with him
each likewise mounted, to say good-bye for ever to the king and people
of Connaught, were warned as they set out for this world not to dismount
if they wished to return to their fairy wives. The warning was strictly
observed, and thus they were able to go back to the *Sidhe*-world (see
p. 295).

<span id="fn_341"></span>[348:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_374) Cf. *Bibliotheca
Normannica*, iii, *Die Lais der Marie de France*, pp. 86-112.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[348:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_375) Cf. Stokes's
trans., in *Rev. Celt.*, ix. 453-95, x. 50-95. Most of the tale comes
[from](errata.htm#0) the *L. U.* MS.; cf. *L'Ép. celt. en Irl.*, pp.
449-500.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[351:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_376) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 385-401. The MS. Text, *Echtra Thaidg mheic Chéin* or 'The Adventure
of Cian's son Teigue', is found in the *Book of Lismore*.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[352:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_377) Summarized and
quoted from translation by R. I. Best, in *Ériu*, iii. 150-73. The text
is found in *the Book of Fermoy* (pp*.* 139--45), a fifteenth-century
codex in the Royal Irish Academy.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[353:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_378) Folios 113-15*,*
trans. O'Beirne Crow, *Journ. Kilkenny Archae. Soc.* (1870-1), pp.
371-448; cf. Rhy^s, *Hib. Lect.*, pp. 260-1.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[353:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_379) Cf. Skene, *Four
Ancient Books of Wales*, i*.* 264-6, 276, &c.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[354:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_380) Cf. *Silva
Gadelica*, ii. 301 ff., from Additional MS. 34119, dating from 1765, in
British Museum.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[354:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_381) *Giolla an
Fhiugha*, or 'The Lad of the Ferrule', trans. by Douglas Hyde, in *Irish
Texts Society*, London, 1899.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[354:3](ffcc260.htm#fr_383) Cf. Meyer and Nutt,
*Voy. of Bran*, i. 147, 228, 230, 235; 161.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[354:4](ffcc260.htm#fr_384) The bulk of the
text comes from the *Book of Fermoy*. Cf. Stokes's trans. in *Rev.
Celt.*, xiv. 59, 49, 53, &c.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[355:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_385) J. Loth,
*L'Émigration bretonne en Armorique* (Paris, 1883), pp. 139-40.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[356:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_386) Ed. and trans. by
W. Stokes, Calcutta, 1866. This *Vision* has been erroneously ascribed
to the celebrated Abbot of Iona, who died in 703*;* but Professor Zimmer
has regarded it as a ninth-century composition; cf. *Voy. of Bran*, i.
219 ff.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[356:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_387) Cf. *Voy. of Bran,*
i. 195 ff.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[357:1](ffcc260.htm#fr_388) See J. G. Campbell,
*The Fians*, pp. 260-7.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[357:2](ffcc260.htm#fr_389) *The Literary
Movement in Ireland*, in *Ideals in Ireland*, ed. by Lady Gregory
(London, 1901), p. 95.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357:3](ffcc260.htm#fr_390) Cf. *Voy. of Bran*,
i. 331.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Celtic Doctrine of Rebirth](ffcc270)
