[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc120)  [Next](ffcc122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### II. IN IRELAND

Introduction by DOUGLAS HYDE, LL.D., D. Litt., M.R.I.A. (*An Craoibhín
Aoibhinn*)*,* President of the Gaelic League; author of *A Literary
History of Ireland*, &c.

Whatever may be thought of the conclusions drawn by Mr. Wentz from his
explorations into the Irish spirit-world, there can be no doubt as to
the accuracy of the data from which he draws them. I have myself been
for nearly a quarter of a century collecting, off and on, the folk-lore
of Western Ireland, not indeed in the shape in which Mr. Wentz has
collected it, but rather with an eye (partly for linguistic and literary
purposes) to its songs, sayings, ballads, proverbs, and *sgéalta*, which
last are generally the equivalent of the German Märchen, but sometimes
have a touch of the saga nature about them. In making a collection of
these things I have naturally come across a very large amount of
folk-belief conversationally expressed, with regard to the 'good people'
and other supernatural manifestations, so that I can bear witness to the
fidelity with which Mr. Wentz has done his work on Irish soil, for to a
great number of the beliefs which he records I have myself heard
parallels, sometimes I have heard near variants of the stories,
sometimes the identical stories. So we may, I think, unhesitatingly
accept his subject-matter, whatever, as I said, be the conclusions we
may deduce from them.

The folk-tale (*sean-sgéal*) or Märchen, which I have spent so much time
in collecting, must not be confounded with the folk-belief which forms
the basis of Mr. Wentz's studies. The *sgéal* or story is something much
more intricate, complicated, and thought-out than the belief. One can
quite easily distinguish between the two. One (the belief) is short,
conversational, chiefly relating to real people, and contains no great
sequence of incidents, while the other (the folk-tale) is long,
complicated, more or less conventional, and above all has its interest
grouped around a single central figure, that of the hero or heroine. I
may make this plainer by an example. Let us go into a cottage on the
mountain-side, as

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. Wentz and I
have done so often, and ask the old man of the house if he ever heard of
such things as fairies, and he will tell you that 'there is fairies in
it surely. Didn't his own father see the "forth" <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) beyond full of them, and he passing by of a
moonlight night and a little piper among them, and he playing music that
mortal man never heard the like?' or he'll tell you that 'he himself
wouldn't say agin fairies for it's often he heard their music at the old
bush behind the house'. Ask what the fairies are like, and he will tell
you--well, pretty much what Mr. Wentz tells us. From this and the like
accounts we form our ideas of fairies and fairy music, of ghosts,
mermaids, *púcas*, and so on, but there is no sequence of incidents, no
hero, no heroine, no story.

Again, ask the old man if he knows e'er a *sean-sgéal* (story or
Märchen), and he will ask you at once, 'Did you ever hear the Speckled
Bull; did you ever hear the Well at the end of the world; did you ever
hear the Tailor and the Three Beasts; did you ever hear the Hornless
Cow?' Ask him to relate one of these, and if you get him in the right
vein, which may be perhaps one time in ten, or if you induce the right
vein, which you may do perhaps nine times out of ten, you will find him
begin with a certain gravity and solemnity at the very beginning, thus,
'There was once, in old times and in old times it was, a king in
Ireland'; or perhaps 'a man who married a second wife'; or perhaps 'a
widow woman with only one son': and the tale proceeds to recount the
life and adventures of the heroes or heroines, whose biographies told in
Irish in a sort of stereotyped form may take from ten minutes to half an
hour to get through. Some stories would burn out a dip candle in the
telling, or even last the whole night. But these stories have little or
nothing to say to the questions raised in this book.

The problem we have to deal with is a startling one, as thus put before
us by Mr. Wentz. Are these beings of the spirit world real beings,
having a veritable existence of their own, in a world of their own, or
are they only the creation

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of the imagination of his informants, and the tradition of bygone
centuries? The newspaper, the 'National' School, and the *Zeitgeist*
have answered to their own entire satisfaction that these things are
imagination pure and simple. Yet this off-hand condemnation does not
always carry with it a perfect conviction. We do not doubt the existence
of tree-martins or kingfishers, although nine hundred and ninety-nine
people out of every thousand pass their entire lives without being
vouchsafed a glimpse of them in their live state; and may it not be the
same with the creatures of the spirit world, may not they also exist,
though to only one in a thousand it be vouchsafed to behold them? The
spirit creatures cannot be stuffed and put into museums, like rare
animals and birds, whose existence we might doubt of if we had not seen
them there; yet they may exist just as such animals and birds do, though
we cannot see them. I, at least, have often been tempted to think so.
But the following considerations, partly drawn from comparative
folk-lore, have made me hesitate about definitely accepting any theory.

In the first place, then, viewing the Irish spirit-world as a whole, we
find that it contains, even on Mr. Wentz's showing, quite a number of
different orders of beings, of varying shapes, appearances, size, and
functions. Are we to believe that all those beings equally exist, and,
on the principle that there can be no smoke without a fire, are we to
hold that there would be no popular conception of the banshee, the
leprechaun, or the *Maighdean-mhara* (sea-maiden, mermaid), and
consequently no tales told about them, if such beings did not exist, and
from time to time allow themselves to be seen like the wood-martin and
the kingfisher? This question is, moreover, further complicated by the
belief in the appearance of things that are or appear to be inanimate
objects, not living beings, such as the deaf coach or the phantom ship
in full sail, the appearance of which Mr. Yeats has immortalized in one
of his earliest and finest poems.

Again, although the *bean-sidhe* (banshee), leprechaun, *púca*, and the
like are the most commonly known and usually

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

seen creatures of the spirit world, yet great quantities of other
appearances are believed to have been also sporadically met with. I very
well remember sitting one night some four or five years ago in an hotel
in Indianapolis, U.S.A., and talking to four Irishmen, one or two of
them very wealthy, and all prosperous citizens of the United States. The
talk happened to turn upon spirits--the only time during my entire
American experiences in which such a thing happened--and each man of the
four had a story of his own to tell, in which he was a convinced
believer, of ghostly manifestations seen by him in Ireland. Two of these
manifestations were of beings that would fall into no known category; a
monstrous rabbit as big as an ass, which plunged into the sea (rabbits
can swim), and a white heifer which ascended to heaven, were two of
them. I myself, when a boy of ten or eleven, was perfectly convinced
that on a fine early dewy morning in summer when people were still in
bed, I saw a strange horse run round a seven-acre field of ours and
change into a woman, who ran even swifter than the horse, and after a
couple of courses round the field disappeared into our haggard. I am
sure, whatever I may believe to-day, no earthly persuasion would, at the
time, have convinced me that I did not see this. Yet I never saw it
again, and never heard of any one else seeing the same.

My object in mentioning these things is to show that if we concede the
real objective existence of, let us say, the apparently
well-authenticated banshee (*Bean-sidhe*,' woman-fairy'), where are we
to stop? for any number of beings, more or less well authenticated, come
crowding on her heels, so many indeed that they would point to a far
more extensive world of different shapes than is usually suspected, not
to speak of inanimate objects like the coach and the ship. Of course
there is nothing inherently impossible in all these shapes existing any
more than in one of them existing, but they all seem to me to rest upon
the same kind of testimony, stronger in the case of some, less strong in
the case of others, and it is as well to point out this clearly.

My own experience is that beliefs in the *Sidhe* (pronounced

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shee) folk, and in
other denizens of the invisible world is, in many places, rapidly dying.
In reading folk-lore collections like those of Mr. Wentz and others, one
is naturally inclined to exaggerate the extent and depth of these
traditions. They certainly still exist, and can be found if you go to
search for them; but they often exist almost as it were by sufferance,
only in spots, and are ceasing to be any longer a power. Near my home in
a western county (County Roscommon) rises gently a slope, which, owing
to the flatness of the surrounding regions, almost becomes a hill, and
is a conspicuous object for many miles upon every side. The old people
called it in Irish *Mullach na Sidhe*. This name is now practically
lost, and it is called Fairymount. So extinct have the traditions of the
*Sidhe*-folk, who lived within the hill, become, that a high
ecclesiastic recently driving by asked his driver was there an Irish
name for the hill, and what was it, and his driver did not know. There
took place a few years ago a much talked of bog-slide in the
neighbouring townland of Cloon-Sheever (*Sidhbhair* or *Siabhra*), 'the
Meadow of the Fairies,' and many newspaper correspondents came to view
it. One of the natives told a sympathetic newspaper reporter, 'Sure we
always knew it was going to move, that 's why the place is named
Cloon-Sheever, the bog was always in a "shiver"!' I have never been able
to hear of any legends attached to what must have at one time been held
to be the head-quarters of the *Sidhe* for a score of miles round it.

Of all the beings in the Irish mythological world the *Sidhe* are,
however, apparently the oldest and the most distinctive. Beside them in
literature and general renown all other beings sink into insignificance.
A belief in them formerly dominated the whole of Irish life. The *Sidhe*
or Tuatha De Danann were a people like ourselves who inhabited the
hills--not as a rule the highest and most salient eminences, but I think
more usually the pleasant undulating slopes or gentle hill-sides--and
who lived there a life of their own, marrying or giving in marriage,
banqueting or making war, and leading there just as real a life as is
our own. All Irish

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

literature, particularly perhaps the 'Colloquy of the Ancients'
(*Agallamh na Senórach*) abounds with reference to them. To inquire how
the Irish originally came by their belief in these beings, the *Sidhe*
or Tuatha De Danann, is to raise a question which cannot be answered,
any more than one can answer the question, Where did the Romans obtain
their belief in Bacchus and the fauns, or the Greeks their own belief in
the beings of Olympus?

But granting such belief to have been indigenous to the Irish, as it
certainly seems to have been, then the tall, handsome fairies of Ben
Bulbin and the Sligo district, about whom Mr. Wentz tells us so much
interesting matter, might be accounted for as being a continuation of
the tradition of the ancient Gaels, or a *piece of heredity inherent in
the folk-imagination*. I mean, in other words, that the tradition about
these handsome dwellers within the hill-sides having been handed down
for ages, and having been perhaps exceptionally well preserved in those
districts, people saw just what they had always been told existed, or,
if I may so put it, they saw what they expected to see.

Fin Bheara, the King of the Connacht Fairies in Cnoc Meadha (or
Castlehacket) in the County Galway, his Queen Nuala, and all the
beautiful forms seen by Mr. Wentz's seer-witness (pp. [60](#page_60)
*ff.*), all the banshees and all the human figures, white women, and so
forth, who are seen in raths and moats and on hill-sides, are the direct
descendants, so to speak, of the Tuatha De Danann or the *Sidhe*. Of
this, I think, there can be no doubt whatever.

But then how are we to account far the little red-dressed men and women
and the leprechauns? Yet, are they any more wonderful than the pygmies
of classic tradition? Is not the Mermaid to be found in Greece, and is
not the Lorelei as Germanic as the Kelpy is Caledonian. If we grant that
all these are creatures of primitive folk-belief, then how they come to
be so ceases to be a Celtic problem, it becomes a world problem. But
granted, as I say, that they were all creatures of primitive
folk-belief, then their occasional appearances, or the belief in such,
may be accounted

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

for in exactly the same way as I have suggested to be possible in the
case of the Ben Bulbin fairies.

As for the belief in ghosts or *revenants* (in Irish *tais* or
*taidhbhse*), it seems to me that this may possibly rest to some extent
upon a different footing altogether. Here we are not confronted by a
different order of beings of different shapes and attributes from our
own, but only with the appearances, amongst the living, of men who were
believed or known to be dead or far away from the scene of their
appearances. Even those who may be most sceptical about the *Sidhe-folk*
and the leprechauns are likely to be convinced (on the mere evidence)
that the existence of 'astral bodies' or 'doubles', or whatever we may
call them, and the appearances of people, especially in the hour of
their death, to other people who were perhaps hundreds of miles away at
the time, is amply proven. Yet whatever may have been the case
originally when man was young, I do not think that this had in later
times any more direct bearing upon the belief in the *Sidhe*, the
leprechauns, the mermaid, and similar beings than upon the belief in the
Greek Pantheon, the naiads, the dryads, or the fauns; all of which
beliefs, probably arising originally from an animistic source, must have
differentiated themselves at a very early period. Of course every real
apparition, every 'ghost' apparition, tends now, and must have tended at
all times, to strengthen every spirit belief. For do not ghost
apparitions belong, in a way, to the same realm as all the others we
have spoken of, that is, to a realm equally outside our normal
experience?

Another very interesting point, and one hitherto generally overlooked,
is this, that different parts of the Irish soil cherish different bodies
of supernatural beings. The North of Ireland believes in beings unknown
in the South, and North-East Leinster has spirits unknown to the West.
Some places seem to be almost given up to special beliefs. Any outsider,
for instance, who may have read that powerful and grisly book, *La
Légende de la Mort*, by M. Anatole Le Braz, in two large volumes, all
about the awful appearances of *Ankou* (Death), who simply dominates the
folk-lore of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brittany, will
probably be very much astonished to know that, though I have been
collecting Irish folk-lore all my life, I have never met Death figuring
as a personality in more than two or three tales, and these mostly of a
trivial or humorous description, though the Deaf Coach (*Cóiste
Bodhar*), the belief in which is pretty general, does seem a kind of
parallel to the creaking cart in which *Ankou* rides.

I would suggest, then, that the restriction of certain forms of spirits,
if I may so call them, to certain localities, may be due to race
intermixture. I would imagine that where the people of a primitive tribe
settled down most strongly, they also most strongly preserved the memory
of those supernatural beings who were peculiarly their own. The
*Sidhe-*folk appear to be pre-eminently and distinctively Milesian, but
the *geancanach* (name of some little spirit in Meath and portion of
Ulster) may have been believed in by a race entirely different from that
which believed in the *clúracaun* (a Munster sprite). Some of these
beliefs may be Aryan, but many are probably pre-Celtic.

Is it not strange that while the names and exploits of the great
semi-mythological heroes of the various Saga cycles of Ireland,
Cuchulainn, Conor mac Nessa, Finn, Osgar, Oisin, and the rest, are at
present the inheritance of all Ireland, and are known in every part of
it, there should still be, as I have said, supernatural beings believed
in which are unknown outside of their own districts, and of which the
rest of Ireland has never heard? If the inhabitants of the limited
districts in which these are seen still think they see them, my
suggestion is that the earlier race handed down an account of the
primitive beings believed in by their own tribe, and later generations,
if they saw anything, saw just what they were told existed.

Whilst far from questioning the actual existence of certain spiritual
forms and apparitions, I venture to throw out these considerations for
what they may be worth, and I desire again to thank Mr. Wentz for all
the valuable data be has collected for throwing light upon so
interesting a question.

RATRA FRENCHPARK,  
COUNTY ROSCOMMON, IRELAND*,  
September* 1910.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### THE FAIRY FOLK OF TARA

On the ancient Hill of Tara, from whose heights the High Kings once
ruled all Ireland, from where the sacred fires in pagan days announced
the annual resurrection of the sun, the Easter Tide, where the magic of
Patrick prevailed over the magic of the Druids, and where the hosts of
the Tuatha De Danann were wont to appear at the great Feast of *Samain*,
to-day the fairy-folk of modern times hold undisputed sovereignty. And
from no point better than Tara, which thus was once the magical and
political centre of the Sacred Island, could we begin our study of the
Irish Fairy-Faith. Though the Hill has lain unploughed and deserted
since the curses of Christian priests fell upon it, on the calm air of
summer evenings, at the twilight hour, wondrous music still sounds over
its slopes, and at night long, weird processions of silent spirits march
round its grass-grown *raths* and *forts*. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) It is only men who fear the curse of the
Christians; the fairy-folk regard it not.

The Rev. Father Peter Kenney, of Kilmessan, had directed me to John
Graham, an old man over seventy years of age, who has lived near Tara
most of his life; and after I had found John, and he had led me from
*rath* to *rath* and then right through the length of the site where
once stood the banquet hail of kings and heroes and Druids, as he
earnestly described the past glories of Tara to which these ancient
monuments bear silent testimony, we sat down in the thick sweet grass on
the Sacred Hill and began talking of the olden times in Ireland, and
then of the good people':--

The 'Good People's' Music.--'As sure as you are sitting down I beard the
pipes there in that wood (pointing to

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

a wood on the north-west slope of the Hill, and west of the banquet
hall). I heard the music another time on a hot summer evening at the
Rath of Ringlestown, in a field where all the grass had been burned off;
and I often heard it in the wood of Tara. Whenever the *good people*
play, you hear their music all through the field as plain as can be; and
it is the grandest kind of music. It may last half the night, but once
day comes, it ends.'

Who the 'Good People' are.--I now asked John what sort of a race the
'good people' are, and where they came from, and this is his
reply:--'People killed and murdered in war stay on earth till their time
is up, and they are among the *good people*. The souls on this earth are
as thick as the grass (running his walking-stick through a thick clump),
and you can't see them; and evil spirits are just as thick, too, and
people don't know it. Because there are so many spirits knocking (going)
about they must appear to some people. The old folk saw the *good
people* here on the Hill a hundred times, and they'd always be talking
about them. The *good people* can see everything, and you dare not
meddle with them. They live in *raths*, and their houses are in them.
The opinion always was that they are a race of spirits, for they can go
into different forms, and can appear big as well as little.'

### EVIDENCE FROM KILMESSAN, NEAR TARA

John Boylin, born in County Meath about sixty years ago, will be our
witness from Kilmessan, a village about two miles from Tara; and he,
being one of the men of the vicinity best informed about its folk-lore,
is able to offer testimony of very great value:--

The Fairy Tribes.--'There is said to be a whole tribe of little red men
living in Glen Odder, between Ringlestown and Tara; and on long evenings
in June they have been heard. There are other breeds or castes of
fairies; and it seems to me, when I recall our ancient traditions, that
some of these fairies are of the Fir Bolgs, some of the Tuatha De
Danann, and some of the Milesians. All of them have been

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

seen serenading round the western slope of Tara, dressed in ancient
Irish costumes. Unlike the little red men, these fairy races are warlike
and given to making invasions. Long processions of them have been seen
going round the King's Chair (an earthwork on which the Kings of Tara
are said to have been crowned); and they then would appear like soldiers
of ancient Ireland in review.'

The Fairy Procession.--'We were told as children, that, as soon as night
fell, the fairies from Rath Ringlestown would form in a procession,
across Tara road, pass round certain bushes which have not been
disturbed for ages, and join the *gangkena* (?) or host of industrious
folk, the red fairies. We were afraid, and our nurses always brought us
home before the advent of the fairy procession. One of the passes used
by this procession happened to be between two mud-wall houses; and it is
said that a man went out of one of these houses at the wrong time, for
when found he was dead: the fairies had *taken* him because he
interfered with their procession.' <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

Death through Cutting Fairy-Bushes.--'A man named Caffney cut as fuel to
boil his pot of potatoes some of these undisturbed bushes round which
the fairies pass. When he put the wood under the pot, though it spat
fire, and fire-sparkles would come out of it, it would not burn. The man
pined away gradually. In six months after cutting the fairy-bushes, he
was dead. Just before he died, he told his experiences with the wood to
his brother, and his brother told me.'

The Fairies are the Dead.--'According to the local belief, fairies are
the spirits of the departed. Tradition says that Hugh O'Neil in the
sixteenth century, after his march to the south, encamped his army on
the *Rath* or *Fort* of Ringlestown, to be assisted by the spirits of
the mighty dead who dwelt within this *rath*. And it is believed that

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gerald Fitzgerald
has been seen coming out of the Hill of Mollyellen, down in County
Louth, leading his horse and dressed in the old Irish costume, with
breastplate, spear, and war outfit.'

Fairy Possession.--'Rose Carroll was possessed by a fairy-spirit. It is
known that her father held communion with evil spirits, and it appears
that they often assisted him. The Carrolls' house was built at the end
of a fairy *fort*, and part of it was scooped out of this *fort*. Rose
grew so peculiar that her folks locked her up. After two years she was
able to shake off the fairy possession by being taken to Father
Robinson's sisters, and then to an old witch-woman in Drogheda.'

### IN THE VALLEY OF THE BOYNE

In walking along the River Boyne, from Slane to Knowth and New Grange, I
stopped at the cottage of Owen Morgan, at Ross-na-Righ, or 'the Wood of
the Kings', though the ancient wood has long since disappeared; and as
we sat looking out over the sunlit beauty of Ireland's classic river,
and in full view of the first of the famous *moats*, this is what Owen
Morgan told me:--

How the Shoemaker's Daughter became the Queen of Tara.--'In olden times
there lived a shoemaker and his wife up there near Moat Knowth, and
their first child was taken by the queen of the fairies who lived inside
the moat, and a little leprechaun left in its place. The same exchange
was made when the second child was born. At the birth of the third child
the fairy queen came again and ordered one of her three servants to take
the child; but the child could not be moved because of a great beam of
iron, too heavy to lift, which lay across the baby's breast. The second
servant and then the third failed like the first, and the queen herself
could not move the child. The mother being short of pins had used a
needle to fasten the child's clothes, and that was what appeared to the
fairies as a beam of iron, for there was virtue in steel in those days.

'So the fairy queen decided to bestow gifts upon the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

child; and advised each of the three servants to give, in turn, a
different gift. The first one said, "May she be the grandest lady in the
world"; the second one said, "May she be the greatest singer in the
world"; and the third one said, "May she be the best mantle-maker in the
world." Then the fairy queen said, "Your gifts are all very good, but
*I* will give a gift of my own better than any of them: the first time
she happens to go out of the house let her come back into it under the
form of a rat." The mother heard all that the fairy women said, and so
she never permitted her daughter to leave the house.

'When the girl reached the age of eighteen, it happened that the young
prince of Tara, in riding by on a hunt, heard her singing, and so
entranced was he with the music that he stopped to listen; and, the song
ended, he entered the house, and upon seeing the wonderful beauty of the
singer asked her to marry him. The mother said that could not be, and
taking the daughter out of the house for the first time brought her back
into it in an apron under the form of a rat, that the prince might
understand the refusal.

'This enchantment, however, did not change the prince's love for the
beautiful singer; and be explained how there was a day mentioned with
his father, the king, for all the great ladies of Ireland to assemble in
the Halls of Tara, and that the grandest lady and the greatest singer
and the best mantle-maker would be chosen as his wife. When he added
that each lady must come in a chariot, the rat spoke to him and said
that he must send to her home, on the day named, four piebald cats and a
pack of cards, and that she would make her appearance, provided that at
the time her chariot came to the Halls of Tara no one save the prince
should be allowed near it; and, she finally said to the prince, "Until
the day mentioned with your father, you must carry me as a rat in your
pocket."

'But before the great day arrived, the rat had made everything known to
one of the fairy women, and so when the four piebald cats and the pack
of cards reached the girl's home, the fairies at once turned the cats
into the four most

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

splendid horses in the world, and the pack of cards into the most
wonderful chariot in the world; and, as the chariot was setting out from
the Moat for Tara, the fairy queen clapped her hands and laughed, and
the enchantment over the girl was broken, so that she became, as before,
the prettiest lady in the world, and she sitting in the chariot.

'When the prince saw the wonderful chariot coming, he knew whose it was,
and went out alone to meet it; but he could not believe his eyes on
seeing the lady inside. And then she told him about the witches and
fairies, and explained everything.

'Hundreds of ladies had come to the Halls of Tara from all Ireland, and
every one as grand as could be. The contest began with the singing, and
ended with the mantle-making, and the young girl was the last to appear;
but to the amazement of all the company the king had to give in (admit)
that the strange woman was the grandest lady, the greatest singer, and
the best mantle-maker in Ireland; and when the old king died she became
the Queen of Tara.'

After this ancient legend, which Owen Morgan heard from the old folks
when he was a boy, he told me many anecdotes about the 'good people' of
the Boyne, who are little men usually dressed in red.

The 'Good People' at New Grange.--Between Knowth and, New Grange I met
Maggie Timmons carrying a pail of butter-milk to her calves; and when we
stopped on the road to talk, I asked her, in due time, if any of the
'good people' ever appeared in the region, or about New Grange, which we
could see in the field, and she replied, in reference to New Grange:--'I
am sure the neighbours used to see the *good people* come out of it at
night and in the morning. The *good people* inherited the *fort*.'

Then I asked her what the 'good people' are, and she said:--'When they
disappear they go like fog; they must be something like spirits, or how
could they disappear in that way? I knew of people,' she added, 'who
would milk in the fields about here and spill milk on the ground for the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

good people; and pots of potatoes would be put out for the *good people*
at night.' (See chap. viii for additional New Grange folk-lore.)

### THE TESTIMONY OF AN IRISH PRIEST

We now pass directly to West Ireland, in many ways our most important
field, and where of all places in the Celtic world the Fairy-Faith is
vigorously alive; and it seems very fitting to offer the first
opportunity to testify in behalf of that district to a scholarly priest
of the Roman Church, for what he tells us is almost wholly the result of
his own memories and experiences as an Irish boy in Connemara,
supplemented in a valuable way by his wider and more mature knowledge of
the fairy-belief as he sees it now among his own parishioners:--

Knock Ma Fairies.--'Knock Ma, which you see over there, is said to
contain excavated passages and a palace where the fairies live, and with
them the people they have *taken*. And from the inside of the hill there
is believed to be an entrance to an underground world. It is a common
opinion that after consumptives die they are there with the fairies in
good health. The wasted body is not taken into the hill, for it is
usually regarded as not the body of the deceased but rather as that of a
changeling, the general belief being that the real body and the soul are
carried off together, and those of an old person from Fairyland
substituted. The old person left soon declines and dies.'

Safeguards against Fairies.--'It was proper when having finished milking
a cow to put one's thumb in the pail of milk, and with the wet thumb to
make the sign of the cross on the thigh of the cow on the side milked,
to be safe against fairies. And I have seen them when churning put a
live coal about an inch square under the churn, because it was an old
custom connected with fairies.'

Milk and Butter for Fairies.--'Whatever milk falls on the ground in
milking a cow is taken by the fairies, for fairies need a little milk.
Also, after churning, the knife which is run through the butter in
drying it must not be scraped

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

clean, for what sticks to it belongs to the fairies. Out of three pounds
of butter, for example, an ounce or two would be left for the fairies. I
have seen this several times.'

Crossing a Stream, and Fairies.--'When out on a dark night, if pursued
by fairies or ghosts one is considered quite safe if one can get over
some stream. I remember coming home on a dark night with a boy companion
and bearing a noise, and then after we had run to a stream and crossed
it feeling quite safe.'

Fairy Preserves.--'A heap of stones in a field should not be disturbed,
though needed for building--especially if they are part of an ancient
tumulus. The fairies are said to live inside the pile, and to move the
stones would be most unfortunate. If a house happens to be built on a
fairy preserve, or in a fairy track, the occupants will have no luck.
Everything will go wrong. Their animals will die, their children fall
sick, and no end of trouble will come on them. When the house happens to
have been built in a fairy track, the doors on the front and back, or
the windows if they are in the line of the track, cannot be kept closed
at night, for the fairies must march through. Near Ballinrobe there is
an old *fort* which is still the preserve of the fairies, and the land
round it. The soil is very fine, and yet no one would dare to till it.
Some time ago in laying out a new road the engineers determined to run
it through the *fort*, but the people rose almost in rebellion, and the
course had to be changed. The farmers wouldn't cut down a tree or bush
growing on the hill or preserve for anything.'

Fairy Control over Crops.--'Fairies are believed to control crops and
their ripening. A field of turnips may promise well, and its owner will
count on so many tons to the acre, but if when the crop is gathered it
is found to be far short of the estimate, the explanation is that the
fairies have extracted so much substance from it. The same thing is the
case with corn.'

November Eve and Fairies.--'On November Eve it is not right to gather or
eat blackberries or sloes, nor after that time as long as they last. On
November Eve the fairies

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

pass over all such things and make them unfit to eat. If one dares to
eat them afterwards one will have serious illness. We firmly believed
this as boys, and I laugh now when I think how we used to gorge
ourselves with berries on the last day of October, and then for weeks
after pass by bushes full of the most luscious fruit, and with months
watering for it couldn't eat it.'

Fairies as Flies.--'There is an old abbey on the river, in County Mayo,
and people say the fairies had a great battle near it, and that the
slaughter was tremendous. At the time, the fairies appeared as swarms of
flies coming from every direction to that spot. Some came from Knock Ma,
and some from South Ireland, the opinion being that fairies can assume
any form they like. The battle lasted a day and a night, and when it was
over one could have filled baskets with the dead flies which floated
down the river.'

Those who Return from Faerie.--'Persons in a short trance-state of two
or three days' duration are said to be away with the fairies enjoying a
festival. The festival may be very material in its nature, or it may be
purely spiritual. Sometimes one may thus go to Faerie for an hour or
two; or one may remain there for seven, fourteen, or twenty-one years.
The mind of a person coming out of Fairyland is usually a blank as to
what has been seen and done there. Another idea is that the person knows
well enough all about Fairyland, but is prevented from communicating the
knowledge. A certain woman of whom I knew said she had forgotten all
about her experiences in Faerie, but a friend who heard her objected,
and said she did remember, and wouldn't tell. A man may remain awake at
night to watch one who has been to Fairyland to see if that one holds
communication with the fairies. Others say in such a case that the
fairies know you are on the alert, and will not be discovered.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF A GALWAY PIPER

Fairies = *Sidheóga*.--According to our next witness, Steven Ruan, a
piper of Galway, with whom I have often talked, there is one class of
fairies 'who are nobody else than the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

spirits of men and women who once lived on earth'; and the banshee is a
dead friend, relative, or ancestor who appears to give a warning. 'The
fairies', he says, 'never care about old folks. They only *take* babies,
and young men and young women. If a young wife dies; she is said to have
been *taken* by *them*, and ever afterwards to live in Fairyland. The
same things are said about a young man or a child who dies. Fairyland is
a place of delights, where music, and singing, and dancing, and feasting
are continually enjoyed; and its inhabitants are all about us, as
numerous as the blades of grass.'

A Fairy Dog.--In the course of another conversation, Steven pointed to a
rocky knoll in a field not far from his home, and said:--'I saw a dog
with a white ring around his neck by that hill there, and the oldest men
round Galway have seen him, too, for he has been here for one hundred
years or more. He is a dog of the *good people,* and only appears at
certain hours of the night.'

An Old Piper in Fairyland.--And before we had done talking, the subject
of fairy-music came up, and the following little story coming from one
of the last of the old Irish pipers himself, about a brother piper, is
of more than ordinary value:--'There used to be an old piper called
Flannery who lived in Oranmore, County Galway. I imagine he was one of
the old generation. And one time the *good people* took him to Fairyland
to learn his profession. He studied music with them for a long time, and
when he returned he was as great a piper as any in Ireland. But he died
young, for the *good people* wanted him to play for them.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF 'OLD PATSY' OF ARANMORE

Our next witness is an old man, familiarly called 'Old Patsy', who is a
native of the Island of Aranmore, off the coast from Galway, and he
lives on the island amid a little group of straw-thatched fishermen's
homes called Oak Quarter. As 'Old Patsy' stood beside a rude stone cross
near Oak Quarter, in one of those curious places on Aranmore, where each
passing funeral stops long enough to erect

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

a little memorial pile of stones on the smooth rocky surface of the
roadside enclosure, he told me many anecdotes about the mysteries of his
native island.

Aranmore Fairies.--Twenty years or so ago round the *Bedd* of Dermot and
Grania, just above us on the hill, there were seen many fairies, 'crowds
of them,' said 'Old Patsy', and a single deer. They began to chase the
deer, and followed it right over the island. At another time similar
little people chased a horse. 'The rocks were full of them, and they
were small fellows.'

A Fairy Beating--in a Dream.--'In the South Island,' he continued, 'as
night was coming on, a man was giving his cow water at a well, and, as
he looked on the other side of a wall, he saw many strange people
playing burley. When they noticed him looking at them, one came up and
struck the cow a hard blow, and turning on the man cut his face and body
very badly. The man might not have been so badly off, but he returned to
the well after the first encounter and got five times as bad a beating;
and when he reached home he couldn't speak at all, until the cock crew.
Then he told about his adventures, and slept a little. When he woke up
in the daylight he was none the worse for his beating, for the fairies
had rubbed something on his face.' Patsy says he knew the man, who if
still alive is now in America, where he went several years ago.

Where Fairies Live.--When I asked Patsy where the fairies live, he
turned half around, and pointing in the direction of Dun Aengus, which
was in full view on the sharp sky-line of Aranmore, said that there, in
a large tumulus on the hillside below it, they had one of their
favourite abodes. But, he added, 'The rocks are full of them, and they
are small fellows.' Just across the road from where we were standing, in
a spot near Oak Quarter, another place was pointed out where the fairies
are often seen dancing. The name of it is *Moneen an Damhsa*, 'the
Little Bog of the Dance.' Other sorts of fairies live in the sea; and
some of them who live on Aranmore (probably in conjunction with those in
the sea) go out over the water and cause storms and wind.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### THE TESTIMONY OF A ROMAN CATHOLIC THEOLOGIAN

The following evidence, by the Rev. Father ------, came out during a
discussion concerning spirits and fairies as regarded by Roman Catholic
theology, which he and I enjoyed when we met as fellow travellers in
Galway Town:--

Of Magic and Place-spirits.--'Magic, according to Catholic theology, is
nothing else than the solicitation of spiritual powers to help us. If
evil spirits are evoked by certain irrational practices it is unholy
magic, and this is altogether forbidden by our Church. All charms,
spells, divination, necromancy, or geomancy are unholy magic. Holy magic
is practiced by carrying the Cross in Christ. Now evil magic has been
practiced here in Ireland: butter has been *taken* so that none came
from the churning; cows have been made to die of maladies; and fields
made unproductive. A cow was bought from an old woman in Connemara, and
no butter was ever had from the cow until exorcism with holy water was
performed. This is reported to me as a fact.' And in another relation
the Rev. Father------ said what for us is highly significant:--'My
private opinion is that in certain places here in Ireland where pagan
sacrifices were practised, evil spirits through receiving homage gained
control, and still hold control, unless driven out by exorcisms.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF THE TOWN CLERK OF TUAM

To the town clerk of Tuam, Mr. John Glynn, who since his boyhood has
taken a keen interest in the traditions of his native county, I am
indebted for the following valuable summary of the fairy creed in that
part of North Galway where Finvara rules:--

Fairies of the Tuam Country.--'The whole of Knock Ma (*Cnoc
Meadha* <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)), which probably means Hill
of the Plain, is said to be the palace of Finvara, king of the Connaught

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

fairies. There are a good many legends about Finvara, but very few about
Queen Meave in this region.'

Famine of I846-7 *caused by Fairies*.--'During I846-7 the potato crop in
Ireland was a failure, and very much suffering resulted. At the time,
the country people in these parts attributed the famine to disturbed
conditions in the fairy world. Old Thady Steed once told me about the
conditions then prevailing, "Sure, we couldn't be any other way; and I
saw the *good people* and hundreds besides me saw them fighting in the
sky over Knock Ma and on towards Galway." And I heard others say they
saw the fighting also.'

Fairyland; and the Seeress.--'Fairies are said to be immortal, and the
fairy world is always described as an immaterial place, though I do not
think it is the same as the world of the dead. Sick persons, however,
are often said to be with the fairies, and when cured, to have come
back. A woman who died here about thirty years ago was commonly believed
to have been with the fairies during her seven years' sickness when she
was a maiden. She married after coming back, and had children; and she
was always able to see the *good people* and to talk with them, for she
bad the second-sight. And it is said that she used to travel with the
fairies at night. After her marriage she lived in Tuam, and though her
people were six or seven miles out from Tuam in the country, she could
always tell all that was taking place with them there, and she at her
own home at the time.'

Fairies on May Day.--'On May Day the *good people* can steal butter if
the chance is given them. If a person enters a house then, and churning
is going on, he must take a hand in it, or else there will be no butter.
And if fire is given away on May Day nothing will go right for the whole
year.'

The Three Fairy Drops.--'Even yet certain things are due the fairies;
for example, two years ago, in the Court Room here in Tuam, a woman was
on trial for watering milk, and to the surprise of us all who were
conducting the proceedings, and, it can be added, to the great amusement
of

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the onlookers, she swore that she had only added "the three fairy
drops".'

Food of Fairies.--'Food, after it has been put out at night for the
fairies, is not allowed to be eaten afterwards by man or beast, not even
by pigs. Such food is said to have no real substance left in it, and to
let anything eat it wouldn't be thought of. The underlying idea seems to
be that the fairies extract the spiritual essence from food offered to
them, leaving behind the grosser elements.'

Fairy Warfare.--'When the fairy tribes under the various kings and
queens have a battle, one side manages to have a living man among them,
and he by knocking the fairies about turns the battle in case the side
he is on is losing. It is always usual for the Munster fairy king to
challenge Finvara, the Connaught fairy king.'

### COUNTY SLIGO, AND THE TESTIMONY OF A PEASANT SEER <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)

The Ben Bulbin country in County Sligo is one of those rare places in
Ireland where fairies are thought to be visible, and our first witness
from there claims to be able to see the fairies or 'gentry' and to talk
with them. This mortal so favoured lives in the same townland where his
fathers have lived during four hundred years, directly beneath the
shadows of Ben Bulbin, on whose sides Dermot is said to have been killed
while hunting the wild-boar. And this famous old mountain, honeycombed
with curious grottoes ages ago when the sea beat against its
perpendicular flanks,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

is the very place where the 'gentry' have their chief abode. Even on its
broad level summit, for it is a high square table-land like a mighty
cube of rock set down upon the earth by some antediluvian god, there are
treacherous holes, wherein more than one hunter may have been lost for
ever, penetrating to unknown depths; and by listening one can bear the
tides from the ocean three or four miles away surging in and out through
ancient subterranean channels, connected with these holes. In the
neighbouring mountains there are long caverns which no man has dared to
penetrate to the end, and even dogs, it is said, have been put in them
never to emerge, or else to come out miles away.

One day when the heavy white fog-banks hung over Ben Bulbin and its
neighbours, and there was a weird almost-twilight at midday over the
purple heather bog-lands at their base, and the rain was falling, I sat
with my friend before a comfortable fire of fragrant turf in his cottage
and heard about the 'gentry':--

Encounters with the' Gentry'.--'When I was a young man I often used to
go out in the mountains over there (pointing out of the window in their
direction) to fish for trout, or to hunt; and it was in January on a
cold, dry day while carrying my gun that I and a friend with me, as we
were walking around Ben Bulbin, saw one of the *gentry* for the first
time. I knew who it was, for I had heard the *gentry* described ever
since I could remember; and this one was dressed in blue with a
head-dress adorned with what seemed to be frills. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) When he came up to us, he said to me in a
sweet and silvery voice, "The seldomer you come to this mountain the
better. A young lady here wants to take you away." Then he told us not
to fire off our guns, because the *gentry* dislike being disturbed by
the noise. And he seemed to be like a soldier of the *gentry* on guard.
As we were leaving the mountains, he told us not to look back, and we
didn't. Another time I was alone trout-fishing in nearly the same region
when I heard a voice say, "It is ------ bare-footed

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and fishing." Then there came a whistle like music and a noise like the
beating of a drum, and soon one of the *gentry* came and talked with me
for half an hour. He said, "Your mother will die in eleven months, and
do not let her die unanointed." And she did die within eleven months. As
he was going away he warned me, "You must be in the house before sunset.
Do not delay! Do not delay! They can do nothing to you until I get back
in the castle." As I found out afterwards, he was going to *take* me,
but hesitated because be did not want to leave my mother alone. After
these warnings I was always afraid to go to the mountains, but lately I
have been told I could go, if I took a friend with me.'

'Gentry' Protection.--'The *gentry* have always befriended and protected
me. I was drowned twice but for them. Once I was going to Durnish
Island, a mile off the coast. The channel is very deep, and at the time
there was a rough sea, with the tide running out, and I was almost lost.
I shrieked and shouted, and finally got safe to the mainland. The day I
talked with one of the *gentry* at the foot of the mountain when he was
for *taking* me, he mentioned this, and said they were the ones who
saved me from drowning then.'

'Gentry' Stations.--'Especially in Ireland, the *gentry* live inside the
mountains in beautiful castles; and there are a good many branches of
them in other countries. Like armies, they have various stations and
move from one to another. Some live in the Wicklow Mountains near
Dublin.'

'Gentry' Control Over Human Affairs.--'The *gentry* take a great
interest in the affairs of men, and they always stand for justice and
right. Any side they favour in our wars, that side wins. They favoured
the Boers, and the Boers did get their rights. They told me they
favoured the Japanese and not the Russians, because the Russians are
tyrants. Sometimes they fight among themselves. One of them once said,
"I'd fight for a friend, or I'd fight for Ireland."'

The 'Gentry' Described.--In response to my wish, this description of the
'gentry' was given:--'The folk are the grandest I have ever seen. They
are far superior to us, and that is why they are called the *gentry.*
They are not a

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

working class, but a military-aristocratic class, tall and
noble-appearing. They are a distinct race between our own and that of
spirits, as they have told me. Their qualifications are tremendous. "We
could cut off half the human race, but would not," they said, "for we
are expecting salvation." And I knew a man three or four years ago whom
they struck down with paralysis. Their sight is so penetrating that I
think they could see through the earth. They have a silvery voice, quick
and sweet. The music they play is most beautiful. They *take* the whole
body and soul of young and intellectual people who are interesting,
transmuting the body to a body like their own. I asked them once if they
ever died, and they said, "No; we are always kept young." Once they take
you and you taste food in their palace you cannot come back. You are
changed to one of them, and live with them for ever. They are able to
appear in different forms. One once appeared to me, and seemed only four
feet high, and stoutly built. He said, "I am bigger than I appear to you
now. We can make the old young, the big small, the small big." One of
their women told all the secrets of my family. She said that my brother
in Australia would travel much and suffer hardships, all of which came
true; and foretold that my nephew, then about two years old, would
become a great clergyman in America, and that is what he is now. Besides
the *gentry*, who are a distinct class, there are bad spirits and
ghosts, which are nothing like them. My mother once saw a leprechaun
beside a bush hammering. He disappeared before she could get to him, but
he also was unlike one of the *gentry*.' <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

### EVIDENCE FROM GRANGE

Our next witness, who lives about three miles from our last witness, is
Hugh Currid, the oldest man in Grange; and so old is he that now he does
little more than sit in the chimney-corner smoking, and, as he looks at
the red glow of the peat, dreaming of the olden times. Hugh knows
English very imperfectly, and so what he narrated was in the ancient
Gaelic which his fathers spoke. When Father Hines took me to Hugh's
cottage, Hugh was in his usual silent pose before the fire. At first he
rather resented having his thoughts disturbed, but in a few minutes he
was as talkative as could be, for there is nothing like the mention of
Ireland to get him started. The Father left us then; and with the help
of Hugh's sister as an interpreter I took down what he said:--

The Flax-Seller's Return from Faerie.--'An old woman near Lough More,
where Father Patrick was drowned, <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)
who used to make her living by selling flax at the market, was *taken*
by the *gentry*, and often came back afterwards to her three children to
comb their hair. One time she told a neighbour that the money she saved
from her dealings in flax would be found near a big rock on the
lake-shore, which she indicated, and that she wanted the three children
to have it.'

A Wife Recovered from the 'Gentry'.--'A man's young wife died in
confinement while he was absent on some business at Ballingshaun, and
one of the *gentry* came to him and

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

said she had been *taken*. The husband hurried home, and that night he
sat with the body of his wife all alone. He left the door open a little,
and it wasn't long before his wife's spirit came in and went to the
cradle where her child was sleeping. As she did so, the husband threw at
her a charm of hen's dung which he had ready, and this held her until he
could call the neighbours. And while they were coming, she went back
into her body, and lived a long time afterwards. The body was stiff and
cold when the husband arrived home, though it hadn't been washed or
dressed.'

### A TAILOR'S TESTIMONY

Our next witness is Patrick Waters, by trade a tailor, living in
Cloontipruckilish, a cross-road hamlet less than two miles from Hugh
Currid's home. His first story is a parallel to one told about the
minister of Aberfoyle who was *taken* by the 'good people' (pp. 89
ff.):--

The Lost Bride.--'A girl in this region died on her wedding-night while
dancing. Soon after her death she appeared to her husband, and said to
him, "I'm not dead at all, but I am put from you now for a time. It may
be a long time, or a short time, I cannot tell. I am not badly off*.* If
you want to get me back you must stand at the gap near the house and
catch me as I go by, for I live near there, and see you, and you do not
see me." He was anxious enough to get her back, and didn't waste any
time in getting to the gap. When he came to the place, a party of
strangers were just coming out, and his wife soon appeared as plain as
could be, but he couldn't stir a hand or foot to save her. Then there
was a scream and she was gone. The man firmly believed this, and would
not marry again.'

The Invisible Island.--'There is an enchanted island which is an
invisible island between Innishmurray and the mainland opposite. It is
only seen once in seven years. I saw it myself, and so did four or five
others with me. A boatman from Sligo named Carr took two strange men
with him towards Innishmurray, and they disappeared at the spot where
the island is, and he thought they had fallen overboard

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and been drowned. Carr saw one of the same men in Connelly (County
Donegal), some six months or so after, and with great surprise said to
him, "Will you tell me the wonders of the world? Is it you I saw drowned
near Innishmurray?" "Yes," he said; and then asked, "Do you see me?"
"Yes," answered Carr. "But," said the man again, "you do not see me with
both eyes?" Then Carr closed one eye to be sure, and found that he saw
him with one eye only. And he told the man which one it was. At this
information the fairy man blew on Carr's face, and Carr never saw him
again.'

A Dream.--'My father dreamt he saw two armies coming in from the sea,
walking on the water. Reaching the strand, they lined up and commenced a
battle, and my father was in great terror. The fighting was long and
bloody, and when it was over every fighter vanished, the wounded and
dead as well as the survivors. The next morning an old woman who had the
reputation of talking with the fairies came in the house to my father,
who, though greatly disturbed over the dream, had told us nothing of it,
and asked him, "Have you anything to tell? I couldn't but laugh at you,"
she added, and before my father could reply, continued, "Well, Jimmy,
you won't tell the news, so I will." And then she began to tell about
the battle. "Ketty!" exclaimed my father at this, "can it be true? And
who were the men beside me?" When Ketty told him, they turned out to be
some of his dead friends. She received her information from a drowned
man whom she met on the spot where the *gentry* armies had come ashore;
and, in the place where they fought, the sand was all burnt red, as from
fire.'

As the narrator reflected on this dream story, he remarked about dreams
generally:--'The reason our dreams appear different from what they are
is because while in them we can't touch the body and transform it.
People believe themselves to be with the dead in dreams.'

During September 1909, when I had several fresh interviews with Patrick
Waters, I verified all of his 1908 testimony such as it appears above;
and among unimportant anecdotes

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have omitted
from the matter taken down in 1908 one anecdote about our seer-witness
from County Sligo, because it proved to be capable of opposite
interpretations. Patrick Waters, however, like many of his neighbours,
thoroughly supports Hugh Currid's opinion that our seer-witness 'surely
sees something, and it must be the *gentry*'; and of Hugh Currid
himself, Patrick Waters said, 'Hugh Currid did surely see the *gentry*;
he saw them passing this way like a blast of wind.' Patrick's fresh
testimony now follows, the story about Father Patrick and Father
Dominick coming first:--

Father Patrick and Father Dominick.--'Father Patrick Noan while bathing
in the harbour at Carns (about three miles north-west of Grange) was
drowned. His body was soon brought ashore, and his brother, Father
Dominick Noan, was sent for. When Father Dominick arrived, one of the
men who had collected around the body said to him, "Why don't you do
something for your brother Patrick?" "Why don't somebody ask me?" he
replied, "for I must be asked in the name of God." So Jimmy McGowan went
on his knees and asked for the honour of God that Father Dominick should
bring Father Patrick back to life; and, at this, Father Dominick took
out his breviary and began to read. After a time he whistled, and began
to read again. He whistled a second time, and returned to the reading.
Upon his whistling the third time, Father Patrick's spirit appeared in
the doorway.

'"Where were you when I whistled the first time?" Father Dominick asked.
"I was at a hurling match with the *gentry* on Mulloughmore strand."
"And where were you at the second whistle?" "I was coming over Corrick
Fadda; and when you whistled the third time I was here at the door."
Father Patrick's spirit had gone back into the body, and Father Patrick
lived round here as a priest for a long time afterwards.

'There was no such thing as artificial respiration known hereabouts when
this happened some fifty or sixty years ago. I heard this story, which I
know is true, from many

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

persons who saw Father Dominick restore his brother to life.'

A Druid Enchantment.--After this strange psychical narrative, there
followed the most weird legend I have heard in Celtic lands about Druids
and magic. One afternoon Patrick Waters pointed out to me the field,
near the sea-coast opposite Innishmurray, in which the ancient menhir
containing the 'enchantment' used to stand; and, at another time, he
said that a bronze wand covered with curious marks (or else interlaced
designs) was found not far from the ruined dolmen and *allée couverte*
on the farm of Patrick Bruan, about two miles southward. This last
statement, like the story itself, I have been unable to verify in any
way.

'In times before Christ there were Druids here who enchanted one another
with Druid rods made of brass, and metamorphosed one another into stone
and lumps of oak, The question is, Where are the spirits of these Druids
now? Their spirits are wafted through the air, and the man or beast they
meet is smitten, while their own bodies are still under enchantment. I
had such a Druid enchantment in my hand; it wasn't stone, nor marble,
nor flint, and had human shape. It was found in the centre of a big rock
on Innis-na-Gore; and round this rock light used to appear at night. The
man who owned the stone decided to blast it up, and he found at its
centre the enchantment--just like a man, with head and legs and
arms. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) Father Healy took the
enchantment away, when he was here on a visit, and said that it was a
Druid enchanted, and that to get out of the rock was one part of the
releasement, and that there would be a second and complete releasement
of the Druid.'

The Fairy Tribes Classified.--Finally I asked Patrick to classify, as
far as he could, all the fairy tribes he had ever heard about, and he
said:--'The leprechaun is a red-capped fellow who stays round pure
springs, generally shoemaking

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

for the rest of the fairy tribes. The lunantishees are the tribes that
guard the blackthorn trees or sloes; they let you cut no stick on the
eleventh of November (the original November Day), or on the eleventh of
May (the original May Day). If at such a time you cut a blackthorn, some
misfortune will come to you. Pookas are black-featured fellows mounted
on good horses; and are horse-dealers. They visit racecourses, but
usually are invisible. The *gentry* are the most noble tribe of all; and
they are a big race who came from the planets--according to my idea;
they usually appear white. The *Daoine Maithe* (though there is some
doubt, the same or almost the same as the *gentry*) were next to Heaven
at the Fall, but did not fall; they are a people expecting salvation.'

### BRIDGET O'CONNER'S TESTIMONY

Our next witness is Bridget O'Conner, a near neighbour to Patrick
Waters, in Cloontipruckilish. When I approached her neat little cottage
she was cutting sweet-pea blossoms with a pair of scissors, and as I
stopped to tell her how pretty a garden she had, she searched out the
finest white bloom she could find and gave it to me. After we had talked
a little while about America and Ireland, she said I must come in and
rest a few minutes, and so I did; and it was not long before we were
talking about fairies:--

The Irish Legend of the Dead.--'Old Peggy Gillin, dead these thirty
years, who lived a mile beyond Grange, used to cure people with a secret
herb shown to her by her brother, dead of a fairy-stroke. He was drowned
and *taken* by the fairies, in the big drowning here during the herring
season. She would pull the herb herself and prepare it by mixing spring
water with it. Peggy could always talk with her dead relatives and
friends, and continually with her brother, and she would tell everybody
that they were with the fairies. Her daughter, Mary Short, who inherited
some of her mother's power, died here about three or four years ago.

'I remember, too, about Mary Leonard and her daughter, Nancy Waters.
Both of them are dead now. The daughter

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

was the first to die, as it happened, and in child-birth, When she was
gone, her mother used to wail and cry in an awful manner; and one day
the daughter appeared to her in the garden, and said, "The more you wail
for me, the more I am in torment. Pray for me, but do not wail."'

A Midwife Story.--'A country nurse was requested by a strange man on
horseback to go with him to exercise her profession; and she went with
him to a castle she didn't know. When the baby was born, every woman in
the place where the event happened put her finger in a basin of water
and rubbed her eyes, and so the nurse put her finger in and rubbed it on
one of her eyes. She went home and thought no more about it. But one day
she was at the fair in Grange and saw some of the same women who were in
the castle when the baby was born; though, as she noticed, she only
could see them with the one eye she had wet with the water from the
basin. The nurse spoke to the women, and they wanted. to know how she
recognized them; and she, in reply, said it was with the one eye, and
asked, "How is the baby?" "Well," said one of the fairy women; "and what
eye do you see us with?" "With the left eye," answered the nurse. Then
the fairy woman blew her breath against the nurse's left eye, and said,
"You'll never see me again." And the nurse was always blind in the left
eye after that.'

### THE SPIRIT WORLD AT CARNS

The Carns or Mount Temple country, about three miles from Grange, County
Sligo, has already been mentioned by witnesses as a 'gentry' haunt, and
so now we shall hear what one of its oldest and most intelligent native
inhabitants says of it. John McCann had been referred to, by Patrick
Waters, as one who knows much about the 'gentry' at first hand, and we
can be sure that what he offers us is thoroughly reliable evidence. For
many years, John McCann, born in 1830, by profession a carpenter and
boat-builder, has been official mail-carrier to Innishmurray; and he
knows quite as much about the strange little island and the mainland
opposite it

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

as any man living. His neat little cottage is on the shore of the bay
opposite the beautiful fairy-haunted Darnish Island; and, as we sat
within it beside a brilliant peat fire, and surrounded by all the
family, this is what was told me:--

A 'Gentry' Medium.--'Ketty Rourk (or Queenan) could tell all that would
happen--funerals, weddings, and so forth. Sure some spirits were coming
to her. She said they were the *gentry*; that the *gentry* are
everywhere; and that my drowned uncles and grandfather and other dead
are among them. A drowned man named Pat Nicholson was her adviser. He
used to live just a mile from here; and she knew him before he was
drowned.'

Here we have, clearly enough, a case of 'mediumship', or of
communication with the dead, as in modern Spiritualism. And the
following story, which like this last has numerous Irish parallels,
illustrates an ancient and world-wide animistic belief, that in
sickness--as in dreams--the soul goes out of the body as at death, and
meets the dead in their own fairy world.

The Clairvoyance of Mike Farrell.--'Mike Farrell, too, could tell all
about the *gentry*, as he lay sick a long time. And he told about Father
Brannan's youth, and even the house in Roscommon in which the Father was
born; and Father Brannan never said anything more against Mike after
that. Mike surely saw the *gentry*; and he was with them during his
illness for twelve months. He said they live in *forts* and at Alt Darby
("the Big Rock"). After he got well, he went to America, at the time of
the famine.'

The 'Gentry' Army.--'The *gentry* were believed to live up on this hill
(Hill of the Brocket Stones, *Cluach-a-brac*), and from it they would
come out like an army and march along the road to the strand. Very few
persons could see them. They were thought to be like living people, but
in different dress. They seemed like soldiers, yet it was known they
were not living beings such as we are.'

The Seership of Dan Quinn.--'On Connor's Island (about two miles
southward from Carns by the mainland) my uncle,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dan Quinn, often
used to see big crowds of the *gentry* come into his house and play
music and dance. The house would be full of them, but they caused him no
fear. Once on such an occasion, one of them came up to him as he lay in
bed, and giving him a green leaf told him to put it in his mouth. When
he did this, instantly he could not see the *gentry*, but could still
hear their music. Uncle Dan always believed he recognized in some of the
*gentry* his drowned friends. Only when he was alone would the *gentry*
visit him. He was a silent old man, and so never talked much; but I know
that this story is as true as can be, and that the *gentry* always took
an interest in him.'

### UNDER THE SHADOW OF BEN BULBIN AND BEN WASKIN

I was driving along the Ben Bulbin road, on the ocean side, with Michael
Oates, who was on his way from his mountain-side home to the lowlands to
cut hay; and as we looked up at the ancient mountain, so mysterious and
silent in the shadows and fog of a calm early morning of summer, he told
me about its invisible inhabitants:--

The 'Gentry' Huntsmen.--'I knew a man who saw the *gentry* hunting on
the other side of the mountain. He saw hounds and horsemen cross the
road and jump the hedge in front of him, and it was one o'clock at
night. The next day he passed the place again, and looked for the tracks
of the huntsmen, but saw not a trace of tracks at all.'

The 'Taking' of the Turf-Cutter.--After I had heard about two boys who
were drowned opposite Innishmurray, and who afterwards appeared as
apparitions, for the *gentry* had them, this curious story was
related:--'A man was cutting turf out on the side of Ben Bulbin when a
strange man came to him and said, "You have cut enough turf for to-day.
You had better stop and go home." The turf-cutter looked around in
surprise, and in two seconds the strange man had disappeared; but he
decided to go home. And as soon as he was home, such a feeling came over
him that he could not tell whether he was alive or dead. Then he took to
his bed and never rose again.'

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Hearing the 'Gentry' Music.--At this Michael said to his companion in
the cart with us, William Barber, 'You tell how you heard the music';
and this followed:--'One dark night, about one o'clock, myself and
another young man were passing along the road up there round Ben Bulbin,
when we heard the finest kind of music. All sorts of music seemed to be
playing. We could see nothing at all, though we thought we heard voices
like children's. It was the music of the *gentry* we heard.'

My next friend to testify is Pat Ruddy, eighty years old, one of the
most intelligent and prosperous farmers living beside Ben Bulbin. He
greeted me in the true Irish way, but before we could come to talk about
fairies his good wife induced me to enter another room where she had
secretly prepared a great feast spread out on a fresh white cloth, while
Pat and myself had been exchanging opinions about America and Ireland.
When I returned to the kitchen the whole family were assembled round the
blazing turf fire, and Pat was soon talking about the 'gentry':--

Seeing the 'Gentry' Army.--'Old people used to say the *gentry* were in
the mountains; that is certain, but I never could be quite sure of it
myself. One night, however, near midnight, I did have a sight: I set out
from Bantrillick to come home, and near Ben Bulbin there was the
greatest army you ever saw, five or six thousand of them in armour
shining in the moonlight. A strange man rose out of the hedge and
stopped me, for a minute, in the middle of the road. He looked into my
face, and then let me go.'

An Ossianic Fragment.--'A man went away with the *good people* (or
*gentry*), and returned to find the townland all in ruins. As he came
back riding on a horse of the *good people*, he saw some men in a quarry
trying to move a big stone. He helped them with it, but his saddle-girth
broke, and he fell to the ground. The horse ran away, and he was left
there, an old man' <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) (cf. pp.
[346](ffcc260.htm#page_346)-7).

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### A SCHOOLMASTER'S TESTIMONY

A schoolmaster, who is a native of the Ben Bulbin country, offers this
testimony:--'There is implicit belief here in the *gentry*, especially
among the old people. They consider them the spirits of their departed
relations and friends, who visit them in joy and in sorrow. On the death
of a member of a family, they believe the spirits of their near
relatives are present; they do not see them, but feel their presence.
They even have a strong belief that the spirits show them the future in
dreams; and say that cases of affliction are always foreshown in a
dream.

'The belief in changelings is not now generally prevalent; but in olden
times a mother used to place a pair of iron tongs over the cradle before
leaving the child alone, in order that the fairies should not change the
child for a weakly one of their own. It was another custom to take a
wisp of straw, and, lighting one end of it, make a fiery sign of the
cross over a cradle before a babe could be placed in it.'

### WITH THE IRISH MYSTICS IN THE *SIDHE* WORLD

Let us now turn to the Rosses Point country, which, as we have already
said, is one of the very famous places for seeing the' gentry', or, as
educated Irish seers who make pilgrimages thither call them, the
*Slake.* I have been told by more than one such seer that there on the
hills and Greenlands (a great stretch of open country, treeless and
grass-grown), and on the strand at Lower Rosses Point--called Wren Point
by the country-folk--these beings can be seen and their wonderful music
heard; and a well-known Irish artist has shown me many drawings, and
paintings in oil, of these *Sidhe* people as he has often beheld them at
those

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

places and elsewhere in Ireland. They are described as a race of
majestic appearance and marvellous beauty, in form human, yet in nature
divine. The highest order of them seems to be a race of beings evolved
to a superhuman plane of existence, such as the ancients called gods;
and with this opinion, strange as it may seem in this age, all the
educated Irish seers with whom I have been privileged to talk agree,
though they go further, and say that these highest *Sidhe* races still
inhabiting Ireland are the ever-young, immortal divine race known to the
ancient men of Erin as the Tuatha De Danann.

Of all European lands I venture to say that Ireland is the most
mystical, and, in the eyes of true Irishmen, as much the Magic Island of
Gods and Initiates now as it was when the Sacred Fires flashed from its
purple, heather-covered mountain-tops and mysterious round towers, and
the Greater Mysteries drew to its hallowed shrines neophytes from the
West as well as from the East, from India and Egypt as well as from
Atlantis; <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) and Erin's mystic-seeing
sons still watch and wait for the relighting of the Fires and the
restoration of the old Druidic Mysteries. Herein I but imperfectly echo
the mystic message Ireland's seers gave me, a pilgrim to their Sacred
Isle. And until this mystic message is interpreted, men cannot discover
the secret of Gaelic myth and song in olden or in modern times, they
cannot drink at the ever-flowing fountain of Gaelic genius, the
perennial source of inspiration which lies behind the new revival of
literature and art in Ireland, nor understand the seeming reality of the
fairy races.

### AN IRISH MYSTIC'S TESTIMONY

Through the kindness of an Irish mystic, who is a seer, I am enabled to
present here, in the form of a dialogue, very rare and very important
evidence, which will serve to illustrate and to confirm what has just
been said above about the mysticism of Ireland. To anthropologists this
evidence may be of more than ordinary value when they know that

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

it comes from one who is not only a cultured seer but who is also a man
conspicuously successful in the practical life of a great city:--

Visions.--

Q.--Are all visions which you have had of the same character?

A.--'I have always made a distinction between pictures seen in the
memory of nature and visions of actual beings now existing in the inner
world. We can make the same distinction in our world: I may close my
eyes and see you as a vivid picture in memory, or I may look at you with
my physical eyes and see your actual image. In seeing these beings of
which I speak, the physical eyes may be open or closed: mystical beings
in their own world and nature are never seen with the physical eyes.'

Otherworlds.--

Q.--By the inner world do you mean the Celtic Otherworld?

A.--'Yes; though there are many Otherworlds. The *Tir-na-nog* of the
ancient Irish, in which the races of the *Sidhe* exist, may be described
as a radiant archetype of this world, though this definition does not at
all express its psychic nature. In *Tir-na-nog* one sees nothing save
harmony and beautiful forms. There are other worlds in which we can see
horrible shapes.'

Classification of the 'Sidhe'.--

Q.--Do you in any way classify the *Sidhe* races to which you refer?

A.--'The beings whom I call the *Sidhe*, I divide, as I have seen them,
into two great classes: those which are shining, and those which are
opalescent and seem lit up by a light within themselves. The shining
beings appear to be lower in the hierarchies; the opalescent beings are
more rarely seen, and appear to hold the positions of great chiefs or
princes among the tribes of Dana.'

Conditions of Seership.--

Q.--Under what state or condition and where have you seen such beings?

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

A.--'I have seen them most frequently after being away from a city or
town for a few days. The whole west coast of Ireland from Donegal to
Kerry seems charged with a magical power, and I find it easiest to see
while I am there. I have always found it comparatively easy to see
visions while at ancient monuments like New Grange and Dowth, because I
think such places are naturally charged with psychical forces, and were
for that reason made use of long ago as sacred places. I usually find it
possible to throw myself into the mood of seeing; but sometimes visions
have forced themselves upon me.'

The Shining Beings.--

Q.--Can you describe the shining beings?

A.--'It is very difficult to give any intelligible description of them.
The first time I saw them with great vividness I was lying on a
hill-side alone in the west of Ireland, in County Sligo: I had been
listening to music in the air, and to what seemed to be the sound of
bells, and was trying to understand these aerial clashings in which wind
seemed to break upon wind in an ever-changing musical silvery sound.
Then the space before me grew luminous, and I began to see one beautiful
being after another.'

The Opalescent Beings.--

Q.--Can you describe one of the opalescent beings?

A.--'The first of these I saw I remember very clearly, and the manner of
its appearance: there was at first a dazzle of light, and then I saw
that this came from the heart of a tall figure with a body apparently
shaped out of half-transparent or opalescent air, and throughout the
body ran a radiant, electrical fire, to which the heart seemed the
centre. Around the head of this being and through its waving luminous
hair, which was blown all about the body like living strands of gold,
there appeared flaming wing-like auras. From the being itself light
seemed to stream outwards in every direction; and the effect left on me
after the vision was one of extraordinary lightness, joyousness, or
ecstasy.

'At about this same period of my life I saw many of these

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

great beings, and I then thought that I had visions of Aengus, Manannan,
Lug, and other famous kings or princes among the Tuatha De Danann; but
since then I have seen so many beings of a similar character that I now
no longer would attribute to any one of them personal identity with
particular beings of legend; though I believe that they correspond in a
general way to the Tuatha De Danann or ancient Irish gods.'

Stature of the 'Sidhe'.--

Q.--You speak of the opalescent beings as great beings; what stature do
you assign to them, and to the shining beings?

A.--'The opalescent beings seem to be about fourteen feet in stature,
though I do not know why I attribute to them such definite height, since
I had nothing to compare them with; but I have always considered them as
much taller than our race. The shining beings seem to be about our own
stature or just a little taller. Peasant and other Irish seers do not
usually speak of the *Sidhe* as being little, but as being tall: an old
schoolmaster in the West of Ireland described them to me from his own
visions as tall beautiful people, and he used some Gaelic words, which I
took as meaning that they were shining with every colour.'

The worlds of the 'Sidhe.'--

Q.--Do the two orders of *Sidhe* beings inhabit the same world?

A.--'The shining beings belong to the mid-world; while the opalescent
beings belong to the heaven-world. There are three great worlds which we
can see while we are still in the body: the earth-world, mid-world, and
heaven-world.'

Nature of the 'Sidhe.'--

Q.--Do you consider the life and state of these *Sidhe* beings superior
to the life and state of men?

A.--'I could never decide. One can say that they themselves

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

are certainly more beautiful than men are, and that their worlds seem
more beautiful than our world.

'Among the shining orders there does not seem to be any individualized
life: thus if one of them raises his hands all raise their hands, and if
one drinks from a fire-fountain all do; they seem to move and to have
their real existence in a being higher than themselves, to which they
are a kind of body. Theirs is, I think, a collective life, so
unindividualized and so calm that I might have more varied thoughts in
five hours than they would have in five years; and yet one feels an
extraordinary purity and, exaltation about their life. Beauty of form
with them has never been broken up by the passions which arise in the
developed egotism of human beings. A hive of bees has been described as
a single organism with disconnected cells; and some of these tribes of
shining beings seem to be little more than one being manifesting itself
in many beautiful forms. I speak this with reference to the shining
beings only: I think that among the opalescent or *Sidhe* beings, in the
heaven-world, there is an even closer spiritual unity, but also a
greater individuality.'

Influence of the 'Sidhe' on Men.--

Q.--Do you consider any of these *Sidhe* beings inimical to humanity?

A.--'Certain kinds of the shining beings, whom I call wood beings, have
never affected me with any evil influences I could recognize. But the
water beings, also of the shining tribes, I always dread, because I felt
whenever I came into contact with them a great drowsiness of mind and, I
often thought, an actual drawing away of vitality.'

Water Beings Described.--

Q.--Can you describe one of these water beings?

A.--'In the world under the waters--under a lake in the West of Ireland
in this case--I saw a blue and orange coloured king seated on a throne;
and there seemed to be some fountain of mystical fire rising from under
his throne, and he breathed this fire into himself as though it were his
life. As I looked, I saw groups of pale beings, almost grey

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

in colour, coming down one side of the throne by the fire-fountain. They
placed their head and lips near the heart of the elemental king, and,
then, as they touched him, they shot upwards, plumed and radiant, and
passed on the other side, as though they had received a new life from
this chief of their world.'

Wood Beings Described.--

Q.--Can you describe one of the wood beings?

A.--'The wood beings I have seen most often are of a shining silvery
colour with a tinge of blue or pale violet, and with dark
purple-coloured hair.'

Reproduction and Immortality of the 'Sidhe'.--

Q.--Do you consider the races of the *Sidhe* able to reproduce their
kind; and are they immortal?

A.--'The higher kinds seem capable of breathing forth beings out of
themselves, but I do not understand how they do so. I have seen some of
them who contain elemental beings within themselves, and these they
could send out and receive back within themselves again.

'The immortality ascribed to them by the ancient Irish is only a
relative immortality, their space of life being much greater than ours.
In time, however, I believe that they grow old and then pass into new
bodies just as men do, but whether by birth or by the growth of a new
body I cannot say, since I have no certain knowledge about this.'

Sex among the 'Sidhe'--

Q.--Does sexual differentiation seem to prevail among the Sidhe races?

A.--'I have seen forms both male and female, and forms which did not
suggest sex at all.'

'Sidhe' and Human Life.--

Q.--(1) is it possible, as the ancient Irish thought, that certain of
the higher *Sidhe* beings have entered or could enter our plane of life
by submitting to human birth? (2) On the other hand, do you consider it
possible for men in trance or at death to enter the *Sidhe* world?

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

A.--(1) 'I cannot say.' (2) 'Yes; both in trance and after death. I
think any one who thought much of the *Sidhe* during his life and who
saw them frequently and brooded on them would likely go to their world
after death.'

Social Organization of the 'Sidhe'.--

Q.--You refer to chieftain-like or prince-like beings, and to a king
among water beings; is there therefore definite social organization
among the various *Sidhe* orders and races, and if so, what is its
nature?

A.--'I cannot say about a definite social organization. I have seen
beings who seemed to command others, and who were held in reverence.
This implies an organization, but whether it is instinctive like that of
a hive of bees, or consciously organized like human society, I cannot
say.'

Lower 'Sidhe' as Nature Elementals.--

Q.--You speak of the water-being king as an elemental king; do you
suggest thereby a resemblance between lower *Sidhe* orders and what
mediaeval mystics called elementals?

A.--'The lower orders of the *Sidhe* are, I think, the nature elementals
of the mediaeval mystics.'

Nourishment of the Higher 'Sidhe'.--

Q.--The water beings as you have described them seem to be nourished and
kept alive by something akin to electrical fluids; do the higher orders
of the *Sidhe* seem to be similarly nourished?

A.--'They seemed to me to draw their life out of the Soul of the World.'

Collective Visions of 'Sidhe' Beings.--

Q.--Have you had visions of the various *Sidhe* beings in company with
other persons?

A.--'I have had such visions on several occasions.'

And this statement has been confirmed to me by three participants in
such collective visions, who separately at different times have seen in
company with our witness the same vision at the same moment. On another
occasion, on the Greenlands at Rosses Point, County Sligo, the same

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Sidhe* being was
seen by our present witness and a friend with him, also possessing the
faculty of seership, at a time when the two percipients were some little
distance apart, and they hurried to each other to describe the being,
not knowing that the explanation was mutually unnecessary. I have talked
with both percipients so much, and know them so intimately that I am
fully able to state that as percipients they fulfil all necessary
pathological conditions required by psychologists in order to make their
evidence acceptable.

### PARALLEL EVIDENCE AS TO THE *SIDHE* RACES

In general, the rare evidence above recorded from the Irish seer could
be paralleled by similar evidence from at least two other reliable Irish
people, with whom also I have been privileged to discuss the
Fairy-Faith. One is a member of the Royal Irish Academy, the other is
the wife of a well-known Irish historian; and both of them testify to
having likewise had collective visions of *Sidhe* beings in Ireland.

This is what Mr. William B. Yeats wrote to me, while this study was in
progress, concerning the Celtic Fairy Kingdom:--'I am certain that it
exists, and will some day be studied as it was studied by Kirk.' <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

### INDEPENDENT EVIDENCE FROM THE *SIDHE* WORLD

One of the most remarkable discoveries of our Celtic researches has been
that the native population of the Rosses Point country, or, as we have
called it, the *Sidhe* world, in most essentials, and, what is most
important, by independent folk-testimony, substantiate the opinions and
statements of the educated Irish mystics to whom we have just referred,
as follows:--

John Conway's Vision of the 'Gentry'.--In Upper Rosses Point, Mrs. J.
Conway told me this about the 'gentry':--'John Conway, my husband, who
was a pilot by profession,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

in watching for in-coming ships used to go up on the high hill among the
Fairy Hills; and there he often saw the *gentry* going down the hill to
the strand. One night in particular he recognized them as men and women
of the *gentry* and they were as big as any living people. It was late
at night about forty years ago.'

Ghosts and Fairies.--When first I introduced myself to Owen Conway, in
his bachelor quarters, a cosy cottage at Upper Rosses Point, he said
that Mr. W. B. Yeats and other men famous in Irish literature had
visited him to hear about the fairies, and that though he knew very
little about the fairies he nevertheless always likes to talk of them.
Then Owen began to tell me about a man's ghost which both he and Bran
Reggan had seen at different times on the road to Sligo, then about a
woman's ghost which he and other people had often seen near where we
were, and then about the exorcizing of a haunted house in Sligo some
sixty years ago by Father McGowan, who as a result died soon afterwards,
apparently having been killed by the exorcized spirits. Finally, I heard
from him the following anecdotes about the fairies:--

A Stone Wall overthrown by 'Fairy' Agency.--'Nothing is more certain
than that there are fairies. The old folks always thought them the
fallen angels. At the back of this house the fairies had their pass. My
neighbour started to build a cow-shed, and one wall abutting on the pass
was thrown down twice, and nothing but the fairies ever did it. The
third time the wall was built it stood.'

Fairies passing through Stone Walls.--'Where MacEwen's house stands was
a noted fairy place. Men in building the house saw fairies on horses
coming across the spot, and the stone walls did not stop them at all.'

Seeing the 'Gentry'.--'A cousin of mine, who was a pilot, once went to
the watch-house up there on the Point to take his brother's place; and
he saw ladies coming towards him as he crossed the Greenlands. At first
he thought they were coming from a dance, but there was no dance going
then, and, if there had been, no human beings dressed like them

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and moving as they were could have come from any part of the globe, and
in so great a party, at that hour of the night. Then when they passed
him and he saw how beautiful they were, he knew them for the *gentry*
women.'

'Michael Reddy (our next witness) saw the *gentry* down on the
Greenlands in regimentals like an army, and in daylight. He was a young
man at the time, and had been sent out to see if any cattle were
astray.'

And this is what Michael Reddy, of Rosses Point, now a sailor on the
ship *Tartar*, sailing from Sligo to neighbouring ports on the Irish
coast, asserts in confirmation of Owen Conway's statement about him:--'I
saw the *gentry* on the strand (at Lower Rosses Point) about forty years
ago. It was afternoon. I first saw one of them like an officer pointing
at me what seemed a sword; and when I got on the Greenlands I saw a
great company of *gentry*, like soldiers, in red, laughing and shouting.
Their leader was a big man, and they were ordinary human size. As a
result \[of this vision\] I took to my bed and lay there for weeks. Upon
another occasion, late at night, I was with my mother milking cows, and
we heard the *gentry* all round us talking, but could not see them.'

Going to the 'Gentry' through Death, Dreams, or Trance.--John O'Conway,
one of the most reliable citizens of Upper Rosses Point, offers the
following testimony concerning the 'gentry':--'In olden times the
*gentry* were very numerous about *forts* and here on the Greenlands,
but rarely seen. They appeared to be the same as any living men. When
people died it was said the *gentry* took them, for they would
afterwards appear among the *gentry*.'

'We had a ploughman of good habits who came in one day too late for his
morning's work, and he in excuse very seriously said, "May be if you had
travelled all night as much as I have you wouldn't talk. I was away with
the *gentry*, and save for a lady I couldn't have been back now. I saw a
long hall full of many people. Some of them I knew and some I did not
know. The lady saved me by telling me to eat no food there, however
enticing it might be."'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

'A young man at Drumcliffe was *taken* \[in a trance state\], and was
with the *Daoine Maithe* some time, and then got back. Another man, whom
I knew well, was haunted by the *gentry* for a long time, and he often
went off with *them*' (apparently in a dream or trance state).

'Sidhe' Music.--The story which now follows substantiates the testimony
of cultured Irish seers that at Lower Rosses Point the music of the
*Sidhe* can be heard:--'Three women were gathering shell-fish, in the
month of March, on the lowest point of the strand (Lower Rosses or Wren
Point) when they heard the most beautiful music. They set to work to
dance with it, and danced themselves sick. They then thanked the
invisible musician and went home.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF A COLLEGE PROFESSOR

Our next witness is the Rev. Father--'a professor in a Catholic college
in West Ireland, and most of his statements are based on events which
happened among his own acquaintances and relatives, and his deductions
are the result of careful investigation:--

Apparitions from Fairyland.--'Some twenty to thirty years ago, on the
borders of County Roscommon near County Sligo, according to the firm
belief of one of my own relatives, a sister of his was *taken* by the
fairies on her wedding-night, and she appeared to her mother afterwards
as an apparition. She seemed to want to speak, but her mother, who was
in bed at the time, was thoroughly frightened, and turned her face to
the wall. The mother is convinced that she saw this apparition of her
daughter, and my relative thinks she might have saved her.

'This same relative who gives it as his opinion that his sister was
*taken* by the fairies, at a different time saw the apparition of
another relative of mine who also, according to similar belief, had been
*taken* by the fairies when only five years old. The child-apparition
appeared beside its living sister one day while the sister was going
from the yard into the house, and it followed her in. It is said the
child was *taken* because she was such a good girl.'

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Nature of the Belief in Fairies.--'As children we were always afraid of
fairies, and were taught to say "God bless *them*! God bless *them*!"
whenever we heard them mentioned.

'In our family we always made it a point to have clean water in the
house at night for the fairies.

'If anything like dirty water was thrown out of doors after dark it was
necessary to say "*Hugga, hugga salach*!" as a warning to the fairies
not to get their clothes wet.

'Untasted food, like milk, used to be left on the table at night for the
fairies. If you were eating and food fell from you, it was not right to
take it back, for the fairies wanted it. Many families are very serious
about this even now. The luckiest thing to do in such cases is to pick
up the food and eat just a speck of it and then throw the rest away to
the fairies.

'Ghosts and apparitions are commonly said to live in isolated
thorn-bushes, or thorn-trees. Many lonely bushes of this kind have their
ghosts. For example, there is Fanny's Bush, Sally's Bush, and another I
know of in County Sligo near Boyle.'

Personal Opinions.--'The fairies of any one race are the people of the
preceding race--the Fomors for the Fir Bolgs, the Fir Bolgs for the
Dananns, and the Dananns for us. The old races died. Where did they go?
They became spirits--and fairies. Second-sight gave our race power to
see the inner world. When Christianity came to Ireland the people had no
*definite* heaven. Before, their ideas about the other world were vague.
But the older ideas of a spirit world remained side by side with the
Christian ones, and being preserved in a subconscious way gave rise to
the fairy world.'

### EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY ROSCOMMON

Our next place for investigation will be the ancient province of the
great fairy-queen Meave, who made herself famous by leading against
Cuchulainn the united armies of four of the five provinces of Ireland,
and all on account of a bull which she coveted. And there could be no
better part of it to visit than Roscommon, which Dr. Douglas Hyde has
made popular in Irish folk-lore.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Dr. Hyde and the Leprechaun.--One day while I was privileged to be at
Ratra, Dr. Hyde invited me to walk with him in the country. After we had
visited an old *fort* which belongs to the 'good people', and had
noticed some other of their haunts in that part of Queen Meave's realm,
we entered a straw-thatched cottage on the roadside and found the good
house-wife and her fine-looking daughter both at home. In response to
Dr. Hyde's inquiries, the mother stated that one day, in her girlhood,
near a hedge from which she was gathering wild berries, she saw a
leprechaun in a hole under a stone:--'He wasn't much larger than a doll,
and he was most perfectly formed, with a little mouth and eyes.' Nothing
was told about the little fellow having a money-bag, although the woman
said people told her afterwards that she would have been rich if she had
only had sense enough to catch him when she had so good a chance. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

The Death Coach.--The next tale the mother told was about the death
coach which used to pass by the very house we were in. Every night until
after her daughter was born she used to rise up on her elbow in bed to
listen to the death coach passing by. It passed about midnight, and she
could hear the rushing, the tramping of the horses, and most beautiful
singing, just like fairy music, but she could not understand the words.
Once or twice she was brave enough to open the door and look out as the
coach passed, but she could never see a thing, though there was

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the noise and singing. One time a man had to wait on the roadside to let
the fairy horses go by, and he could hear their passing very clearly,
and couldn't see one of them.

When we got home, Dr. Hyde told me that the fairies of the region are
rarely seen. The people usually say that they hear or feel them only.

The 'Good People' and Mr. Gilleran.--After the mother had testified, the
daughter, who is quite of the younger generation, gave her own opinion.
She said that the 'good people' live in the *forts* and often take men
and women or youths who pass by the *forts* after sunset; that Mr.
Gilleran, who died not long ago, once saw certain dead friends and
recognized among them those who were believed to have been *taken* and
those who died naturally, and that he saw them again when he was on his
death-bed.

We have here, as in so many other accounts, a clear connexion between
the realm of the dead and Fairyland.

### THE TESTIMONY OF A LOUGH DERG SEER

Neil Colton, seventy-three years old, who lives in Tamlach Townland, on
the shores of Lough Derg, County Donegal, has a local reputation for
having seen the 'gentle folk', and so I called upon him. As we sat round
his blazing turf fire, and in the midst of his family of three sturdy
boys--for he married late in life--this is what he related:--

A Girl Recovered from Faerie.--'One day, just before sunset in
midsummer, and I a boy then, my brother and cousin and myself were
gathering bilberries (whortleberries) up by the rocks at the back of
here, when all at once we heard music. We hurried round the rocks, and
there we were within a few hundred feet of six or eight of the *gentle
folk*, and they dancing. When they saw us, a little woman dressed all in
red came running out from them towards us, and she struck my cousin
across the face with what seemed to be a green rush. We ran for home as
hard as we could, and when my cousin reached the house she fell dead.
Father saddled a horse and went for Father Ryan. When Father Ryan
arrived, he put a stole about his neck and began praying

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

over my cousin and reading psalms and striking her with the stole; and
in that way brought her back. He said if she had not caught hold of my
brother, she would have been *taken* for ever.'

The 'Gentle Folk'.--'The *gentle folk* are not earthly people; they are
a people with a nature of their own. Even in the water there are men and
women of the same character. Others have caves in the rocks, and in them
rooms and apartments. These races were terribly plentiful a hundred
years ago, and they'll come back again. My father lived two miles from
here, where there were plenty of the *gentle folk*. In olden times they
used to take young folks and keep them and draw all the life out of
their bodies. Nobody could ever tell their nature exactly.'

### EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY FERMANAGH

From James Summerville, eighty-eight years old, who lives in the country
near Irvinestown, I heard much about the 'wee people' and about
banshees, and then the following remarkable story concerning the 'good
people':--

Travelling Clairvoyance through 'Fairy' Agency.--'From near Ederney,
County Fermanagh, about seventy years ago, a man whom I knew well was
taken to America on Hallow Eve Night; and *they* (the *good people*)
made him look down a chimney to see his own daughter cooking at a
kitchen fire. Then *they* took him to another place in America, where he
saw a friend he knew. The next morning he was at his own home here in
Ireland.

'This man wrote a letter to his daughter to know if she was at the place
and at the work on Hallow Eve Night, and she wrote back that she was. He
was sure that it was the *good people* who had taken him to America and
back in one night.'

### EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY ANTRIM

At the request of Major R. G. Berry, M.R.I.A., of Richill Castle,
Armagh, Mr. H. Higginson, of Glenavy, County Antrim, collected all the
material he could find concerning the fairy-tradition in his part of
County Antrim, and sent

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

to me the results, from which I have selected the very interesting, and,
in some respects, unique tales which follow:--

The Fairies and the Weaver.--'Ned Judge, of Sophys Bridge, was a weaver.
Every night after he went to bed the weaving started of itself, and when
he arose in the morning he would find the dressing which had been made
ready for weaving so broken and entangled that it took him hours to put
it right. Yet with all this drawback he got no poorer, because the
fairies left him plenty of household necessaries, and whenever he sold a
web \[of cloth\] he always received treble the amount bargained for.'

Meeting Two Regiments of 'Them'.--'William Megarry, of Ballinderry, as
his daughter who is married to James Megarry, J.P., told me, was one
night going to Crumlin on horseback for a doctor, when after passing
through Glenavy he met just opposite the Vicarage two regiments of
*them* (the fairies) coming along the road towards Glenavy. One regiment
was dressed in red and one in blue or green uniform. *They* were playing
music, but when they opened out to let him pass through the middle of
*them* the music ceased until he had passed by.'

### IN CUCHULAINN'S COUNTRY: A CIVIL ENGINEER'S TESTIMONY

In the heroic days of pagan Ireland, as tradition tells, the ancient
earthworks, now called the Navan Rings, just outside Armagh, were the
stronghold of Cuchulainn and the Red Branch Knights; and, later, under
Patrick, Armagh itself, one of the old mystic centres of Erin, became
the ecclesiastical capital of the Gaels. And from this romantic country,
one of its best informed native sons, a graduate civil engineer of
Dublin University, offers the following important evidence:--

The Fairies are the Dead.--'When I was a youngster near Armagh, I was
kept good by being told that the fairies could take bad boys away. The
sane belief about the fairies, however, is different, as I discovered
when I grew up. The old people in County Armagh seriously believe that
the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

fairies are the spirits of the dead; and they say that if you have many
friends deceased you have many friendly fairies, or if you have many
enemies deceased you have many fairies looking out to do you harm.'

Food-Offerings to Place-Fairies.--'It was very usual formerly, and the
practice is not yet given up, to place a bed, some other furniture, and
plenty of food in a newly-constructed dwelling the night before the time
fixed for moving into it; and if the food is not consumed, and the
crumbs swept up by the door in the morning, the house cannot safely be
occupied. I know of two houses now that have never been occupied,
because the fairies did not show their willingness and goodwill by
taking food so offered to them.'

### ON THE SLOPES OF SLIEVE GULLION

In climbing to the summit of Cuchulainn's mountain, which overlooks
parts of the territory made famous by the 'Cattle Raid of Cooley', I met
John O'Hare, sixty-eight years old, of Longfield Townland, leading his
horse to pasture, and I stopped to talk with him about the 'good
people'.

'The *good people* in this mountain,' he said, 'are the people who have
died and been *taken*; the mountain is enchanted.'

The 'Fairy' Overflowing of the Meal-Chest.--'An old woman came to the
wife of Steven Callaghan and told her not to let Steven cut a certain
hedge. "It is where we shelter at night," the old woman added; and Mrs.
Callaghan recognized the old woman as one who had been *taken* in
confinement. A few nights later the same old woman appeared to Mrs.
Callaghan and asked for charity; and she was offered some meal, which
she did not take. Then she asked for lodgings, but did not stop. When
Mrs. Callaghan saw the meal-chest next morning it was overflowing with
meal: it was the old woman's gift for the hedge.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF TWO DROMINTEE PERCIPIENTS

After my friend, the Rev. Father L. Donnellan, C.C., of Dromintee,
County Armagh, had introduced me to Alice Cunningham, of his parish, and
she had told much about

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the 'gentle folk', she emphatically declared that they do exist--and
this in the presence of Father Donnellan--because she has often seen
them on Carrickbroad Mountain, near where she lives. And she then
reported as follows concerning enchanted Slieve Gullion:--

The 'Sidhe' Guardian of Slieve Gullion.--'The top of Slieve Gullion is a
very *gentle* place. A fairy has her house there by the lake, but she is
invisible. She interferes with nobody. I hear of no *gentler* places
about here than Carrickbroad and Slieve Gullion.'

Father Donnellan and l called next upon Thomas McCrink and his wife at
Carrifamayan, because Mrs. McCrink claims to have seen some of the' good
people', and this is her testimony:--

Nature of the 'Good People'.--'I've heard and felt the *good people*
coming on the wind; and I once saw them down in the middle field on my
father's place playing football. They are still on earth. Among them are
the spirits of our ancestors; and these rejoice whenever good fortune
comes our way, for I saw them before my mother won her land \[after a
long legal contest\] in the field rejoicing.

'Some of the *good people* I have thought were fallen angels, though
these may be dead people whose time is not up. We are only like shadows
in this world: my mother died in England, and she came to me in the
spirit. I saw her plainly. I ran to catch her, but my hands ran through
her form as if it were mere mist. Then there was a crack, and she was
gone.' And, finally, after a moment, our percipient said:--'The fairies
once passed down this lane here on a Christmas morning; and I took them
to be suffering souls out of Purgatory, going to mass.'

### THE TESTIMONY OF A DROMINTEE SEERESS

Father Donnellan, the following day, took me to talk with almost the
oldest woman in his parish, Mrs. Biddy Grant, eighty-six years old, of
Upper Toughal, beside Slieve Gullion. Mrs. Grant is a fine specimen of
an Irishwoman, with white hair, clear complexion, and an expression of
great natural intelligence, though now somewhat feeble from age. Her

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

mind is yet clear, however; and her testimony is substantiated by this
statement from her own daughter, who lives with her:--'My mother has the
power of seeing things. It is a fact with her that spirits exist. She
has seen much, even in her old age; and what she is always telling me
scares me half to death.'

The following is Mrs. Grant's direct testimony given at her own home, on
September 20, 1909, in answer to our question if she knew anything about
the 'good people'

Seeing the 'Good People' as the Dead.--'I saw *them* once as plain as
can be--big, little, old, and young. I was in bed at the time, and a boy
whom I had reared since he was born was lying ill beside me. Two of
*them* came and looked at him; then came in three of *them*. One of
*them* seemed to have something like a book, and he put his hand to the
boy's mouth; then he went away, while others appeared, opening the back
window to make an avenue through the house; and through this avenue came
great crowds. At this I shook the boy, and said to him, "Do you see
anything?" "No," he said; but as I made him look a second time he said,
"I do." After that he got well.

'These *good people* were the spirits of our dead friends, but I could
not recognize them. I have often seen them that way while in my bed.
Many women are among them. I once touched a boy of theirs, and he was
just like feathers in my hand; there was no substance in him, and I knew
he wasn't a living being. I don't know where they live; I've heard they
live in the *Carrige* (rocks). Many a time I've heard of their *taking*
people or leading them astray. They can't live far away when they come
to me in such a rush. They are as big as we are. I think these fairy
people are all through this country and in the mountains.'

An Apparition of a' Sidhe' Woman?--'At a wake I went out of doors at
midnight and saw a woman running up and down the field with a strange
light in her hand. I called out my daughter, but she saw nothing, though
all the time the woman dressed in white was in the field, shaking the
light and running back and forth as fast as you could wink.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

I thought the woman might be the spirit of Nancy Frink, but I was not
sure.' (Cf. pp. [60](#page_60) ff., [83](#page_83),
[155](ffcc124.htm#page_155), [215](ffcc126.htm#page_215).)

### EVIDENCE FROM LOUGH GUR, COUNTY LIMERICK

One of the most interesting parts of Ireland for the archaeologist and
for the folk-lorist alike is the territory immediately surrounding Lough
Gur, County Limerick. Shut in for the most part from the outer world by
a circle of low-lying hills on whose summits fairy goddesses yet dwell
invisibly, this region, famous for its numerous and well-preserved
cromlechs, dolmens, menhirs, and tumuli, and for the rare
folk-traditions current among its peasantry, has long been popularly
regarded as a sort of Otherworld preserve haunted by fairy beings, who
dwell both in its waters and on its land.

There seems to be no reasonable doubt that in pre-Christian times the
Lough Gur country was a very sacred spot, a mystic centre for
pilgrimages and for the celebration of Celtic religious rites, including
those of initiation. The Lough is still enchanted, but once in seven
years the spell passes off it, and it then appears like dry land to any
one that is fortunate enough to behold it. At such a time of
disenchantment a Tree is seen growing up through the lake-bottom--a Tree
like the strange World-Tree of Scandinavian myth. The Tree is covered
with a Green Cloth, and under it sits the lake's guardian, a woman
knitting. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) The peasantry about Lough
Gur still believe that beneath its waters there is one of the chief
entrances in Ireland to *Tir-na-nog*, the 'Land of Youth', the Fairy
Realm. And when a child is stolen by the Munster fairies, 'Lough Gur is
conjectured to be the place of its unearthly transmutation from the
human to the fairy state.' <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_22)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

To my friend, Count John de Salis, of Balliol College, I am indebted for
the following legendary material, collected by him on the fairy-haunted
Lough Gur estate, his ancestral home, and annotated by the Rev. J. F.
Lynch, one of the best-informed antiquarians living in that part of
South Ireland

The Fairy Goddesses, Aine--and Fennel (or Finnen).--'There are two hills
near Lough Gur upon whose summits sacrifices and sacred rites used to be
celebrated according to living tradition. One, about three miles
south-west of the lake, is called Knock Aine, Aine or Ane being the name
of an ancient Irish goddess, derived from *an,* "bright." The other, the
highest hill on the lake-shores, is called Knock Fennel or Hill of the
Goddess Fennel, from *Finnen* or *Finnine* or *Fininne*, a form of
*fin*, "white." The peasantry of the region call Aine one of the Good
People; <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_23) and they say that

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fennel (apparently
her sister goddess or a variant of herself) lived on the top of Knock
Fennel' (termed Finnen in a State Paper dated 1200).

The Fairy Boat-Race.--'Different old peasants have told me that on clear
calm moonlight nights in summer, fairy boats appear racing across Lough
Gur. The boats come from the eastern side of the lake, and when they
have arrived at Garrod Island, where the Desmond Castle lies in ruins,
they vanish behind Knock Adoon. There are four of these phantom boats,
and in each there are two men rowing and a woman steering. No sound is
heard, though the seer can see the weird silvery splash of the oars and
the churning of the water at the bows of the boats as they shoot along.
It is evident that they are racing, because one boat gets ahead of the
others, and all the rowers can be seen straining at the oars. Boats and
occupants seem to be transparent, and you

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

cannot see exactly what their nature is. One old peasant told me that it
is the shining brightness of the clothes on the phantom rowers and on
the women who steer which makes them visible.

'Another man, who is about forty years of age, and as far as I know of
good habits, assures me that he also has seen this fairy boat-race, and
that it can still be seen at the proper season.'

The Bean-Tighe. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_24)--'The *Bean-tighe*,
the fairy housekeeper of the enchanted submerged castle of the Earl of
Desmond, is supposed to appear sitting on art ancient earthen monument
shaped like a great chair and hence called *Suidheachan,* the
"Housekeeper's Little Seat," on Knock Adoon (Hill of the Fort), which
juts out into the Lough. The *Bean-tighe,* as I have heard an old
peasant tell the tale, was once asleep on her Seat, when the
*Buachailleen* <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_25) or "Little Herd Boy"

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

stole her golden comb. When the *Bean-tighe* awoke and saw what had
happened, she cast a curse upon the cattle of the *Buachailleen,* and
soon all of them were dead, and then the "Little Herd Boy" himself died,
but before his death he ordered the golden comb to be cast into the
Lough.' <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_26)

Lough Gur Fairies in General.--'The peasantry in the Lough Gur region
commonly speak of the *Good People* or of the *Kind People* or of the
*Little People*, their names for the fairies. The leprechaun indicates
the place where hidden treasure is to be found. If the person to whom he
reveals such a secret makes it known to a second person, the first
person dies, or else no money is found: in some cases the money is
changed into ivy leaves or into furze blossoms.

'I am convinced that some of the older peasants still believe in
fairies. I used to go out on the lake occasionally on moonlight nights,
and an old woman supposed to be a "wise woman" (a Seeress), hearing
about my doing this, told me that under no circumstances should I
continue the practice, for fear of "Them People" (the fairies). One
evening in particular I was warned by her not to venture on the lake.
She solemnly asserted that the" Powers of Darkness" were then abroad,
and that it would be misfortune for me to be in their path. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_27)

'Under ordinary circumstances, as a very close observer of the Lough Gur
peasantry informs me, the old people will

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

pray to the Saints, but if by any chance such prayers remain unanswered
they then invoke other powers, the fairies, the goddesses Aine and
Fennel, or other pagan deities, whom they seem to remember in a vague
subconscious manner through tradition.'

### TESTIMONY FROM A COUNTY KERRY SEER

To another of my fellow students in Oxford, a native Irishman of County
Kerry, I am indebted for the following evidence:--

A Collective Vision of Spiritual Beings.--'Some few weeks before
Christmas, 1910, at midnight on a very dark night, I and another young
man (who like myself was then about twenty-three years of age) were on
horseback on our way home from Limerick. When near Listowel, we noticed
a light about half a mile ahead. At first it seemed to be no more than a
light in some house; but as we came nearer to it and it was passing out
of our direct line of vision we saw that it was moving up and down, to
and fro, diminishing to a spark, then expanding into a yellow luminous
flame. Before we came to Listowel we noticed two lights, about one
hundred yards to our right, resembling the light seen first. Suddenly
each of these lights expanded into the same sort of yellow luminous
flame, about six feet high by four feet broad. In the midst of each
flame we saw a radiant being having human form. Presently the lights
moved toward one another and made contact, whereupon the two beings in
them were seen to be walking side by side. The beings' bodies were
formed of a pure dazzling radiance, white like the radiance of the sun,
and much brighter than the yellow light or aura surrounding them. So
dazzling was the radiance, like a halo, round their heads that we could
not distinguish the countenances of the beings; we could only
distinguish the general shape of their bodies; though their heads were
very clearly outlined because this halo-like radiance, which was the
brightest light about them, seemed to radiate from or rest upon the head
of each being. As we travelled on; a house intervened between us and the
lights, and we saw

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

no more of them. It was the first time we had ever seen such phenomena,
and in our hurry to get home we were not wise enough to stop and make
further examination. But ever since that night I have frequently seen,
both in Ireland and in England, similar lights with spiritual beings in
them.' (Cf. pp. [60](#page_60) ff., [77](#page_77),
[133](ffcc123.htm#page_133), [155](ffcc124.htm#page_155),
[215](ffcc126.htm#page_215), [483](ffcc411.htm#page_483).)

Reality of the Spiritual World.--'Like my companion, who saw all that I
saw of the first three lights, I formerly had always been a sceptic as
to the existence of spirits; now I know that there is a spiritual world.
My brother, a physician, had been equally sceptical until he saw, near
our home at Listowel, similar lights containing spiritual beings and was
obliged to admit the genuineness of the phenomena,

'In whatever country we may be, I believe that we are for ever immersed
in the spiritual world; but most of us cannot perceive it on account of
the unrefined nature of our physical bodies. Through meditation and
psychical training one can come to see the spiritual world and its
beings. We pass into the spirit realm at death and come back into the
human world at birth; and we continue to reincarnate until we have
overcome all earthly desires and mortal appetites. Then the higher life
is open to our consciousness and we cease to be human; we become divine
beings.' (Recorded in Oxford, England, August 12, 1911.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[24:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_9) Anglo-Irish for *rath*,
a circular earthen fort.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[31:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_10) Throughout Ireland
there are many ancient, often prehistoric, earth-works or tumuli, which
are popularly called *forts*, *raths*, or *duns*, and in folk-belief
these are considered *fairy* hills or the abodes of various orders of
fairies. In this belief we see at work a definite anthropomorphism which
attributes dwellings here on earth to an invisible spirit-race, as
though this race were actually the spirits of the ancient Irish who
built the *forts*. As we proceed, we shall see how important and varied
a part these earthworks play in the Irish Fairy-Faith (cf. chapter viii,
on Archaeology).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[33:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_11) An Irish mystic, and
seer of great power, with whom I have often discussed the Fairy-Faith in
its details, regards 'fairy paths' or 'fairy passes' as actual magnetic
arteries, so to speak, through which circulates the earth's magnetism.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[42:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_12) Irish scholars differ
as to the signification of *Meadha*. Some say that it is the genitive
case of *Meadh*, the name of some ancient chieftain who was buried in
the hill. *Knock Magh* is the spelling often used by writers who hold
that the name means "Hill of the Plain".'--JOHN GLYNN.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[44:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_13) On September 8, 1909,
about a year after this testimony was given, Mr. ------, our
seer-witness, at his own home near Grange, told to me again the same
essential facts concerning his psychical experiences as during my first
interview with him, and even repeated word for word the expressions the
'gentry' used in communicating with him. Therefore I feel that he is
thoroughly sincere in his beliefs and descriptions, whatever various
readers may think of them. As his neighbours said to me about him--and I
interviewed a good many of them--'Some give in to him and some do not';
but they always spoke of him with respect, though a few naturally
consider him eccentric. At the time of our second meeting (which gave me
a chance to revise the evidence as first taken down) Mr. ------ made
this additional statement:--'The *gentry* do not tell all their secrets,
and I do not understand many things about them, nor can I be sure that
everything I tell concerning them is exact.'

<span id="fn_14"></span>[45:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_14) A learned and more
careful Irish seer thinks this head-dress should really be described as
an aura.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[47:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_15) I have been told by a
friend in California, who is a student of psychical sciences, that there
exist in certain parts of that state, notably in the Yosemite Valley, as
the Red Men seem to have known, according to their traditions, invisible
races exactly comparable to the 'gentry' of this Ben Bulbin country such
as our seer-witness describes them and as other seers in Ireland have
described them, and quite like the 'people of peace' as described by
Kirk, the seventh son, in his *Secret Commonwealth* (see this study, [p.
85](ffcc122.htm#page_85) n.). These California races are said to exist
now, as the Irish and Scotch invisible races are said to exist now, by
seers who <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> can behold them; and, like the
latter races, are described as a distinct order of beings who have never
been in physical embodiments. If we follow the traditions of the Red
Men, the Yosemite invisible tribes are probably but a few of many such
tribes scattered throughout the North American continent; and equally
with their Celtic relatives they are described as a warlike race with
more than human powers over physical nature, and as able to subject or
destroy men.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[48:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_16) This refers to a tale
told by Hugh Currid, in August, 1908, about Father Patrick and Father
Dominick, which is here omitted because re-investigation during my
second visit to Grange, in September, 1909, showed the tale to have been
incorrectly reported. The same story, however, based upon facts,
according to several reliable witnesses, was more accurately told by
Patrick Waters at the time of my re-Investigation, and appears on page
[51](#page_51).

<span id="fn_17"></span>[52:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_17) It happened that I had
in my pocket a fossil, picked out of the neighbouring sea-cliff rocks,
which are very rich in fossils. I showed this to Pat to ascertain if
what he had had in his hand looked anything like it, and he at once said
'No'.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[57:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_18) After this Ossianic
fragment, which has been handed down orally, I asked Pat if he had ever
heard the old people talk about Dermot and Grania, and he replied;--'To
be sure I have. Dermot and Grania used to <span id="page_58">p.
58</span> live in these parts. Dermot stole Finn MacCoul's sister, and
had to flee away. He took with him a bag of sand and a bunch of heather;
and when he was in the mountains he would put the bag of sand under his
head at night, and then tell everybody he met that he had slept on the
sand (the sea-shore); and when on the sand he would use the bunch of
heather for a pillow, and say he had slept on the heather (the
mountains). And so nobody ever caught him at all.'

<span id="fn_19"></span>[59:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_19) As to probable proof
that there was an Atlantis, see [p. 333](ffcc260.htm#page_333) n.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[66:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_20) This refers to Robert
Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, who wrote *The Secret Commonwealth* (see
this study, [p. 85](ffcc122.htm#page_85) n.).

<span id="fn_21"></span>[71:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_21) 'In going from East
Ireland to Galway, during the summer of 1908, I passed through the
country near Mullingar, where there was then great excitement over a
leprechaun which had been appearing to school-children and to many of
the country-folk. I talked with some of the people as I walked through
part of County Meath about this leprechaun, and most of them were
certain that there could be such a creature showing itself; and I
noticed, too, that they were all quite anxious to have a chance at the
money-bag, if they could only see the little fellow with it. I told one
good-natured old Irishman at Ballywillan--where I stopped over night--as
we sat round his peat fire and pot of boiling potatoes, that the
leprechaun was reported as captured by the police in Mullingar. 'Now
that couldn't be, at all,' he said instantly, 'for everybody knows the
leprechaun is a spirit and can't be caught by any blessed policeman,
though it is likely one might get his gold if they got him cornered so
he had no chance to run away. But the minute you wink or take your eyes
off the little devil, sure enough he is gone.'

<span id="fn_22"></span>[78:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_23) Cf. David Fitzgerald,
*Popular Tales of Ireland*, in *Rev. Celt.*, iv. 185-92; and *All the
Year Round*, New Series, iii. 'This woman guardian of the lake is called
Toice Bhrean, "untidy" or "lazy wench". According to a local legend, she
is said to have been originally the guardian of the sacred well, from
which, owing to her neglect, Lough Gur issued; and in this role she
corresponds to Liban, daughter of Eochaidh Finn, the guardian of the
sacred well from which issued Lough Neagh, according to the
*Dinnshenchas* and the tale of Eochaidh MacMairido.'--J. F. LYNCH.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[79:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_24) It was on the bank of
the little river Camóg, which flows near Lough Gur, that the Earl of
Desmond one day saw Aine as she sat there combing her hair. Overcome
with love for the fairy-goddess, he gained control over her through
seizing her cloak, and made her his wife. From this union was born the
enchanted son Geróid Iarla, even as Galahad was born to Lancelot by the
Lady of the Lake. When Geróid had grown into young manhood, in order to
surpass a woman he leaped right into a bottle and right out again, and
this happened in the midst of a banquet in his father's castle. His
father, the earl, had been put under taboo by Aine never to show
surprise at anything her magician son might do, but now the taboo was
forgotten, and hence broken, amid so unusual a performance; and
immediately Geróid left the feasting and went to the lake. As soon as
its water touched him he assumed the form of a goose, and he went
swimming over the surface of the Lough, and disappeared on Garrod
Island.

According to one legend, Aine, like the Breton *Morgan*, may sometimes
be seen combing her hair, only half her body appearing above the lake.
And in times of calmness and clear water, according to another legend,
one may behold beneath Aine's lake the lost enchanted castle of her son
Geróid, close to Garrod Island--so named from Geróid or 'Gerald'.

Geróid lives there in the under-lake world to this day, awaiting the
time of his normal return to the world of men (see our chapter on
re-birth, [p. 386](ffcc270.htm#page_386)). But once in every seven
years, on clear moonlight nights, he emerges temporarily, when the Lough
Gur peasantry see him as a phantom mounted on a phantom white horse,
leading a phantom or fairy cavalcade across the lake and land. A
well-attested case of such an apparitional appearance of the earl has
been recorded by Miss Anne Baily, the percipient having been Teigue
O'Neill, an old blacksmith whom she knew (see *All the Year Round*, New
Series, iii. 495-6, London, 1870). And Moll <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> Riall, a young woman also known to Miss Baily, saw the phantom
earl by himself, under very weird circumstances, by day, as she stood at
the margin of the lake washing clothes (ib., p. 496).

Some say that Aine's true dwelling-place is in her hill; upon which on
every St. John's Night the peasantry used to gather from all the
immediate neighbourhood to view the moon (for Aine seems to have been a
moon goddess, like Diana), and then with torches (*clíars*) made of
bunches of straw and hay tied on poles used to march in procession from
the hill and afterwards run through cultivated fields and amongst the
cattle. The underlying purpose of this latter ceremony probably was--as
is the case in the Isle of Man and in Brittany (see pp.
[124](ffcc123.htm#page_124) n., [273](ffcc130.htm#page_273)), where
corresponding fire-ceremonies surviving from an ancient agricultural
cult are still celebrated--to exorcise the land from all evil spirits
and witches in order that there may be good harvests and rich increase
of flocks. Sometimes on such occasions the goddess herself has been seen
leading the sacred procession (cf. the Bacchus cult among the ancient
Greeks, who believed that the god himself led his worshippers in their
sacred torch-light procession at night, he being like Aine in this
respect, more or less connected with fertility in nature). One night
some girls staying on the bill late were made to look through a magic
ring by Aine, and lo the hill was crowded with the folk of the fairy
goddess who before had been invisible. The peasants always said that
Aine is 'the best-hearted woman that ever lived' (cf. David Fitzgerald,
*Popular Tales of Ireland*, in *Rev. Celt.*, iv. 185--92).

In *Silva Gadelica* (ii. 347-8), Aine is a daughter of Eogabal, a king
of the Tuatha De Danann, and her abode is within the *sidh*, named on
her account *'Aine cliach*, now Cnoc Aine, or Knockany'. In another
passage we read that Manannan took Aine as his wife (ib., ii. 197). Also
see in *Silva Gadelica*, ii, pp. 225, 576.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[81:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_25) 'In some local tales
the *Bean-tighe*, or *Bean a'tighe* is termed *Beansidhe* (Banshee), and
*Bean Chaointe*, or "wailing woman ", and is identified with Aine. In an
elegy by Ferriter on one of the Fitzgeralds, we read:--

Aine from her closely bid nest did awake,  
The woman of wailing from Gur's voicy lake,

'Thomas O'Connellan, the great minstrel bard, some of whose compositions
are given by Hardiman, died at Lough Gur Castle about 1700, and was
buried at New Church beside the lake. It is locally believed that Aine
stood on a rock of Knock Moon and "keened" O'Connellan whilst the
funeral procession was passing from the castle to the place of
burial.'--J. F. LYNCH.

A Banshee was traditionally attached to the Baily family of Lough Gur;
and one night at dead of night, when Miss Kitty Baily was dying of
consumption, her two sisters, Miss Anne Baily and Miss Susan Baily, who
were sitting in the death chamber, 'heard such sweet and melancholy
music as they had never heard before. It seemed to them like distant
cathedral music ... The music was not in the house ... It seemed to come
through the windows of the old castle, high in the air.' But when Miss
Anne, who went downstairs with a lighted candle to investigate the weird
phenomenon, had approached the ruined castle she thought the music came
from above the house; 'and thus perplexed, and at last frightened, she
returned.' Both sisters are on record as having distinctly heard the
fairy music, and for a long time *(All the Year Round,* New Series, iii.
496--7; London, 1870).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[81:2](ffcc121.htm#fr_26) The *Buachailleen* is
most likely one of the many forms assumed by the shape-shifting Fer Fi,
the Lough Gur Dwarf, who at Tara, according to the *Dinnshenchas* of
Tuag Inbir (see *Folk-Lore,* iii; and A. Nutt, *Voyage of Bran*, i. 195
ff.), took the shape of a woman; and we may trace the tales <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> of Geróid Iarla to Fer Fi, who, and not
Geróid, is believed by the oldest of the Lough Gur peasantry to be the
owner of the lake. Fer Fi is the son of Eogabal of Sidh Eogabail, and
hence brother to Aine. He is also foster. son of Manannan Mac Lir, and a
Druid of the Tuatha De Danann (cf. *Silva Gadelica*, ii. *225*; also
*Dinnshenchas* of Tuag Inbir). At Lough Gur various tales are told by
the peasants concerning the Dwarf, and he is still stated by them to be
the brother of Aine, For the sake of experiment I once spoke very
disrespectfully of the Dwarf to John Punch, an old man, and he said to
me in a frightened whisper: "Whisht! he'll hear you." Edward Fitzgerald
and other old men were very much afraid of the Dwarf.'--J. F. LYNCH.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[82:1](ffcc121.htm#fr_27) 'Compare the tale of
Excalibur, the Sword of King Arthur, which King Arthur before his death
ordered Sir Bedivere to cast into the lake whence it had come. '--J. F.
LYNCH.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[82:2](ffcc121.htm#fr_28) 'It is commonly
believed by young and old at Lough Gur that a human being is drowned in
the Lake once every seven years, and that it is the *Bean Fhionn*, or
"White Lady" who thus *takes* the person.'--J. F. LYNCH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Taking of Evidence: III. In Scotland](ffcc122)
