[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Legendary Creatures](../../lcr/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lou05)  [Next](lou07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FL4WSI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lore of the Unicorn*, by Odell Shepard, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

### EAST AND WEST

    IN the scientific discussion of any animal one of the prime
essentials is the determination of its habitat, and we must not proceed
farther with the study of the unicorn without naming the places where he
has been supposed to be found.

    Ctesias placed the unicorn, as we have seen, in "India", then as for
long after a very inclusive term, and this location sufficed for his
Greek and Roman followers. The Physiologus does not commit itself on
this question, but when we consider that all the other animals it
mentions--or all, at any rate, not concocted in libraries, like the
ant-lion--were thought to belong to Egypt, we may infer that the unicorn
also was regarded as a local species. Few of the Christian echoers of
Physiologus have any notion of animal habitat, so that they give us
little help.

    Ethiopia had been confused with India even by Virgil, and therefore,
if for no other reason, it was so confused during the Middle Ages. The
bewildering transfer of "Prester John's Court" from India to Ethiopia,
already referred to, helped on this confusion, and the transfer had a
definite influence, as it happened, upon the legend of the unicorn. In
the first letter supposed to have been addressed by him to one or other
of the potentates of Europe, Prester John is made to describe himself as
an Indian monarch, and in this letter, furthermore, he mentions the
unicorns to be tound in his realm. Fifty years later, that is to say
about A.D. 1200, we find him established as a king and priest in
Ethiopia, and it was naturally assumed that he had taken his unicorns
with him--all the more because later versions of his letter, dated from
Ethiopia, continued to mention these animals as prominent in the local
fauna. But there were other influences at work to draw the unicorn into
North Africa. For one thing, the people of Abyssinia had their own
version of Physiologus; for another, the Arabs among them had a
well-developed unicorn legend; finally, the Portuguese missionaries and
merchants of a later time went into Ethiopia with unicorn lore gathered
from India itself, and when they found in this new land much the same
legends and beliefs as those with which they had become familiar at Goa
it is not strange that they were convinced.

    Fray Luis de Urreta, whose account of rhinoceros hunting in
Abyssinia we have already considered, places the unicorn--which he
insists is an entirely different animal--in the Mountains of the Moon.
He was by no means the first to hold this view. Cosmas Indicopleustes
saw four brazen figures of the unicorn at the court of the King of
Ethiopia in the sixth century of our era. A Mappa Mundi, made in the
fifteenth century and now hanging on the wall of Hereford Cathedral,
shows the unicorn, with a horn almost as long as its body, standing in
the region of the Upper Nile. The Arabian zoologist Al Damiri testified
to the same effect. John Bermudez reported unicorns in Abyssinia. Marmol
Caravaial found them "en las sierras de Beht, o de la Lune". An English
traveller of the sixteenth century asserts: "I have seen in a place like
a Park adjoyning unto prester Johns Court, three score and seven-teene
Vnicornes and eliphants all alive at one time, and they were so tame
that I have played with them as one would play with young Lambes."
Father Lobo handed on an extended account of the Abyssinian unicorn. Job
Ludoiphus accepts these earlier declarations. We shall see also that a
French consular officer of the nineteenth century corroborates them by a
long and judicious letter about the unicorn of Central Africa addressed
to a learned society.

    Quite apart from this abundance of testimony, there is a fitness in
the association of the unicorn with the enormous mountain ranges of
Abyssinia. The Queen of Sheba is supposed to have hidden her treasure
somewhere in those terrifying gorges, and they are a good place in which
to hide any precious thing. The very name "Mountains of the Moon", which
they owe to Ptolemy, makes them seem a proper home for wonderful beasts.
If the unicorn does live among the snows held up for ever on the line of
the Equator then it is clear why the world should know so little about
him. An Arabian writer says that a great king once sent out a host of
men to discover the sources of the Nile, but that they brought back no
report because when they reached these mountains the heat reflected from
their snows was so great that every man was reduced to ashes.

    No sooner has one accustomed himself to think of the Mountains of
the Moon as the unicorn's native place, however, than he finds that a
case at least equally good may be made out for Tibet. An unknown Chinese
traveller of the eleventh or twelfth century informs us that about
eighty li from H'lari there is a lake in the vicinity of which unicorns
are found in great abundance. Again, we are told by several Eastern
historians that when the conqueror Genghis Khan set forth in 1224 to
invade Hindustan he was met at the top of Mount Djadanaring by a beast
with but one horn which knelt thrice at his feet as though in token of
respect. The conqueror fell to brooding over this strange event, and he
concluded that the beast was an incarnation of his father's spirit come
to warn him against the expedition; therefore he turned his army about
and marched down the mountain, leaving Hindustan unharmed. Centuries
after this, Captain Samuel Turner, one of the most dependable of the
earlier authorities upon Tibet, was solemnly told by the Rajah of Bootan
that he had once owned a horse-like creature with a single horn in the
middle of its forehead. The most famous of all travellers in Tibet, a
learned man of the nineteenth century, was entirely convinced that the
unicorn is to be found there. A certain Major Latter of the British Army
wrote home in 1820 that he had found the unicorn beyond a doubt in
Tibet.

    Next one comes to the numerous reports of the unicorn in South
Africa, where Garcias ab Horto heard it described--equipped with a
single horn which it could raise and lower at will--on his voyage round
the Cape in the middle of the sixteenth century. Somewhat over a century
later Father Jerom Merolla da Sorrento, a Capuchin missionary, saw it in
the region mentioned by Garcias. Baron von Wurmb writes from the Cape of
Good Hope toward the end of the eighteenth century that he expects to
see a unicorn any day, as the reports of it are all about him. Sir John
Barrow, a well. trained observer, found so universal a belief in the
animal among the natives of South Africa that he himself was inclined to
believe, and his faith was rewarded by the discovery of a cave-painting,
which he reproduced, of a beast with a single horn. Sir Francis Galton
is half-convinced by the persistent reports he hears in Africa, and Dr.
William Balfour Baikie finds his former scepticism "partly shaken".

    Returning to the Near East, one finds a similar abundance of
unicorns, either seen or surmised. One John of Hesse, a priest who
visited the Holy Land in 1389, had the good fortune not only to see one
but to witness the water-conning performance in actual operation. Felix
Fabri, who made pilgrimage to the Holy Land a century later saw, on
September 20, 1483, with his own eyes--as did all the members of his
company--a unicorn standing on a hill near Mount Sinai, and he observed
it carefully for a long time. Lewis Vartoman, regarded for centuries as
an exceptionally veracious traveller, gives a careful description of two
unicorns that he says he saw at Mecca about the middle of the sixteenth
century--but it is to be observed that these two had been sent to the
Sultan as a present by the King of Abyssinia. Vincent Le Blanc, who set
out on his travels in 1567--at the age of fourteen--saw only one unicorn
at Mecca, the other one mentioned by Vartoman having died, but by way of
atonement he saw two at the Court of Pegu.

    Not to make too intolerably long a list, there is the unicorn of
Tartary reported by a British traveller of the eighteenth century and
explained one hundred and fifty years later by Lieutenant-Colonel
Prejevalsky. There is the unicorn of Persia, said to have been kept as a
pet by the Sophy in his private gardens at Samarkand. There is the
unicorn of the Carpathians made known by Antony Scheneberger in a letter
quoted by Conrad Gesner. There is the unicorn of India, distinct from
the rhinoceros, clearly depicted on a map of the Orient published with
the English translation of Linschoeten's Voyages. There is the unicorn
of Poland reported by Aldrovandus, the unicorn of Scandinavia of which
we learn in the Historia Naturalis of Johnston, the unicorn of Florida
made known to Europe by the Spanish conquistadors, the unicorn of the
Canadian border described by Olfert Dapper, and finally there is the
unicorn of China.

    Chinese writers do not assert that the unicorn or ki-lin is a native
of their land; on the contrary, they say that it comes from afar,
presumably from heaven, and only at long intervals of time. They regard
it, so to speak, as an intermittent animal, and its appearance on earth
is considered a certain omen of a beneficent reign or of the birth of
some great man comparable with a good emperor in importance. According
to the testimony of Tse-Tche-t'ong-kien-kang-mou, the ki-lin was first
seen in the year 2697 B.C., in the palace of the Emperor Hoang-ti, on
which occasion it was a truthful prophet of national felicity. Another
appeared to the mother of Confucius just before the sage's birth,
holding in its mouth a great tablet of jade on which there was engraven
a dithyramb in praise of the man her son was to become. Events of this
sort have occurred so many times and the prophecy has always been so
unerring that pictures of the unicorn are now pinned or pasted in the
women's quarters of millions of Chinese houses in the hope that they may
exert pre-natal influence and induce the birth of great men, or at least
of boys rather than of girls. They are also affixed to the red chair in
which the bride is borne to her husband's house, and the gods that
oversee the distribution of desirable babies are often depicted riding
upon the ki-lin. To say of any man that a ki-lin appeared at the time of
his birth is the highest form of flattery.

    The question is asked in the Li-Ki: "What were the four intelligent
creatures?" and the answer is given: "They were the Phoenix, the
Tortoise, the Dragon, and the Ki-lin." The last, though not so popular
as the dragon, is commonly regarded as the king of beasts. No hunter has
ever killed one; and it is seldom captured or even wounded, although we
are told that one was injured by a hunter just before the death of
Confucius. Like an exceptionally good Buddhist, the ki-lin eats no
living thing, either animal or vegetable, so that its diet is severely
restricted. It will not even tread upon an insect or a living blade of
grass. It has the body of a stag, the hoof of a horse--conforming in
these respects to the European tradition--the tail of an ox, and a
single horn twelve feet long springing from the middle of its brow,
which has at the end a fleshy growth. The most significant thing about
the ki-lin's physical appearance, however, is the fact that he is
resplendent in the five sacred colours, which are the symbols of his
perfection.

    The ki-lin is supposed to spring from the centre of the earth, and
perhaps he was originally a representative of the earthy element as the
phoenix represents fire, the dragon air, and the tortoise water. All
commentators enlarge upon the excellence of his character. He knows good
from evil, is reverential towards his parents and piously attached to
the memory of all his ancestors; he is harmless, beneficent, and gentle,
the fleshy tip of his horn indicating clearly that that otherwise
formidable member has only symbolic and aesthetic uses. Like the Western
unicorn, he keeps the dignity and the mystery of solitude, never
mingling promiscuously even with those of his own kind and never
treading upon soil tainted by the human foot unless he comes on a
mission. He is not violently haled by hunters into the court of the
sovereign, but arrives as one king visiting another. Unlike the Western
unicorn, the ki-lin has never had commercial value; no drug is made of
any part of his body; he exists for his own sake and not for the
medication, enrichment, entertainment, or even edification of mankind.

    We must infer that this Oriental unicorn was conceived on a higher
plane of civilization than that which produced the European legend. Our
Western unicorn does us credit in many ways, but when we compare him
with the ki-lin we see that there is after all a good deal of violence
and deceit and calculation implicit in the stories we have told of him.
The ki-lin legend was developed by men who had got beyond fear and
calculation in their attitude toward wild nature--by men not unlike
those who painted the pictures and wrote the poetry of the Sung period
in which Nature is loved for her own sufficient self almost a thousand
years before the West learned to look at her without terror.

    While speaking of the ki-lin's beneficence I may mention a detail of
his legend which, although less firmly authenticated than one could
wish, presents a surprising parallel with the legend of the West. The
Chinese, we are told, preserve a tradition to the effect that the ki-lin
"is to come in the shape of an incomparable man, a revealer of
mysteries, supernatural and divine, and a great lover of all mankind. He
is expected to come at about the time of a particular constellation in
the heavens, on a special mission for their benefit." If this belief
really exists--and it corresponds exactly with what we learn from better
sources of the ki-lin's nature--then two apparently quite separate
unicorn legends have worked out, in regions far apart, the same ultimate
symbolism. Both in the East and in the West the unicorn comes to typify
a Messiah. Shall we call this an accident, or shall we attribute it to
the infiltration of Christian influence? A third possibility, one to
which some slight support will be given in later pages, is that the two
legends came to similar fruition because they sprang from a single root.
It may appear that from the very beginning the unicorn has been
conceived as beneficent, holy, in some sense divine, always striving for
the healing of the nations.

    Distinct as the ki-lin seems at first to be from the Western
unicorn, and especially from the unicorn of Physiologus, it is hardly
possible to think of him at last as an entirely independent creation.
His different colouring, his more actively humane disposition, even the
subtle but significant change in his horn--difficult to reconcile with
our notions of physiology, but clear enough in allegorical intent--all
these are due to his Chinese environment. On the other hand, he has the
body of a stag and the solid hoof of a horse, like the unicorn of Aelian
and Pliny and Solinus. Like all Western unicorns, he is solitary, and he
cannot be captured. The Chinese are so certain of this last
characteristic, indeed, that they never go forth against him even with
virgins for bait. It seems likely, therefore, that the ki-lin and the
unicorn of the West have a common ancestor.

    Chinese writers enumerate six different sorts of unicorns: the King,
the Kioh Twan, the Poh, the Hiai Chai, the Too Jon Sheu, and the Ki-lin;
but it seems probable that all six are derived from a single original.
The great age of some of the classics in which these animals are
described proves that the unicorn legend is old in China, and this fact
alone accounts for the existing discrepancies. In spite of these, the
ki-lin is more consistent than the Western unicorn; it varies little in
appearance and not at all in habits or temperament, being always gentle,
beneficent, delicate in diet, regular and stately in pace, and with a
call "which in the middle part thereof is like a monastery bell".

    The ki-lin, moreover, does not show the tendency to sink down and
fade away into the rhinoceros which is so deplorable in the Western
unicorn, for the Chinese know the rhinoceros perfectly well and describe
it accurately as a totally different species. From the time of the Han
dynasty to our own day they have been the carvers of the rhinoceros
horn, and old Chinese writers have much to say of the prophylactic value
of this horn. During the T'ang dynasty (A.D. 618-905) the official
girdles of mandarins were studded with pieces of it, used as charms
somewhat in the way of the Japanese natsuke. Through all the many
centuries that the commerce in rhinoceros horns has been going on,
however, those who have had to do with it have known that the horns came
from the rhinoceros, and the ki-lin has been kept apart from such
associations. Uncontaminated by trade, never regarded as a drug or as an
emblem of moral virtue, he has moved serenely all this while in the
central recesses of the Oriental imagination.

    One of the rarer titles in the "Americana" that have so strongly
attracted the cupidity of book-collectors in recent decades is a
wellprinted and brilliantly illustrated volume called Die Unbekante Neue
Welt, by Dr. Olfert Dapper. The most accurate pages in this entertaining
book are those that deal with New Amsterdam and the present site of New
York City, so that a casual reader is the more surprised when he finds,
immediately after those pages, a lively representation of the American
unicorn in its native haunts--the suggestion is that they must have been
in the general region of the Bronx--with an unmistakable American eagle
upon its back. In the accompanying letterpress, however, and under the
appropriate rubric Seltsame Tiere, the Doctor places this unicorn
somewhat farther afield. "On the Canadian border", he says, "there are
sometimes seen animals resembling horses, but with cloven roofs, rough
manes, a long straight horn upon the forehead, a curled tail like that
of the wild boar, black eyes, and a neck like that of the stag. They
live in the loneliest wildernesses and are so shy that the males do not
even pasture with the females except in the season of rut, when they are
not so wild. As soon as this season is past, however, they fight not
only with other beasts but even with those of their own kind."

    While one reads this fairly accurate paraphrase of Aelian one's
thoughts slip back more than two thousand years behind Dr. Dapper to
another physician sitting in his library at the court of Darius and
describing as accurately as he could the animals of another distant and
wonderful land. (Without the medical profession the lore of the unicorn
would have been far less rich than it is.) Here we see the animal's
range enormously extended at a single leap, so that we may think of the
unicorn as roaming, if not Manhattan Island, at any rate the woods of
Maine and the Canadian border--that is to say, the region of the moose.

    But it had not been reserved for Dr. Dapper to discover the American
unicorn. His account is more than a hundred years too late for that, in
addition to the fact that it has a strong smell of the lamp. We are told
in the legends of the conquistadors that Friar Marcus of Nizza set out
from Mexico in 1539 with Stephen the Negro to find the "Seven Cities of
Cibola", and that when he got there the inhabitants showed him, among
other wonders, "an hide halfe as big againe as the hide of an Oxe, and
said it was the skinne of a beast which had but one home upon his
forehead, bending toward his breast, and that out of the same goeth a
point forward with which he breakes any thing that he runneth against."
Furthermore, Sir John Hawkins writes in his account of his voyage of
1564: "The Floridians have pieces of unicornes homes which they wear
about their necks, whereof the Frenchmen obtained many pieces. Of those
unicornes they have many; for that they doe affirme it to be a beast
with one home, which comming to the river to drinke, putteth the same
into the water before he drinketh. Of this unicornes home there are of
our company, that having gotten the same of the Frenchmen, brought home
thereof to shew . . . . It is thought that there are lions and tygres as
well as unicornes; lions especially; if it be true that is sayd, of the
enmity betweene them and the unicornes: for there is no beast but hath
his enemy insomuch that whereas the one is the other cannot be missing."

    This passage helps one to see how notions of a new country's fauna
developed even in the minds of intelligent men less than four centuries
ago. Objects of horn or bone worn on necklaces by the natives of
"Florida" proved that there were unicorns in that region, and in that
case there must be lions too, for a beast cannot be left without its
natural enemy. No man endowed with the divine faculty of reason
required, or even wished, to see an actual American lion in order to be
convinced; the bits of bone strung round the necks of the Floridians
were a sufficient proof of lions to satisfy him. And if any one should
be inclined to doubt the veracity of Captain Hawkins, now that his sword
is rust, he has left a remarkable bit of "convincing detail" in a
marginal rubric accompanying the text just quoted: "Unicornes homes,
which ye inhabitants call Souanamma." He brought home, then, one hard
bit of fact--a name. We see how he read what he thought he knew into the
unknown, but that unknown belief of the Floridians may after all have
been something worth finding out.

    Twenty-three years after the voyage of Sir John Hawkins, John Davis,
seeking a north-west passage to India, found a "unicorn's horn" in the
hands of a savage on the coast of North America, in latitude 67 degrees.
"Of them," he says, "I had a darte with a bone in it, or a piece of
Unicornes home, as I did judge. This dart he \[the savage owner\] made
store of, but when he saw a knife, he let it go, being more desirous of
the knife than of his dart."

    So much, then, for written records, by means of which we have traced
the unicorn legend through the greater part of the world. And now, if
one might shake off for a moment the necessity of finding definite
authority for every opinion, if one might indulge his own fancy on this
topic as thousands of others have done, and if it were not for the fear
of being taken quite seriously, one would like to toy with the notion
that the original home of the unicorn was the Lost Atlantis. Let us
consider what may be said for this. Here we have a very ancient and
persistent legend concerning a beast that seems to have vanished from
the earth. The belief is of long standing that this beast, although as
actual as the mammoth or the sabre-tooth tiger, was destroyed by the
flood. Now it is generally agreed among Atlanteans that the world-wide
tradition of the Flood--which Hebraizers will persist in calling "Noah's
Flood"--is a racial memory of the submergence of the Atlantic Continent.
Most significant are the few but startling evidences that the aborigines
of the Western Hemisphere had their own legend of the unicorn, and that
they actually used its supposed horn for magical ends. Legends so
similar and so peculiar, found in both hemispheres, must have spread
East and West from a common distributing centre, and that centre may
well have been the vast region that has been covered for at least ten
thousand years by the Atlantic waves. The Sargasso Sea has been for time
out of mind the port of missing ships. Why may it not cover the primeval
habitat of missing animals?

    Here is an argument in support of Plato's theory about the Lost
Atlantis that would have commended itself to the enthusiastic genius of
Ignatius Donnelly; but one of the several objections to it is that we
cannot really prove the existence of a unicorn legend among the American
aborigines. One is sorry for this, feeling that Atlantis would have been
as appropriate a habitat for the unicorn as even the Mountains of the
Moon. We should solve several difficult problems if we could place him
there with assurance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Treasure of His Brow](lou07)
