[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Legendary Creatures](../../lcr/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lou03)  [Next](lou05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FL4WSI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lore of the Unicorn*, by Odell Shepard, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

### THE HOLY HUNT

    IN the King James Version of the Bible there are seven clear
references to the unicorn, all of which occur in the Old Testament. The
animal is mentioned twice in the Pentateuch, once in job, once in
Isaiah, and three times in the Psalms. These passages read as follows:--

    "God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of
the unicorn."--Numbers xxiii. 22.

    "His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are
like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together
to the ends of the earth."--Deuteronomy xxxiii. 17.

    "Save me from the lion's mouth; for thou hast heard me from the
horns of unicorns."--Psalm xxii. 21.

    "He maketh them \[the cedars of Lebanon\] also to skip like a calf;
Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn."--Psalm xxix. 6.

    "But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of the unicorn: I shall
be anointed with fresh oil."--Psalm xcii. 10.

    "And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with
their bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust
made fat with fatness."--Isaiah xxxiv. 7.

    "Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide in thy crib?

    "Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he
harrow the valleys after thee?

    "Wilt thou trust him because his strength is great? or wilt thou
leave thy labour to him?

    "Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather
it into thy barn?"--Job xxxix. 9-12.

    One thing is evident in these passages: they refer to some actual
animal of which the several writers had vivid if not clear impressions.
Although the allusions were made at widely different times, the
characterization is consistent, bringing before us a beast remarkable
for strength, ferocity, wildness, and unconquerable spirit. Nothing
suggests that it was supernatural, a creature of fancy, for it is linked
with the lion, the bullock and the calf; yet it was mysterious enough to
inspire a sense of awe, and powerful enough to provide a vigorous
metaphor.

    Much patient toil has been expended in the effort to identify the
Biblical unicorn. At the outset of such an inquiry one finds that we owe
the word "unicorn" in the King James Version 2 to the xxxxxx everywhere
used by the Septuagint to translate the Hebrew Re'em, a bit of
translation, interesting in itself, which had enduring results. So far
as the western development of the unicorn legend is concerned, this
translation is like the main jewel of a watch, holding the intricate
structure together. One does not like to see it set down, therefore, as
a mere blunder, and when we think of the problem with only such light as
the Seventy had we are inclined to call it a minor stroke of genius.
They did not know what animal the Hebrew seers and poets had in mind
when speaking of the Re'em, but they found that it was characterized as
fleet, fierce, indomitable, and especially distinguished by the armour
of its brow. Dim recollections were awakened by these traits, and so the
Seventy called the one unknown animal by the name of another. Even from
our point of vantage it seems doubtful whether they could have found a
closer equivalent for a beast which had been mysterious and awful to the
Hebrews than this monoceros or unicorn which was to themselves still
strange, remote, and conjectural.

    Apart from such appropriateness, we discover another value of a
different kind in this translation. For the greater part of their
course, and until the scholarship of the late Renaissance brought them
together, what may be called the Hellenic and the Hebraic branches of
the unicorn legend ran separately, with a cleanness of division that
would have satisfied Matthew Arnold himself. This one word xxxxxxxx,
however, with its already accumulated overtones, was a connecting
channel between the two, more important in fact than in appearance. For
a long time it maintained belief in the Greek tradition by seeming to
imply that whatever Ctesias and his successors had said about the
unicorn had the sanction of divine authority. The Septuagint translation
of Re'em by xxxxxxxxxx, a translation which meant hardly more than that
X = X, was accepted, as the inspired word of God. Ctesias, Aelian,
Pliny, and Solinus seemed to be corroborated by Jehovah.

    In several passages of the Vulgate the Re'em becomes a rhinoceros,
losing as much in imaginative value as it gains in clarity of outline.
We are hardly to suppose, however, that Jerome derived this translation
directly from the Hebrew text in complete independence of the Septuagint
version; it is more likely that he, like St. Ambrose, held the xxxxxxx
of the Greeks to be identical with the rhinoceros--a view in which he
was to have many followers and as many ardent antagonists. His word
amounts, therefore, to an interpretation of the Septuagint's word, and
one feels that it is less good largely because it is more precise. How
often Jerome may have attended the Circus during those unregenerate days
in Rome which he so bitterly repented we cannot be sure, but if he went
at all he probably saw there the animal that he later identified with
the Biblical Re'em. In superficial appearance it would seem to
correspond closely enough.

    An attempt to trace the devious and learned arguments by which
Biblical scholars have tried to establish the identity of the Re'em
would lead us too far afield, considering that there is no reason to
believe that the Hebrews themselves thought of this animal as onehorned.
None of the passages cited above forces such an interpretation, and only
one of them, that from the ninety-second Psalm, even suggests it.
Elsewhere, as in Deuteronomy xxxiii. 17 and Psalms xxii. 21, the word
for "horns" is used in the plural while "Re'em" is singular. Clearly,
therefore, this deep and dark little pocket of erudition need not be
explored at present, and we may be content with seeing what has been
brought out of it.

    After the general abandonment of belief in the unicorn during the
eighteenth century there was a return to Jerome's view that the Re'em
was the rhinoceros; but as this animal became better known it was felt
that he was not fierce and swift enough, and there was doubt whether the
Hebrews were likely to have known him. Another view attributed the whole
belief in the Re'em to the bas-reliefs of huge mythological beasts seen
by the Jews in Egypt and Mesopotamia. Under the leadership of Samuel
Bochart, the profoundest scholar who has ever waded these deep waters, a
considerable company once contended for the oryx, pointing out that the
Arabic name of this animal is still rim; but the value of this discovery
was soon destroyed by the announcement of another school that rimu was
the Assyrian name of the gigantic aurochs or Bos Primigenius, a species
of wild buffalo which became extinct in the sixteenth century. Cuvier,
basing his measurement upon remains of the aurochs much smaller than
others since discovered, estimated that this animal was twelve feet long
and almost seven feet high; its teeth have been found in a cave on Mount
Lebanon; Julius Caesar describes it as indigenous to his prolific
Hercynian Forest, and in terms fitting all that is said in the Bible
about the Re'em; Layard identified the animal with the majestic
sculptured bulls of Nineveh. The Bos Primigenius now holds the field.
Its bulk, speed, and savage ferocity are described by Caesar in words
that make it clear why the Hebrews always spoke of the Re'em with bated
breath. So much, then, for the source of the Septuagint xxxxxx--a word
inspired by Apollo if not by Jehovah--and therefore of the Biblical
unicorn. One is glad to have found the Re'em worthy of his descendant.

    Although it seems clear that the writers of the Old Testament did
not think of the Re'em as one-horned, there is a possibility that the
Talmudic writers did come to consider it so. Any horned animal
remembered chiefly by its representations in the sculptures of Egypt,
Babylon, Nineveh, and Persepolis, was likely, as we shall see, to be
regarded sooner or later as a unicorn, and there came a time when Hebrew
writers, with no native sculpture to guide them, were dependent upon
just such representations. The Talmudic interpreters, it is certain, had
never seen the Re'em, for they exaggerate its size "out of all
reasonable compass", asserting in one passage that it is so tall as to
touch the clouds and in another that it was too large to be got into the
ark and so had to be towed along behind by a cord tied to its horn.
Obviously, the Re'em is here seen fading into myth, and so it may have
been the original of the wonderful ox three times mentioned in the
Talmud as the victim of Adam's first sacrifice--an ox with the
interesting peculiarity that it had only one horn on its brow.

    The unicorn legend gained valuable and lasting corroboration from
the brilliant error of the Septuagint, but this alone would not have won
for it anything like its later prestige; another influence was required
to carry the unicorn into the centre of Christian myth and symbolism.
Fully to understand the second influence that was brought into play we
should need to know more than we do about that agglomeration of vice and
virtue, wealth and poverty, ignorance and erudition, wisdom and folly,
which we call Alexandria. In that city, during the third century after
Christ and under Christian influence, there were brought together a
number of animal stories, some of them drawn from the wide-spread "Beast
Epic" of the world and others apparently concocted to serve the
immediate need, each of them fitted with a "moral" somewhat after the
fashion of Aesop's Fables. It seems unnecessary to assume that any
single individual was responsible for the collection as a whole or that
a single original text ever existed.

    Readers of Tertullian, Cassiodorus, and even Origen, will not need
to be told that the habit of allegorizing not merely everything in the
Scriptures but everything outside of them was at this time fastening
upon the Christian mind. The world of nature, seldom valued for its own
sake by the typical Christian, was more and more regarded as a mere
storehouse of edifying metaphors. What we should call facts were felt to
be of little worth in comparison with the moral truths that alleged
facts could be supposed to signify and it was considered that God had
created the lower animals, particularly those that seemed to have no
other use, solely for the moral and spiritual instruction of mankind.
Very little of Aristotle's objective spirit and method was carried over
into the Christian thought centring at Alexandria, disabled as that was
from the start by a puerile moral-hunting and phrase-making, by the
determination to make facts bend to the uses of edification and to see,
almost literally, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and
good--or, what was considered the same thing, moral significance--in
everything.

    These were some of the conditions surrounding the haphazard
selection, fabrication, and welding together of the stories composing
the Christian Beast Epic. In the primitive forms of that body of fable,
apparently, each article began with a quotation from Scripture followed
by the formula: "But the physiologus \[i.e. the naturalist\] says . . .
" and then came a description of the major traits, real or fancied, of
some animal, capped by the moral deduction, the lesson to be learned
therefrom. Later copyists seem to have separated the animal descriptions
and the morals from the texts they were intended to illustrate, so that
each article began with the words: "The Physiologus says." Thus the
whole collection, naturally regarded as the work of one author called
Physiologus, came to be called by that supposed author's name. In later
centuries it was called, in Europe, the "Bestiary".

    What sort of thing we may expect from this treasury of animal lore
is indicated by its account of the ant-lion: "Physiologus says that the
ant-lion's father has the shape of a lion and his mother that of an ant.
His father feeds on flesh and his mother on herbs. These two bring forth
the ant-lion, which is a mixture of both, for his fore part is that of a
lion and his hind part that of an ant. Being thus composed, he can eat
neither flesh like his father nor herbs like his mother, and so he
starves to death."

    Official Christianity did what it could to repudiate this
collection, for a synod of Pope Gelasius in 496 condemned it as the work
of "heretics", although it had been falsely ascribed to Saint Ambrose.
In spite of this and other attacks it remained familiar and influential
throughout Christendom for over a thousand years, and there are extant
texts in Greek, Arabic, Syriac, Latin, Armenian, Old High German,
Icelandic, Old French, Provençal, Ethiopic, Italian, and Anglo-Saxon. It
was chiefly by means of these Bestiaries that the popular as
distinguished from the learned tradition of the unicorn was
disseminated. Not Ctesias and not Aelian but this grist of old wives'
tales fathered upon an imaginary "Physiologus" was responsible for
scattering the image of the unicorn throughout Europe, making him
familiar where books were never read, contorting his shapely limbs on
corbels and cornices and miserere seats, depicting him in stained glass
and on tapestry, lifting him finally to the British Royal Coat of Arms.

    Existing texts of the Physiolous vary considerably in minor details,
but this is the substance of what they have to relate about the unicorn:
He is a small animal, like a kid, but surprisingly fierce for his size,
with one very sharp horn on his head, and no hunter is able to catch him
by force. Yet there is a trick by which he is taken. Men lead a virgin
to the place where he most resorts and leave her there alone. As soon as
he sees this virgin he runs and lays his head in her lap. She fondles
him and he falls asleep. The hunters then approach and capture him and
lead him to the palace of the king.

    One may have known this story for years and may have seen it
represented a hundred times in Christian art, yet if he has any gift for
stubborn wonder he will be surprised at each return by its strangeness,
and curious to know by what queer twist of thought or accident of
transmission it has taken on its present form. For this tale, absurd
though it may be, is not childishly and feebly absurd like that of the
ant-lion; there is a suggestion of age about it and a hint of symbolism
not wholly due to the fact that it has served for centuries as a
Christian symbol. What affinity did the makers of the tale imagine
between the unicorn and the virgin? Why should this animal be thought
worth so elaborate a ruse? Why is he led "to the palace of the king"?
These questions have puzzled a good many acute and learned minds, and
they have never been answered.

    But these questions arise out of the Physiologus story by itself,
without reference to the fact that another unicorn legend was already
current in the Mediterranean world. The moment we recall that fact,
another set of questions comes into view. What strands of connection can
be discerned between the two legends? Instead of the proud beast of
Ctesias and Aelian--fierce, shaped like an ass or horse, solid-hoofed,
dangerous, indomitable--we have here an animal so small that it is
likened to a kid, with a divided hoof and a beard as seen in later
Christian art, and chiefly characterized by a propensity to fall asleep
in virgins' laps. The only discernible likenesses are that in both
legends the animal is said to be fierce and not to be taken by the
ordinary arts of the hunter, and that the quarry in both belongs to the
king; but these similarities are so slight as to seem hardly worth
mentioning. Apparently we must conclude that the unicorn legend has had
two independent origins, or, in stronger terms, that there are two
legends of the unicorn, one of which we may call the Ctesian and the
other that of Physiologus.

    With this not very satisfactory conclusion in mind we may leave, for
the present, the larger question of inter-relationship, turning back to
the Physiologus account for a closer examination. Some light may be
thrown upon that account by the allegorical interpretation that usually
follows, though in varying forms, the story itself. In its simpler
versions this interpretation likens the unicorn directly to Christ: its
one horn is said to signify the unity of Christ and the Father; its
fierceness and defiance of the hunter are to remind us that neither
Principalities nor Powers nor Thrones were able to control the Messiah
against His will; its small stature is a symbol of Christ's humility and
its likeness to a kid of His association with sinful men. The virgin is
held to represent the Virgin Mary and the huntsman is the Holy Spirit
acting through the Angel Gabriel. Taken as a whole, then, the story of
the unicorn's capture typifies the Incarnation of Christ.

    Thus we see the unicorn caught up into the fervours and ecstasies of
Christian symbolism and into the very worship of the Virgin. There could
be no limit, once this had happened, to the glory of his career. For
this reason one is all the more eager to discover, if possible, the
origin of the remarkable story upon which the symbolism is based.

    The widest variations from the typical unicorn story to be found in
what may be called, with caution, the primitive texts of Physiologus,
are those to be seen in the Syriac and Provençal versions. In the
Provençal Bestiary, composed under Waldensian influences, the
"properties" of many of the beasts are changed, and the unicorn is made
to represent the Devil, the signification of the virgin-capture being
that evil can be overcome only by virtue. The Syriac version is so
interesting as to deserve quotation:--

    "There is an animal called dajja, extremely gentle, which the
hunters are unable to capture because of its great strength. It has in
the middle of its brow a single horn. But observe the ruse by which the
huntsmen take it. They lead forth a young virgin, pure and chaste, to
whom, when the animal sees her, he approaches, throwing himself upon
her. Then the girl offers him her breasts, and the animal begins to suck
the breasts of the maiden and to conduct himself familiarly with her.
Then the girl, while sitting quietly, reaches forth her hand and grasps
the horn on the animal's brow, and at this point the huntsmen come up
and take the beast and go away with him to the king.--Likewise the Lord
Christ has raised up for us a horn of salvation in the midst of
Jerusalem, in the house of God, by the intercession of the Mother of
God, a virgin pure, chaste, full of mercy, immaculate, inviolate."

    Little assistance in one's search for the origin of the
virgin-capture story would seem to be obtainable from this wild tale,
which looks like confusion worse confounded, but at least it precludes
all possibility that that story was invented ad hoe by Christian
allegorizers. One is convinced of this partly by the fact that the
signifiatio does not here fit the story as told but is forced upon it in
accordance with a custom known to be followed elsewhere. More conclusive
is the emphasis upon sexual attraction as the source of the power
exercised by the "virgin" over the unicorn. If the virgin-capture story
had been deliberately composed as a symbol of Christ's incarnation--such
a supposition implying, of course, that the virgin was always and from
the start understood to represent the Virgin Mary--it would scarcely
have been corrupted by Christians in just this way. In this version the
Christian interpretation is forced upon a tale not fully prepared to
receive it; old and incongruous elements--or so one might say if
disposed to beg the question--have not been deleted here as they have in
the other versions. The Syriac version seems to represent an idea about
the right method of capturing unicorns which is older than Physiologus;
it suggests a possibility that the origin of the virgin-capture story,
if it can be found, will turn out to be non-Christian and will rest more
heavily, or at least more obviously, upon sexual attraction than the
Christianized form of the story usually does.

    This element was not entirely ignored in later Christian writing
about the unicorn. Hildegarde of Bingen and Thomas of Cantipré, among
others, enlarge upon the animal's skill in detecting a virgin at sight,
and in some stories we are told that when the huntress is not really a
virgin she is killed by the beast--a fairly obvious intrusion of the
virginity-test theme. Furthermore, it was held by some that the hunt was
more likely to succeed if the virgin was naked, and several insist that
she must be beautiful. Alanus de Insulis, who flourished at the end of
the twelfth century, gives a curious explanation of the story in which
the sexual interpretation is made in terms of mediaeval science. He
concludes that the virgin's power is due to a radical difference in
"humours", the calidissima natura of the unicorn being drawn
irresistibly to its opposite, the femina frigida et humida. The unicorn,
he says, has an excess offervent spirits or humours which dilate his
heart, and when he comes into the pure moist air surrounding the virgin
he feels such relief and is so delighted by that feminine atmosphere
that he lies down in her lap. In several early versions, moreover, and
notably in the Ethiopic Bestiary, the virgin is not wholly passive but
adds certain calculated blandishments to the natural attraction of her
charms.

    The connotations of the virgin-capture story are in fact definitely
erotic, and the Christian interpretation put upon it does not harmonize
with the tale exactly but seems to wrench it out of its natural course
of development. In saying that the interpretation does not harmonize I
refer to the difficulty of imagining the Virgin Mary as lending herself
to a deliberate deception of her Son, the omniscient God. In saying that
the story seems to have been wrenched out of its natural course I am
thinking of what would probably have been done with it elsewhere. The
Greeks, if they had been at all interested in animal allegories, might
have made it a symbol of the overmastering power of erotic emotion,
leading to the ruin of a strong, proud nature; the Hebrew poets might
have used it somewhat as they did the great legend of Samson which it so
curiously and perhaps significantly resembles--although Delilah is not a
good surrogate for the virgin; but in Christian legend the story's
original intention has been thwarted, I believe, to serve the purposes
of edification. The attempt to point out what that original intention
was, and so to solve, in some sense, the long-standing mystery of the
virgin-capture story, may be postponed until we have followed the
development of the story during the Christian ages.

    Probably the earliest narration of the tale in literature outside of
the Physiologus itself is that in the Commentary on Saint Basil's
Hexaemeron, long attributed to Saint Eustathius of Antioch, who died
about A.D. 330. This curious work weaves about Basil's poetic account of
creation a tissue of popular legend which makes it good hunting-ground
for the student of folklore. In most of its discussions of animals it
drags a wide net through the sea of Levantine superstition, but the
unicorn passage follows Physiologus in every detail, its only importance
for our purpose consisting in the fact that here we see the
virgin-capture story moving out into literature under its own sail,
without assistance from allegory.

    The next mention of the tale was far more influential, for it
occurred in a work that was read, copied, imitated, and learned almost
by heart for centuries, a work used as quarry and foundation by most of
the "encyclopaedists" of the Middle Ages--writers who tried, not so
unsuccessfully as might be supposed, to compress all human knowledge
within a single book. Isidore of Seville, who died in 636, was one of
the men who have exerted an influence upon human thought out of all
proportion to their powers chiefly because of their strategic positions
in time or place. Played upon by many forces, which he is incapable of
criticizing or relating, his tendency is to shovel together rather
helplessly all that he has read and heard. This tendency is evident in
his important account of the unicorn, which I give myself the pleasure
of quoting in John of Trevisa's English:--

    "Rynoceron in grewe \[i.e. in Greek\] is to meanynge an Home in the
nose. & Monoceros is an Unycorne: and is a ryght cruell beast. And hath
that name for he hath in the mydull of the forehed an home of foure fote
long. And that home is so sharpe & so stronge that he throwyth downe al
or thyrleth al that he resyth on . . . . And this beest fyghtyth ofte
wyth the Elyphaunt and woundyth & stycketh hym in the wombe, and
throwyth hym downe to the grounde: And the Unycorn is so stronge that he
is not take with myghte of hunters. But men that wryte of kynde of
thinges meane that a mayde is sette there he shall come: And she openyth
her lappe and the Unycorne layeth theron his heed, and levyth all his
fyerinesse & slepyth in that wyse: And is taken as a beest wythout wepen
& slayne wyth dartys of hunters."

    It is sometimes said that Isidore took the unicorn to be the
rhinoceros, but this statement is due to a careless reading of his two
first sentences; the fact is that he confused the two animals, which is
a quite different thing, as we have seen in considering the third
passage from Aelian. In what is said of the unicorn's fight with the
elephant and of the great strength of its horn he is dependent upon one
or more of the several accounts of the rhinoceros to be found in late
classical writers, and especially in Pliny. Unlike Aelian, he had
probably never seen a rhinoceros; he had no means of knowing that this
animal supplied most of the details of his description of the unicorn,
and so he is not entirely responsible for the ridiculous picture he
gives us of a rhinoceros slumbering in the lap of a virgin. That
picture, in all its gay absurdity, we owe to his mingling of two diverse
traditions.

    Isidore's account of the unicorn is important, as I have said,
because of its influence on later writers, and it was copied, usually
with slavish exactness, by most of his successors in the long line of
mediaeval encyclopaedists. His passage, indeed, may almost be said to
have established a third tradition in which what I have called the
Hellenic and Hebraic branches come together; one not confined to the
learned like that emanating from Ctesias, nor yet to the ignorant like
that of Physiologus, but familiar to the many persons, mostly monks, who
could read Latin but had little power of discrimination in what they
read. A few of the encyclopaedists, such as Vincent of Beauvais, showed
greater independence, but in general it may be said that Isidore
determined middle-class opinion about the unicorn, giving the animal an
authenticity it could not have won from Physiologus and a vogue it would
not have gained from Ctesias, Aelian, or even Pliny.

    Intimately associated by the Bestiaries with the central mystery of
the Christian faith, and corroborated by a document which even the
semi-learned regarded as authoritative, the unicorn was at length firmly
fixed in the popular imagination of Europe. The fact that no one ever
saw a unicorn did not disturb belief in the slightest degree. No one in
mediaeval Europe ever saw a lion or an elephant or a panther, yet these
beasts were accepted without question upon evidence in no way better or
worse than that which vouched for the unicorn. The stories everywhere
told and believed about these three actual animals were not at all less
marvellous than those that recommended the unicorn to popular attention;
all were upon exactly the same footing so far as credibility was
concerned, and side by side with them stood the griffin, the dragon, the
amphisboena--a snake with a head at either end--the basilisk, the
salamander that lives in fire, and a score of other beasts similarly
spawned in the fertile fancy of man and swept together out of all past
time. By virtue of his beauty and beneficence, but chiefly because he
had the holiest associations, the unicorn was probably the most
important of these, yet he was only primus inter pares. He was not
regarded as in any sense or degree a mythical, legendary, or
supernatural animal--any more than the horse or cat or cow, the hydra or
kraken or were-wolf was so regarded; neither was he thought of as a
symbol in any degree in which any other animal might not be symbolic.
The peculiarity or weakness, call it which one will, which made him so
susceptible to the wiles of virgins was merely his "property" or
"natura", his idiosyncrasy, exactly analagous to the "property"
attributed by mediaeval science to every other creature.

    And yet it is probably true that the unicorn attracted more
attention during the Middle Ages than any other single beast except the
ass. He is the only imaginary animal of Physiologus that passed over
into the Renaissance and the most important figure in those menageries
of the fancy, gathered for the most part out of Physiologus, that began
to swarm in the Cathedrals of Europe during the thirteenth century. From
the time of Isidore to the present day he has been more significant to
the imagination, and more prominent therefore in literature and art,
than any other beast that man has made more or less "in his own image".

    Anything like a full presentation of the literature devoted to the
virgin-capture story would involve an intolerable amount of repetition,
for all this writing was done when it was still sound doctrine that

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Who-so shal telle a tale after a man,  
He moot reherce, as ny as evere he can,  
Everich a word.

</div>

    To take a few examples: the versified Bestiary of Philippe de Thaun
tells the tale rather feebly in perfect accord with Isidore and develops
the allegory at considerable length; that of William, Clerk of Normandy,
carries the significatio to great length and complexity; and Richard de
Fournival in his Bestiaire d'Amour manages to inject some novelty into
the theme by using it as a symbol of the courtly instead of the
celestial love--an audacious thing to have attempted in the middle of
the thirteenth century. Richard's poem is a protracted wooing in terms
of animal symbolisms, and the lady, quite as learned in the lore of
beasts as the lover himself, replies in kind. The lover says in the
unicorn passage: "I have been drawn to you by your sweet odour alone, as
the unicorn falls asleep under the influence of a maiden's fragrance.
For this is the nature of the unicorn, that no other beast is so hard to
capture, and he has one horn on his nose which no armour can withstand,
so that no one dares to go forth against him except a virgin girl. And
as soon as he is made aware of her presence by the scent of her, he
kneels humbly before her and humiliates himself as though to signify
that he would serve her. Therefore wise huntsmen who know his nature set
a virgin in his way; he falls asleep in her lap; and while he sleeps the
hunters, who would not dare to approach him when awake, come up and kill
him. Even so has Love dealt cruelly with me; for I have been the
proudest man alive with regard to love, and I have thought never to see
the woman whom I should care to possess . . . . But Love, the skilful
huntsman, has set in my path a maiden in the odour of whose sweetness I
have fallen asleep, and I die the death to which I was doomed."

    In this charming passage one sees that Isidore's confusion of the
rhinoceros and the unicorn has done its work: the horn of Richard de
Fournival's unicorn is en la narine. Rudolf von Ems places the horn on
the brow--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Emmiten an der stirnin sin  
hat er ein horn reht als ein glas,  
vier fuze lanc, als ich ez las--

</div>

but in other details he depicts the rhinoceros. Thus it happens again
and again, as though by a fatality, that the unicorn slips back, as it
were, into the rhinoceros; and even the virgin-capture story, violently
incongruous as it is with that huge and ugly beast, is often involved in
the confusion. It was not that these writers thought the two animals
identical, for most of them were almost passionately convinced that the
two were different; but no sooner have they finished insisting upon the
differences than they describe the one in terms that apply only to the
other. Thus the nose-horned beast of India, lumpish and gross and
mud-wallowing, looms always just behind the delicate unicorn, related to
it as fact to dream, as actuality to the ideal, as Sancho Panza to Don
Quixote.

    Rudolf von Ems makes as clear a statement as any one of the belief
that the ruse of the hunters can succeed only when the girl chosen for
the decoy is really a virgin. If she is not, the unicorn shows great
anger and runs her through with his horn to punish her deceit. A similar
power of distinguishing at sight between the true and the pretended
virgin is attributed in folklore to several other animals such as the
stag and elephant and lion, and among the many "virginity-tests", all
supposed to be unerring, one of the simplest was that of setting the
woman in the way of one of these beasts: if she was killed, then she
deserved her death; if she lived, overcoming the animal's natural
ferocity, it could be only through chastity's magic power. Such ideas,
so pervasive and enduring as to have had echoes even in Milton's Comus,
were widely current during the centuries when the virgin-capture story
was growing, and it would have been strange if they had not found
expression there; but one cannot believe that they had a shaping, not to
say an originating, influence upon that story. Suggestions of the
virginity test are rare in unicorn literature, and they are late; any
argument based upon them would be strongly countered by the frequently
seductive conduct of the woman herself. In the Syriac Bestiary, as we
have seen, the decoy is so obviously not a virgin that no unicorn with
the slightest discernment in such matters should have been deceived by
her, and we learn, also, from a Greek grammarian of the twelfth century,
that the animal can be taken as well by a young man dressed in a
maiden's garments as by the maiden herself.

    The feminine garments of this youth, we are told, must be heavily
perfumed, and this reminds one that in fully half of the virgin-capture
narratives in which any explanation is vouchsafed of the virgin's powers
of fascination she is said to attract her victim by what may be called
the odour of chastity--a scent which could be purchased, apparently,
like feminine beauty in our own time, of any good chemist. This idea
appears subordinately in the elaborate explanation already cited from
Alanus de Insulis. John of San Geminiano says that the unicorn, while
stepping along through the forest, "smells the odour of a virgin".
Philippe de Thaun remarks that the animal is attracted by the odour of
the maiden's breast. Richard de Fournival makes his unicorn aware of the
maiden "au flair". The list is a long one, extending from Albertus
Magnus, who ascribes the whole phenomenon to the unicorn's keen sense of
smell--and here again one is reminded of the rhinoceros--to a learned
pharmacist of the seventeenth century, Laurens Catelan who decides,
after deep thought and expenditure of much erudition, that the maiden
can attract her prey only by the odour which is peculiar to virgins.

    Laurens Catelan, however, had not the strange mediaeval beliefa
belief which endures to-day in some districts--in the attractive and
holding power of the eye. The Abbess Hildegarde of Bingen felt quite at
home in mysteries such as this, and her explanation is therefore more
confident than most. She believes that several virgins wandering
together in a wood are much more attractive to unicorns than a single
virgin can be. (Considering that almost all other authorities say that
the virgin must be left alone, some even asserting that she must be
naked and bound to a tree, is it permissible to suggest that the Abbess
may have been led to take this view by her responsibilities as head of a
houseful of nuns?) Hildegarde makes it clear that these virgins should
be no mere rustics but well born, and neither too old nor too young.
When the unicorn sees a bevy of such damsels wandering about, gathering
flowers or engaged in some other such maidenly pursuit, he stops at once
in his tracks and eyes them; they eye him; then he advances very slowly,
crouches on his hind legs and looks at them for a long time from a
distance. He is surprised at the fact that although they have in general
the appearance of human beings yet they have no beards; he loves them
because he sees, forsooth, that they are gentle and kind; and while he
is gazing at them, all his wild and innocent heart drawn forth in
adoration, the hunters steal up behind and slay him and cut off his
horn.

    Hildegarde's na•ve remark that the unicorn loves the maidens because
they are gentle and kind, so charmingly oblivious of the purpose of
those maidens, recalls the fact that not once in all the hundreds of
references to the virgin-capture story is there dropped the slightest
hint that this device of venery is somewhat lacking in "sportsmanship".
The girl always plays her detestable role, drawing the unicorn to his
death by acting upon his highest nature, without the slightest
compunction, and in the faces of the virgins that were painted in this
tableau during the Middle Ages there is always an expression of profound
serenity. One feels that some of the supernal charm of chastity might be
dispensed with if we could have a little more of the sense of fair play
in its place.

    The force of this feeling is increased when we turn to consider the
use to which the virgin-capture story was put in Christian symbolism. To
secure clarity of presentation, I have thus far ignored as much as
possible the allegorical meanings put upon the story even in Physiologus
and this separation is justified by the fact that the story is sometimes
told without any reference to those meanings; yet the vogue of the
unicorn legend was largely due to its symbolism, and the efflorescence
of the story in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries synchronized
significantly with the increase of devotion to the Virgin Mary. During
those centuries the story that I have called the Virgin-Capture was
elaborated swiftly, in the fervid devotional spirit of the time, into a
form which, though the same in origin, seems to deserve another name,
and which I shall call the Holy Hunt. Beginning in Physiologus as an
allegory of the Annunciation alone, the story came to comprehend in one
rich and compact symbol the total life and death of Christ and to shadow
forth the whole divine plan of redemption. In its final form it is one
of the strangest and one of the most compressed symbols or allegories
ever devised--and it sprang, as we shall see, from a strange seed.

    The scope of the Holy Hunt allegory may be shown most readily by a
paraphrase of an extended passage in an old German book written in
honour of the Virgin. A very great king, it is said, had two noble sons.
One of them wilfully stabbed himself to death, and the other brought
himself so near to death by his misconduct that his life was despaired
of. The father, though angry with this second son, was determined to do
all that was possible for him, and so sent abroad for the advice of
physicians. The wisest of these counselled that no medicine would avail
except the blood of a unicorn poured upon the wound. The King therefore
inquired how a unicorn might be captured, and he was advised to seek out
the most beautiful maiden in his dominions and to seat her in a garden
with six other maidens about her; then he should find four swift dogs,
set a huntsman over them, bind them two and two together, and cause them
to drive the unicorn toward the maiden. This device was successful. In
the geistliche auszlegong or spiritual interpretation of this story we
are told that the King is God the Father, the first son Lucifer, the
second son Adam and his seed; the chief maiden is Mary and those about
her are the personifications of her virtues; the huntsman is the Holy
Ghost, represented by the Angel Gabriel; the four dogs are strangely
identified with the four winds of heaven. In other narrations and
frequently in the numerous Holy Hunt tapestries and stained glass
windows these dogs are called Veritas, Justitia, Pax, and
Misericordia--strange names indeed, considering the purpose the animals
serve. The coupling of the dogs, which usually takes place after the
unicorn's death, signifies that whereas Mercy and Truth, Justice and
Peace, were formerly foes they are now united.

    When once the story of the Holy Hunt had attained such complexity as
this it was likely to occur anywhere in the vast literature written in
praise of the Virgin and of chastity in general. We find it, for
example, in a thoroughly detestable book celebrating virginity written
by one Heinrich Kornemann early in the seventeenth century. Here the
huntsmen who slay the unicorn are called Jews and the "palace of the
king" to which the animal is taken after its death is identified with
heaven where, "ante conspectum paterni vultus et civium supernorum", it
is greeted with appropriate ceremonies like a returning Roman general.
The story was never questioned or criticized in any way, for it had been
sanctified, and any suggestion that the Virgin acted deceitfully in
ensnaring her own Son would perhaps have been regarded as impious. How
engaging is the picture of the Angel Gabriel driving the beast into her
embraces, with God looking on benignly over the garden wall! And then
how ingenious, when the creature has been soothed to rest and
slaughtered, to blame its death, which all three of the holy Persons
concerned had foreseen and planned and brought about, upon the Jews! The
idea suggested by Kornemann that the Son of God, transformed into a
unicorn, is harried and hunted through the forests of this world in
order to be brought back as a "spectacle" for the citizens of heaven--a
faint memory of the Roman Circus--is not so much "quaint" as it is
degraded and brutal. Furthermore, the story as told by Kornemann and
many others is soaked in a peculiarly foul praise of sexual asceticism
which is more base, to all clear and clean thinking, than honest
pornography.

    The virgin-capture story is not, for all its interest, a pleasing
one, and in its later ramifications it becomes positively painful. When
he strayed into Physiologus the unicorn entered a region not worthy of
him. A creature imagined nobly as terrible, solitary, with the beauty of
power, was transformed under Christian influence into a little goat-like
animal eating out of the hand, going to sleep in maidens' laps, and
serving as a symbol of virginity. Nietzsche could not have asked for a
more brilliant illustration of "slave morality."

    The Greek version of Pysiologus brings before us a trait of the
unicorn which is quite as strange as its weakness for virgins and which
had a development in Europe quite as extensive and bewildering. The
statement of this trait is brief and simple, but we shall find that the
explanation of it, in so far as it can be explained, is neither simple
nor brief but will lead us up and down over great stretches of time and
into some of the darkest places of the mind. The Greek Bestiary says
that when the animals assemble at evening beside the great water to
drink they find that a serpent has left its venom floating upon the
surface--a characteristic trick of serpents which is elsewhere vouched
for. They see or smell this venom and dare not drink,but wait for the
unicorn. At last he comes, steps into the water, makes the sign of the
cross over it with his horn and thereby renders the poison harmless. The
significance of this trait is elsewhere explained by saying that the
animal's single horn represents the Holy Cross, that the serpent stands
for the Devil, and that the poisoned waters are the sins of the world.

    It is remarkable that this trait--which I shall call, somewhat
arbitrarily, the water-conning--exactly suited as it was to the uses of
Christian allegory, was not reported in the Bestiaries of western
Europe. To be sure it was known in the West, but not until late, and
then chiefly in learned circles. Isidore of Seville and his followers
seem never to have heard of it, and it was almost certainly unknown to
Hildegarde of Bingen, who would have delighted in its magical
connotations. We may be fairly certain, therefore, that the trait was
not mentioned in the primitive versions of Physiologus and that it
entered the Greek version from a source to which the other Bestiaries
had not access.

    The two themes of the water-conning and the virgin-capture were
seldom brought together in a single account except in contexts
professedly erudite, but a remarkable exception to this rule is found in
a rather famous poem on hunting written by Natalis Comes in Latin
hexameter about the middle of the sixteenth century. Here a large amount
of unicorn lore is packed into little space:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Far on the edge of the world and beyond the banks of the Ganges,  
Savage and lone, is a place in the realm of the King of the Hindus.  
Where there is born a beast as large as a stag in stature,  
Dark on the back, solid-hoofed, very fierce, and shaped like a
bullock.  
Mighty and black is the horn that springs from the animal's forehead,  
Terrible unto his foe, a defence and a weapon of onslaught.  
Often the poisoners steal to the banks of that swift-flowing river,  
Fouling the waves with disease by their secret insidious poisons;  
After them comes this beast and dips his horn in the water,  
Cleansing the venom away and leaving the stream to flow purely  
So that the forest-dwellers may drink once more by the margin.  
Also men say that the beast delights in the embrace of a virgin,  
Falling asleep in her arms and taking sweet rest on her bosom.  
Ah! but, awaking, he finds he is bound by ropes and by shackles.  
Strange is the tale, indeed, yet so, they say, he is taken,  
Whether it be that the seeds of love have been sown by great Nature  
Deep in his blood or for some more hidden mysterious reason.

</div>

    Having seen in some detail the development of the unicorn legend
during the Middle Ages, we may now turn to the difficult question
regarding the origin of that part of the legend, the Virgin-Capture and
the Holy Hunt, which is the special topic of the present chapter.
Speculation about that origin has engaged a good many pens since the
time when men began once more to ask questions about things instead of
taking them on trust, for every thoughtful writer about the unicorn has
been perplexed by the story and has wanted to know whence it came. The
result of all this speculation may be summed up in the words of one of
the most learned men who have ever touched the problem: "unde nostra
fabella orta sit, ignoro"--whence our fable comes I know not. There are
two attempts at a solution, however, to be recorded--one of them
puerile, but the other, to say the least, highly ingenious.

    The statement of Aelian will be recalled that the unicorn lives at
strife with animals of its own species except during the season of rut,
when the males make a temporary truce with the females. This is not a
surprising or even a peculiar trait, but it has caught the attention of
a number of scholars as a possible explanation, in default of a better,
of the virgin-capture story. Such explanation may have been vaguely
suggested by Manuel Philes in the thirteenth century; it was accepted by
Andrea Bacci and by Conrad Gesner the zoologist; Samuel Bochart, the
greatest scholar who has ever discussed the unicorn legend, added the
weight of his name; even Dr. Friedrich Lauchert, a trained literary
student of our own time, adopts it without hesitation. In spite of this
impressive array of names, however, the theory is too absurd to be
seriously entertained, and even if it were credible in other respects,
we should reject it on the ground that Aelian came too late into the
world to affect the fundamental stories of the Physiologus, and also on
the ground that his influence was primarily rhetorical. There is hardly
any likeness between the kid-like unicorn of Physiologus and the
"cartazon" of Aeian, and it is to the last degree improbable that a
single minor trait was adopted from Aeian's unicorn and given such
extensive and surprising development while major differences were
neglected. Finally, the distinction between the taming of an animal
during the season of rut by the females of his own species and the
taming of him by a human virgin is a difference "of all the sky".

    The second attempt to account for the virgin-capture story requires
more respectful attention. Professor Leo Wiener of Harvard University
points out the striking similarity between the Physiologus account of
the antholops or antelope and that of the unicorn. The former, as told
in a Latin manuscript of the eleventh century, runs thus: There is an
animal called antholops which is so exceedingly fierce that none of the
hunters is able to approach him. He has long horns in the shape of a saw
with which he can cut down the largest oaks . . . . When he is thirsty
he goes to the great river Euphrates and drinks. Now there grow in that
place certain soft and pliable branches of the vine \[sunt autem ibi
virgae viticeae subtiles et molles\], and while he is playing about he
entangles himself in them by the horn. When he is firmly caught by both
horns he cries out with a great voice, because he is unable to escape
from the slender branches \[virgulis\]; and then the hunter, hearing his
voice, runs up, finds him bound, and kills him.

    The analogies between this story and that of the unicorn are
obvious. The antholops is very fierce and defies the hunters; he is
remarkable for the armour of his brow, and this brings about his death;
the hunters wait until he is hors de combat before advancing to dispatch
him; furthermore, he is caught and held, according to this Latin text of
Physiologus, by virgae--in the spelling common in old manuscripts,
virge. Professor Wiener believes, if I understand him correctly, that
the story of the virgin-capture arose from a misreading, or perhaps a
scribe's error, which substituted for virge, "twigs" or "slender
branches", the word Virgo, "a virgin". He also thinks that the antholops
story itself is a retelling of Aesop's story of the Stag Caught by its
Horns in the Forest, and that certain minor details of the unicorn story
as told in Physiologus, are of Arabic origin. He sums up thus: "The
autalops, after drinking from the Euphrates, goes into the woods and
there plays with the branches, virgae . . . . The Physiologus or its
source read Virgo instead of virgae, and thus produced the story of the
unicorn which plays with its horn in the bosom of the virgo, maiden, and
thus is caught. This, then, shows beyond a chance of doubt that the
unicorn story arose only after the Arabs came in contact with Latin,
which was after 711, and thus the earliest date of the Pbysiologus is
established."

    I have spared the reader as much as possible of the amazing
involution in Professor Wiener's argument, but I cannot mitigate the
surprise he will feel at seeing the virgin disappear, like Daphne, into
a tree; I can only ask him to share my own disappointment that after
such gigantic labours the mountain of scholarship should bring forth
only this ridiculous mouse of an alleged mistranslation. Convinced that
the Physiolous as we know it cannot be of earlier date than AD. 711,
Professor Wiener is constrained to argue that the narrations of the
virgin-capture story in Gregory's Moralia and in Isidore's Etymologiae
are interpolations made after that date. He does not mention the fact
that the story was told by Saint Eustathius of Antioch almost four
hundred years before, nor does he explain how Pope Gelasius could have
condemned in the fifth century a work that was not produced until the
eighth. The words upon which his argument chiefly rests--"sunt autem ibi
virgae viticeae"--are found only in a manuscript of the eleventh
century, and this seems to me much too late for our present purposes. I
do not believe, therefore, that the Latin phrasing of the antholops
story gave the original suggestion for the story of the virgin-capture.
There is a considerable difference between a unicorned animal and one
with two horns fitted with saw-tooth edges, and Professor Wiener's
explanation that the antholops may break off one of his horns in his
struggle with the virgae, thereby making himself an artificial unicorn,
does not seem to meet the needs of the case. We shall do well to look
farther.

    In considering the Syriac version of Physiolous we have found reason
to suspect that the emphasis there laid upon sexual attraction indicates
some non-Christian influence. A story similar to that in Syriac is found
in Arabic literature of the fourteenth century. Al Damiri says that "a
virgin or a beautiful girl" is put in the way of the unicorn, and that
as soon as he sees her he leaps into her lap making signs for milk, of
which he is naturally very fond. After he has been suckled he lies down
drunk, as though with wine, and at this moment the hunters rush in and
bind him without resistance. This Arabian unicorn has fallen even below
the poor creature of Physiologus, for he is captured because he is
drunk, and on milk! Equally interesting is the implication that if no
virgin is available any beautiful girl will do as well. Now it seems
remotely possible that this Arabian version is a degraded form of the
Christian story, and that virginity has been subordinated because the
Mohammedans are not Mariolaters and have never laid quite the Christian
emphasis upon chastity; but it is certainly far more probable that we
have here and in the Syriac version the relics of an older story which
the Christians of Alexandria shaped to their purpose. The mention of the
virgin in the Arabic tale is due, no doubt, to Christian influence, but
her presence is so incongruous with the tale itself as to suggest that
she has been imported from another form of the story.

    In that case, we must abandon all effort to explain the
virgin-capture story in terms of itself and its variants, and we are
driven back into the sea of the world's folklore without compass or
chart, there to make what accidental landfalls we may. We are seeking an
explanation of the elective affinity between virgins and beasts with
single horns, or, if virginity is not a primary notion, of the
attraction, whether sexual or of some other sort, between women and
horned beasts. Virgins undergoing sundry tests, beautiful girls seated
lonely and receptive under trees, unicorns, rhinoceroses, faithful
lions, elephants, appear and disappear in the mists. Bartholomew
Anglicus says that "Elephants be hunted in this wise: there go in the
desert two maidens all naked and bare, and these maidens begin to sing
alone; and the beast hath liking when he heareth their song, and cometh
to them and licketh their teats and falleth asleep anon for liking of
the song; and then one maiden sticketh him in the throat and the other
taketh his blood in a vessel, and with that blood the people dye cloth.
This is useful information, but it is not directly to the purpose and
the fog closes in again. We learn that the horn of the young female
rhinoceros, taken before she has mated, sells both in Siam and in South
Africa at a price at least ten times as great as that given for the
horns of mated animals of either sex, on the ground that they are much
more powerfully prophylactic. We delve into the myth of Diana the virgin
huntress and ponder her connection with the horned moon which has had
control over poisons since the beginnings of superstition. In all this
rather aimless beating up and down one may learn much about the mental
habits out of which the virgin-capture story arose, but the actual
source of it eludes one. The suspicion grows upon the seeker that he is
looking for the origin of a belief which has never had any single
beginning and that all the success he can hope for will be like that of
one who looks for the source of a great river--and finds it in half a
dozen different springs separated, it may be, by hundreds of miles, or
in the rainwind, or in the wandering cloud. And just as it is a
hazardous thing to say that the Nile or the Mississippi or the Amazon
springs out of precisely this or that hillside, so it would be rash to
assert that the virgin-capture story must have had just this or that
origin and no other. Such confident assertions are seldom made by those
who have looked long into the mists of the primitive imagination where
vague shapes are constantly forming and dissolving again.

    And yet, though the ultimate origin of the story remains hidden, we
have already traced that story somewhat behind the form it took on in
Physiologus. It is possible to take one long step farther still, and
then we shall have done what we can.

    The sudden expansion of the known world during the sixteenth century
and the consequent opening of new lands to exploration and conquest,
gave to the imagination of Europe an impetus which had among its many
results a sort of modern mythology. We are accustomed to think of this
expansion in connection with the western hemisphere alone, but the sea
route to India and the Far East contributed quite as much as America to
European fancy. India, which had been a land of chimera to Ctesias and
had remained such during all the intervening centuries, was no less
marvellous now that the Portuguese were bringing back a cargo of wonders
in every ship that rounded the Cape. By one of the stranger accidents in
the history of legend, some of the tales that had once been told of
India were transferred to a nearer land, Ethiopia, which had been
confused with the great peninsula even in Virgil's time. Most of these
tales moved westward with the fabulous Court of Prester John, which had
originally been located somewhat vaguely in "India". Ever since the
forged letter describing this Christian court had been received, and
answered, by Pope Alexander III, Christian missionaries had been much
interested in it, and they were none the less so in the early
seventeenth century when there seemed to be grave danger that Prester
John--at that time approximately five hundred years of age--would fall
into heresy. These are the circumstances surrounding the several
accounts of Ethiopia that we owe to Jesuits of the period, the best
known of which is that of Jeronimo Lobo. Most of the Jesuit travellers
to the Court of Prester John have something to say about the Abyssinian
unicorn, and Father Lobo has a great deal. From one of them, Fray Luis
de Urreta, we get an unmistakable clue to the original nature of the
virgin-capture story.

    This clue is found in a book packed with unheard-of matters and
quite worthy of its noble title: Historia de los Grandes y Remotos
Reynos de la Etiopia, Monarchia del Emperador llamado Preste Juan. Well
beyond the middle of it there is a clear description of the rhinoceros,
which Fray Luis says has been made familiar to Europe by many pictures.
He describes it as an extremely wild animal, very fierce and brave and
proud, and so powerful that it can be killed only by one ruse or trick.
The way of killing it is this: The hunters go into the province of
Goyame, which is at the base of the Mountains of the Moon whence the
Nile springs, for there alone, in all Africa, are these beasts to be
found. When they learn that one is near at hand they load their muskets
and they take a female monkey which they have trained for this kind of
hunting, and they bring her to the place. She begins at once to run
about looking for the rhinoceros, and when she sees him she leaps here
and there and dances as she goes toward him, playing a thousand
monkey-tricks. He is much delighted in watching this entertainment, so
that she is able to approach until she can throw one leg over his back.
Then she begins scratching and rubbing his hide, and this gives him keen
pleasure. At last, jumping to the ground again, she starts to rub his
belly, and then the rhinoceros is so overcome with ecstasy that he
stretches himself out at length upon the ground. At this point the
hunters, who have been hidden all the while in some safe place, come up
with their cross-bows or muskets and shoot him.

    Here is such a tale as hunters may have told round the camp-fire,
time out of mind, as a matter-of-fact statement of the method by which a
valuable animal, too tough for darts and arrows, might be killed. One
who lays the two side by side will have little doubt, I think, that the
tale reported by Fray Luis springs from the same root as the
virgin-capture story, for they correspond not merely here and there but
at every point. With regard to the question as to which of the two is
probably the older, one sees that Fray Luis's relation, as compared with
the other, verges everywhere toward the probable, even the realistic.
Instead of the unicorn we have here the rhinoceros, his grossly actual
doppelganger. In place of the virgin we are given a monkey--a female
monkey, be it observed, and one specially trained in the appropriate
feminine blandishments. Instead of depending upon such vague lures as
the odour of chastity or the power of the eye, this decoy sets to work
with seduction of the most physical kind. Instead of the sleep of the
unicorn, which is usually left unexplained by the narrators of the other
tale, we have here the natural stretching-out of the beast to enjoy
itself to the fullest extent.

    Now it seems unlikely that this account is a degraded or brokendown
version of the virgin-capture story. Usually, when a myth or legend has
reached such an elevation of the supernatural as that attained by the
virgin-capture tale, it maintains itself at that level, if only because
simple minds find it easier to remember and perhaps easier to believe.
This rule--which has, of course, many exceptions--holds particularly for
myths and legends that have become entangled with religious beliefs.
Numerous written texts of the virgin-capture story, and very numerous
representations of it, have existed for a long time to preserve it from
corrupting influences. The variations from that story in the account of
the rhinoceros hunt, moreover, are not of a sort to be accounted for by
assuming a gradual decomposition of the Christian tale as it was tossed
from tongue to tongue during the centuries. The two stories answer to
each other point for point, so that one who tried to prove that the
monkey-capture is a debased version of the virgin-capture story would be
obliged to assume a conscious act of euhemerization for which he could
scarcely assign a sufficient motive. But the most cogent argument
against such a theory is the vaguest and the hardest to state: such a
patient unravelling of a developed legend and the substitution, strand
by strand, of baser materials, is simply foreign to the thought-habits
of the times and the minds concerned. Such cynical performances are
amusing to a Lucian or an Anatole France, but we cannot attribute them
to African hunters of the seventeenth or of any earlier century. And
this tale of the rhinoceros hunt is a hunter's tale. As such, it is
probably ancient, for during historic times the rhinoceros of
India--where the story first was told--was captured chiefly by great
drives, such as that organized by Tamerlane in the fourteenth century,
in which hundreds of men took part on foot and horseback.

    We must conclude, then, that the tale told by Fray Luis is not
derived from the account of the unicorn in Physiologus. But the two
stories are related to each other, and closely related. Either they
spring separately from a single root or else the Christian legend is the
product of a more or less deliberate allegorizing of the heathen belief.
The second of these possibilities seems to me to harmonize with the
little we can safely surmise about the methods and purposes of the
shapers of Physialogus. There may have been some intermediary forms of
the story that are now lost, and there were probably some forms of the
monkey-capture story more primitive and even less pleasing than that
related by Fray Luis, for early Arabian tales about the monkey were
often obscene. To pursue the story into the jungles of Siam would be an
absorbing adventure, no doubt, but it would not advance our knowledge of
unicorn lore. We have traced the Christian legend of the unicorn back,
if not to its source, at any rate to a form as primitive, in all
likelihood, as that in which the early Christians found it, and this
should be sufficient.

    The conclusion at which we arrive is a surprising one. On the one
hand we have the rich and mystical beauty of the Holy Hunt comprising in
one packed symbol the conception, life, and death of Christ--a symbol
branching out into literature, flowering profusely in the arts,
entangled with the central religious passion of the Middle Ages. On the
other hand we have a ludicrous tale about the antics of a she-monkey
trained to decoy the rhinoceros by scratching his belly and back. Our
inference that the religious symbol is derived from the gross hunter's
tale may be repugnant to some sensibilities, but the apparent contrast
is exactly of the kind that confronts us everywhere in our probing
toward the bases of life, of beauty, even of love. Ultimately we have to
decide whether we shall think less highly of the flower or contrive to
think somewhat better of the earth from which it grows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Shaping Fantasies](lou05)
