<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/003)  [Palmer
Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/003)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/00301) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq003)  [Rodwell](../qr/003)   
[Previous](002)  [Next](004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 3. Al-Imran: The Family Of Imran

<span id="an_003_001">1</span> Alim. Lam. Mim.

<span id="an_003_002">2</span> Allah! There is no God save Him, the
Alive, the Eternal.

<span id="an_003_003">3</span> He hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the
Scripture with truth, confirming that which was (revealed) before it,
even as He revealed the Torah and the Gospel.

<span id="an_003_004">4</span> Aforetime, for a guidance to mankind; and
hath revealed the Criterion (of right and wrong). Lo! those who
disbelieve the revelations of Allah, theirs will be a heavy doom. Allah
is Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong).

<span id="an_003_005">5</span> Lo! nothing in the earth or in the
heavens is hidden from Allah.

<span id="an_003_006">6</span> He it is Who fashioneth you in the wombs
as pleaseth Him. There is no God save Him, the Almighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_003_007">7</span> He it is Who hath revealed unto thee
(Muhammad) the Scripture wherein are clear revelations - they are the
substance of the Book - and others (which are) allegorical. But those in
whose hearts is doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is allegorical
seeking (to cause) dissension by seeking to explain it. None knoweth its
explanation save Allah. And those who are of sound instruction say: We
believe therein; the whole is from our Lord; but only men of
understanding really heed.

<span id="an_003_008">8</span> Our Lord! Cause not our hearts to stray
after Thou hast guided us, and bestow upon us mercy from Thy Presence.
Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Bestower.

<span id="an_003_009">9</span> Our Lord! Lo! it is Thou Who gatherest
mankind together to a Day of which there is no doubt. Lo! Allah faileth
not to keep the tryst.

<span id="an_003_010">10</span> (On that Day) neither the riches nor the
progeny of those who disbelieve will aught avail them with Allah. They
will be fuel for Fire.

<span id="an_003_011">11</span> Like Pharaoh's folk and those who were
before them, they disbelieved Our revelations and so Allah seized them
for their sins. And Allah is severe in punishment.

<span id="an_003_012">12</span> Say (O Muhammad) unto those who
disbelieve: Ye shall be overcome and gathered unto Hell, an evil
resting-place.

<span id="an_003_013">13</span> There was a token for you in two hosts
which met: one army fighting in the way of Allah, and another
disbelieving, whom they saw as twice their number, clearly, with their
very eyes. Thus Allah strengtheneth with His succour whom He will. Lo!
herein verily is a lesson for those who have eyes.

<span id="an_003_014">14</span> Beautified for mankind is love of the
joys (that come) from women and offspring; and stored-up heaps of gold
and silver, and horses branded (with their mark), and cattle and land.
That is comfort of the life of the world. Allah! With Him is a more
excellent abode.

<span id="an_003_015">15</span> Say: Shall I inform you of something
better than that ? For those who keep from evil, with their Lord, are
Gardens underneath which rivers flow wherein they will abide, and pure
companions, and contentment from Allah. Allah is Seer of His bondmen,

<span id="an_003_016">16</span> Those who say: Our Lord! Lo! we believe.
So forgive us our sins and guard us from the punishment of Fire;

<span id="an_003_017">17</span> The steadfast, and the truthful, and the
obedient, those who spend (and hoard not), those who pray for pardon in
the watches of the night.

<span id="an_003_018">18</span> Allah (Himself) is Witness that there is
no God save Him. And the angels and the men of learning (too are
witness). Maintaining His creation in justice, there is no God save Him
the Almighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_003_019">19</span> Lo! religion with Allah (is) the
Surrender (to His Will and Guidance). Those who (formerly) received the
Scripture differed only after knowledge came unto them, through
transgression among themselves. Whoso disbelieveth the revelations of
Allah (will find that) lo! Allah is swift at reckoning.

<span id="an_003_020">20</span> And if they argue with thee, (O
Muhammad), say: I have surrendered my purpose to Allah and (so have)
those who follow me. And say unto those who have received the Scripture
and those who read not: Have ye (too) surrendered ? If they surrender,
then truly they are rightly guided, and if they turn away, then it is
thy duty only to convey the message (unto them). Allah is Seer of (His)
bondmen.

<span id="an_003_021">21</span> Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations
of Allah, and slay the prophets wrongfully, and slay those of mankind
who enjoin equity: promise them a painful doom.

<span id="an_003_022">22</span> Those are they whose works have failed
in the world and the Hereafter; and they have no helpers.

<span id="an_003_023">23</span> Hast thou not seen how those who have
received a portion of the Scripture invoke the Scripture of Allah (in
their disputes) that it may judge between them; then a faction of them
turn away, being opposed (to it) ?

<span id="an_003_024">24</span> That is because they say: The Fire will
not touch us save for a certain number of days. That which they used to
invent hath deceived them regarding their religion.

<span id="an_003_025">25</span> How (will it be with them) when We have
brought them all together to a Day of which there is no doubt, when
every soul will be paid in full what it hath earned, and they will not
be wronged.

<span id="an_003_026">26</span> Say: O Allah! Owner of Sovereignty! Thou
givest sovereignty unto whom Thou wilt, and Thou withdrawest sovereignty
from whom Thou wilt. Thou exaltest whom Thou wilt, and Thou abasest whom
Thou wilt. In Thy hand is the good. Lo! Thou art Able to do all things.

<span id="an_003_027">27</span> Thou causest the night to pass into the
day, and Thou causest the day to pass into the night. And Thou bringest
forth the living from the dead, and Thou bringest forth the dead from
the living. And Thou givest sustenance to whom Thou choosest, without
stint.

<span id="an_003_028">28</span> Let not the believers take disbelievers
for their friends in preference to believers. Whoso doeth that hath no
connection with Allah unless (it be) that ye but guard yourselves
against them, taking (as it were) security. Allah biddeth you beware
(only) of Himself. Unto Allah is the journeying.

<span id="an_003_029">29</span> Say, (O Muhammad): Whether ye hide that
which is in your breasts or reveal it, Allah knoweth it. He knoweth that
which is in the heavens and that which is in the earth, and Allah is
Able to do all things.

<span id="an_003_030">30</span> On the Day when every soul will find
itself confronted with all that it hath done of good and all that it
hath done of evil (every soul) will long that there might be a mighty
space of distance between it and that (evil). Allah biddeth you beware
of Him. And Allah is Full of Pity for (His) bondmen.

<span id="an_003_031">31</span> Say, (O Muhammad, to mankind): If ye
love Allah, follow me; Allah will love you and forgive you your sins.
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_003_032">32</span> Say: Obey Allah and the messenger. But
if they turn away, lo! Allah loveth not the disbelievers (in His
guidance).

<span id="an_003_033">33</span> Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and
the Family of Abraham and the Family of 'Imran above (all His)
creatures.

<span id="an_003_034">34</span> They were descendants one of another.
Allah is Hearer, Knower.

<span id="an_003_035">35</span> (Remember) when the wife of 'Imran said:
My Lord! I have vowed unto Thee that which is in my belly as a
consecrated (offering). Accept it from me. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the
Hearer, the Knower!

<span id="an_003_036">36</span> And when she was delivered she said: My
Lord! Lo! I am delivered of a female - Allah knew best of what she was
delivered - the male is not as the female; and lo! I have named her
Mary, and lo! I crave Thy protection for her and for her offspring from
Satan the outcast.

<span id="an_003_037">37</span> And her Lord accepted her with full
acceptance and vouchsafed to her a goodly growth; and made Zachariah her
guardian. Whenever Zachariah went into the sanctuary where she was, he
found that she had food. He said: O Mary! Whence cometh unto thee this
(food) ? She answered: It is from Allah. Allah giveth without stint to
whom He will.

<span id="an_003_038">38</span> Then Zachariah prayed unto his Lord and
said: My Lord! Bestow upon me of Thy bounty goodly offspring. Lo! Thou
art the Hearer of Prayer.

<span id="an_003_039">39</span> And the angels called to him as he stood
praying in the sanctuary: Allah giveth thee glad tidings of (a son whose
name is) John, (who cometh) to confirm a word from Allah lordly, chaste,
a prophet of the righteous.

<span id="an_003_040">40</span> He said: My Lord! How can I have a son
when age hath overtaken me already and my wife is barren ? (The angel)
answered: So (it will be). Allah doeth what He will.

<span id="an_003_041">41</span> He said: My Lord! Appoint a token for
me. (The angel) said: The token unto thee (shall be) that thou shalt not
speak unto mankind three days except by signs. Remember thy Lord much,
and praise (Him) in the early hours of night and morning.

<span id="an_003_042">42</span> And when the angels said: O Mary! Lo!
Allah hath chosen thee and made thee pure, and hath preferred thee above
(all) the women of creation.

<span id="an_003_043">43</span> O Mary! Be obedient to thy Lord,
prostrate thyself and bow with those who bow (in worship).

<span id="an_003_044">44</span> This is of the tidings of things hidden.
We reveal it unto thee (Muhammad). Thou wast not present with them when
they threw their pens (to know) which of them should be the guardian of
Mary, nor wast thou present with them when they quarrelled (thereupon).

<span id="an_003_045">45</span> (And remember) when the angels said: O
Mary! Lo! Allah giveth thee glad tidings of a word from him, whose name
is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, illustrious in the world and the
Hereafter, and one of those brought near (unto Allah).

<span id="an_003_046">46</span> He will speak unto mankind in his cradle
and in his manhood, and he is of the righteous.

<span id="an_003_047">47</span> She said: My Lord! How can I have a
child when no mortal hath touched me ? He said: So (it will be). Allah
createth what He will. If He decreeth a thing, He saith unto it only:
Be! and it is.

<span id="an_003_048">48</span> And He will teach him the Scripture and
wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel,

<span id="an_003_049">49</span> And will make him a messenger unto the
Children of Israel, (saying): Lo! I come unto you with a sign from your
Lord. Lo! I fashion for you out of clay the likeness of a bird, and I
breathe into it and it is a bird, by Allah's leave. I heal him who was
born blind, and the leper, and I raise the dead, by Allah's leave. And I
announce unto you what ye eat and what ye store up in your houses. Lo!
herein verily is a portent for you, if ye are to be believers.

<span id="an_003_050">50</span> And (I come) confirming that which was
before me of the Torah, and to make lawful some of that which was
forbidden unto you. I come unto you with a sign from your Lord, so keep
your duty to Allah and obey me.

<span id="an_003_051">51</span> Lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so
worship Him. That is a straight path.

<span id="an_003_052">52</span> But when Jesus became conscious of their
disbelief, he cried: Who will be my helpers in the cause of Allah ? The
disciples said: We will be Allah's helpers. We believe in Allah, and
bear thou witness that we have surrendered (unto Him).

<span id="an_003_053">53</span> Our Lord! We believe in that which Thou
hast revealed and we follow him whom Thou hast sent. Enrol us among
those who witness (to the truth).

<span id="an_003_054">54</span> And they (the disbelievers) schemed, and
Allah schemed (against them): and Allah is the best of schemers.

<span id="an_003_055">55</span> (And remember) when Allah said: O Jesus!
Lo! I am gathering thee and causing thee to ascend unto Me, and am
cleansing thee of those who disbelieve and am setting those who follow
thee above those who disbelieve until the Day of Resurrection. Then unto
Me ye will (all) return, and I shall judge between you as to that
wherein ye used to differ.

<span id="an_003_056">56</span> As for those who disbelieve I shall
chastise them with a heavy chastisement in the world and the Hereafter;
and they will have no helpers.

<span id="an_003_057">57</span> And as for those who believe and do good
works, He will pay them their wages in full. Allah loveth not
wrong-doers.

<span id="an_003_058">58</span> This (which) We recite unto thee is a
revelation and a wise reminder.

<span id="an_003_059">59</span> Lo! the likeness of Jesus with Allah is
as the likeness of Adam. He created him of dust, then He said unto him:
Be! and he is.

<span id="an_003_060">60</span> (This is) the truth from thy Lord (O
Muhammad), so be not thou of those who waver.

<span id="an_003_061">61</span> And whoso disputeth with thee concerning
him, after the knowledge which hath come unto thee, say (unto him):
Come! We will summon our sons and your sons, and our women and your
women, and ourselves and yourselves, then we will pray humbly (to our
Lord) and (solemnly) invoke the curse of Allah upon those who lie.

<span id="an_003_062">62</span> Lo! This verily is the true narrative.
There is no God save Allah, and lo! Allah, He verily is, is the Mighty,
the Wise.

<span id="an_003_063">63</span> And if they turn away, then lo! Allah is
Aware of (who are) the corrupters.

<span id="an_003_064">64</span> Say: O People of the Scripture! Come to
an agreement between us and you: that we shall worship none but Allah,
and that we shall ascribe no partner unto Him, and that none of us shall
take others for lords beside Allah. And if they turn away, then say:
Bear witness that we are they who have surrendered (unto Him).

<span id="an_003_065">65</span> O People of the Scripture! Why will ye
argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed
till after him ? Have ye then no sense ?

<span id="an_003_066">66</span> Lo! ye are those who argue about that
whereof ye have some knowledge: Why then argue ye concerning that
whereof ye have no knowledge ? Allah knoweth. Ye know not.

<span id="an_003_067">67</span> Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a
Christian; but he was an upright man who had surrendered (to Allah), and
he was not of the idolaters.

<span id="an_003_068">68</span> Lo! those of mankind who have the best
claim to Abraham are those who followed him, and this Prophet and those
who believe (with him); and Allah is the Protecting Guardian of the
believers.

<span id="an_003_069">69</span> A party of the People of the Scripture
long to make you go astray; and they make none to go astray except
themselves, but they perceive not.

<span id="an_003_070">70</span> O People of the Scripture! Why
disbelieve ye in the revelations of Allah, when ye (yourselves) bear
witness (to their truth) ?

<span id="an_003_071">71</span> O People of the Scripture! Why confound
ye truth with falsehood and knowingly conceal the truth ?

<span id="an_003_072">72</span> And a party of the People of the
Scripture say: Believe in that which hath been revealed unto those who
believe at the opening of the day, and disbelieve at the end thereof, in
order that they may return;

<span id="an_003_073">73</span> And believe not save in one who
followeth your religion - Say (O Muhammad): Lo! the guidance is Allah's
Guidance - that anyone is given the like of that which was given unto
you or that they may argue with you in the presence of their Lord. Say
(O Muhammad): Lo! the bounty is in Allah's hand. He bestoweth it on whom
He will. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

<span id="an_003_074">74</span> He selecteth for His mercy whom He will.
Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

<span id="an_003_075">75</span> Among the People of the Scripture there
is he who, if thou trust him with a weight of treasure, will return it
to thee. And among them there is he who, if thou trust him with a piece
of gold, will not return it to thee unless thou keep standing over him.
That is because they say: We have no duty to the Gentiles. They speak a
lie concerning Allah knowingly.

<span id="an_003_076">76</span> Nay, but (the chosen of Allah is) he who
fulfilleth his pledge and wardeth off (evil); for lo! Allah loveth those
who ward off (evil).

<span id="an_003_077">77</span> Lo! those who purchase a small gain at
the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths, they have no portion in
the Hereafter. Allah will neither speak to them nor look upon them on
the Day of Resurrection, nor will He make them grow. Theirs will be a
painful doom.

<span id="an_003_078">78</span> And lo! there is a party of them who
distort the Scripture with their tongues, that ye may think that what
they say is from the Scripture, when it is not from the Scripture. And
they say: It is from Allah, when it is not from Allah; and they speak a
lie concerning Allah knowingly.

<span id="an_003_079">79</span> It is not (possible) for any human being
unto whom Allah had given the Scripture and wisdom and the prophethood
that he should afterwards have said unto mankind: Be slaves of me
instead of Allah; but (what he said was): Be ye faithful servants of the
Lord by virtue of your constant teaching of the Scripture and of your
constant study thereof.

<span id="an_003_080">80</span> And he commanded you not that ye should
take the angels and the prophets for lords. Would he command you to
disbelieve after ye had surrendered (to Allah) ?

<span id="an_003_081">81</span> When Allah made (His) covenant with the
prophets, (He said): Behold that which I have given you of the Scripture
and knowledge. And afterward there will come unto you a messenger,
confirming that which ye possess. Ye shall believe in him and ye shall
help him. He said: Do ye agree, and will ye take up My burden (which I
lay upon you) in this (matter) ? They answered: We agree. He said: Then
bear ye witness. I will be a witness with you.

<span id="an_003_082">82</span> Then whosoever after this shall turn
away: they will be miscreants.

<span id="an_003_083">83</span> Seek they other than the religion of
Allah, when unto Him submitteth whosoever is in the heavens and the
earth, willingly or unwillingly, and unto Him they will be returned.

<span id="an_003_084">84</span> Say (O Muhammad): We believe in Allah
and that which is revealed unto us and that which was revealed unto
Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and that which
was vouchsafed unto Moses and Jesus and the prophets from their Lord. We
make no distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have
surrendered.

<span id="an_003_085">85</span> And whoso seeketh as religion other than
the Surrender (to Allah) it will not be accepted from him, and he will
be a loser in the Hereafter.

<span id="an_003_086">86</span> How shall Allah guide a people who
disbelieved after their belief and (after) they bore witness that the
messenger is true and after clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty) had
come unto them. And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

<span id="an_003_087">87</span> As for such, their guerdon is that on
them rests the curse of Allah and of angels and of men combined.

<span id="an_003_088">88</span> They will abide therein. Their doom will
not be lightened, neither will they be reprieved;

<span id="an_003_089">89</span> Save those who afterward repent and do
right. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_003_090">90</span> Lo! those who disbelieve after their
(profession of) belief, and afterward grow violent in disbelief: their
repentance will not be accepted. And such are those who are astray.

<span id="an_003_091">91</span> Lo! those who disbelieve, and die in
disbelief, the (whole) earth full of gold would not be accepted from
such an one if it were offered as a ransom (for his soul). Theirs will
be a painful doom and they will have no helpers.

<span id="an_003_092">92</span> Ye will not attain unto piety until ye
spend of that which ye love. And whatsoever ye spend, Allah is Aware
thereof.

<span id="an_003_093">93</span> All food was lawful unto the Children of
Israel, save that which Israel forbade himself, (in days) before the
Torah was revealed. Say: Produce the Torah and read it (unto us) if ye
are truthful.

<span id="an_003_094">94</span> And whoever shall invent a falsehood
after that concerning Allah, such will be wrong-doers.

<span id="an_003_095">95</span> Say: Allah speaketh truth. So follow the
religion of Abraham, the upright. He was not of the idolaters.

<span id="an_003_096">96</span> Lo! the first Sanctuary appointed for
mankind was that at Mecca, a blessed place, a guidance to the peoples;

<span id="an_003_097">97</span> Wherein are plain memorials (of Allah's
guidance); the place where Abraham stood up to pray; and whosoever
entereth it is safe. And pilgrimage to the House is a duty unto Allah
for mankind, for him who can find a way thither. As for him who
disbelieveth, (let him know that) lo! Allah is Independent of (all)
creatures.

<span id="an_003_098">98</span> Say: O People of the Scripture! Why
disbelieve ye in the revelations of Allah, when Allah (Himself) is
Witness of what ye do ?

<span id="an_003_099">99</span> Say: O People of the Scripture! Why
drive ye back believers from the way of Allah, seeking to make it
crooked, when ye are witnesses (to Allah's guidance) ? Allah is not
unaware of what ye do.

<span id="an_003_100">100</span> O ye who believe! If ye obey a party of
those who have received the Scripture they will make you disbelievers
after your belief.

<span id="an_003_101">101</span> How can ye disbelieve, when it is ye
unto whom Allah's revelations are recited, and His messenger is in your
midst ? He who holdeth fast to Allah, he indeed is guided unto a right
path.

<span id="an_003_102">102</span> O ye who believe! Observe your duty to
Allah with right observance, and die not save as those who have
surrendered (unto Him)

<span id="an_003_103">103</span> And hold fast, all of you together, to
the cable of Allah, and do not separate. And remember Allah's favour
unto you: How ye were enemies and He made friendship between your hearts
so that ye became as brothers by His grace; and (how) ye were upon the
brink of an abyss of fire, and He did save you from it. Thus Allah
maketh clear His revelations unto you, that haply ye may be guided,

<span id="an_003_104">104</span> And there may spring from you a nation
who invite to goodness, and enjoin right conduct and forbid indecency.
Such are they who are successful.

<span id="an_003_105">105</span> And be ye not as those who separated
and disputed after the clear proofs had come unto them. For such there
is an awful doom,

<span id="an_003_106">106</span> On the Day when (some) faces will be
whitened and (some) faces will be blackened; and as for those whose
faces have been blackened, it will be said unto them: Disbelieved ye
after your (profession of) belief ? Then taste the punishment for that
ye disbelieved.

<span id="an_003_107">107</span> And as for those whose faces have been
whitened, in the mercy of Allah they dwell for ever.

<span id="an_003_108">108</span> These are revelations of Allah. We
recite them unto thee in truth. Allah willeth no injustice to (His)
creatures.

<span id="an_003_109">109</span> Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in
the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth; and unto Allah all things
are returned.

<span id="an_003_110">110</span> Ye are the best community that hath
been raised up for mankind. Ye enjoin right conduct and forbid
indecency; and ye believe in Allah. And if the People of the Scripture
had believed it had been better for them. Some of them are believers;
but most of them are evil-livers.

<span id="an_003_111">111</span> They will not harm you save a trifling
hurt, and if they fight against you they will turn and flee. And
afterward they will not be helped.

<span id="an_003_112">112</span> Ignominy shall be their portion
wheresoever they are found save (where they grasp) a rope from Allah and
a rope from men. They have incurred anger from their Lord, and
wretchedness is laid upon them. That is because they used to disbelieve
the revelations of Allah, and slew the prophets wrongfully. That is
because they were rebellious and used to transgress.

<span id="an_003_113">113</span> They are not all alike. Of the People
of the Scripture there is a staunch community who recite the revelations
of Allah in the night season, falling prostrate (before Him).

<span id="an_003_114">114</span> They believe in Allah and the Last Day,
and enjoin right conduct and forbid indecency, and vie one with another
in good works. These are of the righteous.

<span id="an_003_115">115</span> And whatever good they do, they will
not be denied the meed thereof. Allah is Aware of those who ward off
(evil).

<span id="an_003_116">116</span> Lo! the riches and the progeny of those
who disbelieve will not avail them aught against Allah; and such are
rightful owners of the Fire. They will abide therein.

<span id="an_003_117">117</span> The likeness of that which they spend
in this life of the world is as the likeness of a biting, icy wind which
smiteth the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves, and
devastateth it. Allah wronged them not, but they do wrong themselves.

<span id="an_003_118">118</span> O ye who believe! Take not for
intimates others than your own folk, who would spare no pains to ruin
you; they love to hamper you. Hatred is revealed by (the utterance of)
their mouths, but that which their breasts hide is greater. We have made
plain for you the revelations if ye will understand.

<span id="an_003_119">119</span> Lo! ye are those who love them though
they love you not, and ye believe in all the Scripture. When they fall
in with you they say: We believe; but when they go apart they bite their
finger-tips at you, for rage. Say: Perish in your rage! Lo! Allah is
Aware of what is hidden in (your) breasts.

<span id="an_003_120">120</span> If a lucky chance befall you, it is
evil unto them, and if disaster strike you they rejoice thereat. But if
ye persevere and keep from evil their guile will never harm you. Lo!
Allah is Surrounding what they do.

<span id="an_003_121">121</span> And when thou settedst forth at
daybreak from thy housefolk to assign to the believers their positions
for the battle, Allah was Hearer, Knower.

<span id="an_003_122">122</span> When two parties of you almost fell
away, and Allah was their Protecting Friend. In Allah let believers put
their trust.

<span id="an_003_123">123</span> Allah had already given you the victory
at Badr, when ye were contemptible. So observe your duty to Allah in
order that ye may be thankful.

<span id="an_003_124">124</span> When thou didst say unto the believers:
Is it not sufficient for you that your Lord should support you with
three thousand angels sent down (to your help) ?

<span id="an_003_125">125</span> Nay, but if ye persevere, and keep from
evil, and (the enemy) attack you suddenly, your Lord will help you with
five thousand angels sweeping on.

<span id="an_003_126">126</span> Allah ordained this only as a message
of good cheer for you, and that thereby your hearts might be at rest -
Victory cometh only from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise -

<span id="an_003_127">127</span> That He may cut off a part of those who
disbelieve, or overwhelm them so that they retire, frustrated.

<span id="an_003_128">128</span> It is no concern at all of thee
(Muhammad) whether He relent toward them or punish them; for they are
evil-doers.

<span id="an_003_129">129</span> Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in
the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. He forgiveth whom He will,
and punisheth whom He will. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_003_130">130</span> O ye who believe! Devour not usury,
doubling and quadrupling (the sum lent). Observe your duty to Allah,
that ye may be successful.

<span id="an_003_131">131</span> And ward off (from yourselves) the Fire
prepared for disbelievers.

<span id="an_003_132">132</span> And obey Allah and the messenger, that
ye may find mercy.

<span id="an_003_133">133</span> And vie one with another for
forgiveness from your Lord, and for a paradise as wide as are the
heavens and the earth, prepared for those who ward off (evil);

<span id="an_003_134">134</span> Those who spend (of that which Allah
hath given them) in ease and in adversity, those who control their wrath
and are forgiving toward mankind; Allah loveth the good;

<span id="an_003_135">135</span> And those who, when they do an evil
thing or wrong themselves, remember Allah and implore forgiveness for
their sins - Who forgiveth sins save Allah only ? - and will not
knowingly repeat (the wrong) they did.

<span id="an_003_136">136</span> The reward of such will be forgiveness
from their Lord, and Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they
will abide for ever - a bountiful reward for workers!

<span id="an_003_137">137</span> Systems have passed away before you. Do
but travel in the land and see the nature of the consequence for those
who did deny (the messengers).

<span id="an_003_138">138</span> This is a declaration for mankind, a
guidance and an admonition unto those who ward off (evil)

<span id="an_003_139">139</span> Faint not nor grieve, for ye will
overcome them if ye are (indeed) believers.

<span id="an_003_140">140</span> If ye have received a blow, the
(disbelieving) people have received a blow the like thereof. These are
(only) the vicissitudes which We cause to follow one another for
mankind, to the end that Allah may know those who believe and may choose
witnesses from among you; and Allah loveth not wrong-doers.

<span id="an_003_141">141</span> And that Allah may prove those who
believe, and may blight the disbelievers.

<span id="an_003_142">142</span> Or deemed ye that ye would enter
paradise while yet Allah knoweth not those of you who really strive, nor
knoweth those (of you) who are steadfast ?

<span id="an_003_143">143</span> And verily ye used to wish for death
before ye met it (in the field). Now ye have seen it with your eyes!

<span id="an_003_144">144</span> Muhammad is but a messenger, messengers
(the like of whom) have passed away before him. Will it be that, when he
dieth or is slain, ye will turn back on your heels ? He who turneth back
on his heels doth no hurt to Allah, and Allah will reward the thankful.

<span id="an_003_145">145</span> No soul can ever die except by Allah's
leave and at a term appointed. Whoso desireth the reward of the world,
We bestow on him thereof; and whoso desireth the reward of the
Hereafter, We bestow on him thereof. We shall reward the thankful.

<span id="an_003_146">146</span> And with how many a prophet have there
been a number of devoted men who fought (beside him). They quailed not
for aught that befell them in the way of Allah, nor did they weaken, nor
were they brought low. Allah loveth the steadfast.

<span id="an_003_147">147</span> Their cry was only that they said: Our
Lord! forgive us for our sins and wasted efforts, make our foothold
sure, and give us victory over the disbelieving folk.

<span id="an_003_148">148</span> So Allah gave them the reward of the
world and the good reward of the Hereafter. Allah loveth those whose
deeds are good.

<span id="an_003_149">149</span> O ye who believe! if ye obey those who
disbelieve, they will make you turn back on your heels, and ye turn back
as losers.

<span id="an_003_150">150</span> But Allah is your Protector, and He is
the Best of Helpers.

<span id="an_003_151">151</span> We shall cast terror into the hearts of
those who disbelieve because they ascribe unto Allah partners, for which
no warrant hath been revealed. Their habitation is the Fire, and hapless
the abode of the wrong-doers.

<span id="an_003_152">152</span> Allah verily made good His promise unto
you when ye routed them by His leave, until (the moment) when your
courage failed you, and ye disagreed about the order and ye disobeyed,
after He had shown you that for which ye long. Some of you desired the
world, and some of you desired the Hereafter. Therefore He made you flee
from them, that He might try you. Yet now He hath forgiven you. Allah is
a Lord of Kindness to believers.

<span id="an_003_153">153</span> When ye climbed (the hill) and paid no
heed to anyone, while the messenger, in your rear, was calling you (to
fight). Therefor He rewarded you grief for (his) grief, that (He might
teach) you not to sorrow either for that which ye missed or for that
which befell you. Allah is Informed of what ye do.

<span id="an_003_154">154</span> Then, after grief, He sent down
security for you. As slumber did it overcome a party of you, while (the
other) party, who were anxious on their own account, thought wrongly of
Allah, the thought of ignorance. They said: Have we any part in the
cause ? Say (O Muhammad): The cause belongeth wholly to Allah. They hide
within themselves (a thought) which they reveal not unto thee, saying:
Had we had any part in the cause we should not have been slain here.
Say: Even though ye had been in your houses, those appointed to be slain
would have gone forth to the places where they were to lie. (All this
hath been) in order that Allah might try what is in your breasts and
prove what is in your hearts. Allah is Aware of what is hidden in the
breasts (of men).

<span id="an_003_155">155</span> Lo! those of you who turned back on the
day when the two hosts met, Satan alone it was who caused them to
backslide, because of some of that which they have earned. Now Allah
hath forgiven them. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Clement.

<span id="an_003_156">156</span> O ye who believe! Be not as those who
disbelieved and said of their brethren who went abroad in the land or
were fighting in the field: If they had been (here) with us they would
not have died or been killed: that Allah may make it anguish in their
hearts. Allah giveth life and causeth death; and Allah is Seer of what
ye do.

<span id="an_003_157">157</span> And what though ye be slain in Allah's
way or die therein ? Surely pardon from Allah and mercy are better than
all that they amass.

<span id="an_003_158">158</span> What though ye be slain or die, when
unto Allah ye are gathered ?

<span id="an_003_159">159</span> It was by the mercy of Allah that thou
wast lenient with them (O Muhammad), for if thou hadst been stern and
fierce of heart they would have dispersed from round about thee. So
pardon them and ask forgiveness for them and consult with them upon the
conduct of affairs. And when thou art resolved, then put thy trust in
Allah. Lo! Allah loveth those who put their trust (in Him).

<span id="an_003_160">160</span> If Allah is your helper none can
overcome you, and if He withdraw His help from you, who is there who can
help you after Him ? In Allah let believers put their trust.

<span id="an_003_161">161</span> It is not for any prophet to embezzle.
Whoso embezzleth will bring what he embezzled with him on the Day of
Resurrection. Then every soul will be paid in full what it hath earned;
and they will not be wronged.

<span id="an_003_162">162</span> Is one who followeth the pleasure of
Allah as one who hath earned condemnation from Allah, whose habitation
is the Fire, a hapless journey's end ?

<span id="an_003_163">163</span> There are degrees (of grace and
reprobation) with Allah, and Allah is Seer of what they do.

<span id="an_003_164">164</span> Allah verily hath shown grace to the
believers by sending unto them a messenger of their own who reciteth
unto them His revelations, and causeth them to grow, and teacheth them
the Scripture and wisdom; although before (he came to them) they were in
flagrant error.

<span id="an_003_165">165</span> And was it so, when a disaster smote
you, though ye had smitten (them with a disaster) twice (as great), that
ye said: How is this ? Say (unto them, O Muhammad): It is from
yourselves. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.

<span id="an_003_166">166</span> That which befell you, on the day when
the two armies met, was by permission of Allah; that He might know the
true believers;

<span id="an_003_167">167</span> And that He might know the hypocrites,
unto whom it was said: Come, fight in the way of Allah, or defend
yourselves. They answered: If we knew aught of fighting we would follow
you. On that day they were nearer disbelief than faith. They utter with
their mouths a thing which is not in their hearts. Allah is Best Aware
of what they hide.

<span id="an_003_168">168</span> Those who, while they sat at home, said
of their brethren (who were fighting for the cause of Allah): If they
had been guided by us they would not have been slain. Say (unto them, O
Muhammad): Then avert death from yourselves if ye are truthful.

<span id="an_003_169">169</span> Think not of those, who are slain in
the way of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are living. With their Lord they
have provision.

<span id="an_003_170">170</span> Jubilant (are they) because of that
which Allah hath bestowed upon them of His bounty, rejoicing for the
sake of those who have not joined them but are left behind: That there
shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.

<span id="an_003_171">171</span> They rejoice because of favour from
Allah and kindness, and that Allah wasteth not the wage of the
believers.

<span id="an_003_172">172</span> As for those who heard the call of
Allah and His messenger after the harm befell them (in the fight); for
such of them as do right and ward off (evil), there is great reward.

<span id="an_003_173">173</span> Those unto whom men said: Lo! the
people have gathered against you, therefor fear them. (The threat of
danger) but increased the faith of them and they cried: Allah is
Sufficient for us! Most Excellent is He in Whom we trust!

<span id="an_003_174">174</span> So they returned with grace and favour
from Allah, and no harm touched them. They followed the good pleasure of
Allah, and Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

<span id="an_003_175">175</span> It is only the devil who would make
(men) fear his partisans. Fear them not; fear Me, if ye are true
believers.

<span id="an_003_176">176</span> Let not their conduct grieve thee, who
run easily to disbelief, for lo! they injure Allah not at all. It is
Allah's Will to assign them no portion in the Hereafter, and theirs will
be an awful doom.

<span id="an_003_177">177</span> Those who purchase disbelief at the
price of faith harm Allah not at all, but theirs will be a painful doom.

<span id="an_003_178">178</span> And let not those who disbelieve
imagine that the rein We give them bodeth good unto their souls. We only
give them rein that they may grow in sinfulness. And theirs will be a
shameful doom.

<span id="an_003_179">179</span> It is not (the purpose) of Allah to
leave you in your present state till He shall separate the wicked from
the good. And it is not (the purpose of) Allah to let you know the
Unseen. But Allah chooseth of His messengers whom He will, (to receive
knowledge thereof). So believe in Allah and His messengers. If ye
believe and ward off (evil), yours will be a vast reward.

<span id="an_003_180">180</span> And let not those who hoard up that
which Allah hath bestowed upon them of His bounty think that it is
better for them. Nay, it is worse for them. That which they hoard will
be their collar on the Day of Resurrection. Allah's is the heritage of
the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Informed of what ye do.

<span id="an_003_181">181</span> Verily Allah heard the saying of those
who said, (when asked for contributions to the war): "Allah, forsooth,
is poor, and we are rich!" We shall record their saying with their
slaying of the prophets wrongfully and We shall say: Taste ye the
punishment of burning!

<span id="an_003_182">182</span> This is on account of that which your
own hands have sent before (you to the judgment). Allah is no oppressor
of (His) bondmen.

<span id="an_003_183">183</span> (The same are) those who say: Lo! Allah
hath charged us that we believe not in any messenger until he bring us
an offering which fire (from heaven) shall devour. Say (unto them, O
Muhammad): Messengers came unto you before me with miracles, and with
that (very miracle) which ye describe. Why then did ye slay them ?
(Answer that) if ye are truthful!

<span id="an_003_184">184</span> And if they deny thee, even so did they
deny messengers who were before thee, who came with miracles and with
the Psalms and with the Scripture giving light.

<span id="an_003_185">185</span> Every soul will taste of death. And ye
will be paid on the Day of Resurrection only that which ye have fairly
earned. Whoso is removed from the Fire and is made to enter paradise, he
indeed is triumphant. The life of this world is but comfort of illusion.

<span id="an_003_186">186</span> Assuredly ye will be tried in your
property and in your persons, and ye will hear much wrong from those who
were given the Scripture before you, and from the idolaters. But if ye
persevere and ward off (evil), then that is of the steadfast heart of
things.

<span id="an_003_187">187</span> And (remember) when Allah laid a charge
on those who had received the Scripture (He said): Ye are to expound it
to mankind and not to hide it. But they flung it behind their backs and
bought thereby a little gain. Verily evil is that which they have gained
thereby.

<span id="an_003_188">188</span> Think not that those who exult in what
they have given, and love to be praised for what they have not done -
Think not, they are in safety from the doom. A painful doom is theirs.

<span id="an_003_189">189</span> Unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of
the heavens and the earth. Allah is Able to do all things.

<span id="an_003_190">190</span> Lo! In the creation of the heavens and
the earth and (in) the difference of night and day are tokens (of His
Sovereignty) for men of understanding,

<span id="an_003_191">191</span> Such as remember Allah, standing,
sitting, and reclining, and consider the creation of the heavens and the
earth, (and say): Our Lord! Thou createdst not this in vain. Glory be to
Thee! Preserve us from the doom of Fire.

<span id="an_003_192">192</span> Our Lord! Whom Thou causest to enter
the Fire: him indeed Thou hast confounded. For evil-doers there will be
no helpers.

<span id="an_003_193">193</span> Our Lord! Lo! we have heard a crier
calling unto Faith: "Believe ye in your Lord!" So we believed. Our Lord!
Therefor forgive us our sins, and remit from us our evil deeds, and make
us die the death of the righteous.

<span id="an_003_194">194</span> Our Lord! And give us that which Thou
hast promised to us by Thy messengers. Confound us not upon the Day of
Resurrection. Lo! Thou breakest not the tryst.

<span id="an_003_195">195</span> And their Lord hath heard them (and He
saith): Lo! I suffer not the work of any worker, male or female, to be
lost. Ye proceed one from another. So those who fled and were driven
forth from their homes and suffered damage for My cause, and fought and
were slain, verily I shall remit their evil deeds from them and verily I
shall bring them into Gardens underneath which rivers flow - A reward
from Allah. And with Allah is the fairest of rewards.

<span id="an_003_196">196</span> Let not the vicissitude (of the
success) of those who disbelieve, in the land, deceive thee (O
Muhammad).

<span id="an_003_197">197</span> It is but a brief comfort. And
afterward their habitation will be hell, an ill abode.

<span id="an_003_198">198</span> But those who keep their duty to their
Lord, for them are Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they
will be safe for ever. A gift of welcome from their Lord. That which
Allah hath in store is better for the righteous.

<span id="an_003_199">199</span> And lo! of the People of the Scripture
there are some who believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto you
and that which was revealed unto them, humbling themselves before Allah.
They purchase not a trifling gain at the price of the revelations of
Allah. Verily their reward is with their Lord. Lo! Allah is swift to
take account.

<span id="an_003_200">200</span> O ye who believe! Endure, outdo all
others in endurance, be ready, and observe your duty to Allah, in order
that ye may succeed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. an-Nisa': Women](004)

</div>
