<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/006)  [Palmer
Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/006)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/00601) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq006)  [Rodwell](../qr/006)   
[Previous](005)  [Next](007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 6. al-An\`am: The Cattle

<span id="an_006_001">1</span> Praise be to Allah, Who hath created the
heavens and the earth, and hath appointed darkness and light. Yet those
who disbelieve ascribe rivals unto their Lord.

<span id="an_006_002">2</span> He it is Who hath created you from clay,
and hath decreed a term for you. A term is fixed with Him. Yet still ye
doubt!

<span id="an_006_003">3</span> He is Allah in the heavens and in the
earth. He knoweth both your secret and your utterance, and He knoweth
what ye earn.

<span id="an_006_004">4</span> Never came there unto them a revelation
of the revelations of Allah but they did turn away from it.

<span id="an_006_005">5</span> And they denied the truth when it came
unto them. But there will come unto them the tidings of that which they
used to deride.

<span id="an_006_006">6</span> See they not how many a generation We
destroyed before them, whom We had established in the earth more firmly
than We have established you, and We shed on them abundant showers from
the sky, and made the rivers flow beneath them. Yet we destroyed them
for their sins, and created after them another generation.

<span id="an_006_007">7</span> Had we sent down unto thee (Muhammad)
(actual) writing upon parchment, so that they could feel it with their
hands, those who disbelieve would have said: This is naught else than
mere magic.

<span id="an_006_008">8</span> They say: Why hath not an angel been sent
down unto him ? If We sent down an angel, then the matter would be
judged; no further time would be allowed them (for reflection).

<span id="an_006_009">9</span> Had we appointed him (Our messenger) an
angel, We assuredly had made him (as) a man (that he might speak to
men); and (thus) obscured for them (the truth) they (now) obscure.

<span id="an_006_010">10</span> Messengers (of Allah) have been derided
before thee, but that whereat they scoffed surrounded such of them as
did deride.

<span id="an_006_011">11</span> Say (unto the disbelievers): Travel in
the land, and see the nature of the consequence for the rejecters!

<span id="an_006_012">12</span> Say: Unto whom belongeth whatsoever is
in the heavens and the earth ? Say: Unto Allah. He hath prescribed for
Himself mercy, that He may bring you all together to the Day of
Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Those who ruin their souls will
not believe.

<span id="an_006_013">13</span> Unto Him belongeth whatsoever resteth in
the night and the day. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

<span id="an_006_014">14</span> Say: Shall I choose for a protecting
friend other than Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth,
Who feedeth and is never fed ? Say: I am ordered to be the first to
surrender (unto Him). And be not thou (O Muhammad) of the idolaters.

<span id="an_006_015">15</span> Say: I fear, if I rebel against my Lord,
the retribution of an Awful Day.

<span id="an_006_016">16</span> He from whom (such retribution) is
averted on that day, (Allah) hath in truth had mercy on him. That will
be the signal triumph.

<span id="an_006_017">17</span> If Allah touch thee with affliction,
there is none that can relieve therefrom save Him, and if He touch thee
with good fortune (there is none that can impair it); for He is Able to
do all things.

<span id="an_006_018">18</span> He is the Omnipotent over His slaves,
and He is the Wise, the Knower.

<span id="an_006_019">19</span> Say (O Muhammad): What thing is of most
weight in testimony ? Say: Allah is Witness between me and you. And this
Qur'an hath been inspired in me, that I may warn therewith you and
whomsoever it may reach. Do ye in sooth bear witness that there are gods
beside Allah ? Say: I bear no such witness. Say: He is only One God. Lo!
I am innocent of that which ye associate (with Him).

<span id="an_006_020">20</span> Those unto whom We gave the Scripture
recognise (this revelation) as they recognise their sons. Those who ruin
their own souls will not believe.

<span id="an_006_021">21</span> Who doth greater wrong than he who
inventeth a lie against Allah or denieth His revelations ? Lo! the
wrongdoers will not be successful.

<span id="an_006_022">22</span> And on the day We gather them together
We shall say unto those who ascribed partners (unto Allah): Where are
(now) those partners of your make-believe ?

<span id="an_006_023">23</span> Then will they have no contention save
that they will say: By Allah, our Lord, we never were idolaters.

<span id="an_006_024">24</span> See how they lie against themselves, and
(how) the thing which they devised hath failed them!

<span id="an_006_025">25</span> Of them are some who listen unto thee,
but We have placed upon their hearts veils, lest they should understand,
and in their ears a deafness. If they saw every token they would not
believe therein; to the point that, when they come unto thee to argue
with thee, the disbelievers say: This is naught else than fables of the
men of old.

<span id="an_006_026">26</span> And they forbid (men) from it and avoid
it, and they ruin none save themselves, though they perceive not.

<span id="an_006_027">27</span> If thou couldst see when they are set
before the Fire and say: Oh, would that we might return! Then would we
not deny the revelations of our Lord but we would be of the believers!

<span id="an_006_028">28</span> Nay, but that hath become clear unto
them which before they used to hide. And if they were sent back they
would return unto that which they are forbidden. Lo! they are liars.

<span id="an_006_029">29</span> And they say: There is naught save our
life of the world, and we shall not be raised (again).

<span id="an_006_030">30</span> If thou couldst see when they are set
before their Lord! He will say: Is not this real ? They will say: Yea,
verily, by our Lord! He will say: Taste now the retribution for that ye
used to disbelieve.

<span id="an_006_031">31</span> They indeed are losers who deny their
meeting with Allah until, when the Hour cometh on them suddenly, they
cry: Alas for us, that we neglected it! They bear upon their backs their
burdens. Ah, evil is that which they bear!

<span id="an_006_032">32</span> Naught is the life of the world save a
pastime and a spot. Better far is the abode of the Hereafter for those
who keep their duty (to Allah). Have ye then no sense ?

<span id="an_006_033">33</span> We know well how their talk grieveth
thee, though in truth they deny not thee (Muhammad) but evil-doers flout
the revelations of Allah.

<span id="an_006_034">34</span> Messengers indeed have been denied
before thee, and they were patient under the denial and the persecution
till Our succour reached them. There is none to alter the decisions of
Allah. Already there hath reached thee (somewhat) of the tidings of the
messengers (We sent before).

<span id="an_006_035">35</span> And if their aversion is grievous unto
thee, then, if thou canst, seek a way down into the earth or a ladder
unto the sky that thou mayst bring unto them a portent (to convince them
all)! - If Allah willed, He could have brought them all together to the
guidance - So be not thou among the foolish ones.

<span id="an_006_036">36</span> Only those can accept who hear. As for
the dead, Allah will raise them up; then unto Him they will be returned.

<span id="an_006_037">37</span> They say: Why hath no portent been sent
down upon him from his Lord ? Say: Lo! Allah is Able to send down a
portent. But most of them know not.

<span id="an_006_038">38</span> There is not an animal in the earth, nor
a flying creature flying on two wings, but they are peoples like unto
you. We have neglected nothing in the Book (of Our decrees). Then unto
their Lord they will be gathered.

<span id="an_006_039">39</span> Those who deny Our revelations are deaf
and dumb in darkness. Whom Allah will sendeth astray, and whom He will
He placeth on a straight path.

<span id="an_006_040">40</span> Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the
punishment of Allah come upon you or the Hour come upon you, (calling
upon other than Allah) ? Do ye then call (for help) to any other than
Allah ? (Answer that) if ye are truthful.

<span id="an_006_041">41</span> Nay, but unto Him ye call, and He
removeth that because of which ye call unto Him, if He will, and ye
forget whatever partners ye ascribed unto Him.

<span id="an_006_042">42</span> We have sent already unto peoples that
were before thee, and We visited them with tribulation and adversity, in
order that they might grow humble.

<span id="an_006_043">43</span> If only, when Our disaster came on them,
they had been humble! But their hearts were hardened and the devil made
all that they used to do seem fair unto them!

<span id="an_006_044">44</span> Then, when they forgot that whereof they
had been reminded, We opened unto them the gates of all things till,
even as they were rejoicing in that which they were given, We seized
them unawares, and lo! they were dumbfounded.

<span id="an_006_045">45</span> So of the people who did wrong the last
remnant was cut off. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

<span id="an_006_046">46</span> Say: Have ye imagined, if Allah should
take away your hearing and your sight and seal your hearts, Who is the
God Who could restore it to you save Allah ? See how We display the
revelations unto them! Yet still they turn away.

<span id="an_006_047">47</span> Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the
punishment of Allah come upon you unawares or openly ? Would any perish
save wrongdoing folk ?

<span id="an_006_048">48</span> We send not the messengers save as
bearers of good news and warners. Whoso believeth and doeth right, there
shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.

<span id="an_006_049">49</span> But as for those who deny Our
revelations, torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey.

<span id="an_006_050">50</span> Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): I
say not unto you (that) I possess the treasures of Allah, nor that I
have knowledge of the Unseen; and I say not unto you: Lo! I am an angel.
I follow only that which is inspired in me. Say: Are the blind man and
the seer equal ? Will ye not then take thought ?

<span id="an_006_051">51</span> Warn hereby those who fear (because they
know) that they will be gathered unto their Lord, for whom there is no
protecting ally nor intercessor beside Him, that they may ward off
(evil).

<span id="an_006_052">52</span> Repel not those who call upon their Lord
at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance. Thou art not accountable
for them in aught, nor are they accountable for thee in aught, that thou
shouldst repel them and be of the wrong-doers.

<span id="an_006_053">53</span> And even so do We try some of them by
others, that they say: Are these they whom Allah favoureth among us ? Is
not Allah best Aware of the thanksgivers ?

<span id="an_006_054">54</span> And when those who believe in Our
revelations come unto thee, say: Peace be unto you! Your Lord hath
prescribed for Himself mercy, that whoso of you doeth evil through
ignorance and repenteth afterward thereof and doeth right, (for him) lo!
He is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_006_055">55</span> Thus do We expound the revelations that
the way of the unrighteous may be manifest.

<span id="an_006_056">56</span> Say: I am forbidden to worship those on
whom ye call instead of Allah. Say: I will not follow your desires, for
then should I go astray and I should not be of the rightly guided.

<span id="an_006_057">57</span> Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from
my Lord, while ye deny Him. I have not that for which ye are impatient.
The decision is for Allah only. He telleth the truth and He is the Best
of Deciders.

<span id="an_006_058">58</span> Say: If I had that for which ye are
impatient, then would the case (ere this) have been decided between me
and you. Allah is Best Aware of the wrong-doers.

<span id="an_006_059">59</span> And with Him are the keys of the
Invisible. None but He knoweth them. And He knoweth what is in the land
and the sea. Not a leaf falleth but He knoweth it, not a grain amid the
darkness of the earth, naught of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear
record.

<span id="an_006_060">60</span> He it is Who gathereth you at night and
knoweth that which ye commit by day. Then He raiseth you again to life
therein, that the term appointed (for you) may be accomplished. And
afterward unto Him is your return. Then He will proclaim unto you what
ye used to do.

<span id="an_006_061">61</span> He is the Omnipotent over His slaves. He
sendeth guardians over you until, when death cometh unto one of you, Our
messengers receive him, and they neglect not.

<span id="an_006_062">62</span> Then are they restored unto Allah, their
Lord, the Just. Surely His is the judgment. And He is the most swift of
reckoners.

<span id="an_006_063">63</span> Say: Who delivereth you from the
darkness of the land and the sea ? Ye call upon Him humbly and in
secret, (saying): If we are delivered from this (fear) we truly will be
of the thankful.

<span id="an_006_064">64</span> Say: Allah delivereth you from this and
from all affliction. Yet ye attribute partners unto Him.

<span id="an_006_065">65</span> Say: He is able to send punishment upon
you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with
dissension and make you taste the tyranny one of another. See how We
display the revelations so that they may understand.

<span id="an_006_066">66</span> Thy people (O Muhammad) have denied it,
though it is the Truth. Say: I am not put in charge of you.

<span id="an_006_067">67</span> For every announcement there is a term,
and ye will come to know.

<span id="an_006_068">68</span> And when thou seest those who meddle
with Our revelations, withdraw from them until they meddle with another
topic. And if the devil cause thee to forget, sit not, after the
remembrance, with the congregation of wrong-doers.

<span id="an_006_069">69</span> Those who ward off (evil) are not
accountable for them in aught, but the Reminder (must be given them)
that haply they (too) may ward off (evil).

<span id="an_006_070">70</span> And forsake those who take their
religion for a pastime and a jest, and whom the life of the world
beguileth. Remind (mankind) hereby lest a soul be destroyed by what it
earneth. It hath beside Allah no protecting ally nor intercessor, and
though it offer every compensation it will not be accepted from it.
Those are they who perish by their own deserts. For them is drink of
boiling water and a painful doom, because they disbelieved.

<span id="an_006_071">71</span> Say: Shall we cry, instead of unto
Allah, unto that which neither profiteth us nor hurteth us, and shall we
turn back after Allah hath guided us, like one bewildered whom the
devils have infatuated in the earth, who hath companions who invite him
to the guidance (saying): Come unto us ? Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah
is Guidance, and we are ordered to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds,

<span id="an_006_072">72</span> And to establish worship and be dutiful
to Him, and He it is unto Whom ye will be gathered.

<span id="an_006_073">73</span> He it is Who created the heavens and the
earth in truth. In the day when He saith: Be! it is. His Word is the
Truth, and His will be the Sovereignty on the day when the trumpet is
blown. Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, He is the Wise, the
Aware.

<span id="an_006_074">74</span> (Remember) when Abraham said unto his
father Azar: Takest thou idols for gods ? Lo! I see thee and thy folk in
error manifest.

<span id="an_006_075">75</span> Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of
the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing
certainty:

<span id="an_006_076">76</span> When the night grew dark upon him he
beheld a star. He said: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said: I
love not things that set.

<span id="an_006_077">77</span> And when he saw the moon uprising, he
exclaimed: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said: Unless my Lord
guide me, I surely shall become one of the folk who are astray.

<span id="an_006_078">78</span> And when he saw the sun uprising, he
cried: This is my Lord! This is greater! And when it set he exclaimed: O
my people! Lo! I am free from all that ye associate (with Him).

<span id="an_006_079">79</span> Lo! I have turned my face toward Him Who
created the heavens and the earth, as one by nature upright, and I am
not of the idolaters.

<span id="an_006_080">80</span> His people argued with him. He said:
Dispute ye with me concerning Allah when He hath guided me ? I fear not
at all that which ye set up beside Him unless my Lord willeth aught. My
Lord includeth all things in His knowledge. Will ye not then remember ?

<span id="an_006_081">81</span> How should I fear that which ye set up
beside Him, when ye fear not to set up beside Allah that for which He
hath revealed unto you no warrant ? Which of the two factions hath more
right to safety ? (Answer me that) if ye have knowledge.

<span id="an_006_082">82</span> Those who believe and obscure not their
belief by wrongdoing, theirs is safety; and they are rightly guided.

<span id="an_006_083">83</span> That is Our argument. We gave it unto
Abraham against his folk. We raise unto degrees of wisdom whom We will.
Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware.

<span id="an_006_084">84</span> And We bestowed upon him Isaac and
Jacob; each of them We guided; and Noah did We guide aforetime; and of
his seed (We guided) David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and
Aaron. Thus do We reward the good.

<span id="an_006_085">85</span> And Zachariah and John and Jesus and
Elias. Each one (of them) was of the righteous.

<span id="an_006_086">86</span> And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and
Lot. Each one (of them) did We prefer above (Our) creatures,

<span id="an_006_087">87</span> With some of their forefathers and their
offspring and their brethren; and We chose them and guided them unto a
straight path.

<span id="an_006_088">88</span> Such is the guidance of Allah wherewith
He guideth whom He will of His bondmen. But if they had set up (for
worship) aught beside Him, (all) that they did would have been vain.

<span id="an_006_089">89</span> Those are they unto whom We gave the
Scripture and command and prophethood. But if these disbelieve therein,
then indeed We shall entrust it to a people who will not be disbelievers
therein.

<span id="an_006_090">90</span> Those are they whom Allah guideth, so
follow their guidance. Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no
fee for it. Lo! it is naught but a Reminder to (His) creatures.

<span id="an_006_091">91</span> And they measure not the power of Allah
its true measure when they say: Allah hath naught revealed unto a human
being. Say (unto the Jews who speak thus): Who revealed the Book which
Moses brought, a light and guidance for mankind, which ye have put on
parchments which ye show, but ye hide much (thereof), and (by which) ye
were taught that which ye knew not yourselves nor (did) your fathers
(know it) ? Say: Allah. Then leave them to their play of cavilling.

<span id="an_006_092">92</span> And this is a blessed Scripture which We
have revealed, confirming that which (was revealed) before it, that thou
mayst warn the Mother of Villages and those around her. Those who
believe in the Hereafter believe herein, and they are careful of their
worship.

<span id="an_006_093">93</span> Who is guilty of more wrong than he who
forgeth a lie against Allah, or saith: I am inspired, when he is not
inspired in aught; and who saith: I will reveal the like of that which
Allah hath revealed ? If thou couldst see, when the wrong-doers reach
the pangs of death and the angels stretch their hands out (saying):
Deliver up your souls. This day ye are awarded doom of degradation for
that ye spake concerning Allah other than the truth, and used to scorn
His portents.

<span id="an_006_094">94</span> Now have ye come unto Us solitary as We
did create you at the first, and ye have left behind you all that We
bestowed upon you, and We behold not with you those your intercessors,
of whom ye claimed that they possessed a share in you. Now is the bond
between you severed, and that which ye presumed hath failed you.

<span id="an_006_095">95</span> Lo! Allah (it is) Who splitteth the
grain of corn and the date-stone (for sprouting). He bringeth forth the
living from the dead, and is the bringer-forth of the dead from the
living. Such is Allah. How then are ye perverted ?

<span id="an_006_096">96</span> He is the Cleaver of the Daybreak, and
He hath appointed the night for stillness, and the sun and the moon for
reckoning. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_006_097">97</span> And He it is Who hath set for you the
stars that ye may guide your course by them amid the darkness of the
land and the sea. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who have
knowledge.

<span id="an_006_098">98</span> And He it is Who hath produced you from
a single being, and (hath given you) a habitation and a repository. We
have detailed Our revelations for a people who have understanding.

<span id="an_006_099">99</span> He it is Who sendeth down water from the
sky, and therewith We bring forth buds of every kind; We bring forth the
green blade from which We bring forth the thick-clustered grain; and
from the date-palm, from the pollen thereof, spring pendant bunches; and
(We bring forth) gardens of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate,
alike and unlike. Look upon the fruit thereof, when they bear fruit, and
upon its ripening. Lo! herein verily are portents for a people who
believe.

<span id="an_006_100">100</span> Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him
the jinn, although He did create them, and impute falsely, without
knowledge, sons and daughters unto Him. Glorified be He and High Exalted
above (all) that they ascribe (unto Him).

<span id="an_006_101">101</span> The Originator of the heavens and the
earth! How can He have a child, when there is for Him no consort, when
He created all things and is Aware of all things ?

<span id="an_006_102">102</span> Such is Allah, your Lord. There is no
God save Him, the Creator of all things, so worship Him. And He taketh
care of all things.

<span id="an_006_103">103</span> Vision comprehendeth Him not, but He
comprehendeth (all) vision. He is the Subtile, the Aware.

<span id="an_006_104">104</span> Proofs have come unto you from your
Lord, so whoso seeth, it is for his own good, and whoso is blind is
blind to his own hurt. And I am not a keeper over you.

<span id="an_006_105">105</span> Thus do We display Our revelations that
they may say (unto thee, Muhammad): "Thou hast studied," and that We may
make (it) clear for people who have knowledge.

<span id="an_006_106">106</span> Follow that which is inspired in thee
from thy Lord; there is no God save Him; and turn away from the
idolaters.

<span id="an_006_107">107</span> Had Allah willed, they had not been
idolatrous. We have not set thee as a keeper over them, nor art thou
responsible for them.

<span id="an_006_108">108</span> Revile not those unto whom they pray
beside Allah lest they wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance. Thus
unto every nation have We made their deed seem fair. Then unto their
Lord is their return, and He will tell them what they used to do.

<span id="an_006_109">109</span> And they swear a solemn oath by Allah
that if there come unto them a portent they will believe therein. Say;
Portents are with Allah and (so is) that which telleth you that if such
came unto them they would not believe.

<span id="an_006_110">110</span> We confound their hearts and their
eyes. As they believed not therein at the first, We let them wander
blindly on in their contumacy.

<span id="an_006_111">111</span> And though We should send down the
angels unto them, and the dead should speak unto them, and We should
gather against them all things in array, they would not believe unless
Allah so willed. Howbeit, most of them are ignorant.

<span id="an_006_112">112</span> Thus have We appointed unto every
prophet an adversary - devils of humankind and jinn who inspire in one
another plausible discourse through guile. If thy Lord willed, they
would not do so; so leave them alone with their devising;

<span id="an_006_113">113</span> That the hearts of those who believe
not in the Hereafter may incline thereto, and that they may take
pleasure therein, and that they may earn what they are earning.

<span id="an_006_114">114</span> Shall I seek other than Allah for
judge, when He it is Who hath revealed unto you (this) Scripture, fully
explained ? Those unto whom We gave the Scripture (aforetime) know that
it is revealed from thy Lord in truth. So be not thou (O Muhammad) of
the waverers.

<span id="an_006_115">115</span> Perfected is the Word of thy Lord in
truth and justice. There is naught that can change His words. He is the
Hearer, the Knower.

<span id="an_006_116">116</span> If thou obeyedst most of those on earth
they would mislead thee far from Allah's way. They follow naught but an
opinion, and they do but guess.

<span id="an_006_117">117</span> Lo! thy Lord, He knoweth best who
erreth from His way; and He knoweth best (who are) the rightly guided.

<span id="an_006_118">118</span> Eat of that over which the name of
Allah hath been mentioned, if ye are believers in His revelations.

<span id="an_006_119">119</span> How should ye not eat of that over
which the name of Allah hath been mentioned, when He hath explained unto
you that which is forbidden unto you unless ye are compelled thereto.
But lo! many are led astray by their own lusts through ignorance. Lo!
thy Lord, He is Best Aware of the transgressors.

<span id="an_006_120">120</span> Forsake the outwardness of sin and the
inwardness thereof. Lo! those who garner sin will be awarded that which
they have earned.

<span id="an_006_121">121</span> And eat not of that whereon Allah's
name hath not been mentioned, for lo! it is abomination. Lo! the devils
do inspire their minions to dispute with you. But if ye obey them, ye
will be in truth idolaters.

<span id="an_006_122">122</span> Is he who was dead and We have raised
him unto life, and set for him a light wherein he walketh among men, as
him whose similitude is in utter darkness whence he cannot emerge ? Thus
is their conduct made fairseeming for the disbelievers.

<span id="an_006_123">123</span> And thus have We made in every city
great ones of its wicked ones, that they should plot therein. They do
but plot against themselves, though they perceive not.

<span id="an_006_124">124</span> And when a token cometh unto them, they
say: We will not believe till we are given that which Allah's messengers
are given. Allah knoweth best with whom to place His message.
Humiliation from Allah and heavy punishment will smite the guilty for
their scheming.

<span id="an_006_125">125</span> And whomsoever it is Allah's will to
guide, He expandeth his bosom unto the Surrender, and whomsoever it is
His Will to send astray, He maketh his bosom close and narrow as if he
were engaged in sheer ascent. Thus Allah layeth ignominy upon those who
believe not.

<span id="an_006_126">126</span> This is the path of thy Lord, a
straight path. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who take
heed.

<span id="an_006_127">127</span> For them is the abode of peace with
their Lord. He will be their Protecting Friend because of what they used
to do.

<span id="an_006_128">128</span> In the day when He will gather them
together (He will say): O ye assembly of the jinn! Many of humankind did
ye seduce. And their adherents among humankind will say: Our Lord! We
enjoyed one another, but now we have arrived at the appointed term which
Thou appointedst for us. He will say: Fire is your home. Abide therein
for ever, save him whom Allah willeth (to deliver). Lo! thy Lord is
Wise, Aware.

<span id="an_006_129">129</span> Thus We let some of the wrong-doers
have power over others because of what they are wont to earn.

<span id="an_006_130">130</span> O ye assembly of the jinn and
humankind! Came there not unto you messengers of your own who recounted
unto you My tokens and warned you of the meeting of this your Day ? They
will say: We testify against ourselves. And the life of the world
beguiled them. And they testify against themselves that they were
disbelievers.

<span id="an_006_131">131</span> This is because thy Lord destroyeth not
the townships arbitrarily while their people are unconscious (of the
wrong they do).

<span id="an_006_132">132</span> For all there will be ranks from what
they did. Thy Lord is not unaware of what they do.

<span id="an_006_133">133</span> Thy Lord is the Absolute, the Lord of
Mercy. If He will, He can remove you and can cause what He will to
follow after you, even as He raised you from the seed of other folk.

<span id="an_006_134">134</span> Lo! that which ye are promised will
surely come to pass, and ye cannot escape.

<span id="an_006_135">135</span> Say (O Muhammad): O my people! Work
according to your power. Lo! I too am working. Thus ye will come to know
for which of us will be the happy sequel. Lo! the wrong-doers will not
be successful.

<span id="an_006_136">136</span> They assign unto Allah, of the crops
and cattle which He created, a portion, and they say: "This is Allah's"
- in their make-believe - "and this is for (His) partners in regard to
us." Thus that which (they assign) unto His partners in them reacheth
not Allah and that which (they assign) unto Allah goeth to their
(so-called) partners. Evil is their ordinance.

<span id="an_006_137">137</span> Thus have their (so-called) partners
(of Allah) made the killing of their children to seem fair unto many of
the idolaters, that they may ruin them and make their faith obscure for
them. Had Allah willed (it otherwise), they had not done so. So leave
them alone with their devices.

<span id="an_006_138">138</span> And they say: Such cattle and crops are
forbidden. No-one is to eat of them save whom we will - in their
make-believe - cattle whose backs are forbidden, cattle over which they
mention not the name of Allah. (All that is) a lie against Him. He will
repay them for that which they invent.

<span id="an_006_139">139</span> And they say: That which is in the
bellies of such cattle is reserved for our males and is forbidden to our
wives; but if it be born dead, then they (all) may be partakers thereof.
He will reward them for their attribution (of such ordinances unto Him).
Lo, He is Wise, Aware.

<span id="an_006_140">140</span> They are losers who besottedly have
slain their children without knowledge, and have forbidden that which
Allah bestowed upon them, inventing a lie against Allah. They indeed
have gone astray and are not guided.

<span id="an_006_141">141</span> He it is Who produceth gardens
trellised and untrellised, and the date-palm, and crops of divers
flavour, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike. Eat ye of
the fruit thereof when it fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the
harvest day, and be not prodigal. Lo! Allah loveth not the prodigals.

<span id="an_006_142">142</span> And of the cattle (He produceth) some
for burdens, some for food. Eat of that which Allah hath bestowed upon
you, and follow not the footsteps of the devil, for lo! he is an open
foe to you.

<span id="an_006_143">143</span> Eight pairs: Of the sheep twain, and of
the goats twain. Say: Hath He forbidden the two males or the two
females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain ? Expound to
me (the case) with knowledge, if ye are truthful.

<span id="an_006_144">144</span> And of the camels twain and of the oxen
twain. Say: Hath He forbidden the two males or the two females, or that
which the wombs of the two females contain; or were ye by to witness
when Allah commanded you (all) this ? Then who doth greater wrong than
he who deviseth a lie concerning Allah, that he may lead mankind astray
without knowledge. Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

<span id="an_006_145">145</span> Say: I find not in that which is
revealed unto me aught prohibited to an eater that he eat thereof,
except it be carrion, or blood poured forth, or swineflesh - for that
verily is foul - or the abomination which was immolated to the name of
other than Allah. But whoso is compelled (thereto), neither craving nor
transgressing, (for him) lo! thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_006_146">146</span> Unto those who are Jews We forbade
every animal with claws. And of the oxen and the sheep forbade We unto
them the fat thereof save that upon the backs or the entrails, or that
which is mixed with the bone. That we awarded them for their rebellion.
And lo! we verily are truthful.

<span id="an_006_147">147</span> So if they give the lie to thee
(Muhammad), say: Your Lord is a Lord of All- Embracing Mercy, and His
wrath will never be withdrawn from guilty folk.

<span id="an_006_148">148</span> They who are idolaters will say: Had
Allah willed, we had not ascribed (unto Him) partners neither had our
fathers, nor had we forbidden aught. Thus did those who were before them
give the lie (to Allah's messengers) till they tasted of the fear of Us.
Say: Have ye any knowledge that ye can adduce for Us ? Lo! ye follow
naught but an opinion, Lo! ye do but guess.

<span id="an_006_149">149</span> Say - For Allah's is the final argument
- Had He willed He could indeed have guided all of you.

<span id="an_006_150">150</span> Say: Come, bring your witnesses who can
bear witness that Allah forbade (all) this. And if they bear witness, do
not thou bear witness with them. Follow thou not the whims of those who
deny Our revelations, those who believe not in the Hereafter and deem
(others) equal with their Lord.

<span id="an_006_151">151</span> Say: Come, I will recite unto you that
which your Lord hath made a sacred duty for you: That ye ascribe no
thing as partner unto Him and that ye do good to parents, and that ye
slay not your children because of penury - We provide for you and for
them - and that ye draw not nigh to lewd things whether open or
concealed. And that ye slay not the life which Allah hath made sacred,
save in the course of justice. This He hath command you, in order that
ye may discern.

<span id="an_006_152">152</span> And approach not the wealth of the
orphan save with that which is better, till he reach maturity. Give full
measure and full weight, in justice. We task not any soul beyond its
scope. And if ye give your word, do justice thereunto, even though it be
(against) a kinsman; and fulfil the covenant of Allah. This He
commandeth you that haply ye may remember.

<span id="an_006_153">153</span> And (He commandeth you, saying): This
is My straight path, so follow it. Follow not other ways, lest ye be
parted from His way. This hath He ordained for you, that ye may ward off
(evil).

<span id="an_006_154">154</span> Again, We gave the Scripture unto
Moses, complete for him who would do good, an explanation of all things,
a guidance and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting with
their Lord.

<span id="an_006_155">155</span> And this is a blessed Scripture which
We have revealed. So follow it and ward off (evil), that ye may find
mercy.

<span id="an_006_156">156</span> Lest ye should say: The Scripture was
revealed only to two sects before us, and we in sooth were unaware of
what they read;

<span id="an_006_157">157</span> Or lest ye should say: If the Scripture
had been revealed unto us, we surely had been better guided than are
they. Now hath there come unto you a clear proof from your Lord, a
guidance and mercy; and who doeth greater wrong than he who denieth the
revelations of Allah, and turneth away from them ? We award unto those
who turn away from Our revelations an evil doom because of their
aversion.

<span id="an_006_158">158</span> Wait they, indeed, for nothing less
than that the angels should come unto them, or thy Lord should come, or
there should come one of the portents from thy Lord ? In the day when
one of the portents from thy Lord cometh, its belief availeth naught a
soul which theretofore believed not, nor in its belief earned good (by
works). Say: Wait ye! Lo! We (too) are waiting.

<span id="an_006_159">159</span> Lo! As for those who sunder their
religion and become schismatics, no concern at all hast thou with them.
Their case will go to Allah, Who then will tell them what they used to
do.

<span id="an_006_160">160</span> Whoso bringeth a good deed will receive
tenfold the like thereof, while whoso bringeth an ill-deed will be
awarded but the like thereof; and they will not be wronged.

<span id="an_006_161">161</span> Say: Lo! As for me, my Lord hath guided
me unto a straight path, a right religion, the community of Abraham, the
upright, who was no idolater.

<span id="an_006_162">162</span> Say: Lo! my worship and my sacrifice
and my living and my dying are for Allah, Lord of the Worlds.

<span id="an_006_163">163</span> He hath no partner. This am I
commanded, and I am first of those who surrender (unto Him).

<span id="an_006_164">164</span> Say: Shall I seek another than Allah
for Lord, when He is Lord of all things ? Each soul earneth only on its
own account, nor doth any laden bear another's load. Then unto your Lord
is your return and He will tell you that wherein ye differed.

<span id="an_006_165">165</span> He it is Who hath placed you as
viceroys of the earth and hath exalted some of you in rank above others,
that He may try you by (the test of) that which He hath given you. Lo!
Thy Lord is swift in prosecution, and Lo! He verily is Forgiving,
Merciful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. al-A\`raf: The Elevated Places](007)

</div>
