<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/017)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/017)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/01701) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq017)  [Rodwell](../qr/017)   
[Previous](016)  [Next](018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 17. bani Isra'il: The Israelites

<span id="an_017_001">1</span> Glorified be He Who carried His servant
by night from the Inviolable Place of Worship to the Far distant place
of worship the neighbourhood whereof We have blessed, that We might show
him of Our tokens! Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.

<span id="an_017_002">2</span> We gave unto Moses the Scripture, and We
appointed it a guidance for the children of Israel, saying: Choose no
guardian beside Me.

<span id="an_017_003">3</span> (They were) the seed of those whom We
carried (in the ship) along with Noah. Lo! he was a grateful slave.

<span id="an_017_004">4</span> And We decreed for the Children of Israel
in the Scripture: Ye verily will work corruption in the earth twice, and
ye will become great tyrants.

<span id="an_017_005">5</span> So when the time for the first of the two
came, We roused against you slaves of Ours of great might who ravaged
(your) country, and it was a threat performed.

<span id="an_017_006">6</span> Then we gave you once again your turn
against them, and We aided you with wealth and children and made you
more in soldiery.

<span id="an_017_007">7</span> (Saying): If ye do good, ye do good for
your own souls, and if ye do evil, it is for them (in like manner). So,
when the time for the second (of the judgments) came (We roused against
you others of Our slaves) to ravage you, and to enter the Temple even as
they entered it the first time, and to lay waste all that they conquered
with an utter wasting.

<span id="an_017_008">8</span> It may be that your Lord will have mercy
on you, but if ye repeat (the crime) We shall repeat (the punishment),
and We have appointed hell a dungeon for the disbelievers.

<span id="an_017_009">9</span> Lo! this Qur'an guideth unto that which
is straightest, and giveth tidings unto the believers who do good works
that theirs will be a great reward.

<span id="an_017_010">10</span> And that those who believe not in the
Hereafter, for them We have prepared a painful doom.

<span id="an_017_011">11</span> Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for
good; for man was ever hasty.

<span id="an_017_012">12</span> And We appoint the night and the day two
portents. Then We make dark the portent of the night, and We make the
portent of the day sight-giving, that ye may seek bounty from your Lord,
and that ye may know the computation of the years, and the reckoning;
and everything have We expounded with a clear expounding.

<span id="an_017_013">13</span> And every man's augury have We fastened
to his own neck, and We shall bring forth for him on the Day of
Resurrection a book which he will find wide open.

<span id="an_017_014">14</span> (And it will be said unto him): Read thy
Book. Thy soul sufficeth as reckoner against thee this day.

<span id="an_017_015">15</span> Whosoever goeth right, it is only for
(the good of) his own soul that he goeth right, and whosoever erreth,
erreth only to its hurt. No laden soul can bear another's load, We never
punish until we have sent a messenger.

<span id="an_017_016">16</span> And when We would destroy a township We
send commandment to its folk who live at ease, and afterward they commit
abomination therein, and so the Word (of doom) hath effect for it, and
we annihilate it with complete annihilation.

<span id="an_017_017">17</span> How many generations have We destroyed
since Noah! And Allah sufficeth as Knower and Beholder of the sins of
His slaves.

<span id="an_017_018">18</span> Whoso desireth that (life) which
hasteneth away, We hasten for him therein what We will for whom We
please. And afterward We have appointed for him hell; he will endure the
heat thereof, condemned, rejected.

<span id="an_017_019">19</span> And whoso desireth the Hereafter and
striveth for it with the effort necessary, being a believer; for such,
their effort findeth favour (with their Lord).

<span id="an_017_020">20</span> Each do We supply, both these and those,
from the bounty of thy Lord. And the bounty of thy Lord can never be
walled up.

<span id="an_017_021">21</span> See how We prefer one of them above
another, and verily the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater
in preferment.

<span id="an_017_022">22</span> Set not up with Allah any other god (O
man) lest thou sit down reproved, forsaken.

<span id="an_017_023">23</span> Thy Lord hath decreed, that ye worship
none save Him, and (that ye show) kindness to parents. If one of them or
both of them attain old age with thee, say not "Fie" unto them nor
repulse them, but speak unto them a gracious word.

<span id="an_017_024">24</span> And lower unto them the wing of
submission through mercy, and say: My Lord! Have mercy on them both as
they did care for me when I was little.

<span id="an_017_025">25</span> Your Lord is Best Aware of what is in
your minds. If ye are righteous, then lo! He was ever Forgiving unto
those who turn (unto Him).

<span id="an_017_026">26</span> Give the kinsman his due, and the needy,
and the wayfarer, and squander not (thy wealth) in wantonness.

<span id="an_017_027">27</span> Lo! the squanderers were ever brothers
of the devils, and the devil was ever an ingrate to his Lord.

<span id="an_017_028">28</span> But if thou turn away from them, seeking
mercy from thy Lord, for which thou hopest, then speak unto them a
reasonable word.

<span id="an_017_029">29</span> And let not thy hand be chained to thy
neck nor open it with a complete opening, lest thou sit down rebuked,
denuded.

<span id="an_017_030">30</span> Lo! thy Lord enlargeth the provision for
whom He will, and straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo, He was ever
Knower, Seer of His slaves.

<span id="an_017_031">31</span> Slay not your children, fearing a fall
to poverty, We shall provide for them and for you. Lo! the slaying of
them is great sin.

<span id="an_017_032">32</span> And come not near unto adultery. Lo! it
is an abomination and an evil way.

<span id="an_017_033">33</span> And slay not the life which Allah hath
forbidden save with right. Whoso is slain wrongfully, We have given
power unto his heir, but let him not commit excess in slaying. Lo! he
will be helped.

<span id="an_017_034">34</span> Come not near the wealth of the orphan
save with that which is better till he come to strength; and keep the
covenant. Lo! of the covenant it will be asked.

<span id="an_017_035">35</span> Fill the measure when ye measure, and
weigh with a right balance; that is meet, and better in the end.

<span id="an_017_036">36</span> (O man), follow not that whereof thou
hast no knowledge. Lo! the hearing and the sight and the heart - of each
of these it will be asked.

<span id="an_017_037">37</span> And walk not in the earth exultant. Lo!
thou canst not rend the earth, nor canst thou stretch to the height of
the hills.

<span id="an_017_038">38</span> The evil of all that is hateful in the
sight of thy Lord.

<span id="an_017_039">39</span> This is (part) of that wisdom wherewith
thy Lord hath inspired thee (O Muhammad). And set not up with Allah any
other god, lest thou be cast into hell, reproved, abandoned.

<span id="an_017_040">40</span> Hath your Lord then distinguished you (O
men of Makka) by giving you sons, and hath chosen for Himself females
from among the angels ? Lo! verily ye speak an awful word!

<span id="an_017_041">41</span> We verily have displayed (Our warnings)
in this Qur'an that they may take heed, but it increaseth them in naught
save aversion.

<span id="an_017_042">42</span> Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers):
If there were other gods along with Him, as they say, then had they
sought a way against the Lord of the Throne.

<span id="an_017_043">43</span> Glorified is He, and High Exalted above
what they say!

<span id="an_017_044">44</span> The seven heavens and the earth and all
that is therein praise Him, and there is not a thing but hymneth His
praise; but ye understand not their praise. Lo! He is ever Clement,
Forgiving.

<span id="an_017_045">45</span> And when thou recitest the Qur'an we
place between thee and those who believe not in the Hereafter a hidden
barrier;

<span id="an_017_046">46</span> And We place upon their hearts veils
lest they should understand it, and in their ears a deafness; and when
thou makest mention of thy Lord alone in the Qur'an, they turn their
backs in aversion.

<span id="an_017_047">47</span> We are Best Aware of what they wish to
hear when they give ear to thee and when they take secret counsel, when
the evil-doers say: Ye follow but a man bewitched.

<span id="an_017_048">48</span> See what similitudes they coin for thee,
and thus are all astray, and cannot find a road!

<span id="an_017_049">49</span> And they say: When we are bones and
fragments, shall we forsooth, be raised up as a new creation ?

<span id="an_017_050">50</span> Say: Be ye stones or iron

<span id="an_017_051">51</span> Or some created thing that is yet
greater in your thoughts! Then they will say: Who shall bring us back
(to life). Say: He Who created you at the first. Then will they shake
their heads at thee, and say: When will it be ? Say: It will perhaps be
soon;

<span id="an_017_052">52</span> A day when He will call you and ye will
answer with His praise, and ye will think that ye have tarried but a
little while.

<span id="an_017_053">53</span> Tell My bondmen to speak that which is
kindlier. Lo! the devil soweth discord among them. Lo! the devil is for
man an open foe.

<span id="an_017_054">54</span> Your Lord is Best Aware of you. If He
will, He will have mercy on you, or if He will, He will punish you. We
have not sent thee (O Muhammad) as a warden over them.

<span id="an_017_055">55</span> And thy Lord is Best Aware of all who
are in the heavens and the earth. And we preferred some of the prophets
above others, and unto David We gave the Psalms.

<span id="an_017_056">56</span> Say: Cry unto those (saints and angels)
whom ye assume (to be gods) beside Him, yet they have no power to rid
you of misfortune nor to change.

<span id="an_017_057">57</span> Those unto whom they cry seek the way of
approach to their Lord, which of them shall be the nearest; they hope
for His mercy and they fear His doom. Lo! the doom of thy Lord is to be
shunned.

<span id="an_017_058">58</span> There is not a township but We shall
destroy it ere the Day of Resurrection, or punish it with dire
punishment. That is set forth in the Book (of Our decrees).

<span id="an_017_059">59</span> Naught hindereth Us from sending
portents save that the folk of old denied them. And We gave Thamud the
she-camel - a clear portent save to warn.

<span id="an_017_060">60</span> And (it was a warning) when we told
thee: Lo! thy Lord encompasseth mankind, and We appointed the sight
which We showed thee as an ordeal for mankind, and (likewise) the
Accursed Tree in the Qur'an. We warn them, but it increaseth them in
naught save gross impiety.

<span id="an_017_061">61</span> And when We said unto the angels: Fall
down prostrate before Adam and they fell prostrate all save Iblis, he
said: Shall I fall prostrate before that which Thou hast created of clay
?

<span id="an_017_062">62</span> He said: Seest Thou this (creature) whom
Thou hast honoured above me, if Thou give me grace until the Day of
Resurrection I verily will seize his seed, save but a few.

<span id="an_017_063">63</span> He said: Go, and whosoever of them
followeth thee - lo! hell will be your payment, ample payment.

<span id="an_017_064">64</span> And excite any of them whom thou canst
with thy voice, and urge thy horse and foot against them, and be a
partner in their wealth and children, and promise them. Satan promiseth
them only to deceive.

<span id="an_017_065">65</span> Lo! My (faithful) bondmen - over them
thou hast no power, and thy Lord sufficeth as (their) guardian.

<span id="an_017_066">66</span> (O mankind), your Lord is He Who driveth
for you the ship upon the sea that ye may seek of His bounty. Lo! He was
ever Merciful toward you.

<span id="an_017_067">67</span> And when harm toucheth you upon the sea,
all unto whom ye cry (for succour) fail save Him (alone), but when He
bringeth you safe to land, ye turn away, for man was ever thankless.

<span id="an_017_068">68</span> Feel ye then secure that He will not
cause a slope of the land to engulf you, or send a sand-storm upon you,
and then ye will find that ye have no protector ?

<span id="an_017_069">69</span> Or feel ye secure that He will not
return you to that (plight) a second time, and send against you a
hurricane of wind and drown you for your thanklessness, and then ye will
not find therein that ye have any avenger against Us ?

<span id="an_017_070">70</span> Verily we have honoured the Children of
Adam. We carry them on the land and the sea, and have made provision of
good things for them, and have preferred them above many of those whom
We created with a marked preferment.

<span id="an_017_071">71</span> On the day when We shall summon all men
with their record, whoso is given his book in his right hand - such will
read their book and they will not be wronged a shred.

<span id="an_017_072">72</span> Whoso is blind here will be blind in the
Hereafter, and yet further from the road.

<span id="an_017_073">73</span> And they indeed strove hard to beguile
thee (Muhammad) away from that wherewith We have inspired thee, that
thou shouldst invent other than it against Us; and then would they have
accepted thee as a friend.

<span id="an_017_074">74</span> And if We had not made thee wholly firm
thou mightest almost have inclined unto them a little.

<span id="an_017_075">75</span> Then had we made thee taste a double
(punishment) of living and a double (punishment) of dying, then hadst
thou found no helper against Us.

<span id="an_017_076">76</span> And they indeed wished to scare thee
from the land that they might drive thee forth from thence, and then
they would have stayed (there) but a little after thee.

<span id="an_017_077">77</span> (Such was Our) method in the case of
those whom We sent before thee (to mankind), and thou wilt not find for
Our method aught of power to change.

<span id="an_017_078">78</span> Establish worship at the going down of
the sun until the dark of night, and (the recital of) the Qur'an at
dawn. Lo! (the recital of) the Qur'an at dawn is ever witnessed.

<span id="an_017_079">79</span> And some part of the night awake for it,
a largess for thee. It may be that thy Lord will raise thee to a praised
estate.

<span id="an_017_080">80</span> And say: My Lord! Cause me to come in
with a firm incoming and to go out with a firm outgoing. And give me
from Thy presence a sustaining Power.

<span id="an_017_081">81</span> And say: Truth hath come and falsehood
hath vanished away. Lo! falsehood is ever bound to vanish.

<span id="an_017_082">82</span> And We reveal of the Qur'an that which
is a healing and a mercy for believers though it increase the evil-doers
in naught save ruin.

<span id="an_017_083">83</span> And when We make life pleasant unto man,
he turneth away and is averse; and when ill toucheth him he is in
despair.

<span id="an_017_084">84</span> Say: Each one doth according to his rule
of conduct, and thy Lord is Best Aware of him whose way is right.

<span id="an_017_085">85</span> They are asking thee concerning the
Spirit. Say: The Spirit is by command of my Lord, and of knowledge ye
have been vouchsafed but little.

<span id="an_017_086">86</span> And if We willed We could withdraw that
which We have revealed unto thee, then wouldst thou find no guardian for
thee against Us in respect thereof.

<span id="an_017_087">87</span> (It is naught) save mercy from thy Lord.
Lo! His kindness unto thee was ever great.

<span id="an_017_088">88</span> Say: Verily, though mankind and the jinn
should assemble to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not
produce the like thereof though they were helpers one of another.

<span id="an_017_089">89</span> And verily We have displayed for mankind
in this Qur'an all kind of similitudes, but most of mankind refuse aught
save disbelief.

<span id="an_017_090">90</span> And they say: We will not put faith in
thee till thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us;

<span id="an_017_091">91</span> Or thou have a garden of date-palms and
grapes, and cause rivers to gush forth therein abundantly;

<span id="an_017_092">92</span> Or thou cause the heaven to fall upon us
piecemeal, as thou hast pretended, or bring Allah and the angels as a
warrant;

<span id="an_017_093">93</span> Or thou have a house of gold; or thou
ascend up into heaven, and even then we will put no faith in thine
ascension till thou bring down for us a book that we can read. Say (O
Muhammad): My Lord be Glorified! Am I aught save a mortal messenger ?

<span id="an_017_094">94</span> And naught prevented mankind from
believing when the guidance came unto them save that they said: Hath
Allah sent a mortal as (His) messenger ?

<span id="an_017_095">95</span> Say: If there were in the earth angels
walking secure, We had sent down for them from heaven an angel as
messenger.

<span id="an_017_096">96</span> Say: Allah sufficeth for a witness
between me and you. Lo! He is Knower, Seer of His slaves.

<span id="an_017_097">97</span> And he whom Allah guideth, he is led
aright; while, as for him whom He sendeth astray, for them thou wilt
find no protecting friends beside Him, and We shall assemble them on the
Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their
habitation will be hell; whenever it abateth, We increase the flame for
them.

<span id="an_017_098">98</span> That is their reward because they
disbelieved Our revelations and said: When we are bones and fragments
shall we, forsooth, be raised up as a new creation ?

<span id="an_017_099">99</span> Have they not seen that Allah Who
created the heavens and the earth is Able to create the like of them,
and hath appointed for them an end whereof there is no doubt ? But the
wrong-doers refuse aught save disbelief.

<span id="an_017_100">100</span> Say (unto them): If ye possessed the
treasures of the mercy of my Lord, ye would surely hold them back for
fear of spending, for man was ever grudging.

<span id="an_017_101">101</span> And verily We gave unto Moses nine
tokens, clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty). Do but ask the Children
of Israel how he came unto them, then Pharaoh said unto him: Lo! I deem
thee one bewitched, O Moses.

<span id="an_017_102">102</span> He said: In truth thou knowest that
none sent down these (portents) save the Lord of the heavens and the
earth as proofs, and lo! (for my part) I deem thee lost, O Pharaoh.

<span id="an_017_103">103</span> And he wished to scare them from the
land, but We drowned him and those with him, all together.

<span id="an_017_104">104</span> And We said unto the Children of Israel
after him: Dwell in the land; but when the promise of the Hereafter
cometh to pass We shall bring you as a crowd gathered out of various
nations.

<span id="an_017_105">105</span> With truth have We sent it down, and
with truth hath it descended. And We have sent thee as naught else save
a bearer of good tidings and a warner.

<span id="an_017_106">106</span> And (it is) a Qur'an that We have
divided, that thou mayst recite it unto mankind at intervals, and We
have revealed it by (successive) revelation.

<span id="an_017_107">107</span> Say: Believe therein or believe not,
lo! those who were given knowledge before it, when it is read unto them,
fall down prostrate on their faces, adoring,

<span id="an_017_108">108</span> Saying: Glory to our Lord! Verily the
promise of our Lord must be fulfilled.

<span id="an_017_109">109</span> They fall down on their faces, weeping,
and it increaseth humility in them.

<span id="an_017_110">110</span> Say (unto mankind): Cry unto Allah, or
cry unto the Beneficent, unto whichsoever ye cry (it is the same). His
are the most beautiful names. And thou (Muhammad), be not loud-voiced in
thy worship nor yet silent therein, but follow a way between.

<span id="an_017_111">111</span> And say: Praise be to Allah, Who hath
not taken unto Himself a son, and Who hath no partner in the
Sovereignty, nor hath He any protecting friend through dependence. And
magnify Him with all magnificence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. al-Kahf: The Cave](018)

</div>
