<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/018)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/018)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/01801) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq018)  [Rodwell](../qr/018)   
[Previous](017)  [Next](019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 18. al-Kahf: The Cave

<span id="an_018_001">1</span> Praise be to Allah Who hath revealed the
Scripture unto His slave, and hath not placed therein any crookedness,

<span id="an_018_002">2</span> (But hath made it) straight, to give
warning of stern punishment from Him, and to bring unto the believers
who do good works the news that theirs will be a fair reward,

<span id="an_018_003">3</span> Wherein they will abide for ever;

<span id="an_018_004">4</span> And to warn those who say: Allah hath
chosen a son,

<span id="an_018_005">5</span> (A thing) whereof they have no knowledge,
nor (had) their fathers, Dreadful is the word that cometh out of their
mouths. They speak naught but a lie.

<span id="an_018_006">6</span> Yet it may be, if they believe not in
this statement, that thou (Muhammad) wilt torment thy soul with grief
over their footsteps.

<span id="an_018_007">7</span> Lo! We have placed all that is on the
earth as an ornament thereof that We may try them: which of them is best
in conduct.

<span id="an_018_008">8</span> And lo! We shall make all that is thereon
a barren mound.

<span id="an_018_009">9</span> Or deemest thou that the People of the
Cave and the Inscription are a wonder among Our portents ?

<span id="an_018_010">10</span> When the young men fled for refuge to
the Cave and said: Our Lord! Give us mercy from Thy presence, and shape
for us right conduct in our plight.

<span id="an_018_011">11</span> Then We sealed up their hearing in the
Cave for a number of years.

<span id="an_018_012">12</span> And afterward We raised them up that We
might know which of the two parties would best calculate the time that
they had tarried.

<span id="an_018_013">13</span> We narrate unto thee their story with
truth. Lo! they were young men who believed in their Lord, and We
increased them in guidance.

<span id="an_018_014">14</span> And We made firm their hearts when they
stood forth and said: Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth.
We cry unto no God beside Him, for then should we utter an enormity.

<span id="an_018_015">15</span> These, our people, have chosen (other)
gods beside Him though they bring no clear warrant (vouchsafed) to them.
And who doth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah
?

<span id="an_018_016">16</span> And when ye withdraw from them and that
which they worship except Allah, then seek refuge in the Cave; your Lord
will spread for you of His mercy and will prepare for you a pillow in
your plight.

<span id="an_018_017">17</span> And thou mightest have seen the sun when
it rose move away from their cave to the right, and when it set go past
them on the left, and they were in the cleft thereof. That was (one) of
the portents of Allah. He whom Allah guideth, he indeed is led aright,
and he whom He sendeth astray, for him thou wilt not find a guiding
friend.

<span id="an_018_018">18</span> And thou wouldst have deemed them waking
though they were asleep, and We caused them to turn over to the right
and the left, and their dog stretching out his paws on the threshold. If
thou hadst observed them closely thou hadst assuredly turned away from
them in flight, and hadst been filled with awe of them.

<span id="an_018_019">19</span> And in like manner We awakened them that
they might question one another. A speaker from among them said: How
long have ye tarried ? They said: We have tarried a day or some part of
a day, (Others) said: Your Lord best knoweth what ye have tarried. Now
send one of you with this your silver coin unto the city, and let him
see what food is purest there and bring you a supply thereof. Let him be
courteous and let no man know of you.

<span id="an_018_020">20</span> For they, if they should come to know of
you, will stone you or turn you back to their religion; then ye will
never prosper.

<span id="an_018_021">21</span> And in like manner We disclosed them (to
the people of the city) that they might know that the promise of Allah
is true, and that, as for the Hour, there is no doubt concerning it.
When (the people of the city) disputed of their case among themselves,
they said: Build over them a building; their Lord knoweth best
concerning them. Those who won their point said: We verily shall build a
place of worship over them.

<span id="an_018_022">22</span> (Some) will say: They were three, their
dog the fourth, and (some) say: Five, their dog the sixth, guessing at
random; and (some) say: Seven, and their dog the eighth. Say (O
Muhammad): My Lord is Best Aware of their number. None knoweth them save
a few. So contend not concerning them except with an outward contending,
and ask not any of them to pronounce concerning them.

<span id="an_018_023">23</span> And say not of anything: Lo! I shall do
that tomorrow,

<span id="an_018_024">24</span> Except if Allah will. And remember thy
Lord when thou forgettest, and say: It may be that my Lord guideth me
unto a nearer way of truth than this.

<span id="an_018_025">25</span> And (it is said) they tarried in their
Cave three hundred years and add nine.

<span id="an_018_026">26</span> Say: Allah is Best Aware how long they
tarried. His is the Invisible of the heavens and the earth. How clear of
sight is He and keen of hearing! They have no protecting friend beside
Him, and He maketh none to share in His government.

<span id="an_018_027">27</span> And recite that which hath been revealed
unto thee of the Scripture of thy Lord. There is none who can change His
words, and thou wilt find no refuge beside Him.

<span id="an_018_028">28</span> Restrain thyself along with those who
cry unto their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance; and
let not thine eyes overlook them, desiring the pomp of the life of the
world; and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our
remembrance, who followeth his own lust and whose case hath been
abandoned.

<span id="an_018_029">29</span> Say: (It is) the truth from the Lord of
you (all). Then whosoever will, let him believe, and whosoever will, let
him disbelieve. Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers Fire. Its tent
encloseth them. If they ask for showers, they will be showered with
water like to molten lead which burneth the faces. Calamitous the drink
and ill the resting-place!

<span id="an_018_030">30</span> Lo! as for those who believe and do good
works - Lo! We suffer not the reward of one whose work is goodly to be
lost.

<span id="an_018_031">31</span> As for such, theirs will be Gardens of
Eden, wherein rivers flow beneath them; therein they will be given
armlets of gold and will wear green robes of finest silk and gold
embroidery, reclining upon throne therein. Blest the reward, and fair
the resting-place!

<span id="an_018_032">32</span> Coin for them a similitude: Two men,
unto one of whom We had assigned two gardens of grapes, and We had
surrounded both with date-palms and had put between them tillage.

<span id="an_018_033">33</span> Each of the gardens gave its fruit and
withheld naught thereof. And We caused a river to gush forth therein.

<span id="an_018_034">34</span> And he had fruit. And he said unto his
comrade, when he spake with him: I am more than thee in wealth, and
stronger in respect of men.

<span id="an_018_035">35</span> And he went into his garden, while he
(thus) wronged himself. He said: I think not that all this will ever
perish.

<span id="an_018_036">36</span> I think not that the Hour will ever
come, and if indeed I am brought back unto my Lord I surely shall find
better than this as a resort.

<span id="an_018_037">37</span> His comrade, when he (thus) spake with
him, exclaimed: Disbelievest thou in Him Who created thee of dust, then
of a drop (of seed), and then fashioned thee a man ?

<span id="an_018_038">38</span> But He is Allah, my Lord, and I ascribe
unto my Lord no partner.

<span id="an_018_039">39</span> If only, when thou enteredst thy garden,
thou hadst said: That which Allah willeth (will come to pass)! There is
no strength save in Allah! Though thou seest me as less than thee in
wealth and children,

<span id="an_018_040">40</span> Yet it may be that my Lord will give me
better than thy garden, and will send on it a bolt from heaven, and some
morning it will be a smooth hillside,

<span id="an_018_041">41</span> Or some morning the water thereof will
be lost in the earth so that thou canst not make search for it.

<span id="an_018_042">42</span> And his fruit was beset (with
destruction). Then began he to wring his hands for all that he had spent
upon it, when (now) it was all ruined on its trellises, and to say:
Would that I had ascribed no partner to my Lord!

<span id="an_018_043">43</span> And he had no troop of men to help him
as against Allah, nor could he save himself.

<span id="an_018_044">44</span> In this case is protection only from
Allah, the True, He is Best for reward, and best for consequence.

<span id="an_018_045">45</span> And coin for them the similitude of the
life of the world as water which We send down from the sky, and the
vegetation of the earth mingleth with it and then becometh dry twigs
that the winds scatter. Allah is able to do all things.

<span id="an_018_046">46</span> Wealth and children are an ornament of
the life of the world. But the good deeds which endure are better in thy
Lord's sight for reward, and better in respect of hope.

<span id="an_018_047">47</span> And (bethink you of) the Day when we
remove the hills and ye see the earth emerging, and We gather them
together so as to leave not one of them behind.

<span id="an_018_048">48</span> And they are set before thy Lord in
ranks (and it is said unto them): Now verily have ye come unto Us as We
created you at the first. But ye thought that We had set no tryst for
you.

<span id="an_018_049">49</span> And the Book is placed, and thou seest
the guilty fearful of that which is therein, and they say: What kind of
a Book is this that leaveth not a small thing nor a great thing but hath
counted it! And they find all that they did confronting them, and thy
Lord wrongeth no-one.

<span id="an_018_050">50</span> And (remember) when We said unto the
angels: Fall prostrate before Adam, and they fell prostrate, all save
Iblis. He was of the jinn, so he rebelled against his Lord's command.
Will ye choose him and his seed for your protecting friends instead of
Me, when they are an enemy unto you ? Calamitous is the exchange for
evil-doers.

<span id="an_018_051">51</span> I made them not to witness the creation
of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation; nor choose I
misleaders for (My) helpers.

<span id="an_018_052">52</span> And (be mindful of) the Day when He will
say: Call those partners of Mine whom ye pretended. Then they will cry
unto them, but they will not hear their prayer, and We shall set a gulf
of doom between them.

<span id="an_018_053">53</span> And the guilty behold the Fire and know
that they are about to fall therein, and they find no way of escape
thence.

<span id="an_018_054">54</span> And verily We have displayed for mankind
in this Qur'an all manner of similitudes, but man is more than anything
contentious.

<span id="an_018_055">55</span> And naught hindereth mankind from
believing when the guidance cometh unto them, and from asking
forgiveness of their Lord unless (it be that they wish) that the
judgment of the men of old should come upon them or (that) they should
be confronted with the Doom.

<span id="an_018_056">56</span> We send not the messengers save as
bearers of good news and warners. Those who disbelieve contend with
falsehood in order to refute the Truth thereby. And they take Our
revelations and that wherewith they are threatened as a jest.

<span id="an_018_057">57</span> And who doth greater wrong than he who
hath been reminded of the revelations of his Lord, yet turneth away from
them and forgetteth what his hands send forward (to the Judgment) ? Lo!
on their hearts We have placed coverings so that they understand not,
and in their ears a deafness. And though thou call them to the guidance,
in that case they can never be led aright.

<span id="an_018_058">58</span> Thy Lord is the Forgiver, Full of Mercy.
If He took them to task (now) for what they earn, He would hasten on the
doom for them; but theirs is an appointed term from which they will find
no escape.

<span id="an_018_059">59</span> And (all) those townships! We destroyed
them when they did wrong, and We appointed a fixed time for their
destruction.

<span id="an_018_060">60</span> And when Moses said unto his servant: I
will not give up until I reach the point where the two rivers meet,
though I march on for ages.

<span id="an_018_061">61</span> And when they reached the point where
the two met, they forgot their fish, and it took its way into the
waters, being free.

<span id="an_018_062">62</span> And when they had gone further, he said
unto his servant: Bring us our breakfast. Verily we have found fatigue
in this our journey.

<span id="an_018_063">63</span> He said: Didst thou see, when we took
refuge on the rock, and I forgot the fish - and none but Satan caused me
to forget to mention it - it took its way into the waters by a marvel.

<span id="an_018_064">64</span> He said: This is that which we have been
seeking. So they retraced their steps again.

<span id="an_018_065">65</span> Then found they one of Our slaves, unto
whom We had given mercy from Us, and had taught him knowledge from Our
presence.

<span id="an_018_066">66</span> Moses said unto him: May I follow thee,
to the end that thou mayst teach me right conduct of that which thou
hast been taught ?

<span id="an_018_067">67</span> He said: Lo! thou canst not bear with
me.

<span id="an_018_068">68</span> How canst thou bear with that whereof
thou canst not compass any knowledge ?

<span id="an_018_069">69</span> He said: Allah willing, thou shalt find
me patient and I shall not in aught gainsay thee.

<span id="an_018_070">70</span> He said: Well, if thou go with me, ask
me not concerning aught till I myself make mention of it unto thee.

<span id="an_018_071">71</span> So they twain set out till, when they
were in the ship, he made a hole therein. (Moses) said: Hast thou made a
hole therein to drown the folk thereof ? Thou verily hast done a
dreadful thing.

<span id="an_018_072">72</span> He said: Did I not tell thee that thou
couldst not bear with me ?

<span id="an_018_073">73</span> (Moses) said: Be not wroth with me that
I forgot, and be not hard upon me for my fault.

<span id="an_018_074">74</span> So they twain journeyed on till, when
they met a lad, he slew him. (Moses) said: What! Hast thou slain an
innocent soul who hath slain no man ? Verily thou hast done a horrid
thing.

<span id="an_018_075">75</span> He said: Did I not tell thee that thou
couldst not bear with me ?

<span id="an_018_076">76</span> (Moses) said: If I ask thee after this
concerning aught, keep not company with me. Thou hast received an excuse
from me.

<span id="an_018_077">77</span> So they twain journeyed on till, when
they came unto the folk of a certain township, they asked its folk for
food, but they refused to make them guests. And they found therein a
wall upon the point of falling into ruin, and he repaired it. (Moses)
said: If thou hadst wished, thou couldst have taken payment for it.

<span id="an_018_078">78</span> He said: This is the parting between
thee and me! I will announce unto thee the interpretation of that thou
couldst not bear with patience.

<span id="an_018_079">79</span> As for the ship, it belonged to poor
people working on the river, and I wished to mar it, for there was a
king behind them who is taking every ship by force.

<span id="an_018_080">80</span> And as for the lad, his parents were
believers and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and
disbelief.

<span id="an_018_081">81</span> And we intended that their Lord should
change him for them for one better in purity and nearer to mercy.

<span id="an_018_082">82</span> And as for the wall, it belonged to two
orphan boys in the city, and there was beneath it a treasure belonging
to them, and their father had been righteous, and thy Lord intended that
they should come to their full strength and should bring forth their
treasure as a mercy from their Lord; and I did it not upon my own
command. Such is the interpretation of that wherewith thou couldst not
bear.

<span id="an_018_083">83</span> They will ask thee of Dhu'l-Qarneyn.
Say: I shall recite unto you a remembrance of him.

<span id="an_018_084">84</span> Lo! We made him strong in the land and
gave him unto every thing a road.

<span id="an_018_085">85</span> And he followed a road

<span id="an_018_086">86</span> Till, when he reached the setting-place
of the sun, he found it setting in a muddy spring, and found a people
thereabout. We said: O Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Either punish or show them
kindness.

<span id="an_018_087">87</span> He said: As for him who doeth wrong, we
shall punish him, and then he will be brought back unto his Lord, Who
will punish him with awful punishment!

<span id="an_018_088">88</span> But as for him who believeth and doeth
right, good will be his reward, and We shall speak unto him a mild
command.

<span id="an_018_089">89</span> Then he followed a road

<span id="an_018_090">90</span> Till, when he reached the rising-place
of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had appointed no
shelter therefrom.

<span id="an_018_091">91</span> So (it was). And We knew all concerning
him.

<span id="an_018_092">92</span> Then he followed a road

<span id="an_018_093">93</span> Till, when he came between the two
mountains, he found upon their hither side a folk that scarce could
understand a saying.

<span id="an_018_094">94</span> They said: O Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Lo! Gog and
Magog are spoiling the land. So may we pay thee tribute on condition
that thou set a barrier between us and them ?

<span id="an_018_095">95</span> He said: That wherein my Lord hath
established me is better (than your tribute). Do but help me with
strength (of men), I will set between you and them a bank.

<span id="an_018_096">96</span> Give me pieces of iron - till, when he
had levelled up (the gap) between the cliffs, he said: Blow! - till,
when he had made it a fire, he said: Bring me molten copper to pour
thereon.

<span id="an_018_097">97</span> And (Gog and Magog) were not able to
surmount, nor could they pierce (it).

<span id="an_018_098">98</span> He said: This is a mercy from my Lord;
but when the promise of my Lord cometh to pass, He will lay it low, for
the promise of my Lord is true.

<span id="an_018_099">99</span> And on that day we shall let some of
them surge against others, and the Trumpet will be blown. Then We shall
gather them together in one gathering.

<span id="an_018_100">100</span> On that day we shall present hell to
the disbelievers, plain to view,

<span id="an_018_101">101</span> Those whose eyes were hoodwinked from
My reminder, and who could not bear to hear.

<span id="an_018_102">102</span> Do the disbelievers reckon that they
can choose My bondmen as protecting friends beside Me ? Lo! We have
prepared hell as a welcome for the disbelievers.

<span id="an_018_103">103</span> Say: Shall We inform you who will be
the greatest losers by their works ?

<span id="an_018_104">104</span> Those whose effort goeth astray in the
life of the world, and yet they reckon that they do good work.

<span id="an_018_105">105</span> Those are they who disbelieve in the
revelations of their Lord and in the meeting with Him. Therefor their
works are vain, and on the Day of Resurrection We assign no weight to
them.

<span id="an_018_106">106</span> That is their reward: hell, because
they disbelieved, and made a jest of Our revelations and Our messengers.

<span id="an_018_107">107</span> Lo! those who believe and do good
works, theirs are the Gardens of Paradise for welcome,

<span id="an_018_108">108</span> Wherein they will abide, with no desire
to be removed from thence.

<span id="an_018_109">109</span> Say: Though the sea became ink for the
Words of my Lord, verily the sea would be used up before the words of my
Lord were exhausted, even though We brought the like thereof to help.

<span id="an_018_110">110</span> Say: I am only a mortal like you. My
Lord inspireth in me that your God is only One God. And whoever hopeth
for the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work, and make none
sharer of the worship due unto his Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Maryam: Mary](019)

</div>
