<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/038)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/038)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/03801) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq038)  [Rodwell](../qr/038)   
[Previous](037)  [Next](039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 38. Sad: Sad

<span id="an_038_001">1</span> Sad. By the renowned Qur'an,

<span id="an_038_002">2</span> Nay, but those who disbelieve are in
false pride and schism.

<span id="an_038_003">3</span> How many a generation We destroyed before
them, and they cried out when it was no longer the time for escape!

<span id="an_038_004">4</span> And they marvel that a warner from among
themselves hath come unto them, and the disbelievers say: This is a
wizard, a charlatan.

<span id="an_038_005">5</span> Maketh he the gods One God ? Lo! that is
an astounding thing.

<span id="an_038_006">6</span> The chiefs among them go about,
exhorting: Go and be staunch to your gods! Lo! this is a thing designed.

<span id="an_038_007">7</span> We have not heard of this in later
religion. This is naught but an invention.

<span id="an_038_008">8</span> Hath the reminder been unto him (alone)
among us ? Nay, but they are in doubt concerning My reminder; nay but
they have not yet tasted My doom.

<span id="an_038_009">9</span> Or are theirs the treasures of the mercy
of thy Lord, the Mighty, the Bestower ?

<span id="an_038_010">10</span> Or is the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth and all that is between them theirs ? Then let them ascend by
ropes!

<span id="an_038_011">11</span> A defeated host are (all) the factions
that are there.

<span id="an_038_012">12</span> The folk of Noah before them denied
(their messenger) and (so did the tribe of) A'ad, and Pharaoh firmly
planted,

<span id="an_038_013">13</span> And (the tribe of) Thamud, and the folk
of Lot, and the dwellers in the wood: these were the factions.

<span id="an_038_014">14</span> Not one of them but did deny the
messengers, therefor My doom was justified,

<span id="an_038_015">15</span> These wait for but one Shout, there will
be no second thereto.

<span id="an_038_016">16</span> They say: Our Lord! Hasten on for us our
fate before the Day of Reckoning.

<span id="an_038_017">17</span> Bear with what they say, and remember
Our bondman David, lord of might, Lo! he was ever turning in repentance
(toward Allah).

<span id="an_038_018">18</span> Lo! We subdued the hills to hymn the
praises (of their Lord) with him at nightfall and sunrise,

<span id="an_038_019">19</span> And the birds assembled; all were
turning unto Him.

<span id="an_038_020">20</span> We made his kingdom strong and gave him
wisdom and decisive speech.

<span id="an_038_021">21</span> And hath the story of the litigants come
unto thee ? How they climbed the wall into the royal chamber;

<span id="an_038_022">22</span> How they burst in upon David, and he was
afraid of them. They said: Be not afraid! (We are) two litigants, one of
whom hath wronged the other, therefor judge aright between us; be not
unjust; and show us the fair way.

<span id="an_038_023">23</span> Lo! this my brother hath ninety and nine
ewes while I had one ewe; and he said: Entrust it to me, and he
conquered me in speech.

<span id="an_038_024">24</span> (David) said: He hath wronged thee in
demanding thine ewe in addition to his ewes, and lo! many partners
oppress one another, save such as believe and do good works, and they
are few. And David guessed that We had tried him, and he sought
forgiveness of his Lord, and he bowed himself and fell down prostrate
and repented.

<span id="an_038_025">25</span> So We forgave him that; and lo! he had
access to Our presence and a happy journey's end.

<span id="an_038_026">26</span> (And it was said unto him): O David! Lo!
We have set thee as a viceroy in the earth; therefor judge aright
between mankind, and follow not desire that it beguile thee from the way
of Allah. Lo! those who wander from the way of Allah have an awful doom,
forasmuch as they forgot the Day of Reckoning.

<span id="an_038_027">27</span> And We created not the heaven and the
earth and all that is between them in vain. That is the opinion of those
who disbelieve. And woe unto those who disbelieve, from the Fire!

<span id="an_038_028">28</span> Shall We treat those who believe and do
good works as those who spread corruption in the earth; or shall We
treat the pious as the wicked ?

<span id="an_038_029">29</span> (This is) a Scripture that We have
revealed unto thee, full of blessing, that they may ponder its
revelations, and that men of understanding may reflect.

<span id="an_038_030">30</span> And We bestowed on David, Solomon. How
excellent a slave! Lo! he was ever turning in repentance (toward Allah).

<span id="an_038_031">31</span> When there were shown to him at eventide
lightfooted coursers

<span id="an_038_032">32</span> And he said: Lo! I have preferred the
good things (of the world) to the remembrance of my Lord; till they were
taken out of sight behind the curtain.

<span id="an_038_033">33</span> (Then he said): Bring them back to me,
and fell to slashing (with his sword their) legs and necks.

<span id="an_038_034">34</span> And verily We tried Solomon, and set
upon his throne a (mere) body. Then did he repent.

<span id="an_038_035">35</span> He said: My Lord! Forgive me and bestow
on me sovereignty such as shall not belong to any after me. Lo! Thou art
the Bestower.

<span id="an_038_036">36</span> So We made the wind subservient unto
him, setting fair by his command whithersoever he intended.

<span id="an_038_037">37</span> And the unruly, every builder and diver
(made We subservient),

<span id="an_038_038">38</span> And others linked together in chains,

<span id="an_038_039">39</span> (Saying): This is Our gift, so bestow
thou, or withhold, without reckoning.

<span id="an_038_040">40</span> And lo! he hath favour with Us, and a
happy journey's end.

<span id="an_038_041">41</span> And make mention (O Muhammad) of Our
bondman Job, when he cried unto his Lord (saying): Lo! the devil doth
afflict me with distress and torment.

<span id="an_038_042">42</span> (And it was said unto him): Strike the
ground with thy foot. This (spring) is a cool bath and a refreshing
drink.

<span id="an_038_043">43</span> And We bestowed on him (again) his
household and therewith the like thereof, a mercy from Us, and a
memorial for men of understanding.

<span id="an_038_044">44</span> And (it was said unto him): Take in
thine hand a branch and smite therewith, and break not thine oath. Lo!
We found him steadfast, how excellent a slave! Lo! he was ever turning
in repentance (to his Lord).

<span id="an_038_045">45</span> And make mention of Our bondmen,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of parts and vision.

<span id="an_038_046">46</span> Lo! We purified them with a pure
thought, remembrance of the Home (of the Hereafter).

<span id="an_038_047">47</span> Lo! in Our sight they are verily of the
elect, the excellent.

<span id="an_038_048">48</span> And make mention of Ishmael and Elisha
and Dhu'l-Kifl. All are of the chosen.

<span id="an_038_049">49</span> This is a reminder. And lo! for those
who ward off (evil) is a happy journey's end,

<span id="an_038_050">50</span> Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are
opened for them,

<span id="an_038_051">51</span> Wherein, reclining, they call for
plenteous fruit and cool drink (that is) therein.

<span id="an_038_052">52</span> And with them are those of modest gaze,
companions.

<span id="an_038_053">53</span> This it is that ye are promised for the
Day of Reckoning.

<span id="an_038_054">54</span> Lo! this in truth is Our provision,
which will never waste away.

<span id="an_038_055">55</span> This (is for the righteous). And lo! for
the transgressors there with be an evil journey's end,

<span id="an_038_056">56</span> Hell, where they will burn, an evil
resting-place.

<span id="an_038_057">57</span> Here is a boiling and an ice-cold
draught, so let them taste it,

<span id="an_038_058">58</span> And other (torment) of the kind in pairs
(the two extremes)!

<span id="an_038_059">59</span> Here is an army rushing blindly with
you. (Those who are already in the Fire say): No word of welcome for
them. Lo! they will roast at the Fire.

<span id="an_038_060">60</span> They say: Nay, but you (misleaders), for
you there is no word of welcome. Ye prepared this for us (by your
misleading). Now hapless is the plight.

<span id="an_038_061">61</span> They say: Our Lord! Whoever did prepare
this for us, oh, give him double portion of the Fire!

<span id="an_038_062">62</span> And they say: What aileth us that we
behold not men whom we were wont to count among the wicked ?

<span id="an_038_063">63</span> Did we take them (wrongly) for a
laughing-stock, or have our eyes missed them ?

<span id="an_038_064">64</span> Lo! that is very truth: the wrangling of
the dwellers in the Fire.

<span id="an_038_065">65</span> Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I am only a
warner, and there is no God save Allah, the One, the Absolute,

<span id="an_038_066">66</span> Lord of the heavens and the earth and
all that is between them, the Mighty, the Pardoning.

<span id="an_038_067">67</span> Say: It is tremendous tidings

<span id="an_038_068">68</span> Whence ye turn away!

<span id="an_038_069">69</span> I had no knowledge of the Highest Chiefs
when they disputed;

<span id="an_038_070">70</span> It is revealed unto me only that I may
be a plain warner.

<span id="an_038_071">71</span> When thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo!
I am about to create a mortal out of mire,

<span id="an_038_072">72</span> And when I have fashioned him and
breathed into him of My Spirit, then fall down before him prostrate,

<span id="an_038_073">73</span> The angels fell down prostrate, every
one,

<span id="an_038_074">74</span> Saving Iblis; he was scornful and became
one of the disbelievers.

<span id="an_038_075">75</span> He said: O Iblis! What hindereth thee
from falling prostrate before that which I have created with both My
hands ? Art thou too proud or art thou of the high exalted ?

<span id="an_038_076">76</span> He said: I am better than him. Thou
createdst me of fire, whilst him Thou didst create of clay.

<span id="an_038_077">77</span> He said: Go forth from hence, for lo!
thou art outcast,

<span id="an_038_078">78</span> And lo! My curse is on thee till the Day
of Judgment.

<span id="an_038_079">79</span> He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the
day when they are raised.

<span id="an_038_080">80</span> He said: Lo! thou art of those reprieved

<span id="an_038_081">81</span> Until the day of the time appointed.

<span id="an_038_082">82</span> He said: Then, by Thy might, I surely
will beguile them every one,

<span id="an_038_083">83</span> Save Thy single-minded slaves among
them.

<span id="an_038_084">84</span> He said: The Truth is, and the Truth I
speak,

<span id="an_038_085">85</span> That I shall fill hell with thee and
with such of them as follow thee, together.

<span id="an_038_086">86</span> Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of
you no fee for this, and I am no simulating.

<span id="an_038_087">87</span> Lo! it is naught else than a reminder
for all peoples

<span id="an_038_088">88</span> And ye will come in time to know the
truth thereof.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39. az-Zumar: The Companies](039)

</div>
