<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/041)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/041)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/04101) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq041)  [Rodwell](../qr/041)   
[Previous](040)  [Next](042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 41. Ha Mim Sajdah: Revelations Well Expounded

<span id="an_041_001">1</span> Ha. Mim.

<span id="an_041_002">2</span> A revelation from the Beneficent, the
Merciful,

<span id="an_041_003">3</span> A Scripture whereof the verses are
expounded, a Lecture in Arabic for people who have knowledge,

<span id="an_041_004">4</span> Good tidings and a warning. But most of
them turn away so that they hear not.

<span id="an_041_005">5</span> And they say: Our hearts are protected
from that unto which thou (O Muhammad) callest us, and in our ears there
is a deafness, and between us and thee there is a veil. Act, then. Lo!
we also shall be acting.

<span id="an_041_006">6</span> Say (unto them O Muhammad): I am only a
mortal like you. It is inspired in me that your God is One God, therefor
take the straight path unto Him and seek forgiveness of Him. And woe
unto the idolaters,

<span id="an_041_007">7</span> Who give not the poor-due, and who are
disbelievers in the Hereafter.

<span id="an_041_008">8</span> Lo! as for those who believe and do good
works, for them is a reward enduring.

<span id="an_041_009">9</span> Say (O Muhammad, unto the idolaters):
Disbelieve ye verily in Him Who created the earth in two Days, and
ascribe ye unto Him rivals ? He (and none else) is the Lord of the
Worlds.

<span id="an_041_010">10</span> He placed therein firm hills rising
above it, and blessed it and measured therein its sustenance in four
Days, alike for (all) who ask;

<span id="an_041_011">11</span> Then turned He to the heaven when it was
smoke, and said unto it and unto the earth: Come both of you, willingly
or loth. They said: We come, obedient.

<span id="an_041_012">12</span> Then He ordained them seven heavens in
two Days and inspired in each heaven its mandate; and We decked the
nether heaven with lamps, and rendered it inviolable. That is the
measuring of the Mighty, the Knower.

<span id="an_041_013">13</span> But if they turn away, then say: I warn
you of a thunderbolt like the thunderbolt (which fell of old upon the
tribes) of A'ad and Thamud;

<span id="an_041_014">14</span> When their messengers came unto them
from before them and behind them, saying: Worship none but Allah! they
said: If our Lord had willed, He surely would have sent down angels
(unto us), so lo! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been
sent.

<span id="an_041_015">15</span> As for A'ad, they were arrogant in the
land without right, and they said: Who is mightier than us in power ?
Could they not see that Allah Who created them, He was mightier than
them in power ? And they denied Our revelations.

<span id="an_041_016">16</span> Therefor We let loose on them a raging
wind in evil days, that We might make them taste the torment of disgrace
in the life of the world. And verily the doom of the Hereafter will be
more shameful, and they will not be helped.

<span id="an_041_017">17</span> And as for Thamud, We gave them
guidance, but they preferred blindness to the guidance, so the bolt of
the doom of humiliation overtook them because of what they used to earn.

<span id="an_041_018">18</span> And We delivered those who believed and
used to keep their duty to Allah.

<span id="an_041_019">19</span> And (make mention of) the day when the
enemies of Allah are gathered unto the Fire, they are driven on

<span id="an_041_020">20</span> Till, when they reach it, their ears and
their eyes and their skins testify against them as to what they used to
do.

<span id="an_041_021">21</span> And they say unto their skins: Why
testify ye against us ? They say: Allah hath given us speech Who giveth
speech to all things, and Who created you at the first, and unto Whom ye
are returned.

<span id="an_041_022">22</span> Ye did not hide yourselves lest your
ears and your eyes and your skins should testify against you, but ye
deemed that Allah knew not much of what ye did.

<span id="an_041_023">23</span> That, your thought which ye did think
about your Lord, hath ruined you; and ye find yourselves (this day)
among the lost.

<span id="an_041_024">24</span> And though they are resigned, yet the
Fire is still their home; and if they ask for favour, yet they are not
of those unto whom favour can be shown.

<span id="an_041_025">25</span> And We assigned them comrades (in the
world), who made their present and their past fairseeming unto them. And
the Word concerning nations of the jinn and humankind who passed away
before them hath effect for them. Lo! they were ever losers.

<span id="an_041_026">26</span> Those who disbelieve say: Heed not this
Qur'an, and drown the hearing of it; haply ye may conquer.

<span id="an_041_027">27</span> But verily We shall cause those who
disbelieve to taste an awful doom, and verily We shall requite them the
worst of what they used to do.

<span id="an_041_028">28</span> That is the reward of Allah's enemies:
the Fire. Therein is their immortal home, payment forasmuch as they
denied Our revelations.

<span id="an_041_029">29</span> And those who disbelieve will say: Our
Lord! Show us those who beguiled us of the jinn and humankind. We will
place them underneath our feet that they may be among the nethermost.

<span id="an_041_030">30</span> Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah,
and afterward are upright, the angels descend upon them, saying: Fear
not nor grieve, but hear good tidings of the paradise which ye are
promised.

<span id="an_041_031">31</span> We are your protecting friends in the
life of the world and in the Hereafter. There ye will have (all) that
your souls desire, and there ye will have (all) for which ye pray.

<span id="an_041_032">32</span> A gift of welcome from One Forgiving,
Merciful.

<span id="an_041_033">33</span> And who is better in speech than him who
prayeth unto his Lord and doeth right, and saith: Lo! I am of those who
are muslims (surrender unto Him).

<span id="an_041_034">34</span> The good deed and the evil deed are not
alike. Repel the evil deed with one which is better, then lo! he,
between whom and thee there was enmity (will become) as though he was a
bosom friend.

<span id="an_041_035">35</span> But none is granted it save those who
are steadfast, and none is granted it save the owner of great happiness.

<span id="an_041_036">36</span> And if a whisper from the devil reach
thee (O Muhammad) then seek refuge in Allah. Lo! He is the Hearer, the
Knower.

<span id="an_041_037">37</span> And of His portents are the night and
the day and the sun and the moon. Adore not the sun not the moon; but
adore Allah Who created them, if it is in truth Him Whom ye worship.

<span id="an_041_038">38</span> But if they are too proud - still those
who are with thy Lord glorify Him night and day, and tire not.

<span id="an_041_039">39</span> And of His portents (is this): that thou
seest the earth lowly, but when We send down water thereon it thrilleth
and groweth. Lo! He Who quickeneth it is verily the Quickener of the
Dead. Lo! He is Able to do all things.

<span id="an_041_040">40</span> Lo! those who distort Our revelations
are not hid from Us. Is he who is hurled into the Fire better, or he who
cometh secure on the Day of Resurrection ? Do what ye will. Lo! He is
Seer of what ye do.

<span id="an_041_041">41</span> Lo! those who disbelieve in the Reminder
when it cometh unto them (are guilty), for lo! it is an unassailable
Scripture.

<span id="an_041_042">42</span> Falsehood cannot come at it from before
it or from behind it. (It is) a revelation from the Wise, the Owner of
Praise.

<span id="an_041_043">43</span> Naught is said unto thee (Muhammad) save
what was said unto the messengers before thee. Lo! thy Lord is owner of
forgiveness, and owner (also) of dire punishment.

<span id="an_041_044">44</span> And if We had appointed it a Lecture in
a foreign tongue they would assuredly have said: If only its verses were
expounded (so that we might understand) ? What! A foreign tongue and an
Arab ? - Say unto them (O Muhammad): For those who believe it is a
guidance and a healing; and as for those who disbelieve, there is a
deafness in their ears, and it is blindness for them. Such are called to
from afar.

<span id="an_041_045">45</span> And We verily gave Moses the Scripture,
but there hath been dispute concerning it; and but for a Word that had
already gone forth from thy Lord, it would ere now have been judged
between them; but lo! they are in hopeless doubt concerning it.

<span id="an_041_046">46</span> Whoso doeth right it is for his soul,
and whoso doeth wrong it is against it. And thy Lord is not at all a
tyrant to His slaves.

<span id="an_041_047">47</span> Unto Him is referred (all) knowledge of
the Hour. And no fruits burst forth from their sheaths, and no female
carrieth or bringeth forth but with His knowledge. And on the day when
He calleth unto them: Where are now My partners ? they will say: We
confess unto Thee, not one of us is a witness (for them).

<span id="an_041_048">48</span> And those to whom they used to cry of
old have failed them, and they perceive they have no place of refuge.

<span id="an_041_049">49</span> Man tireth not of praying for good, and
if ill toucheth him, then he is disheartened, desperate.

<span id="an_041_050">50</span> And verily, if We cause him to taste
mercy after some hurt that hath touched him, he will say: This is my
own; and I deem not that the Hour will ever rise, and if I am brought
back to my Lord, I surely shall be better off with Him - But We verily
shall tell those who disbelieve (all) that they did, and We verily shall
make them taste hard punishment.

<span id="an_041_051">51</span> When We show favour unto man, he
withdraweth and turneth aside, but when ill toucheth him then he
aboundeth in prayer.

<span id="an_041_052">52</span> Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye
reject it - Who is further astray than one who is at open feud (with
Allah) ?

<span id="an_041_053">53</span> We shall show them Our portents on the
horizons and within themselves until it will be manifest unto them that
it is the Truth. Doth not thy Lord suffice, since He is Witness over all
things ?

<span id="an_041_054">54</span> How! Are they still in doubt about the
meeting with their Lord ? Lo! Is not He surrounding all things ?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 42. ash-Shura: The Counsel](042)

</div>
