<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/060)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/060)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/06001) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq060)  [Rodwell](../qr/060)   
[Previous](059)  [Next](061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 60. al-Mumtahanah: She Who is Tested

<span id="an_060_001">1</span> O ye who believe! Choose not My enemy and
your enemy for allies. Do ye give them friendship when they disbelieve
in that truth which hath come unto you, driving out the messenger and
you because ye believe in Allah, your Lord ? If ye have come forth to
strive in My way and seeking My good pleasure, (show them not
friendship). Do ye show friendship unto them in secret, when I am Best
Aware of what ye hide and what ye proclaim ? And whosoever doeth it
among you, he verily hath strayed from the right way.

<span id="an_060_002">2</span> If they have the upper hand of you, they
will be your foes, and will stretch out their hands and their tongues
toward you with evil (intent), and they long for you to disbelieve.

<span id="an_060_003">3</span> Your ties of kindred and your children
will avail you naught upon the Day of Resurrection. He will part you.
Allah is Seer of what ye do.

<span id="an_060_004">4</span> There is a goodly pattern for you in
Abraham and those with him, when they told their folk: Lo! we are
guiltless of you and all that ye worship beside Allah. We have done with
you. And there hath arisen between us and you hostility and hate for
ever until ye believe in Allah only - save that which Abraham promised
his father (when he said): I will ask forgiveness for thee, though I own
nothing for thee from Allah - Our Lord! In Thee we put our trust, and
unto Thee we turn repentant, and unto Thee is the journeying.

<span id="an_060_005">5</span> Our Lord! Make us not a prey for those
who disbelieve, and forgive us, our Lord! Lo! Thou, only Thou, are the
Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_060_006">6</span> Verily ye have in them a goodly pattern
for everyone who looketh to Allah and the Last Day. And whosoever may
turn away, lo! still Allah, He is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.

<span id="an_060_007">7</span> It may be that Allah will ordain love
between you and those of them with whom ye are at enmity. Allah is
Mighty, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_060_008">8</span> Allah forbiddeth you not those who warred
not against you on account of religion and drove you not out from your
homes, that ye should show them kindness and deal justly with them. Lo!
Allah loveth the just dealers.

<span id="an_060_009">9</span> Allah forbiddeth you only those who
warred against you on account of religion and have driven you out from
your homes and helped to drive you out, that ye make friends of them.
Whosoever maketh friends of them - (All) such are wrong- doers.

<span id="an_060_010">10</span> O ye who believe! When believing women
come unto you as fugitives, examine them. Allah is Best Aware of their
faith. Then, if ye know them for true believers, send them not back unto
the disbelievers. They are not lawful for them (the disbelievers), nor
are they (the disbelievers) lawful for them. And give them (the
disbelievers) that which they have spent (upon them). And it is no sin
for you to marry such women when ye have given them their dues. And hold
not to the ties of disbelieving women; and ask for (the return of) that
which ye have spent; and let them (the disbelievers) ask for that which
they have spent. That is the judgment of Allah. He judgeth between you.
Allah is Knower, Wise.

<span id="an_060_011">11</span> And if any of your wives have gone from
you unto the disbelievers and afterward ye have your turn (of triumph),
then give unto those whose wives have gone the like of that which they
have spent, and keep your duty to Allah in Whom ye are believers.

<span id="an_060_012">12</span> O Prophet! If believing women come unto
thee, taking oath of allegiance unto thee that they will ascribe no
thing as partner unto Allah, and will neither steal nor commit adultery
nor kill their children, nor produce any lie that they have devised
between their hands and feet, nor disobey thee in what is right, then
accept their allegiance and ask Allah to forgive them. Lo! Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_060_013">13</span> O ye who believe! Be not friendly with a
folk with whom Allah is wroth, (a folk) who have despaired of the
Hereafter as the disbelievers despair of those who are in the graves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 61. as-Saff: The Ranks](061)

</div>
