[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4506)  [Next](sbe4508) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH LECTURE.

###### DEATH AGAINST ONE'S WILL.

In this ocean (of life) with its currents (viz. births) difficult to
cross, one man has reached the opposite shore; one wise man has given an
answer to the following question. (1)

These two ways of life ending with death have been declared: death with
one's will, and death against one's will. (2)

Death against one's will is that of ignorant men, and it happens (to the
same individual) many times. Death with one's will is that of wise men,
and at best <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_94) it happens but once. (3)

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Mahâvîra has (thus) described the first kind in which an ignorant man,
being attached to pleasures, does very cruel actions. (4)

A man attached to pleasures and amusements will be caught in the trap
(of deceit). (He thinks): 'I never saw the next world, but I have seen
with my own eyes the pleasures of this life.' (5)

'The pleasures of this life are (as it were) in your hand, but the
future ones are uncertain <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_95). Who knows
whether there is a next world or not?' (6)

The fool boasts: 'I shall have the company of (most) men <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_96).' But by his love of pleasures and
amusements he will come to grief. (7)

Then he begins to act cruelly against movable and immovable beings, and
he kills living beings with a purpose or without. (8)

An ignorant man kills, lies, deceives, calumniates, dissembles, drinks
liquor, and eats meat, thinking that this is the right thing to do. (9)

Overbearing in acts and words, desirous for wealth and women, he
accumulates sins in two ways <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_97), just
as a young snake gathers dust (both on and in its body). (10)

Then he suffers ill and is attacked by disease; and he is in dread of
the next world when he reflects on his deeds. (11)

I have heard of the places in hell, and of the destination of the
sinner, where the fools who do cruel deeds will suffer violently. (12)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Then going to the place where he is to be born again according to his
deeds, he feels remorse, as I have heard (from my teacher). (13)

As a charioteer, who against his better judgment leaves the smooth
highway and gets on a rugged road, repents when the axle breaks; so the
fool, who transgresses the Law and embraces unrighteousness, repents in
the hour of death, like (the charioteer) over the broken axle. (14, 15)

Then when death comes at last, the fool trembles in fear; he dies the
'death against one's will,' (having lost his chance) like a gambler
vanquished by Kali. (16)

Thus has been explained the fools’ 'death against one's will;' now hear
from me the wise men's 'death with one's will!' (17)

Full of peace and without injury to any one is, as I have heard (from my
teachers), the death of the virtuous who control themselves and subdue
their senses <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_98). (18)

(Such a death) does not fall to the lot of every monk, nor of every
householder; for the morality of householders is of various character,
and that of monks is not always good throughout. (19)

Some householders are superior to some monks in self-control; but the
saints are superior to all householders in self-control. (20)

Bark and skin (of a goat), nakedness, twisted

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

hair, baldness--these (outward tokens) will not save a sinful ascetic.
(21)

A sinner, though he be a mendicant (friar), will not escape hell; but a
pious man, whether monk or householder, ascends to heaven. (22)

A faithful man should practise <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_99) the
rules of conduct for householders; he should never neglect the Pôsaha
fast <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_100) in both fortnights, not even
for a single night. (23)

When under such discipline he lives piously even as a householder, he
will, on quitting flesh and bones <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_101),
share the world of the Yakshas. (24)

Now a restrained monk will become one of the two: either one free from
all misery or a god of great power. (25)

To the highest regions, in due order, to those where there is no
delusion, and to those which are full of light, where the glorious (gods
dwell)--who have long life, great power, great lustre, who can change
their shape at will, who are beautiful as on their first day, and have
the brilliancy of many suns--to such places go those who are trained in
self-control and penance, monks or householders, who have obtained
liberation by absence of passion. (26-28)

Having heard (this) from the venerable men who control themselves and
subdue their senses, the virtuous and the learned do not tremble in the
hour of death. (29)

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

A wise man having weighed (both kinds of death) and chosen the better
one (taught in) the Law of Compassion, will become calm through
patience, with an undisturbed mind (at the time of death). (30)

When the right time (to prepare for death) has arrived, a faithful
(monk) should in the presence (of his teacher) suppress all emotions (of
fear or joy) and wait for the dissolution of his body. (31)

When the time for quitting the body has come, a sage dies the 'death
with one's will,' according to one of the three methods <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_102). (32)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[20:1](sbe4507.htm#fr_95) Viz. in the case of a
Kêvalin. Other sages die this death seven or eight times before reaching
mukti.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[21:1](sbe4507.htm#fr_96) Kâlikâ, doubtful as
regards the time when they will be enjoyed.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[21:2](sbe4507.htm#fr_97) I.e. I shall do as
people generally do, viz. enjoy pleasures.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[21:3](sbe4507.htm#fr_98) Viz. By his acts and
thoughts.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[22:1](sbe4507.htm#fr_99) Sa*mg*ayâ*n*a*m*
vusîmao = sa*m*yatânâ*m* va*s*yavata*m*. Vusîmao is gen. sing., it is
here used in juxtaposition with a word in gen. plur. Such an
irregularity would of course be impossible in classical Prâk*ri*t, but
the authors of metrical *G*aina Sûtras take such liberties with grammar
that we must put up with any faulty expression, though it would be easy
to correct it by a conjecture.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[23:1](sbe4507.htm#fr_100) Kâê*n*a phâsaê =
kâyêna sp*ris*êt, literally, touch with his body.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[23:2](sbe4507.htm#fr_101) The Pôsaha of the
*G*ainas corresponds to the Upôsatha of the Buddhists. Hoernle in note
87 of his translation of the Uvâsaga Dasâo (Bibliotheca Indica) says of
the Pôsaha: it is distinguished by the four abstinences (uvavâsa) from
food (âhâra), bodily attentions (*s*arîrasatkâra), sexual intercourse
(abrahma) and daily work (vyâpâra).

<span id="fn_101"></span>[23:3](sbe4507.htm#fr_102) Literally, skin and
joints.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[24:1](sbe4507.htm#fr_103) These three methods
are (1) bhaktapratyâkhyâna, (2) iṅgitamara*n*a, (3) pâdapôpagamana. They
are fully described in the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra I, 7, 8, 7 ff., see part i,
p. 75 f.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sixth Lecture. The False Ascetic](sbe4508)
