[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4553)  [Next](sbe4555) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

## SIXTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### PRAISE OF MAHÂVÎRA.

*S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, householders and heretics, have asked
(me): Who is he that proclaimed this unrivalled truly wholesome Law,
which was (put forward) with true knowledge <span
id="fr_853"></span>[1](#fn_847)? (1)

What was the knowledge, what the faith, and what the conduct of the
*Gñ*ât*ri*putra? If you know it truly, O monk, tell us as you have heard
it, as it was told you! (2)

This wise and clever great sage possessed infinite knowledge and
infinite faith. Learn and think about the Law and the piety of the
glorious man who lived before our eyes <span
id="fr_854"></span>[2](#fn_848)! (3)

This wise man had explored all beings, whether they move or not, on
high, below, and on earth, as well as the eternal and transient things.
Like a lamp he put the Law in a true light. (4)

He sees everything; his knowledge has got beyond (the four lower
stages) <span id="fr_855"></span>[3](#fn_849); he has no impurity; he is
virtuous, of a fixed mind, the highest, the

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

wisest in the whole world; he has broken from all ties; he is above
danger and the necessity to continue life <span
id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_850). (5)

Omniscient, wandering about without a home, crossing the flood (of the
Sa*m*sâra), wise, and of an unlimited perception, without an equal, he
shines forth (or he does penance) like the sun, and he illumines the
darkness like a brilliant fire, (6)

The omniscient <span id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_851) sage, Kâ*s*yapa,
has proclaimed this highest Law of the *G*inas; he, the illustrious one,
is prominent (among men) like the thousand-eyed Indra among the gods of
heaven. (7)

His knowledge is inexhaustible like the (water of the) sea; he has no
limits and is pure like the great ocean; he is free from passion,
unfettered, and brilliant like *S*akra, the lord of the gods. (8)

By his vigour he is the most vigorous; as Sudar*s*ana (Mêru), the best
of all mountains, or as heaven, a very mine of delight, he shines forth
endowed with many virtues. (9)

(Mêru) a hundred thousand yô*g*anas high, with three tiers <span
id="fr_858"></span>[3](#fn_852), with the Pa*nd*aga (-wood) as its flag,
rising ninety-nine thousand yô*g*anas above the ground, and reaching one
thousand below it; (lo)

It touches the sky and is immersed in the earth; round it revolve the
suns <span id="fr_859"></span>[4](#fn_853); it has the colour of gold,
and contains many Nandana (parks) <span id="fr_860"></span>[5](#fn_854);
on it the Mahêndras enjoy themselves. (11)

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

This mountain is distinguished by (many) names; it has the colour of
burnished gold; it is the greatest of all mountains, difficult to ascend
on account of its rocks; this excellent mountain is like a part of the
earth on fire. (12)

The king of mountains, standing in the centre of the earth, is seen in a
pure light <span id="fr_861"></span>[1](#fn_855) like that of the sun.
With such beauty shines forth this many-coloured, lovely (mountain),
which is crowned with radiance. (13)

Thus is described the glory of mount Sudar*s*ana, the great mountain;
similar to it is the *S*rama*n*a *Gñ*ât*ri*putra, who is noble,
glorious, full of faith, knowledge, and virtue. (14)

As Nishadha <span id="fr_862"></span>[2](#fn_856) is the best of
long-stretched mountains, and Ru*k*aka of circular ones, so is he
(Mahâvîra) among sages the wisest in the world, according to the
declaration of the wise ones. (15)

After having taught the highest Law he practised the highest
contemplation <span id="fr_863"></span>[3](#fn_857), which is the purest
of pure, pure without a flaw, thoroughly white (as it were) like
mother-of-pearl and the moon. (16)

Having annihilated all his Karman, the great sage by his knowledge,
virtue, and faith reached

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

the insurpassable, highest perfection, a state which has a beginning but
no end. (17)

As the *S*âlmalî, in which the Supar*n*a <span
id="fr_864"></span>[1](#fn_858) gods take their delight, is most famous
among trees, as Nandana is among parks, so is the Omniscient most famous
through his knowledge and virtue. (18)

As thunder is the loudest of sounds, as the moon is the most glorious of
heavenly bodies, as sandal is the best of perfumes, so of monks is he
who had renounced all wishes or plans. (19)

As (the ocean on which sleeps) Svayambhû is the best of seas, as
Dhara*n*êndra is the best of Nâgas, as the juice of sugarcane is, as it
were, the flag of juices, so is he (Mahâvîra) the flag of monks by his
austerities. (20)

As Airâva*n*a is the best of elephants, the lion of beasts, Gaṅgâ of
rivers, as Garuda, Vê*n*udêva <span id="fr_865"></span>[2](#fn_859), is
the best of birds, so is *Gñ*ât*ri*putra the best of those who have
taught the Nirvâ*n*a. (21)

As Vishvaksêna <span id="fr_866"></span>[3](#fn_860) is the most famous
of warriors, as the lotus is the best of flowers, as Dantavakra is the
best of Kshattriyas, so Vardhamâna is the best of sages. (22)

As giving safety is the best of gifts, as the best of true speeches is
that which causes no distress,

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

as chastity is the highest of austerities, so is the *S*rama*n*a
*Gñ*ât*ri*putra the highest of men. (23)

As the Lavasaptamas <span id="fr_867"></span>[1](#fn_861) are the
highest of those gods who live very long, as the palace Saudharman is
the best of heavenly abodes, as Nirvâ*n*a is the chief object of the
Law, so there is no wiser man than *Gñ*ât*ri*putra. (24)

He (bears everything) like the earth; he annihilates (his Karman); he is
free from greed; he, the Omniscient, does not keep store (of anything);
he has crossed the ocean of life like the sea: he, the Hero, who grants
protection to all, and whose perception is infinite. (25)

Having conquered the passions which defile the soul: wrath, pride,
deceit, and greed, the Arhat, the great sage, does not commit any wrong,
nor does he cause it to be committed. (26)

He understood the doctrines of the Kriyâvâdins, of the Akriyâvâdins, of
the Vainayikas, and of the A*gñ*ânavâdins <span
id="fr_868"></span>[2](#fn_862); he had mastered all philosophical
systems, and he practised control as long as he lived. (27)

He abstained <span id="fr_869"></span>[3](#fn_863) from women, and from
eating at night, he practised austerities for the removal of pain, he
knew this world and that beyond; the lord renounced <span
id="fr_870"></span>[3](#fn_863) everything at every time. (28)

Having heard and believing in the Law, which

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

has been proclaimed and taught by the Arhat, and has been demonstrated
with arguments, people will either make an end of their mundane
existence, or they will become like Indra, the king of gods. (29)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[287:1](sbe4554.htm#fr_853) The question is
supposed to be addressed by *G*ambûsvâmin to Sudharman.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[287:2](sbe4554.htm#fr_854) *K*akkhupahê
*th*iyassa = *k*akshu*h*pathê sthitasya, literally, 'who stood (or
stands) in the path of the eyes.' We are scarcely entitled to infer from
this phrase that the author had actually seen Mahâvîra as tradition
would make us believe.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[287:3](sbe4554.htm#fr_855) Abhibhûya-nâ*n*î.
Concerning the five stages or kinds of knowledge, see above, [p.
352](sbe4565.htm#page_352). The Kêvala knowledge is intended.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[288:1](sbe4554.htm#fr_856) To render anâyu*h*.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[288:2](sbe4554.htm#fr_857) Âsupanna =
â*s*upra*gñ*a, literally, 'quickly witted;' the word is usually
explained by kêvalin.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[288:3](sbe4554.htm#fr_858) Ka*nd*aka, one of
stone, one of gold, and one of turquoise.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[288:4](sbe4554.htm#fr_859) As is well known
the *G*ainas assume a plurality of suns.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[288:5](sbe4554.htm#fr_860) The names of these
four parks are, according to the commentary, <span id="page_289">p.
289</span> *S*âlavana, Nandanavana, Saumanasavana, and Pa*nd*aka (or
Pâ*nd*uka) vana. The first is at the foot of Mêru, the second 500
yô*g*anas above it, the third 62,000 above the second, and the fourth
36,000 above the last, i.e. at the very top.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[289:1](sbe4554.htm#fr_861) Suddha-lessê =
*s*uddhalê*s*ya. Here lê*s*yâ is equal to tê*g*as.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[289:2](sbe4554.htm#fr_862) Nishadha and
Ru*k*aka are two fabulous chains of mountains situated beyond
*G*ambûdvîpa.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[289:3](sbe4554.htm#fr_863) This is the *s*ukla
dhyâna. As *s*ukla, which I translate 'pure,' originally means white,'
the comparison with the moon is natural in the original.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[290:1](sbe4554.htm#fr_864) They belong to the
Bhavanapatis, see above, [p. 225](sbe4538.htm#page_225).

<span id="fn_859"></span>[290:2](sbe4554.htm#fr_865) The commentator
says that Vê*n*udêva is another name of Garu*d*a. Vê*n*u stands perhaps
for ve*n*hu = vish*n*u; but I do not know that Garu*d*a ever was
directly identified with Vish*n*u.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[290:3](sbe4554.htm#fr_866) Vîsasêna.
Vishvaksêna is a name of K*ri*sh*n*a. The commentators make Vi*s*vasêna
of Vîsase*n*a, and seem to take it as a synonym of *k*akravartin or
universal monarch. Dantavakra is mentioned in my 'Ausgewählte
Erzählungen,' p. 35, line 36.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[291:1](sbe4554.htm#fr_867) The commentator
identifies them with the fifth class of Anuttara gods (see
Uttarâdhyayana XXXVI, 215, above p. 227), and explains the name by
saying if they lived seven lavas longer, they would reach perfection.'

<span id="fn_862"></span>[291:2](sbe4554.htm#fr_868) Concerning these
four principal heresies see note on Uttarâdhyayana XVIII, 23, above p.
83.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[291:3](sbe4554.htm#fr_870) Vâriya, literally
'forbade.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 7: Description of the Wicked](sbe4555)
