[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4515)  [Next](sbe4517) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOURTEENTH LECTURE.

###### ISHUKÂRA.

Having been gods in a former existence and lived in the same heavenly
region, some were born (here below) in the ancient, wealthy, and famous

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

town called Ishukâra <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_175), which is
beautiful like heaven. (1)

By a remnant of the merit they had acquired in their former life, they
were born in noble families. Disgusted with the world and afraid of the
Sa*m*sâra, they abandoned (pleasures, &c.) and took refuge in the path
of the *G*inas. (2)

Two males remained bachelors, (the third became) the Purôhita
(Bh*ri*gu), (the fourth) his wife Ya*s*â, (the fifth) the widely-famed
king Ishukâra, and (the sixth) his wife Kamalâvatî. (3)

Overcome by fear of birth, old age, and death, their mind intent on
pilgrimage, and hoping to escape the Wheel of Births, they examined
pleasures and abandoned them. (4)

Both dear sons of the Brahmanical Purôhita, who was intent on works,
remembered their former birth, and the penance and self-control they had
then practised. (5)

Averse to human and heavenly pleasures, desiring liberation, and full of
faith, they went to their father and spoke thus: (6)

'Seeing that the lot of man is transitory and precarious, and that his
life lasts not long, we take no delight in domestic life; we bid you
farewell: we shall turn monks.' (7)

In order to dissuade them from a life of austerities, the father replied
to those (would-be) monks: 'Those versed in the Vêdas say that there
will be no better world for men without sons. (8)

'My sons, after you have studied the Vêdas, and fed the priests, after
you have placed your own sons

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

at the head of your house, and after you have enjoyed life together with
your wives, then you may depart to the woods as praiseworthy sages.' (9)

The young men perceiving that the Purôhita was wholly consumed, as it
were, by the fire of grief, which was fed by his individual inclinations
and blown into a huge flame by the wind of delusion; that he suffered
much and talked a great deal in many ways; that he tried to persuade
them by degrees, and that he would even bribe them with money and with
objects of desire, (spoke) these words: (10, 11)

"The study of the Vêdas will not save you; the feeding of Brâhma*n*as
will lead you from darkness to darkness, and the birth of sons will not
save you. Who will assent to what you said? (12)

"Pleasures bring only a moment's happiness, but suffering for a very
long time, intense suffering, but slight happiness; they are an obstacle
to the liberation from existence, and are a very mine of evils. (13)

"While a man walks about without abandoning pleasures, and grieves day
and night, while he is anxious about other people, and seeks for wealth,
he comes to old age and death. (14)

"I have this, and I have not that; I must do this, and I should not do
that! While he talks in this strain, the robbers (viz. time) drag him
away. What foolishness is this!" (15)

'Great wealth and women, a family and exquisite pleasures: for such
things people practise austerities. All this you may have for your
asking.' (16)

"What avail riches for the practice of religion, what a family, what
pleasures? We shall become

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *S*rama*n*as,
possessed of many virtues, and wander about collecting alms." (17)

'As fire is produced in the Ara*n*i-wood, as butter in milk, and oil in
sesamum seed, so, my sons, is the soul <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176) produced in the body; (all these things)
did not exist before, they came into existence, and then they perish;
but they are not permanent.' (18)

"(The soul) cannot be apprehended by the senses, because it possesses no
corporeal form <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_177), and since it
possesses no corporeal form it is eternal. The fetter of the soul has
been ascertained to be caused by its bad qualities, and this fetter is
called the cause of worldly existence. (19)

"Thus being ignorant of the Law, we formerly did sinful actions, and
through our wrong-mindedness we were kept back and retained (from
entering the order). We shall not again act in the same way. (20)

"As mankind is harassed (by the one), and taken hold of (by the other),
and as the unfailing ones go by, we take no delight in the life of a
householder." (21)

'Who harasses the world? who takes hold of it?

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

whom do you call unfailing? My sons, I am anxious to learn this.' (22)

"Mankind is harassed by Death; it is taken hold of by Old Age; the
days <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_178) are called unfailing: know
this, Father! (23)

"The day that goes by will never return; the days elapse without profit
to him who acts contrary to the Law. (24)

"The day that goes by will never return; the days elapse with much
profit to him who acts up to the Law." (25)

'Having lived together in one place, and both parties <span
id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_179) having acquired righteousness, we shall,
O my sons, afterwards go forth (as monks) and beg alms from house to
house.' (26)

"He who can call Death his friend, or who can escape him, or who knows
that he will not die, might perhaps decide: this shall be done tomorrow.
(27)

"We will even now adopt the Law, after the adoption of which we shall
not be born again. The future has nothing in store for us (which we have
not experienced already). Faith will enable us to put aside attachment."
(28)

(Bh*ri*gu speaks to his wife Vâsish*th*î.) 'Domestic

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

life ceases (to have attraction) for one who has lost his sons;
Vâsish*th*î, the time has arrived for me to turn mendicant friar. As
long as a tree retains its branches, it is really a tree; when they are
lopped off, it is called a trunk. (29)

'As a bird without its wings, as a king in battle without his followers,
as a merchant on a boat without his goods, even so am I without my
sons.' (30)

"You have brought together all these objects of desire, and have
collected many exquisitely pleasant things. Let us, therefore, fully
enjoy the pleasures; afterwards we shall go forth on the road of
salvation." (31)

'We have finished enjoying pleasures, my dear; our life is drawing to
its close. I do not abandon pleasures for the sake of an unholy life;
but looking with indifference on gain and loss, on happiness and
suffering, I shall lead the life of a monk.' (32)

"May you not remember your brothers (when it is too late) like an old
goose swimming against the current. Enjoy the pleasures together with
me. A mendicant's life is misery." (33)

'My dear, as a snake casts off the slough of its body and goes along
free and easy, even so have my sons abandoned pleasure. Why should I,
being left alone, not follow them? (34)

'As the fish Rôhita <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_180) breaks through
a weak net, even so wise men of exemplary character and famous for their
austerities abandon pleasure and live as mendicants. (35)

"As the herons fly through the air and the geese too, who had rent the
net, even so my sons and

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

my husband depart. Why should I, being left alone, not follow them?"
(36)

When the queen had heard that the Purôhita with his wife and sons had
entered the order, abandoning pleasures and all his large property, she
spoke to the king: (37)

'A man who returns, as it were,. to the vomit, is not praised; but you
want to confiscate <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_181) the property
left by the Brâhma*n*a. (38)

'If the whole world and all treasures were yours, you would still not be
satisfied, nor would all this be able to save you. (39)

'Whenever you die, O king, and leave all pleasant things behind, the Law
alone, and nothing else in this world, will save you, O monarch. (40)

'As a bird dislikes the cage, so do I (dislike the world). I shall live
as a nun, without offspring, poor, upright, without desire, without love
of gain, and without hatred. (42)

'As when by a conflagration of a forest animals are burned, other beasts
greatly rejoice, being under the influence of love and hate; even so we,
fools that we are, being attached to pleasure, do not perceive that the
world is consumed by the fire of love and hatred. (42, 43)

'Those who have enjoyed pleasures, and have renounced them, move about
like the wind, and go wherever they please, like the birds unchecked in
their flight. (44)

'When they <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_182) are caught, and held by
my hand,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

sir, they struggle; we shall be like them, if we are attached to
pleasures. (45)

'As an unbaited (bird) <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_183) sees a
baited one caught in the snare, even so shall we avoid every bait and
walk about, not baited by anything. (46)

'Being aware that pleasures are causes for the continuance of worldly
existence, as illustrated in (the above) similes of the greedy man, one
should be cautious and stir as little as possible, like a snake in the
presence of Supar*n*a. (47)

'Like an elephant who has broken his fetters, go to your proper
destination. O great king Ishukâri; this is the wholesome truth I have
learned. (48)

'Leave your large kingdom and the pleasures which are so dear to all;
abandon what pleases the senses, and what attracts; be without
attachment and property; learn thoroughly the Law and give up all
amusements; then practise famous and severe penance, being of firm
energy <span id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_184).' (49, 50)

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

In this way all (these) professors of the Law gradually obtained
enlightenment, being frightened by birth and death, and seeking for the
end of misery. (51)

Their doubts about the true doctrine were dispersed, and they realised
the Bhâvanâs <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_185); in a short time they
reached the end of misery. (52)

The king and the queen, the Brahmanical Purôhita, his wife, and his
sons, they all reached perfection. (53)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[62:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_176) In Prâk*ri*t Usuyâra
(or Isuyâra). According to the Prâk*ri*t legend given in the commentary
it was in the Kuru country.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[64:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_177) Sattâ in the
original; it is rendered sattva by the commentators. Perhaps sattâ is
the Prâk*ri*t for svâtmâ; at any rate, the context of the next verse
proves that soul is intended.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[64:2](sbe4516.htm#fr_178) Amûrta. In later
philosophy mûrtatva is defined as the possessing of definite and limited
form (pari*kkh*innaparimâ*n*avattvam) or the possessing of action
(kriyâvattvam or vegavattvam). Amûrta dravya are with the Vai*s*eshikas:
the air (âkâ*s*a), time, space, and Atman. These are also called
nityadravya. Amûrta is here apparently synonymous with arûpin, formless,
compare XXXVI, 4, where dharma, adharma, akâ*s*a, and kâla are
enumerated as the 'formless things without life.'

<span id="fn_178"></span>[65:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_179) Literally, the
nights. It seems to have been the custom at the time when the Sûtras
were composed, to reckon the time by nights, though the reckoning by
days is not quite uninstanced in the Sûtras.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[65:2](sbe4516.htm#fr_180) This is the
explanation of duhaô by the commentators, who apparently think that the
parents and the sons are meant. The word in question is originally an
adverb, but it is also (cf. Thirteenth Lecture, verse 18) taken by the
commentator as a numeral, and rendered dvayô*h*. A genitive of the dual
occurs in XIX, 90.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[66:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_181) Cyprinus Rohita.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[67:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_182) It was considered a
privilege of the king to confiscate the property of a man who had no
heir; compare Gautama XXVIII, 42, Vasish*th*a XVII, 83-86, &c.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[67:2](sbe4516.htm#fr_183) This apparently
refers to the birds mentioned in the last verse. <span id="page_68">p.
68</span> The commentators labour to interpret them as 'pleasures,' but
that will not make good sense.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[68:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_184) Kulala in the
original. Kulâla in Sanskrit denotes the wild cock, Phasianus Gallus.
The word seems to be derived from kulâya by assimilation of the y to the
preceding consonant, compare saliyâ for saliyâ = saritâ = sarit. In the
sense of bird the word kulâla seems to be used in the well-known stanza
of 'A Bhart*ri*hari: brahmâ yena kulâlavan niyamito
brahmâ*nd*abhâ*nd*ôdare, unless here kulâla is an early corruption for
kulâyin.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[68:2](sbe4516.htm#fr_185) The commentators
assign these verses to the two sons of Bh*ri*gu; but then the verses do
not construe. Besides the mention of the 'large kingdom' in the first
line seems to prove that the king, and not the Brahmans, is to be
understood as the person addressed. In the last line I separate
pagi*ggh*aha kkhâya*m* (scil. tava*m*), instead of
pagi*ggh*<sup>ऽ</sup>ahakkhâya*m*. It is, however, just possible that
the next verse is to be connected with the preceding ones; in that case,
we must read pagi*ggh*<sup>ऽ</sup> and interpret it in conformity with
the scholiast as a gerund.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[69:1](sbe4516.htm#fr_186) The bhâvanâs are
certain meditations which are conducive to the purity of the soul. They
are treated at length in a work by Hêma*k*andra, called Bhavabhâvanâ,
which seems to be rather popular with the *S*vêtâmbaras. The Digambaras
seem to call them Anuprêkshâs. A work in Prâk*ri*t by *S*ubha*k*andra,
called Kârttikêyânuprêkshâ, is epitomised in Bhandarkar's Report for
1883-84, p. 113 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifteenth Lecture. The True Monk](sbe4517)
