[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4569)  [Next](sbe4571) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SIXTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

######  <span id="fr_1203"></span>[2](#fn_1193).

Gô*s*âla.

'Listen, Ârdraka <span id="fr_1204"></span>[3](#fn_1194), to what
(Mahâvîra) has done. At first he wandered about as a single monk; but
now he has surrounded himself by many monks, and teaches every one of
them the Law at length. (1)

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

'The inconstant man has decided upon this mode of life <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1](#fn_1195): to stand up in a crowd of men,
surrounded by monks, and to teach his doctrines for the benefit of many
people. Therefore his former and his present life are not of a piece.
(2)

'Either to live as a single mendicant (was right conduct) or his present
life; therefore both do not agree with each other.'

Ârdraka.

"His past, present, and future lives agree with each other; for he is
really always single and alone (though he be now surrounded by many
followers). (3)

"For if a *S*rama*n*a or Brâhma*n*a who causes peace and security,
comprehends the nature of movable and immovable living beings and
explains it in a crowd numbering thousands, he realises singleness,
remaining in the same mental condition as before <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[2](#fn_1196). (4)

"It is no sin to teach the Law, if (he who teaches it) is patient and
resigned, subdues his senses, avoids bad speech, and uses virtuous
speech. (5)

"He who (teaches) the great vows (of monks) and the five small vows (of
the laity <span id="fr_1207"></span>[3](#fn_1197)), the five Âsravas and
the stoppage of the Âsravas, and control, who avoids Karman in this
blessed life of *S*rama*n*as, him I call a *S*rama*n*a." (6)

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

Gô*s*âla.

('As your Law makes it no sin for Mahâvîra to surround himself by a
crowd of disciples), so according to our Law an ascetic, who lives alone
and single, commits no sin if he uses cold water, eats seeds, accepts
things prepared for him, and has intercourse with women.' (7)

Ârdraka.

"Know this: those who use cold water, eat seeds, accept things
especially prepared for them, and have intercourse with women, are (no
better than) householders, but they are no *S*rama*n*as. (8)

"If those who eat seeds, use (cold) water, and have intercourse with
women, are admitted to be *S*rama*n*as, then householders too are
*S*rama*n*as; for they do the same things <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1](#fn_1198). (9)

"Monks who eat seeds and use cold water, who beg alms as a means of
living, will, though they leave their relations, be born again and
again, and will not put an end to mundane existence." (10)

Gô*s*âla.

'In making this statement you blame all philosophers alike! '

Ârdraka.

"Every philosopher praises his own doctrines and makes them known. (11)

"*S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as blame one another when they teach (their
doctrines). (The truth, they

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

say,) is all on their side; there is none on that of the opponents. But
we blame only the (wrong) doctrines and not at all (those who entertain
them). (12)

"We do not detract from anybody because of his personal qualities; but
we make known the path pointed out in our creed. I have been taught the
supreme, right path by worthy, good men. (13)

"If a well-controlled man, afraid of injuring any movable or immovable
living beings, above, below, or on earth, condemns (evil deeds), he does
not at all blame (anybody) in this world." (14)

Gô*s*âla.

'Out of fear your *S*rama*n*a will not stay in houses for travellers or
in public garden-houses; for in such places he would meet with many
clever people, with lower or nobler men, with talkative or silent ones.
(15)

'He will not stay there because he fears lest some monks, wise, well
instructed, learned men, who are well versed in the sacred texts and
their meaning, should put questions to him.' (16)

Ârdraka.

"Doing nothing without a purpose, nor without consideration, neither on
the behest of the king nor from fear of anybody, he answers questions or
not (according to the circumstances); but he (answers) worthy people
with a definite purpose (in his mind) <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1](#fn_1199). (17)

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

"He, the wise man, impartially teaches (the Law) whether he goes (to his
pupils) or not; because unworthy men have fallen from the true faith, he
does not go to places (frequented by them)." (18)

Gô*s*âla.

'As a merchant desirous of gain (shows) his wares and attracts a crowd
to do business, in a similar way (acts) the *S*rama*n*a *Gñ*ât*ri*putra.
This is what I think and calculate about it.' (19)

Ârdraka.

"(Mahâvîra) acquires no new (Karman), he annihilates the old, avoiding
wrong opinions; and thus the saviour said to others: Herein is contained
the vow (leading to) Brahman (i.e. Môksha); this is the gain which a
*S*rama*n*a is desirous of. Thus I say. (20)

"A merchant kills living beings and desires property; not leaving his
kinsmen, he attracts a crowd in order to do business. (21)

"Desiring riches and addicted to sensuality, merchants wander about to
earn their living. But we (say) that they are passionately fond of
pleasures, unworthy, and desiring the enjoyment of love. (22)

"They do not abstain from slaughter and the acquirement of property,
they are in bondage and full of wickedness; and their gain of which you
spoke,. will be the endless Circle of Births and pains manifold <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1](#fn_1200). (23)

"They do not always make profit, nor does it last

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

for ever; they meet with both results (success and failure) in their
quest of gain <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1](#fn_1201). The profit (of
the teacher), however, has a beginning, but no end; the saviour and sage
shares his profit (with others). (24)

"Him who kills no (living beings), who has compassion on all creatures,
who is well grounded in the Law, and causes the truth of the Law to be
known, him you would equal to those wicked men! This is the outcome of
your folly." (25)

A Buddhist <span id="fr_1212"></span>[2](#fn_1202).

'If (a savage) thrusts a spit through the side of a granary <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[3](#fn_1203), mistaking it for a man; or through a
gourd, mistaking it for a baby, and roasts it, he will be guilty of
murder according to our views. (26)

'If a savage <span id="fr_1214"></span>[4](#fn_1204) puts a man on a
spit and roasts him, mistaking him for a fragment of the granary; or a

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

baby, mistaking him for a gourd, he will not be guilty of murder
according to our views. (27)

'If anybody thrusts a spit through a man or a baby, mistaking him for a
fragment of the granary, puts him on the fire, and roasts him, that will
be a meal fit for Buddhas to break fast upon. (28)

'Those who always feed two thousand worthy monks, acquire great
merit <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1](#fn_1205) and become powerful gods
in Arûpa (dhâtu) <span id="fr_1216"></span>[2](#fn_1206).' (29)

Ârdraka.

"Well-controlled men cannot accept (your denial of) guilt incurred by
(unintentionally) doing harm to living beings. It will cause error and
no good to both who teach such doctrines and who believe them. (30)

"A man who knows the nature of movable and immovable living beings,
above, below, and on earth, who is afraid of injuring them and abstains
from wicked deeds, may speak and act (in accordance with our Law); he
will not be guilty of any (sin). (31)

"It is impossible to mistake (a fragment of the granary) for a man; only
an unworthy man can say it. How can (the idea of a man) be produced by a
fragment of the granary? Even to utter this is an untruth. (32)

"Do not use such speech by means of which you do evil; for such speech
is incompatible with virtues. No ordained (monk) should speak empty
words <span id="fr_1217"></span>[3](#fn_1207). (33)

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

"Oh! you have explored this subject; you have thoroughly examined the
consequences of acts <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1](#fn_1208) of living
beings; your (fame) reaches the Eastern and Western oceans; you view
(the universe as if) it stood on the palm of your hands! (34)

"Thoroughly examining the consequences of acts of living beings, (our
monks) have found out a pure way of sustaining life. It is a maxim <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[2](#fn_1209) of the monks of our creed <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[3](#fn_1210), that nobody who lives by secret
sins <span id="fr_1221"></span>[4](#fn_1211), should lay down the Law.
(35)

"A man who always feeds two thousand worthy monks, does not control
himself, and will be blamed in this world like a man with bloody hands.
(36)

"They kill a fattened sheep, and prepare food for the sake of a
particular person; they season the meat with salt and oil, and dress it
with pepper. (37)

"You are irreligious, unworthy men, devoted to foolish pleasures, who
say that partaking heartily of this meat you are not soiled by sin. (38)

"All who partake of such food, commit sins in their ignorance; but the
wise do nothing of the kind. Even to utter it is an untruth. (39)

"In compassion to all beings, the seers, the *Gñ*ât*ri*putras <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[5](#fn_1212), avoid what is sinful; afraid of it,
they abstain from food especially prepared for them. (40)

"They abstain from wicked deeds, afraid of injuring living beings, and
do no harm to any creature; therefore they do not partake of such food.
This is a maxim of the monks of our creed. (41)

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

"(Having reached) this perfection <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1](#fn_1213) in the Law of the Nirgranthas and
standing firm in it, one should live without deceit <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[2](#fn_1214). The awakened sage who is endowed with
all virtues thereby obtained very great fame." (42)

A Vêdic Priest.

'Those who always feed two thousand holy <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[3](#fn_1215) mendicants, acquire great merit and
become gods. This is the teaching of the Vêda.' (43)

Ârdraka.

"He who always feeds two thousand holy cats <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[4](#fn_1216) (i.e. Brâhma*n*as), will have to
endure great pains in hell, being surrounded by hungry (beasts). (44)

"He who despises the Law that enjoins compassion, and praises the Law
that permits slaughter, and who feeds but a single unprincipled man,
even if he be a king, will go to darkness <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[5](#fn_1217), and not to the gods." (45)

A Vêdântin <span id="fr_1228"></span>[6](#fn_1218).

'Both of us follow (very much the same) Law; we stood firm in it, and
shall do so in the time to come; (we believe that) virtue consists in
good conduct, and that knowledge (is necessary for liberation); and with
regard to the Circle of Births there is no difference between us. (46)

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

'(But we assume) an invisible, great, eternal, imperishable, and
indestructible Soul, who excels all other beings in every respect, as
the moon excels the stars.' (47)

Ârdraka.

"(If there were but one Soul common to all beings) they could not be
known (from one another), nor could they experience different lots;
there would not be Brâhma*n*as, Kshattriyas, Vai*s*yas, and Sûdras <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1](#fn_1219), insects, birds, and snakes; all would
be men and gods. (48)

"Those who do not know all things by Kêvala (knowledge), but who being
ignorant teach a Law (of their own), are lost themselves, and work the
ruin of others in this dreadful, boundless Circle of Births. (49)

"Those who know all things by the full Kêvala knowledge, and who
practising meditation teach the whole Law, are themselves saved and save
others. (50)

"You have, in your mind, made equal both those who lead a blameable
life, and those who in this world practise right conduct. Friend, you
are deluded," (51)

A Hastitâpasa <span id="fr_1230"></span>[2](#fn_1220).

'Every year we kill one big elephant with an arrow, and live upon it in
order to spare the life of other animals.' (52)

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

Ârdraka.

"If every year you kill but one animal without abstaining from sin,
though you are not guilty of the slaughter of other creatures, there is
little difference between you and a householder. (53)

"If a man kills every year but one animal, and lives (in other respects)
as a *S*rama*n*a, he is unworthy, and works his perdition. Such men will
not become Kêvalins." (54)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

A (monk) who has achieved his religious perfection through the
instruction of the Awakened One <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1](#fn_1221),
and stands firm in it, who guards himself in the threefold way (i.e.
with regard to thoughts, words, and acts), and who possesses the things
requisite for crossing the immense ocean of existence, may preach the
Law. (55)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[409:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1203) The commentators
relate a romantic story about prince Ârdraka, which need not be repeated
here. Suffice it to say that he became monk, and after many adventures
held the disputation which forms the subject of our lecture. After
having vanquished his opponents, he was about to join Mahâvîra, when a
newly-tamed elephant broke his chain, rushed on him, but just in front
of him went down on his knees and paid him reverence. King Srê*n*ika
witnessed this scene, and wondered how the elephant could have broken
his chains. Ârdraka replied that it was still more strange that a man
could break the fetters which worldliness had fastened upon him. The
whole story must be very old, for it is epitomised in ten gâthâs by the
author of the Niryukti.--The names of the opponents not stated in the
text of the verses are supplied from the commentaries.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[409:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1204) This name is
spelt either Ârdra or Ârdraka, Adda in Prâk*ri*t.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[410:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1205) According to the
commentators, Gô*s*âla intimates that Mahâvîra had found it very
inconvenient to live alone, because he was then exposed to many
injuries; so he set up as a Tîrthakara.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[410:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1206) Taha*kk*e =
tathâr*k*a. Âr*k*â is here explained as equal to lê*s*yâ.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[410:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1207) A*n*uvrata. They
are a modification of the great vows, intended for the laity. See
Bhandarkar's Report, p. 114.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[411:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1208) I.e. if the
characteristic mark of a *S*rama*n*a is to wander about without a
companion, and to bear all sorts of hardship, then householders are
included in this definition; for some of them also wander about without
a companion and bear the same hardships.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[412:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1209) As the
commentators explain: he is actuated by the Karman, by virtue of which
he has become a prophet (tîrthakaranâmakarman); and this Karman must
take effect and so be annihilated.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[413:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1210) *N*êhâ or
*n*êdhâ. According to *S*îlâṅka it is = na iha: 'not even here (do they
find the profit they seek).' I think it may be the Prâk*ri*t of
anêkadhâ. It may, however, stand for snêhâ*h*, in which case the meaning
would be: love's (reward will be) pain.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[414:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1211) Vayanti to dôvi
gu*n*ê<sup>ऽ</sup>dayammi = vra*g*anti tê dvâvapi gu*n*âv udayê. The
usual reading adopted by the commentators is gu*n*ô for gu*n*ê. They
translate: vadanti tê dvau vigatagu*n*ôdayau bhavata iti: (the experts)
say that both (kinds of profit) are without value and duration. It is
obvious that this interpretation is wrong.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[414:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1212) Ârdraka after
having put down Gô*s*âla is met, on his way to Mahâvîra, by Buddhists
who engage him in the following discussion.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[414:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1213) Pi*nn*âgapi*nd*i.
The commentators explain pi*nn*âga ( = pi*n*yâka) by khala, and pi*nd*i
by bhinnaka (?) or *s*akala. *S*îlâṅka gives the following explanation.
During a struggle with savage men (mlê*kkh*a) some one runs away and
throws his cloak off on a granary. An enemy in pursuit of that man
mistakes it for him and takes hold of it, together with the part of the
granary.--This interpretation looks absurd; but it will appear not so if
we remember that granaries are beehive-shaped reservoirs made of
sun-baked mud or wattle and mud; compare Grierson, Bihar Peasant Life,
p. 17.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[414:4](sbe4570.htm#fr_1214) Milakkhu =
mlê*kkh*a.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[415:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1215) Pu*nn*akhandha =
pu*n*yaskandha.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[415:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1216) Âroppa. This is
apparently derived from Arûpa as rendered in the text. Arûpadhâtu is the
highest heaven of the Buddhists; compare Burnouf, Le Lotus de la Bonne
Loi, p. 807.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[415:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1217) Urâla = udâra,
here explained nissâra, void of sense.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[416:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1218) A*n*ubhâe =
anubhâga*h*, explained karmavipâka.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[416:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1219) Anudharma.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[416:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1220) Iha sa*m*yatânâm,
who control themselves in this (creed of the *G*ainas).

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[416:4](sbe4570.htm#fr_1221)
*Kh*annapadôpa*g*îvin.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[416:5](sbe4570.htm#fr_1222) I.e. the
*G*ainas.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[417:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1223) Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[417:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1224) A*n*ihê.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[417:3](sbe4570.htm#fr_1225) Snâtaka, cf. Manu
XI, 1.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[417:4](sbe4570.htm#fr_1226) Kulâlaya =
kulâ*t*a, explained mâr*g*âra. Another explanation is: who live (âlaya)
in houses.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[417:5](sbe4570.htm#fr_1227) Nisa*m*,
literally, night.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[417:6](sbe4570.htm#fr_1228) *S*îlâṅka calls
this opponent an Êkada*nd*in, and ascribes to him the views of the
Sâṅkhya philosophy. But it is evident from the sequel that he is a
Vêdântin, as the commentators admit in their comment on the next verse.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[418:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1229) Pessâ = prêshya,
literally, servants or slaves.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[418:2](sbe4570.htm#fr_1230) The Hastitâpasas
are thus named from the fact that they kill an elephant and live upon
its flesh for a whole year or for six months, as *S*îlâṅka adds,
explaining thus the words avi ya (api *k*a) after sa*m*va*kkh*arê*n*a.
The Hastitâpasas are mentioned in a list of the different Tâpasas in the
Aupapâtika Sûtra, ed. Leumann, § 74.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[419:1](sbe4570.htm#fr_1231) Buddhassa â*n*âi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 2, Lecture 7: Nâlandâ](sbe4571)
