[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4551)  [Next](sbe4553) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

## FIFTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### DESCRIPTION OF THE HELLS.

### FIRST CHAPTER.

I once asked the Kêvalin, the great sage <span
id="fr_829"></span>[1](#fn_823): What is the punishment in the hells?
Knowing it, O sage, tell it me who do not know it! How do sinners go to
hell? (1)

When I thus questioned the illustrious Kâ*s*yapa, the omniscient
one <span id="fr_830"></span>[2](#fn_824) spoke as follows: I shall
describe the truly insupportable pains where there is distress and (the
punishment of) evil deeds. (2)

Those cruel sinners who, from a desire of (worldly) life, commit bad
deeds, will sink into the dreadful hell which is full of dense darkness
and great suffering. (3)

He who always kills movable and immovable beings for the sake of his own
comfort, who injures them, who takes what is not freely given, who does
not learn what is to be practised (viz. control); (4)

The impudent sinner, who injures many beings without relenting <span
id="fr_831"></span>[3](#fn_825), will go to hell; at the end of his life
the will sink to the (place of) darkness; head downwards he comes to the
place of torture. (5)

They hear the cries of the punishers: Beat, cut,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

split, burn him! The prisoners in hell lose their senses from fright,
and do not know in what direction to run. (6)

Going to a place like a burning heap of coals on fire, and being burnt
they cry horribly; they remain there long, shrieking aloud. (7)

Have you heard of the horrible (river) Vaitara*n*î, whose cutting waves
are like sharp razors <span id="fr_832"></span>[1](#fn_826)? They cross
the horrible Vaitara*n*î, being urged on by arrows, and wounded with
spears. (8)

The punishers pierce them with darts; they go in the boat, losing their
memory; others pierce them with long pikes and tridents, and throw them
on the ground. (9)

Some, round whose neck big stones are tied, are drowned in deep water.
Others again roll about in the Kadambavâlukâ (river) <span
id="fr_833"></span>[2](#fn_827) or in burning chaff, and are roasted in
it. (10)

And they come to the great impassable hell, full of agony, called Asûrya
(i.e. where the sun does not shine), where there is great darkness,
where fires, placed above, below, and all around, are blazing. (11)

There, as in a cave, being roasted on the fire, he is burned, having
lost the reminiscence (of his sins) and consciousness of everything
else; always suffering (he comes) to that miserable hot place that is
ever ready (for the punishment of evildoers) <span
id="fr_834"></span>[3](#fn_828). (12)

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

There the cruel punishers have lighted four fires, and roast the
sinners; they are roasted there like fishes put on the fire alive. (13)

The prisoners in hell come to the dreadful place called
Santaksha*n*a <span id="fr_835"></span>[1](#fn_829) (i.e. cutting),
where the cruel punishers tie their hands and feet, and with axes in
their hands cut them like wooden planks. (14)

And they turn the writhing victims round, and stew them, like living
fishes, in an iron caldron filled with their own blood, their limbs
covered with ordure, their heads smashed. (15)

They are not reduced to ashes there, and they do not die of their
enormous pains; undergoing this punishment <span
id="fr_836"></span>[2](#fn_830), the miserable men suffer for their
misdeeds. (16)

And there in the place, where there is constant shivering, they resort
to a large burning fire; but they find no relief in that place of
torture; the tormentors torture them still <span
id="fr_837"></span>[3](#fn_831). (17)

There is heard everywhere the noise of painfully uttered cries even as
in the street of a town. Those whose bad Karman takes effect (viz. the
punishers), violently torment again and again those whose bad Karman
takes effect also (viz. the punished). (18)

They deprive the sinner of his life; I shall truly tell you how this is
done. The wicked (punishers) remind by (similar) punishment (their
victims) of all sins they had committed in a former life <span
id="fr_838"></span>[4](#fn_832). (19)

Being killed they are thrown into a hell which is

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

full of boiling filth. There they stay eating filth, and they are eaten
by vermin. (20)

And there is an always crowded, hot place, which men deserve for their
great sins, and which is full of misery <span
id="fr_839"></span>[1](#fn_833). (The punishers) put them in shackles,
beat their bodies, and torment them (by perforating) their skulls with
drills. (21)

They cut off the sinner's nose with a razor, they cut off both his ears
and lips; they pull out his tongue a span's length and torment (him by
piercing it) with sharp pikes. (22)

There the sinners dripping (with blood) whine day and night even as the
dry leaves of a palm-tree (agitated by the wind). Their blood, matter,
and flesh are dropping off while they are roasted, their bodies being
besmeared with natron. (23)

Have you heard of the large, erected caldron of more than man's size,
full of blood and matter, which is extremely heated by a fresh fire, in
which blood and matter are boiling? (24)

The sinners are thrown into it and boiled there, while they utter horrid
cries of 'Agony; they are made to drink molten lead and copper when they
are thirsty, and they shriek still more horribly. (25)

Those evildoers who have here forfeited their souls' (happiness) for the
sake of small (pleasures), and have been born in the lowest births
during hundred thousands of 'former years,' will stay in this (hell).
Their punishment will be adequate to their deeds. (26)

The wicked who have committed crimes will

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

atone for them, deprived of all pleasant and lovely objects, by dwelling
in the stinking crowded hell, a scene of pain, which is full of flesh
(&c.). (27)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_823"></span>[279:1](sbe4552.htm#fr_829) I.e. Mahâvîra.
Sudharman speaks to *G*ambûsvâmin.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[279:2](sbe4552.htm#fr_830)
Âsupanna--â*s*upra*gñ*a 'quickly comprehending.' I usually render this
word 'intelligent,' when it is used of common monks.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[279:3](sbe4552.htm#fr_831) Anivvuê =
anirv*ri*ta*h*.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[280:1](sbe4552.htm#fr_832) *S*îlâṅka says that
the water of this river is alkali and hot blood; compare Uttarâdhyayana
XIX, 59, above p. 95.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[280:2](sbe4552.htm#fr_833) See the note on
Uttarâdhyayana XIX, 50, above p. 94, note I.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[280:3](sbe4552.htm#fr_834) The last two lines
recur in verse 21 with the only difference that there kasi*n*a*m* stands
for kalu*n*a*m* in this place; yet the commentators offer a different
explanation in the second place. In my translation I follow their
interpretation both times.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[281:1](sbe4552.htm#fr_835) Here and in similar
places the commentators do not take the word as a proper name, but as an
epithet.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[281:2](sbe4552.htm#fr_836) Anubhâga.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[281:3](sbe4552.htm#fr_837) Or, with burning
fire they roast them.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[281:4](sbe4552.htm#fr_838) See Uttarâdhyayana
XIX, 69 ff., above [p. 96](sbe4521.htm#page_96).

<span id="fn_833"></span>[282:1](sbe4552.htm#fr_839) Compare note on
verse 12. The same lines recur in the next chapter, verse 13. The
commentator gives the same explanation there as here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 5, Chapter 2](sbe4553)
