[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4501)  [Next](sbe4503) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

TEN years have elapsed since the first part of my translation of *G*aina
Sûtras appeared. During that decennium many and very important additions
to our knowledge of *G*ainism and its history have been made by a small
number of excellent scholars. The text of the canonical books, together
with good commentaries in Sanskrit and Guzeratî, has been made
accessible in fair editions published by native scholars in India.
Critical editions of two of them have been published by Professors
Leumann <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and Hoernle <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1); and the latter scholar has added a careful
translation and ample illustrations to his edition of the text. A
general survey of the whole *G*aina literature has been given by
Professor Weber in his catalogue of the Berlin Manuscripts <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) and in his learned treatise <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) on the sacred literature of the *G*ainas.
The development of *G*aina learning and science has been studied by
Professor Leumann, and some *G*aina legends and their relations to those
of the Brahmans and Buddhists have been investigated by the same
scholar <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4). An important document for our
knowledge of the old history of the *S*vêtâmbara sect has been edited

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

by myself <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5), and the history of some of
their Ga*kkh*as has been made known from their lists of teachers by
Hoernle and Klatt. The last-named scholar, whom we have all but lost by
this time, has prepared a biographical dictionary of all *G*aina writers
and historical persons, and he has issued specimens of this great
Onomasticon, while Hofrat Bühler has written a detailed biography of the
famous encyclopaedist Hêma*k*andra <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6).
The same scholar has deciphered the ancient inscriptions, and discussed
the sculptures excavated by Dr. Führer at Mathurâ <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7), and the important inscriptions at
*S*rava*n*a Be*l*go*l*a have been edited by Mr. Lewis Rice <span
id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8); M. A. Barth has reviewed our knowledge of
*G*ainism <span id="fr_9"></span>[5](#fn_9), and likewise Bühler in a
short paper <span id="fr_10"></span>[6](#fn_10). Lastly Bhandarkar has
given a most valuable sketch of the whole of *G*ainism <span
id="fr_11"></span>[7](#fn_11). All these additions to our knowledge of
*G*ainism (and I have but mentioned the most remarkable ones) have shed
so much clear light on the whole subject that little room is left now
for mere guesswork, and the true historical and philological method can
be applied to all its parts. Still some of the principal problems
require elucidation, while the proffered solution of others is not
accepted by all scholars. I, therefore, gladly avail myself of this
opportunity to discuss some of the disputed points, for the settling of
which the works translated in this volume offer valuable materials.

It is now admitted by all that Nâtaputta (*Gñ*ât*ri*putra), who is
commonly called Mahâvîra or Vardhamâna, was a contemporary of Buddha;
and that the Niga*nth*as <span id="fr_12"></span>[8](#fn_12)

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Nirgranthas), now
better known under the name of *G*ainas or Ârhatas, already existed as
an important sect at the time when the Buddhist church was being
founded. But it is still open to doubt whether the religion of the early
Nirgranthas was essentially the same as that taught in the canonical and
other books of the present *G*ainas, or underwent a great change up to
the time of the composition of the Siddhânta. In order to come nearer
the solution of this question, it may be desirable to collect from the
published Buddhist works, as the oldest witnesses we can summon, all
available information about the Niga*nth*as, their doctrines and
religious practices.

In the Aṅguttara Nikâya, III, 74, a learned prince of the Li*kkh*avis of
Vai*s*âlî, Abhaya <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13), gives the
following account of some Niga*nth*a doctrines: 'The Niga*nth*a
Nâtaputta, sir, who knows and sees all things, who claims perfect
knowledge and faith (in the following terms): "walking and standing,
sleeping or waking, I am always possessed of perfect knowledge and
faith;" teaches the annihilation by austerities of the old Karman, and
the prevention by inactivity of new Karman. When Karman ceases, misery
ceases; when misery ceases, perception ceases; when perception ceases,
every misery will come to an end. In this way a man is saved by pure
annihilation of sin (ni*gg*arâ) which is really effective.'

The *G*aina counterpart to these tenets can be collected from the
Uttarâdhyayana XXIX. By austerities he cuts off Karman,' § 27. 'By
renouncing activity he obtains inactivity; by ceasing to act he acquires
no new Karman, and destroys the Karman he had acquired before,' § 37.
The last stages in this process are fully described in §§ 71,

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 72. And again, in
XXXII, v. 7, we read: 'Karman is the root of birth and death, and birth
and death they call misery.' The nearly identical verses 34, 47, 60, 73,
86, 99 may be thus condensed: 'But a man who is indifferent to the
object of the senses, and to the feelings of the mind \[this comes
nearest to the Buddhist vêdanâ, perception\], is free from sorrows;
though still in the Sa*m*sâra, he is not afflicted by that long
succession of pains. just as the leaf of the Lotus (is not moistened) by
water.'

The above assertion that Nâtaputta claimed the possession of perfect
knowledge and faith, requires no further proof; for it is one of the
fundamental dogmas of the *G*ainas.

Another piece of information about Niga*nth*a doctrines may be gathered
from the Mahâvagga VI, 31 (S. B. E., vol. xvii, p. 108 ff.) There a
story is told of Sîha <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14), the general
of the Li*kkh*avis, who was a lay disciple of Nâtaputta. He wanted to
pay the Buddha a visit, but Nâtaputta tried to dissuade him from it,
because the Niga*nth*as held the Kriyâvâda, while the Buddha taught the
Akriyâvâda. Sîha, however, setting his master's prohibition at nought,
went to the Buddha on his own account, and was, of course, converted by
him. Now the statement that the Niga*nth*as embraced the Kriyâvâda is
borne out by our texts; for in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga I, 12, 21, below, p.
319, it is said that a perfect ascetic 'is entitled to expound the
Kriyâvâda;' and this doctrine is thus expressed in the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra
I, 1, 1, 4 (part i, p. 2): 'He believes in soul, believes in the world,
believes in reward, believes in action (believed to be our own doing in
such judgments as these): "I did it;" "I shall cause another to do it;"
"I shall allow another to do it.'

Another lay disciple of Mahâvîra, converted by the Buddha, was Upâli. As
narrated in the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya 56, he ventured upon a dispute with
him whether the sins of the mind are heaviest, as the Buddha teaches, or
the

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

sins of the body, as the Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta contends. In the beginning
of the discourse Upâli states that his master uses the term da*nd*a,
punishment, for what is commonly called kamma, deed, act. This is true,
though not quite to the letter; for the word kamma occurs also in the
*G*aina Sûtras in that sense. The term da*nd*a, however, is at least as
frequently used. Thus, in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga II, 2, p. 357 ff., the
thirteen kinds of 'committing sins' are treated of, and in the first
five cases the word which I have translated committing sins' is in the
original da*nd*asamâdâ*n*e, and in the remaining cases kiriyâ*th*a*n*e,
i.e. kriyâsthâna.

The Niga*nth*a Upâli goes on to explain that there are three da*nd*as,
the da*nd*a of body, that of speech, and that of mind. This agrees with
the *G*aina doctrine expressed in nearly the same words in the Sthânâṅga
Sûtra, 3rd uddê*s*aka (see Indian Antiquary, IX, p. 159).

The second statement of Upâli, that the Niga*nth*as consider sins of the
body more important than sins of the mind, is in perfect harmony with
*G*aina views. For in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga II, 4, p. 398 ff., the
question is discussed whether sins may be committed unconsciously, and
it is boldly answered in the affirmative (compare note 6, p. 399); and
in the Sixth Lecture of the same book (p. 414) the Buddhists are
severely ridiculed for maintaining that it depends on the intention of
the man whether a deed of his be a sin or not.

In the Aṅguttara Nikâya III, 70, 3, some practices of Niga*nth*a laymen
are discussed. I translate the passage thus: 'O Visâkhâ, there is a
class of Sama*n*as who are called Niga*nth*as. They exhort a Sâvaka
thus: "Well, sir, you must desist from doing injury to beings in the
East beyond a yô*g*ana from here, or to those in the West, North, South,
always beyond a yô*g*ana from here." In this way they enjoin tenderness
by making him spare some living beings; in this way they enjoin cruelty
by making him not spare other living beings.' It is not difficult to
recognise under these words the Digvirati vow of the *G*ainas, which

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

consists in laying down the limits beyond which one shall not travel nor
do business in the different directions. A man who keeps this vow
cannot, of course, do any harm to beings beyond the limits within which
he is obliged to keep. This is so distorted by the hostile sect as to
lay the rule under discussion open to blame. We cannot expect one sect
to give a fair and honest exposition of the tenets of their opponents;
it is but natural that they should put them in such a form as to make
the objections to be raised against them all the better applicable. The
*G*ainas were not a whit better in this respect than the Bauddhas, and
they have retorted upon them in the same way; witness their
misrepresentation of the Buddhist idea that a deed becomes a sin only
through the sinful intention of the doer, in a passage in the present
volume, [p. 414](sbe4570.htm#page_414), v. 26 ff., where the sound
principle of the Buddhists is ridiculed by applying it to a fictitious
and almost absurd case.

The passage in the Aṅguttara Nikâya, which we have just discussed, goes
on as follows: 'On the Upôsatha day they exhort a Sâvaka thus: "Well,
sir, take off all your clothes and declare: I belong to nobody, and
nobody belongs to me." Now his parents know him to be their son, and he
knows them to be his parents. His son or wife know him to be their
father or husband, and he knows them to be his son or wife. His slaves
and servants know him to be their master, and he knows them to be his
slaves and servants. Therefore (the Niga*nth*as) make him use lying
speech at the time when he makes the above declarations. On this account
I charge him with lying speech. After the lapse of that night he enjoys
pleasures (by means of things) that were not freely given. On this
account I charge him with taking of what is not freely given.'

According to this statement, the duties of a Niga*nth*a layman became,
during the Upôsatha days, equal to those of a monk; it was on common
days only that the difference between layman and monk was realised. This
description, however, does not quite agree with the Pôsaha rules of the
*G*ainas. Bhandarkar gives the following definition of Pôsaha

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

according to the Tattvârthasâradîpikâ, which agrees with what we know
about it from other sources: Pôsaha, i.e. to observe a fast or eat once
only or one dish only on the two holy days (the eighth and the
fourteenth of each fortnight), after having given up bathing, unguents,
ornaments, company of women, odours, incense, lights, &c., and assumed
renunciation as an ornament.' Though the Pôsaha observances of the
present *G*ainas are apparently more severe than those of the Buddhists,
still they fall short of the above description of the Niga*nth*a rules;
for a *G*aina layman does not, to my knowledge, take off his clothes
during the Pôsaha days, though he discards all ornaments and every kind
of luxury; nor must he pronounce any formula of renunciation similar to
that which the monks utter on entering the order. Therefore, unless the
Buddhist account contains some mistake or a gross misstatement, it would
appear that the *G*ainas have abated somewhat in their rigidity with
regard to the duties of laymen.

Buddhaghôsa, in his commentary on the Brahma*g*âla Sutta, Dîgha Nikâya
I, 2, 38 <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15), mentions the Niga*nth*as
as holding the opinion, discussed in the text, that the soul has no
colour, in contradistinction to the Â*g*îvikas, who divide mankind into
six classes according to the colour of the Âtman; both Niga*nth*as and
Â*g*îvikas, however, agree in maintaining that the soul continues to
exist after death and is free from ailments (arôgô). Whatever may be the
exact meaning of the last expression, it is clear that the above
description squares with the opinions of the *G*ainas about the nature
of the soul, as described below, [p. 172](sbe4531.htm#page_172) f.

In another passage (l.c. p. 168) Buddhaghôsa says that Niga*nth*a
Nâtaputta considers cold water to be possessed of life (so kira sîtôdakê
sattasa*ññ*î hôti), for which reason he does not use it. This doctrine
of the *G*ainas is so generally known that I need not bring forward any
quotation from the Sûtras in support of its genuineness.

This is nearly all the information on the doctrines of the

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

ancient Niga*nth*as which I have been able to gather from the Pâli
texts. Though it is less than we desire, its value is not to be
underrated. For with one exception all the doctrines and usages of the
ancient Niga*nth*as mentioned agree with those of the present *G*ainas,
and they comprise some of the fundamental ideas of *G*ainism. It is
therefore not probable that the doctrines of the *G*ainas have undergone
a great change in the interval between the quoted Buddhist records and
the composition of the *G*aina canon.

I have purposely deferred the discussion of the classical passage on the
doctrines of Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta, because it leads us to a new line of
inquiry. The passage in question occurs in the Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta of
the Dîgha Nikâya <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16). I translate it in
accordance with Buddhaghôsa's comment in the Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî. 'Here,
great king, a Niga*nth*a is protected by restraint in four directions
(*k*âtuyâmasa*m*varasa*m*vutô). How, great king, is a Niga*nth*a
protected by restraint in four directions? Here, great king, a
Niga*nth*a abstains from all (cold) water, he abstains from all bad
deeds, by abstinence from all bad deeds he is free from sins, he
realises abstinence from all bad deeds. In this way, great king, a
Niga*nth*a is protected by restraint in four directions. And, great
king, because he is thus protected, the Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta's soul is
exalted, is restrained, is well settled <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17).'--This is, certainly, not an accurate nor
an exhaustive description of the *G*aina creed, though it contains
nothing alien from it, and successfully imitates the language of the
*G*aina Sûtras. As I have already explained elsewhere <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18), I think the term
*k*âtuyâmasa*m*varasa*m*vutô has been misunderstood not only by the
commentator, but also by the author of the text. For

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

the Pâli *k*âtuyâma is equivalent to the Prâk*ri*t *k*âtu*gg*âma, a
well-known *G*aina term which denotes the four vows of Pâr*s*va in
contradistinction to the five vows (pa*ñk*a mahavvaya) of Mahâvîra.
Here, then, the Buddhists, I suppose, have made a mistake in ascribing
to Nâtaputta Mahâvîra a doctrine which properly belonged to his
predecessor Pâr*s*va. This is a significant mistake; for the Buddhists
could not have used the above term as descriptive of the Niga*nth*a
creed unless they had heard it from followers of Pâr*s*va, and they
would not have used it if the reforms of Mahâvîra had already been
generally adopted by the Niga*nth*as at the time of the Buddha. I,
therefore, look on this blunder of the Buddhists as a proof for the
correctness of the *G*aina tradition, that followers of Pâr*s*va
actually existed at the time of Mahâvîra.

Before following up this line of inquiry, I have to call attention to
another significant blunder of the Buddhists: they call Nâtaputta an
Aggivêsana, i.e. Agnivai*s*yâyana; according to the *G*ainas, however,
he was a Kâ*s*yapa, and we may credit them in such particulars about
their own Tîrthakara. But Sudharman, his chief disciple, who in the
Sûtras is made the expounder of his creed, was an Agnivai*s*yâyana, and
as he played a prominent part in the propagation of the *G*aina
religion, the disciple may often have been confounded by outsiders with
the master, so that the Gôtra of the former was erroneously assigned to
the latter. Thus by a double blunder the Buddhists attest the existence
of Mahâvîra's predecessor Pâr*s*va and of his chief disciple Sudharman.

That Pâr*s*va was a historical person, is now admitted by all as very
probable; indeed, his followers, especially Kê*s*i <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19), who seems to have been the leader of the
sect at the time of Mahâvîra, are frequently mentioned in *G*aina Sûtras
in such a matter-of-fact way, as to give us no reason for doubting the
authenticity of those records. The legend in

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

the Uttarâdhyayana, Lecture XXIII, how the union of the old and the new
church was effected, is of much interest in this respect. Kê*s*i and
Gautama, the representatives and leaders of the two branches of the
*G*aina church, both at the head of their pupils, meet in a park near
*S*râvasti; the differences in their creed concerning the number of
great vows, and the use or disuse of clothes are explained away without
further discussion, and full harmony with regard to the fundamental
ethical ideas is satisfactorily established by the readiness with which
allegorical expressions of the one speaker are understood and explained
by the other. There seems to have been some estrangement, but no
hostility between the two branches of the church; and though the members
of the older branch invariably are made to adopt the Law of Mahâvîra,
'which enjoins five vows,' it may be imagined that they continued in
some of their old practices, especially with regard to the use of
clothes, which Mahâvîra had abandoned. On this assumption we can account
for the division of the church in *S*vêtâmbaras and Digambaras, about
the origin of which both sects have contradictory legends <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20). There was apparently no sudden rupture;
but an original diversity (such as e.g. subsists now between the several
Gak*kh*as of the *S*vêtâmbaras) ripened into division, and in the end
brought about the great schism.

The records in the Buddhist Canon are not repugnant to our views about
the existence of the Niga*nth*as before Nâtaputta; for the Niga*nth*as
must have been an important sect at the time when Buddhism took its
rise. This may be inferred from the fact that they are so frequently
mentioned in the Pi*t*akas as opponents or converts of Buddha and his
disciples; and as it is nowhere said or even merely implied that the
Niga*nth*as were a newly-founded sect, we may conclude that they had
already existed a considerable time before the advent of the Buddha.
This conclusion is supported by another fact. Makkhali Gôsâla, a
contemporary

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

of Buddha and Mahâvîra, divided mankind into six classes <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21). Of these, according to Buddhaghôsa <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22), the third class contains the Niga*nth*as.
Gôsâla probably would not have ranked them as a separate, i.e.
fundamental subdivision of mankind, if they had only recently come into
existence. He must have looked upon them as a very important, and at the
same time, an old sect, in the same way in which, in my opinion, the
early Buddhists looked upon them. As a last argument in favour of my
theory I may mention that in the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya 35, a disputation
between the Buddha and Sa*kk*aka, the son of a Niga*nth*a, is narrated.
Sa*kk*aka is not a Niga*nth*a himself, as he boasts of having vanquished
Nâtaputta in disputation <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23), and,
moreover, the tenets he defends are not those of the *G*ainas. Now when
a famous controversialist, whose father was a Niga*nth*a, was a
contemporary of the Buddha, the Niga*nth*as can scarcely have been a
sect founded during Buddha's life.

Let us now confront the records of the *G*ainas about the philosophical
doctrines of heretics, which they had to combat, with such as the
Buddhists describe. In the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga II, I, 15 ([p.
339](sbe4565.htm#page_339) f.) and 21 f. ([p.
343](sbe4565.htm#page_343)) two materialistic theories which have much
in common are spoken of. The first passage treats of the opinion of
those who contend that the body and the soul are one and the same thing;
the second passage is concerned with the doctrine that the five elements
are eternal and constitute everything. The adherents of either
philosophy maintain that it is no sin to kill living beings. Similar
opinions are, in the Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta, ascribed to Pûra*n*a Kassapa
and A*g*ita Kêsakambalî. The former denies that there is such a thing as
sin or merit. A*g*ita Kêsakambalî holds that nothing real

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

corresponds to the current transcendental ideas. He moreover maintains:
Man (purisô) consists of the four elements; when he dies, earth returns
to earth, water to water, fire to fire, wind to wind, and the organs of
sense merge into air (or space) <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24).
Four bearers with the hearse carry the corpse to the place of cremation
(or, while it is burned) they make lamentations; the dove-coloured bones
remain, the offerings are reduced to ashes.' The last passage recurs
with few alterations in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga, [p.
340](sbe4565.htm#page_340): 'Other men carry the corpse away to burn it.
When it has been consumed by fire, only dove-coloured bones remain, and
the four bearers return with the hearse to their village <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25).'

In connection with the second materialistic system ([p.
343](sbe4565.htm#page_343), § 22, and [p. 237](sbe4539.htm#page_237) f.,
vv. 15, 16) a variety of it is mentioned, which adds the permanent Âtman
or soul as a sixth to the five permanent elements. This seems to have
been a primitive or a popular form of the philosophy which we now know
under the name of Vai*s*êshika. To this school of philosophy we must
perhaps assign Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana of Buddhist record. He
maintained <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26) that there are seven
eternal, unchangeable, mutually independent things: the four elements,
pleasure, pain, and the soul. As they have no influence upon one
another, it is impossible to do any real harm to anybody. I confess that
to maintain the eternal existence of pleasure and pain (sukha and
dukkha) and to deny their influence on the soul, seems to me absurd; but
the Buddhists have perhaps misstated the original tenets. At any rate,
the views of Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

come under the denomination of Akriyâvâda; and in this they differ from
the Vai*s*êshika proper, which is a Kriyâvâda system. As these two terms
are frequently used both by Buddhists and *G*ainas, it will not be amiss
to define them more accurately. Kriyâvâda is the doctrine which teaches
that the soul acts or is affected by acts. Under this head comes
*G*ainism, and of Brahmanical philosophies Vai*s*êshika and Nyâya
(which, however, are not expressly quoted in the canonical books of
either Buddhists or *G*ainas), and apparently a great many systems of
which the names have not been preserved, but the existence of which is
implied in our texts. Akriyâvâda is the doctrine which teaches either
that a soul does not exist, or that it does not act or is not affected
by acts. Under this subdivision fall the different schools of
materialists; of Brahmanical philosophies the Vêdânta, Sâṅkhya, and
Yoga; and the Buddhists. Of the latter the doctrines of the
Ksha*n*ikavâdins and the *S*ûnyavâdins are alluded to in Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga
I, 14, verses 4 and 7. It may be mentioned here that the Vêdântists or
their opinions are frequently mentioned in the Siddhânta; in the
Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga the Vêdânta is the third heresy described in the First
Lecture of the Second Book, [p. 344](sbe4565.htm#page_344); it is also
adverted to in the Sixth Lecture, p. 417. But as no professor of it was
among the six heretical teachers (titthiya) of the Buddhists, we may
pass them over here <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27).

The fourth heresy discussed in the First Lecture of the Second Book of
the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) is Fatalism. In
the Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta this system is expounded by Makkhali Gôsâla in
the following words <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29): 'Great king,
there is no cause, nor any previously existing principle productive of
the pollution of sentient beings; their defilement is uncaused and
unproduced by anything previously existing. There is no cause nor any
previously existing principle

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

productive of the purity of sentient beings: their purity is uncaused
and unproduced by anything previously existing. For their production
there is nothing that results from the conduct of the individuals,
nothing from the actions of others, nothing from human effort: they
result neither from power nor effort, neither from manly fortitude nor
manly energy. Every sentient being, every insect, every living thing,
whether animal or vegetable <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30), is
destitute of intrinsic force, power, or energy, but, being held by the
necessity of its nature, experiences happiness or misery in the six
forms of existence, &c.' The explanation of these doctrines in the
Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga (l.c.), though less wordy, comes to the same; it does
not, however, expressly ascribe them to Gôsâla, the son of Makkhali.

The *G*ainas enumerate four principal schools of philosophy <span
id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31): Kriyâvâda, Akriyâvâda, A*gñ*ânavâda, and
Vainayikavâda. The views of the A*gñ*ânikas, or Agnostics, are not
clearly stated in the texts, and the explanation of the commentators of
all these philosophies which I have given in note <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_31), [p. 83](sbe4520.htm#page_83), is vague
and misleading. But from Buddhist writings we may form a pretty correct
idea of what Agnosticism was like. It is, according to the
Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta, the doctrine of Sa*ñg*aya Bêla*tth*iputta, and is
there stated in the following way <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_32):
'If you inquire of me whether there be a future state of being, I
answer: If I experience a future state of existence, I will then explain
the nature of that state. If they inquire, Is it after this manner? that
is

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

not my concern. Is it after that fashion? that is not my concern. Is it
different from these? that is not my concern. Is it not? that is not my
concern. No, is it not? It is no concern of mine.' In the same way he
e.g. refuses a definite answer to the questions whether the Tathâgata is
after death, or is not; is and is not at the same time, is not nor is
not at the same time. It is evident that the Agnostics examined all
modes of expression of the existence or nonexistence of a thing, and if
it were anything transcendental or beyond human experience, they
negatived all those modes of expression.

The records of the Buddhists and *G*ainas about the philosophical ideas
current at the time of the Buddha and Mahâvîra, meagre though they be,
are of the greatest importance to the historian of that epoch. For they
show us the ground on which, and the materials with which, a religious
reformer had to build his system. The similarity between some of those
'heretical' doctrines on the one side, and *G*aina or Buddhist ideas on
the other, is very suggestive, and favours the assumption that the
Buddha, as well as Mahâvîra, owed some of his conceptions to these very
heretics, and formulated others under the influence of the controversies
which were continually going on with them. Thus, I think, that in
opposition to the Agnosticism of Sa*ñg*aya, Mahâvîra has established the
Syâdvâda. For as the A*gñ*ânavâda declares that of a thing beyond our
experience the existence, or non-existence or simultaneous existence and
non-existence, can neither be affirmed nor denied, so in a similar way,
but one leading to contrary results, the Syâdvâda declares that 'you can
affirm the existence of a thing from one point of view (syâd asti), deny
it from another (syâd nâsti); and affirm both existence and
non-existence with reference to it at different times (syâd asti nâsti).
If you should think of affirming existence and non-existence at the same
time from the same point of view, you must say that the thing cannot be
spoken of (syâd avaktavya*h*). Similarly, under certain circumstances,
the affirmation of existence is not possible

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (syâd asti
avaktavya*h*); of non-existence (syân nâsti avaktavya*h*); and also of
both (syâd asti nâsti avaktavya*h*) <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_33).'

This is the famous Saptabhaṅgînaya of the *G*ainas. Would any
philosopher have enunciated such truisms, unless they served to silence
some dangerous opponents? The subtle discussions of the Agnostics had
probably bewildered and misled many of their contemporaries.
Consequently the Syâdvâda must have appeared to them as a happy way
leading out of the maze of the A*gñ*ânavâda. It was the weapon with
which the Agnostics assailed the enemy, turned against themselves. Who
knows how many of their followers went over to Mahâvîra's creed
convinced by the truth of the Saptabhaṅgînaya!

We can trace, I imagine, the influence of Agnosticism also in the
doctrine of the Buddha about the Nirvâ*n*a, as it is stated in Pâli
books. Professor Oldenberg was the first to draw attention to the
decisive passages which prove beyond the possibility of doubt that the
Buddha declined answering the question whether the Tathâgata (i.e. the
liberated soul, or rather principle of individuality) is after death or
not. If the public of his time had not been accustomed to be told that
some things, and those of the greatest interest, were beyond the ken of
the human mind, and had not acquiesced in such answers, it certainly
would not have lent a willing ear to a religious reformer who declined
to speak out on what in Brahmanical philosophy is considered the end and
goal of all speculations. As it is, Agnosticism seems to have prepared
the way for the Buddhist doctrine of the Nirvâ*n*a <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_34). It is worthy of note

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

that in a dialogue between king Pasênadi and the nun Khêmâ, told in the
Sa*m*yutta Nikâya, and translated by Oldenberg, the king puts his
questions about the existence or non-existence of the Tathâgata after
death in the same formulas which Sa*ñg*aya is made to use in the passage
translated above from the Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta.

In support of my assumption that the Buddha was influenced by
contemporary Agnosticism, I may adduce a tradition incorporated in the
Mahâvagga I, 23 and 24. There we are told that the most distinguished
pair of his disciples, Sâriputta and Moggalâna, had, previously to their
conversion, been adherents of Sa*ñg*aya, and had brought over to Buddha
250 disciples of their former teacher. This happened not long after
Buddha's reaching Bôdhi, i.e. at the very beginning of the new sect,
when its founder must have been willing, in order to win pupils, to
treat prevalent opinions with all due consideration.

The greatest influence on the development of Mahâvîra's doctrines must,
I believe, be ascribed to Gôsâla, the son of Makkhali. A history of his
life, contained in the Bhagavatî XV, I, has been briefly translated by
Hoernle in the Appendix to his translation of the Uvâsaga Dasâo. It is
there recorded that Gôsâla lived six years together with Mahâvîra as his
disciple, practising asceticism, but afterwards separated from him,
started a Law of his own, and set up as a *G*ina, the leader of the
Â*g*îvikas. The Buddhist records, however, speak of him as the successor
of Nanda Va*kkh*a and Kisa Sa*m*ki*kk*a, and of his sect, the a*k*êlaka
paribbâ*g*akas, as a long-established order of monks. We have no reason
to doubt the statement of the *G*ainas, that Mahâvîra and Gôsâla for
some time practised austerities together; but the relation between them
probably was different from what the *G*ainas would have us believe. I
suppose, and shall now bring forward some arguments in favour of my
opinion, that Mahâvîra and Gôsâla associated

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

with the intention of combining their sects and fusing them into one.
The fact that these two teachers lived together for a long period,
presupposes, it would appear, some similarity between their opinions. I
have already pointed out above, in the note on [p. xxvi](#page_xxvi),
that the expression sabbê sattâ sabbê pâ*n*â sabbê bhûtâ sabbê *g*îvâ is
common to both Gôsâla and the *G*ainas, and from the commentary we learn
that the division of animals into êkêndriyas, dvîndriyas, &c., which is
so common in *G*aina texts, was also used by Gôsâla. The curious and
almost paradoxical *G*aina doctrine of the six Lê*s*yâs closely
resembles, as Professor Leumann was the first to perceive, Gôsâla's
division of mankind into six classes; but in this particular I am
inclined to believe that the *G*ainas borrowed the idea from the
Â*g*îvikas and altered it so as to bring it into harmony with the rest
of their own doctrines. With regard to the rules of conduct the
collective evidence obtainable is such as to amount nearly to proof that
Mahâvîra borrowed the more rigid rules from Gôsâla. For as stated in the
Uttarâdhyayana XXIII, 13, [p. 121](sbe4525.htm#page_121), the Law of
Pâr*s*va allowed monks to wear an under and upper garment, but the Law
of Vardhamâna forbade clothes. A term <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_35) for naked friar, frequently met with in
the *G*aina Sûtras, is a*k*êlaka, literally 'unclothed.' Now the
Buddhists distinguish between A*k*êlakas and Niga*nth*as; e.g. in
Buddhaghôsa's commentary on the Dhammapadam <span
id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_36) it is said of some Bhikkhus that they gave
the preference to the Niga*nth*as before the A*k*êlakas, because the
latter are stark naked (sabbasô apa*t*i*kkh*annâ), while the Niga*nth*as
use some sort of cover <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_37) 'for the sake
of decency,' as was wrongly assumed by those Bhikkhus. The Buddhists
denote

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

by A*k*êlaka the followers of Makkhali Gôsâla and his two predecessors
Kisa Sa*m*ki*kk*a and Nanda Va*kkh*a, and have preserved an account of
their religious practices in the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya 36. There Sa*kk*aka,
the son of a Niga*nth*a, whom we are already acquainted with, explains
the meaning of kâyabhâvanâ, bodily purity, by referring to the conduct
of the A*k*êlakas. Some details of Sa*kk*aka's account are
unintelligible in the absence of a commentary, but many are quite clear,
and bear a close resemblance to well-known *G*aina usages. Thus the
A*k*êlakas, like the *G*aina monks, may not accept an invitation for
dinner; they are forbidden food that is abhiha*t*a or uddissaka*t*a,
which terms are, in all likelihood, identical with adhyâh*ri*ta and
auddê*s*ika of the *G*ainas (see [p. 132](sbe4526.htm#page_132), note);
they are not allowed to eat meat or to drink liquor. 'Some beg only in
one house and accept but one morsel of food, some in more up to seven;
some live upon one donation of food, some on more up to seven.' Similar
to these are some practices of *G*aina monks described in the Kalpa
Sûtra, 'Rules for Yatis,' 26, part i, p. 300, and below, p. 176 f.,
verses 15 and 19. The following practice of the A*k*êlakas is
identically the same as that observed by the *G*ainas: 'some eat but one
meal every day, or every second day <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_38),
&c., up to every half month.' All the rules of the A*k*êlakas are either
identical with those of the *G*ainas or extremely like them, and
dictated, so to say, by the same spirit. And still Sa*kk*aka does not
quote the Niga*nth*as as a standard of 'bodily purity,' though he was
the son of a Niga*nth*a, and therefore must have known their religious
practices. This curious fact may most easily be accounted for by our
assuming that the original Niga*nth*as, of whom the Buddhist records
usually speak, were not the section of the church, which submitted to
the more rigid rules of Mahâvîra, but those followers of Pâr*s*va, who,

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

without forming a hostile party, yet continued, I imagine, to retain
within the united church some particular usages of the old one <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_39). As those rigid rules formed no part of
the ancient creed, and Mahâvîra, therefore, must have introduced them,
it is probable that he borrowed them from the A*k*êlakas or Â*g*îvikas,
the followers of Gôsâla, with whom he is said to have lived in close
companionship for six years practising austerities. We may regard
Mahâvîra's adoption of some religious ideas and practices of the
Â*g*îvikas as concessions made to them in order to win over Gôsâla and
his disciples. This plan seems to have succeeded for some time; but at
last the allied teachers quarrelled, it may be supposed, on the question
who was to be the leader of the united sects. Mahâvîra's position
apparently was strengthened by his temporary association with Gôsâla,
but the latter seems to have lost by it, if we are to believe the
account of the *G*ainas, and his tragic end must have been a severe blow
to the prospects of his sect.

Mahâvîra probably borrowed much more from other sects than we shall ever
be able to prove. It must have been easy to add new doctrines to the
*G*aina creed, as it scarcely forms a system in the true sense of the
word. Each sect, or fraction of a sect, which was united with the
*G*aina church by the successful policy of Mahâvîra <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_40), may have brought with it some of its
favourite speculations, and most probably its favourite saints too, who
were recognised as *K*akravartins or Tîrthakaras. This is, of course, a
mere conjecture of mine; but it would account for the strange hagiology
of the *G*ainas, and in the absence of any trace of direct evidence we
are driven to rely upon guesses, and those deserve the preference which
are the most

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

plausible. For the rest, however, of the hypotheses which I have tried
to establish in the preceding pages, I claim a higher degree of
probability. For on the one hand I do no violence to the tradition of
the *G*ainas, which in the absence of documents deserves most careful
attention, and on the other, I assume but what under the given
circumstances would have been most likely to happen. The cardinal
feature in my construction of the early history of the *G*aina church
consists in my turning to account the alleged existence of followers of
Pâr*s*va in the time of Mahâvîra, a tradition which seems to be almost
unanimously accepted by modern scholars.

If *G*ainism dates from an early period, and is older than Buddha and
Mahâvîra, we may expect to find marks of its antiquity in the character
of *G*aina philosophy. Such a mark is the animistic belief that nearly
everything is possessed of a soul; not only have plants their own souls,
but particles of earth, cold water, fire, and wind also. Now ethnology
teaches us that the animistic theory forms the basis of many beliefs
that have been called the philosophy of savages; that it is more and
more relinquished or changed into purer anthropomorphism as civilisation
advances. If, therefore, *G*aina ethics are for their greater part based
on primitive animism, it must have extensively existed in large classes
of Indian society when *G*ainism was first originated. This must have
happened at a very early time, when higher forms of religious beliefs
and cults had not yet, more generally, taken hold of the Indian mind.

Another mark of antiquity *G*ainism has in common with the oldest
Brahmanical philosophies, Vêdânta and Sâṅkhya. For at this early epoch
in the development of metaphysics, the Category of Quality is not yet
clearly and distinctly conceived, but it is just evolving, as it were,
out of the Category of Substance: things which we recognise as qualities
are constantly mistaken for and mixed up with substances. Thus in the
Vêdânta the highest Brahman is not possessed of pure existence,
intellect, and joy as qualities of his nature, but Brahman is existence,
intellect, and

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

joy itself. In the Sâṅkhya the nature of purusha or soul is similarly
defined as being intelligence or light; and the three gu*n*as are
described as goodness, energy, and delusion, or light, colour, and
darkness; yet these gu*n*as are not qualities in our sense of the word,
but, as Professor Garbe adequately calls them, constituents of primitive
matter. It is quite in accordance with this way of thinking that the
ancient *G*aina texts usually speak only of substances, dravyas, and
their development or modifications, paryâyas; and when they mention
gu*n*as, qualities, besides, which however is done but rarely in the
Sûtras and regularly in comparatively modern books only, this seems to
be a later innovation due to the influence which the philosophy and
terminology of Nyâya-Vai*s*êshika gradually gained over the scientific
thoughts of the Hindus. For at the side of paryâya, development or
modification, there seems to be no room for an independent category
'quality,' since paryâya is the state in which a thing, dravya, is at
any moment of its existence, and this must, therefore, include
qualities, as seems to be actually the view embodied in the oldest text.
Another instance of the *G*ainas applying the category 'substance' to
things which are beyond its sphere, and come rather under that of
quality,' is seen in their treating merit and demerit, dharma and
adharma, as kinds of substances with which the soul comes into
contact <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_41); for they are regarded as
coextensive with the world, not unlike space, which even the
Vai*s*êshikas count as a substance. If the categories of substance and
quality had already been clearly distinguished from one another, and had
been recognised as correlative terms, as they are in Vai*s*êshika
philosophy (which defines substance as the substratum of qualities, and
quality as that which is inherent in substance), *G*ainism would almost
certainly not have adopted such confused ideas as those just expounded.

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

From the preceding remarks it will be evident that I do not agree with
Bhandarkar <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_42), who claims a late origin
for *G*ainism, because, on some points, it entertains the same views as
the Vai*s*êshika. The Vai*s*êshika philosophy may be briefly described
as a philosophical treatment and systematical arrangement of those
general concepts and ideas which were incorporated in the language, and
formed therefore the mental property common to all who spoke or knew
Sanskrit. The first attempts to arrive at such a natural philosophy may
have been made at an early epoch; but the perfection of the system, as
taught in the aphorisms of Ka*n*âda, could not be reached till after
many centuries of patient mental labour and continuous philosophical
discussion. In the interval between the origin and the final
establishment of the system those borrowings may have taken place of
which, rightly or wrongly, the *G*ainas may be accused. I must, however,
remark that Bhandarkar believes the *G*ainas to hold, on the points
presently to be discussed, a view 'which is of the nature of a
compromise between the Sâṅkhyas and the Vêdântins on the one hand and
the Vai*s*êshika on the other.' But for our discussion it makes no
difference whether direct borrowing or a compromise between two
conflicting views be assumed. The points in question are the following:
(1) both *G*ainism and Vai*s*êshika embrace the Kriyâvâda, i.e. they
maintain that the soul is directly affected by actions, passions, &c.;
(2) both advocate the doctrine of asatkârya, i.e. that the product is
different from its material cause, while the Vedanta and Sâṅkhya hold
that they are the same (satkârya); (g) that they distinguish qualities
from their substratum (d navy a). The latter item has been discussed
above; we have to deal, therefore, with the first two only. It will be
seen that the opinions under (1) and (2) are the common-sense views; for
that we are directly affected by passions, and that the product is
different from its cause, e.g. the tree from the seed, will always and
everywhere be the primâ faciê conclusion

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

of an unbiassed mind, or rather will appear as the simple statement of
what common experience teaches. Such opinions cannot be regarded as
characteristic marks of a certain philosophy, and their occurrence in
another system need not be explained by the assumption of borrowing. The
case would be different if a paradoxical opinion were found in two
different schools; for a paradoxical opinion is most likely the product
of but one school, and, when once established, it may be adopted by
another. But such opinions of the Vai*s*êshika, as are the result of a
peculiar train of reasoning, e.g. that space (di*s*) and air (âkâ*s*a)
are two separate substances, do not recur in *G*ainism. For in it, as
well as in the older Brahmanical systems, Vêdânta and Sâṅkhya, space and
air are not yet distinguished from one another, but âkâ*s*a is made to
serve for both.

Some other instances of difference in fundamental doctrines between
Vai*s*êshikas and *G*ainas are, that according to the former the souls
are infinite and all-pervading, while to the latter they are of limited
dimensions, and that the Vai*s*êshikas make dharma and adharma qualities
of the soul, while, as has been said above, the *G*ainas look on them as
a sort of substances. In one point, however, there is some resemblance
between a paradoxical Vai*s*êshika opinion and a distinct *G*aina
doctrine. According to the Vai*s*êshika there are four kinds of bodies:
bodies of earth, as those of men, animals, &c.; bodies of water in the
world of Varu*n*a; bodies of fire in the world of Agni; and bodies of
wind in the world of Vâyu. This curious opinion has its counterpart in
*G*ainism; for the *G*ainas, too, assume Earth-bodies, Water-bodies,
Fire-bodies, and Wind-bodies. However, these elementary bodies are the
elements or the most minute particles of them, inhabited by particular
souls. This hylozoistic doctrine is, as I have said above, the outcome
of primitive animism, while the Vai*s*êshika opinion, though probably
derived from the same current of thought, is an adaptation of it to
popular mythology. I make no doubt that the *G*aina opinion is much more
primitive and

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

belongs to an older stage in the development of philosophical thought
than the Vai*s*êshika assumption of four kinds of bodies.

Though I am of opinion that between Vai*s*êshika and *G*ainism no such
connection existed as could be proved by borrowings of the one system
from the other, still I am ready to admit that they are related to each
other by a kind of affinity of ideas. For the fundamental ideas of the
Vêdântins and Sâṅkhyas go directly counter to those of the *G*ainas, and
the latter could not adopt them without breaking with their religion.
But they could go a part of their way together with the Vai*s*êshika,
and still retain their religious persuasion. We need, therefore, not
wonder that among the writers on the Nyâya-Vai*s*êshika some names of
*G*ainas occur. The *G*ainas themselves go still farther, and maintain
that the Vai*s*êshika philosophy was established by a schismatical
teacher of theirs, *Kh*aluya Rôhagutta of the Kau*s*ika Gôtra, with whom
originated the sixth schism of the *G*ainas, the Trairâ*s*ika-matam, in
544 A. V. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_43) (18 A. D.) The details of
this system given in the Âva*s*yaka, vv. 77-83, are apparently
reproduced from Ka*n*âda's Vai*s*êshika Dar*s*ana; for they consist in
the enumeration of the six (not seven) categories with their
subdivisions, among which that of qualities contains but seventeen items
(not twenty-four), and those identical with Vai*s*êshika Dar*s*ana I, 1,
6.

I believe that in this case, as in many others, the *G*ainas claim more
honour than is their due in connecting every Indian celebrity with the
history of their creed. My reason for doubting the correctness of the
above *G*aina legend is the following. The Vai*s*êshika philosophy is
reckoned as one of the orthodox Brahmanical philosophies, and it has
chiefly, though not exclusively, been cultivated by orthodox Hindus. We
have, therefore, no reason for doubting that they have misstated the
name and Gôtra of the author of the Sûtras, viz. Ka*n*âda of the
Kâ*s*yapa Gôtra. No trace

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

has been found in Brahmanical literature that the name of the real
author of the Vai*s*êshika was Rôhagupta, and his Gôtra the Kau*s*ika
Gôtra; nor can Rôhagupta and Ka*n*âda be taken as different names of the
same person, because their Gôtras also differ. Kâ*n*âda, follower of
Ka*n*âda, means etymologically crow-eater, owl; hence his system has
been nicknamed Aulûkya Dar*s*ana, owl-philosophy <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44). In Rôhagupta's second name, *Kh*uluya,
which stands for Sha*d*ulûka <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45),
allusion is made to the 'owl,' probably to the Kâ*n*âdas; but the
*G*ainas refer ulûka to the Gôtra of the Rôhagupta, viz. Kau*s*ika <span
id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_46), which word also means owl. As the
unanimous tradition of the Brahmans deserves the preference before that
of the *G*ainas, we can most easily account for the latter by assuming
that Rôhagupta did not invent, but only adopted the Vai*s*êshika
philosophy to support his schismatical views.

 

About the two works translated in this volume, the Uttarâdhyayana and
Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga, I have little to add to the remarks of Professor Weber
in the Indische Studien, vol. xvi, p. 259 ff., and vol. xvii, p. 43 ff.
The Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga is probably the older of the two, as it is the
second Aṅga, and the Aṅgas obtain the foremost rank among the canonical
books of the *G*ainas, while the Uttarâdhyayana, the first Mûlasûtra,
belongs to the last section of the Siddhânta. According to the summary
in the fourth Aṅga the object of the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga is to fortify young
monks against the heretical opinions of alien teachers, to confirm them
in the right faith, and to lead them to the highest good. This
description is correct on the whole, but not exhaustive, as will be seen
by going over our table of contents. The work opens with the refutation
of heretical doctrines, and the same object is again treated at greater
length in the

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> First Lecture of
the Second Book. It is followed in the First Book by Lectures on a holy
life in general, on the difficulties a monk has to overcome, especially
the temptations thrown in his way, the punishment of the unholy, and the
praise of Mahâvîra as the standard of righteousness. Then come some
Lectures on cognate subjects. The Second Book, which is almost entirely
in prose, treats of similar subjects, but without any apparent
connection of its parts. It may therefore be considered as
supplementary, and as a later addition to the First Book. The latter was
apparently intended as a guide for young monks <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_47). Its form, too, seems adapted to this
purpose; for it lays some claim to poetical art in the variety of the
metres employed, and in the artificial character of some verses. It may,
therefore, be considered as the composition of one author, while the
Second Book is a collection of tracts which treat on the subjects
discussed in the first.

The Uttarâdhyayana resembles the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga with regard to its
object and part of the subjects treated; but it is of greater extent
than the original part of the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga, and the plan of the work
is carried out with more skill. Its intention is to instruct a young
monk in his principal duties, to commend an ascetic life by precepts and
examples, to warn him against the dangers in his spiritual career, and
to give some theoretical information. The heretical doctrines are only
occasionally alluded to, not fully discussed; apparently the dangers
expected from that quarter grew less in the same measure as time
advanced and the institutions of the sect were more firmly established.
Of more importance to a young monk seems to have been an accurate
knowledge of animate and inanimate things, as a rather long treatise on
this subject has been added at the end of the book.--Though there is an
apparent plan in the selection and arrangement of the single Lectures,
still it is open to doubt whether they were all composed by one

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

author, or only selected from the traditional literature, written or
oral, which among the *G*ainas, as everywhere else, must have preceded
the formation of a canon. I am inclined to adopt the latter alternative,
because there is a greater variety of treatment and style in the
different parts than seems compatible with the supposition of one
author, and because a similar origin must be assumed for many works of
the present canon.

At what time the works under discussion were composed or brought into
their present shape is a problem which cannot be satisfactorily solved.
As, however, the reader of the present volume will naturally expect the
translator to give expression to his personal conviction on this point,
I give my opinion with all reserve, viz. that most parts, tracts, or
treatises of which the canonical books consist, are old; that the
redaction of the Aṅgas took place at an early period (tradition places
it under Bhadrabâhu); that the other works of the Siddhânta were
collected in course of time, probably in the first centuries before our
era, and that additions or alterations may have been made in the
canonical works till the time of their first edition under
Devardhiga*n*in (980 A*V*. = 454 A. D.)

 

I have based my translation of the Uttarâdhyayana and Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga on
the text adopted by the oldest commentators I could consult. This text
differs little from that of the MSS. and the printed editions. I had
prepared a text of my own from some MSS. at my disposal, and this has
served to check the printed text.

The Calcutta edition of the Uttarâdhyayana (Sa*m*vat 1936 = 1879 A. D.)
contains, besides a Guzeratî gloss, the Sûtradîpikâ of Lakshmîvallabha,
pupil of Lakshmîkîrtiga*n*in of the Kharatara Ga*kkh*a. Older than this
commentary is the *T*îkâ of Dêvêndra, which I have made my principal
guide. It was composed in Sa*m*vat 1179 or 1123 A. D., and is
confessedly an abstract from *S*ântyâ*k*ârya's V*ri*tti, which I have
not used. But I have had at my disposal an illuminated old MS. of the
Ava*k*ûri, belonging to the

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Strassburg
University Library. This work is apparently an abstract from the
V*ri*tti of *S*ântyâ*k*ârya, as in a great many passages it almost
verbally agrees with Dêvêndra's work.

The Bombay edition of the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga (Sa*m*vat 1936 or 1880 A. D.)
contains three commentaries: (1) *S*îlâṅka's *T*îkâ, in which is
incorporated Bhadrabâhu's Niryukti. This is the oldest commentary
extant; but it was not without predecessors, as *S*îlâṅka occasionally
alludes to old commentators. *S*îlâṅka lived in the second half of the
ninth century A. D., as he is said to have finished his commentary on
the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra in the *S*aka year 798 or 876 A. D. (2) The Dîpika,
an abstract from the last by Harshakula, which was composed in Sa*m*vat
1583 or 1517 A*D*. I have also used a MS. of the Dîpika in my
possession. (3) Pâ*s*a*k*andra's Bâlâvabôdha, a Guzeratî gloss.--My
principal guide was, of course, *S*îlâṅka; when he and Harshakula agree,
I refer to them in my notes as the 'commentators;' I name *S*îlâṅka when
his remark in question has been omitted by Harshakula, and I quote the
latter when he gives some original matter of interest. I may add that
one of my MSS. is covered with marginal and interlinear glosses which
have now and then given me some help in ascertaining the meaning of the
text.

H. JACOBI.

      BONN:  
November, 1894.

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

### ADDITIONAL NOTE.

I may here add a remark on the Parable of the Three Merchants, see [p.
29](sbe4509.htm#page_29) f., which agrees with Matthew xxv. 14 and Luke
xix. 11. It seems, however, to have had a still greater resemblance to
the version of the parable in The Gospel according to the Hebrews, as
will appear from the following passage from Eusebius’ Theophania (ed.
Migne's Patrologia Graeca, iv. 155), translated by Nicholson, 'The
Gospel according to the Hebrews (London, 1879): The Gospel, which comes
to us in Hebrew characters, has directed the threat not against the
hider, but against the abandoned liver. For it has included three
servants, one which devoured the substance with harlots and flute-women,
one which multiplied, and one which hid the talent: one was accepted,
one only blamed, and one shut up in prison.' I owe this quotation to my
colleague Arnold Meyer.

Taking into consideration (1) that the *G*aina version contains only the
essential elements of the parable, which in the Gospels are developed
into a full story; and (2) that it is expressly stated in the
Uttarâdhyayana VII, 15 that 'this parable is taken from common life,' I
think it probable that the Parable of the Three Merchants was invented
in India, and not in Palestine.

H. J.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_0) Das Aupapâtika Sûtra,
in the Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes, vol. viii; and
Da*s*avaikâlika Sûtra und Niryukti, in the Journal of the German
Oriental Society, vol. xlvi.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xiii:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_1) The Uvâsaga Dasâo: (in
the Bibliotheca Indica), vol. i. Text and Commentary, Calcutta, 1890;
vol. ii. Translation, 1888.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xiii:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_2) Berlin, 1888 and 1892.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:4](sbe4502.htm#fr_3) In the Indische
Studien, vol. xvi, p. 211 ff., and xvii, p. 1 ff.; translated in the
Indian Antiquary and edited separately, Bombay, 1893.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:5](sbe4502.htm#fr_4) In the Actes du VI
Congrès International des Orientalistes, section Arienne, p. 469 ff., in
the 5th and 6th vols. of the Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes, and in the 48th vol. of the Journal of the German Oriental
Society.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xiv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_5) The
Pari*s*ish*t*aparvan by Hêma*k*andra, Bibliotheca Indica.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiv:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_6) Denkschriften der
philos.-histor. Classe der kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften, vol.
xxxvii, p. 171 ff.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xiv:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_7) Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes, vols. ii and iii. Epigraphia Indica, vols. i
and ii.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiv:4](sbe4502.htm#fr_8) Bangalore, 1889.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiv:5](sbe4502.htm#fr_9) The Religions of India.
Bulletin des Religions de l’Inde, 1889-94.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiv:6](sbe4502.htm#fr_10) Über die indische
Secte der Jaina. Wien, 1887.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xiv:7](sbe4502.htm#fr_11) Report for 1883-84.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiv:8](sbe4502.htm#fr_12) Niga*nth*a is
apparently the original form of the word, since it is thus spelled in
the A*s*ôka inscription, in Pâli, and occasionally by the *G*ainas,
though the phonetic laws of all three idioms would have given preference
to the form niggantha, the more frequent spelling in *G*aina works.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_13) There are apparently
two persons of this name. The other Abhaya, a son of king Srê*n*ika, was
a patron of the *G*ainas, and is frequently mentioned in their legends
and in the canonical books. In the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya 58 (Abhayakumâra
Sutta) it is related that the Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta made him engage in a
disputation with Buddha. The question was so adroitly framed that
whether the answer was Yes or No, it involved Buddha in
self-contradiction. But the plan did not succeed, and Abhaya was
converted by Buddha. There is nothing in this account to elucidate the
doctrines of Nâtaputta.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xvi:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_14) The name Sîha occurs
in the Bhagavatî (Calcutta edition, p. 1267, see Hoernle, Uvâsaga Dasâo
Appendix, p. 10) as that of a disciple of Mahâvîra; but as he was a
monk, he cannot be identified with his namesake in the Mahâvagga.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xix:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_15) Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî,
p. 119 of the Pali Text Society edition.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xx:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_16) Page 57 of the edition
in the Pali Text Society.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xx:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_17) The translations of
Gogerly and of Burnouf in Grimblot, Sept Suttas Pâlis, were made without
the help of a commentary, and may, therefore, be passed by. It is,
however, open to doubt whether Buddhaghôsa has drawn his information
from genuine tradition, or had to rely on conjectures of his own.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xx:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_18) See my paper, 'On
Mahâvîra and his Predecessors,' in the Indian Antiquary, IX, 158 ff.,
where some of the above problems have been treated.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxi:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_19) In the Râ*g*apra*s*nî
Pâr*s*va has a discussion with king Paêsi and converts him, see Actes du
VI Congrès International des Orientalistes, vol. iii, P. 490 ff.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_20) See my paper on the
origin of the *S*vêtâmbara and Digambara sects in the Journal of the
German Oriental Society, vol. xxxviii, p. 1 ff.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_21) Sâma*ññ*aphala
Sutta, Dîgha Nikâya II, 20.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxiii:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_22) Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî,
p. 162. Buddhaghôsa expressly states that Gôsâla reckoned the
Niga*nth*as lower than his own lay disciples, who form the fourth
class.--As Buddhaghôsa does not take umbrage at Gôsâla's reckoning the
Bhikkhus still lower, it is clear that he did not identify the Bhikkhus
with the Buddhist monks.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxiii:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_23) See p. 250 of the
Pali Text Society edition.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_24) Âkâ*s*a; it is not
reckoned as a fifth element in the Buddhist account, but it is so in
that of the *G*ainas, see below, [p. 343](sbe4565.htm#page_343), and [p.
237](sbe4539.htm#page_237), verse 15. This is a verbal, rather than a
material difference.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxiv:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_25) I put here the
original texts side by side so that their likeness may be more obvious:

|                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| âsandipa*ñk*amâ purisâ mata*m* âdâya ga*kkh*anti yâva â*l*âhanâ padâni pa*ññ*âpenti, kâpôtakâni a*tth*îni bhavanti, bhassantâ<sup>ऽ</sup>hutiyô. | âdahanâe parêhi ni*gg*ai, aga*n*i*ggh*âmitê sarîre kavôtava*nn*âim a*tth*îni âsandîpa*ñk*amâ purisâ gâma*m* pa*kk*âga*kkh*anti. |

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxiv:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_26) Loc. cit., p. 56.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_27) It is worthy of
remark that the Vêdântists play no conspicuous part, if any, among
Buddha's opponents. As they were, however, the foremost of Brahmanical
philosophers, we must conclude that Brahmans of learning held aloof from
the classes of society to which the new religion appealed.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxv:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_28) Page
[345](sbe4565.htm#page_345) f., see also [p. 239](sbe4539.htm#page_239).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxv:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_29) Grimblot, Sept Suttas
Pâlis, p. 170.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_30) In the original:
sabbê sattâ, sabbê pâ*n*â, sabbê bhûtâ, sabbê *g*îvâ. The same
enumeration frequently occurs in *G*aina Sûtras, and has, in my
translation, been abbreviated in all classes of living beings.'
Buddhaghôsa's explanation has been thus rendered by Hoernle, Uvâsaga
Dasâo, Appendix II, p. 16: 'In the term *all beings* (sabbê sattâ) he
comprises camels, oxen, asses, and other animals without exception. The
term *all sensive beings* (sabbê pâ*n*â) he uses to denote those with
one sense, those with two senses, and so forth. The term *all generated
beings* (sabbê bhûtâ) he uses with reference to those that are generated
or produced from an egg or from the womb. The term *all living beings*
(sabbê *g*îvâ) he uses with reference to rice, barley, wheat, and so
forth; in these he conceives that there is life, because it is their
nature to grow.'

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxvi:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_32) See pp.
[83](sbe4520.htm#page_83), [291](sbe4554.htm#page_291),
[316](sbe4560.htm#page_316), [385](sbe4566.htm#page_385).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxvi:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_33) Grimblot, l.c., p.
174.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_34) Bhandarkar, Report
for 1883-4, p. 95 f.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxviii:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_35) The reticence of
Buddha on the nature of the Nirvâ*n*a may have been wise at his time;
but it was fraught with very important results for the development of
the church. For his followers, having to hold their own against such
split-hair dialecticians as the Brahmanical philosophers, were almost
driven to enunciate more explicit ideas about the great problem which
the founder of the church had left unsolved. The tendency to supply the
crowning stone to an edifice which appeared to have been left unfinished
by the hand of the master, led to the division of the community into
numerous <span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span> sects soon after the
Nirvâ*n*a of Buddha. We need not wonder therefore that in Ceylon, which
is at such a distance from the centre of Brahmanical learning, Buddhists
could retain the doctrine of the Nirvâ*n*a in its original form.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxx:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_36) Another term is
*G*inakalpika, which may be rendered: adopting the standard of the
*G*inas. The Svêtâmbaras say that the *G*inakalpa was early replaced by
the Sthavirakalpa, which allows the use of clothes.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxx:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_37) Fausböll's edition,
p. 398.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxx:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_38) The words sêsakam
purimasamappitâ va pati*kkh*âdenti are not quite clear, but the contrast
leaves no doubt about what is meant. Sêsaka is, I believe, the Pâli for
*s*i*s*naka. If this is right, the above words may be translated: 'they
cover the pudenda wearing (a cloth) about the forepart (of their body).'

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_39) These fasts are
called by the *G*ainas *k*autthabhatta, kha*tth*abhatta, &c. (see e.g.
Aupapâtika Sûtra, ed. Leumann, § 30 I A); and monks observing them,
*k*autthabhattiya, *kh*a*tth*abhattiya, &c. (see e.g. Kalpa Sûtra,
'Rules for Yatis,' § 21 ff.)

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_40) As I have said
above and in note [2](sbe4536.htm#fn_565). [p.
119](sbe4524.htm#page_119), this difference has probably given rise to
the division of the church into Svêtâmbaras and Digambaras. But these
two branches have not directly grown out of the party of Pâr*s*va and
that of Mahâvîra; for both recognise Mahâvîra as a Tîrthakara.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxxii:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_41) Mahâvîra must have
been a great man in his way, and an eminent leader among his
contemporaries; he owed the position of a Tîrthakara probably not so
much to the sanctity of his life, as to his success in propagating his
creed.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxxiv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_42) That this was the
primitive conception of the Vedic Hindus has been noted by Oldenberg,
Die Religion des Veda, p. 317 f.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxxv:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_43) See his Report for
1883-84., p. 116 f.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxxvii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_44) See Indische
Studien, vol. xvii, p. 116 ff.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxxviii:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_45) See my edition of
the Kalpa Sûtra, p. 119.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxxviii:2](sbe4502.htm#fr_46) Literally
Six-owl. The number six refers to the six categories of the
Vai*s*êshika.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxxviii:3](sbe4502.htm#fr_47) Part i, p. 290.
But in the legend translated by Professor Leumann, l.c., p. 121, his
Gôtra is called *Kh*aûlû.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxxix:1](sbe4502.htm#fr_48) According to an old
tradition (see Indische Studien, vol. xvi, p. 223) the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga
is studied in the fourth year after the ordination of a monk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Lecture. On Discipline](sbe4503)
