[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4519)  [Next](sbe4521) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EIGHTEENTH LECTURE.

###### SA*ÑG*AYA <span id="fr_211"></span>[4](#fn_210).

In the town of Kâmpilya there was a king, named Sa*ñg*aya, who possessed
numerous troops and war-chariots; once he went a-hunting. (1)

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

He was surrounded on all sides by a large host of horses, elephants,
chariots, and footmen. (2)

He chased the deer on horseback in the Kêsara-park of Kâmpilya; and
intent on his sport he killed there the frightened deer. (3)

Now in the Kêsara-park there was a houseless ascetic intent on sacred
study and meditating on the Law. (4)

Annihilating sinful inclinations <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_211),
he meditated in the Asphôta-bower <span id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_212).
But the king killed the deer that fled to him. (5)

Now the king on horseback came quickly there; he saw the killed deer and
saw the monk there. (6)

The king in his consternation (thought) 'I had nearly hurt the monk;
ill-fated and cruel me that is mad for the sport.' (7)

Having dismissed his horse, the king bowed respectfully to the monk's
feet (saying), 'Forgive me this, Reverend sir.' (8)

But the venerable monk, being plunged in silent meditation, made no
reply to the king, who, therefore, was seized with fear. (9)

'I am Sa*ñg*aya; answer me, Reverend sir; a monk might by the fire of
his wrath reduce millions of men to ashes.' (10)

'Be without fear, O king; but grant safety to others also; in this
transient world of living beings, why are you addicted to cruelty? (11)

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

'As you must, of necessity, one day part with everything, in this
transient world of living beings, why do you cling to kingly power? (12)

'Transient like a stroke of lightning are life and beauty, which you
love so much; you do not comprehend what will benefit you in the next
life. (13)

'Wives and children, friends and relations, all are dependent on a man
during his life; but they will not follow him in death. (14)

'The sons, in great sorrow, will remove the corpse of their father (to
the cemetery); and so will parents do with their sons and relations; O
king, do penance! (15)

'O king, other men, glad, and pleased, and well attired, will enjoy the
riches (the deceased) had amassed, and will dally with the wives he had
so well guarded. (16)

'And whatever actions he has done, good or wicked ones, with their
Karman he will depart to his next existence.' (17)

Then the king was taught the Law by this monk, and was filled with a
great desire for purity, and disregard of worldly objects. (18)

Sa*ñg*aya gave up his kingly power and adopted the faith of the *G*inas
in the presence of the venerable monk Gardabhâli. (19)

A Kshattriya, who had abandoned his kingdom and had turned monk, said to
him: 'As you look so happy in outward appearance, you must have peace of
mind. (20)

'What is your name, to which Gôtra do you belong, and why have you
become an ascetic <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_213)?

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How do you
venerate the enlightened ones <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_214), and
how did you come to be called a well-behaved (monk)? (21)

"My name is Sa*ñg*aya; I belong to the Gôtra of Gôtama; my teacher is
Gardabhâli, who is conversant with the sacred lore and good conduct.
(22)

"O great sage, the man of limited knowledge talks foolishly on these
four heads <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_215), viz. the existence of
the soul, its non-existence, idolatry, and the inefficiency of
knowledge. (23)

"This has been declared by him who is enlightened, wise, liberated,
conversant with the sacred lore and good conduct, who is truthful and of
right energy. (24)

"Men who commit sins will go to hell; but those who have walked the road
of righteousness, will obtain a place in heaven. (25)

"All this delusive talk (of the heretics) is untrue and without any
meaning; I live and walk about according to the rules of self-control.
(26)

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

"I know all these heresies to be contemptible; I know that there will be
a life hereafter, and I know my Self. (27)

"I was an illustrious god in the Mahâprâ*n*a heaven, and reached old age
as we here would say of a man who is a hundred years old; but in heaven,
hundred years consist of as many Mahâpâlîs of Pâlîs <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_216). (28)

"Descending from the Brahmalôka, I was born as a man. I know exactly the
length of my life as well as that of other men. (29)

"A monk should abandon the manifold doctrines (of heretics), and his own
fancies, and such deeds as are productive of evil everywhere. One should
live up to this wisdom <span id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_217). (30)

"I keep clear of the (superstitious) questions and the spells of laymen,
exerting myself day and night (in the true religion). Thinking thus, one
should practise austerities. (31)

"And what you of a pure mind asked me just now, that has been revealed
by the enlightened one <span id="fr_219"></span>[3](#fn_218); such
knowledge makes part of the creed of the *G*inas. (32)

"A wise man believes in the existence of the soul <span
id="fr_220"></span>[4](#fn_219),

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

he avoids the heresy of the non-existence of the soul; possessing true
faith one should practise the very difficult Law according to the faith.
(33)

"Having learned this pure creed, which is adorned by truth and
righteousness, Bharata <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_220) gave up
Bharatavarsha and all pleasures, and entered the order. (34)

"King Sagara <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_221) also gave up the
ocean-girt Bharatavarsha and his unrivalled kingly power, and reached
perfection through his compassion. (35)

"After having given up Bharatavarsha, the famous universal monarch of
great power, called Maghavan <span id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_222),
entered the order. (36)

"King Sanatkumâra <span id="fr_224"></span>[4](#fn_223), a universal
monarch of great power, placed his son on the throne, and then practised
austerities. (37)

"*S*ânti <span id="fr_225"></span>[5](#fn_224), a universal monarch of
great power, the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

bringer of peace to the world, gave up Bharatavarsha and reached
perfection. (38)

"King Kunthu, the bull of the Aikshvâka race, the widely famed lord,
reached perfection. (39)

"King Ara, after he had given up the sea-girt Bharatavarsha, reached
perfection on becoming exempt from defilement. (40)

"After having given up his large kingdom, his army and war-chariots, his
exquisite pleasures, Mahâpadma <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_225)
practised austerities. (41)

"Having brought the (whole) earth under his sceptre, king
Harishê*n*a <span id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_226), who humbled the pride
(of other kings), reached perfection. (42)

"*G*aya <span id="fr_228"></span>[3](#fn_227), together with thousands
of kings, renouncing the world, practised self-restraint. He

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

reached perfection which has been taught by the *G*inas. (43)

"Da*s*âr*n*abhadra <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_228), giving up his
flourishing kingdom of Dasâr*n*a, turned monk; he renounced the world,
being directed to do so by *S*akra himself. (44)

"Karaka*nd*u was king of Kaliṅga; Dvimukha, of Pa*ñk*âla; Nami, of
Vidêha; Naggati (or rather Nagna*g*it), of Gândhâra <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_229). (45)

"Nami humbled himself, being directed to do so by Sakra himself; the
king of Vidêha left the house and became a *S*rama*n*a. (46)

"These bulls of kings have adopted the faith of the *G*inas; after
having placed their sons on the throne, they exerted themselves as
*S*rama*n*as. (47)

"Udâya*n*a <span id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_230), the bull of the kings
of Sauvîra, renounced the world and turned monk; he entered the order
and reached perfection. (48)

"And thus the king of Kâ*s*i <span id="fr_232"></span>[4](#fn_231),
exerting himself for the best truth, abandoned all pleasures, and hewed
down, as it were, his Karman like a forest. (49)

"And thus king Vi*g*aya <span id="fr_233"></span>[5](#fn_232), whose
sins were not quite annihilated <span id="fr_234"></span>[6](#fn_233),
turned monk after he, the famous man, had quitted his excellent kingdom.
(50)

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

"And thus the royal seer Mahâbala <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_234)
practised severe penance with an undistracted mind, and took upon
himself the glory (of self-control). (51)

"Why should a wise man, for bad reasons, live on earth like a madman,
since those persons (mentioned above) who reached eminence, exerted
themselves strongly? (52)

"I have spoken true words able to promote virtue; some have been saved,
some are being saved, and some will be saved. (53)

"Why should a wise man, for bad reasons, bring affliction upon himself?
He who has become free from all ties and sins, will reach perfection."
(54)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[80:4](sbe4520.htm#fr_211) The commentators
Sanskritise this name in Sa*m*yata. But however appropriate it may be to
a *G*aina, it certainly does not <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> look
like a king's name. The Sanskrit form of the name was probably Sa*ñg*aya
or S*riñg*aya, both of which frequently occur in Sanskrit literature.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[81:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_212) To render âsrava.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[81:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_213) Apphôva in the
original; there are several plants which are called âsphôta.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[82:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_214) Literally, a
Brahman.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[83:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_215) Buddhê, explained
â*k*âryân, preceptors.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[83:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_216) These are the four
great heresies: (1) that of the kriyâvâdinas, who maintain that the soul
exists; (2) that of the akriyâvâdinas, who hold the reverse of the
preceding doctrine; (3) that of the vainayikas, which seems to be
identical with salvation by bhakti; (4) that of the a*gñ*ânavâdinas, who
contend that knowledge is not necessary for salvation, but t a p a s;
this seems identical with the karmapatha. The commentators explain
kriyâvâdina*h* 'those who believe the soul or âtman to be characterised
by the verb to be (i.e. by a permanent and unchangeable existence), and
ascribe to it such qualities as ubiquity or non-ubiquity, activity or
non-activity.' This they treat as heresy, but from Mahâvagga VI, 31, 2
(vol. xvii, p. 109) it is evident that the *G*ainas were considered
kriyâvâdins. The akriyâvâda is also identified with the ksha*n*ikavâda
or doctrine, usually ascribed to Buddhists, that everything has but a
momentary existence and is in the next moment replaced by a facsimile of
itself. About these heresies compare the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga I, 12; II, 2,
77.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[84:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_217) According to the
commentary a pâlî seems to be what is commonly called palyôpamâ, and
mahâpâlî a sâgarôpamâ. However the longest life of a god in Brahmalôka
is but ten Sâgarôpamâs, see below, XXXVI, 225. The construction of the
verse is very involved, but the drift of it cannot be mistaken.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[84:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_218) ii vi*gg*âm
a*n*usa*mk*arê. I believe that vi*gg*âm here stands for vidvân, as in
the following verse. The meaning would then be, 'knowing this one should
live as a monk.'

<span id="fn_218"></span>[84:3](sbe4520.htm#fr_219) Buddha.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[84:4](sbe4520.htm#fr_220) The *G*ainas do not
deny the existence of the soul, but the unalterable character of the
soul. Hence they object to the kriyâvâda.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[85:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_221) Bharata was the
eldest son of *Ri*shabha, the first Tîrthakara. He became the first
*K*akravartin, or universal monarch, and resided in Ayôdhyâ. At his
renunciation he was ordered by Indra himself to pluck out five handfuls
of his hair as is the custom of *G*aina monks on entering the order.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[85:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_222) Sagara, king of
Ayôdhyâ, was, according to the legend contained in the commentary (see
R. Fick, Eine jainistische Bearbeitung der Sagara-Sage, Kiel, 1889), the
younger brother of A*g*ita, the second Tîrthakara. He became the second
*K*akravartin, and, in the end, he was ordained by A*g*ita. The *G*aina
legend seems to be but a strangely distorted version of the story of
Sagara told in the first book of the Râmâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[85:3](sbe4520.htm#fr_223) Maghavan, son of
king Samudravi*g*aya of *S*râvastî, and his wife Bhadrâ, became the
third *K*akravartin.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[85:4](sbe4520.htm#fr_224) Sanatkumâra, son of
king A*s*vasêna of Hastinâpura, and his wife Sahadêvî, became the fourth
*K*akravartin. The adventures of Sanatkumâra are told in a Prâk*ri*t
legend, which I have published in my Ausgewählte Erzählungen in
Mâhârâsh*t*rî, Leipzig, x886, p. 20 ff.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[85:5](sbe4520.htm#fr_225) *S*ânti was the
sixteenth Tîrthakara, Kunthu the seventeenth, and <span id="page_86">p.
86</span> Ara the eighteenth Tîrthakara. Kunthu sounds strange for a
proper name. I think it just possible that it is a popular or Prâk*ri*t
corruption of Kakutstha, who was an Aikshvâka. As is well known, Râma is
frequently called after him Kâkutstha, and so are other kings of the
same line, in which he stands as the twenty-fifth according to the list
in the Râmâya*n*a I, 70.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[86:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_226) Mahâpadma was the
ninth *K*akravartin. His elder brother was Vish*n*ukumâra, who was
ordained by Suvrata, a disciple of Munisuvrata, the twentieth
Tîrthakara. He wrenched the sovereignty of the world from Namu*k*i,
minister of his father Padmôttara, who had ascended the throne, by
making him promise as much of his territory as he could cover with three
strides. This is the Brahmanical story of Vish*n*u and Bali, for whom
the *G*ainas have substituted Namu*k*i. According to them the minister
Namu*k*i was, in a disputation, defeated by the *G*aina monks, and to
revenge himself on them, he ordered them to quit his kingdom as soon as
he got it.--Mahâpadma's residence was Hastinâpura.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[86:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_227) Harishê*n*a, son of
king Mahâhari of Kâmpilya, became the tenth *K*akravartin.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[86:3](sbe4520.htm#fr_228) *G*aya, son of king
Samudravi*g*aya of Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, became the eleventh *K*akravartin.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[87:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_229) King
Da*s*âr*n*abhadra was a contemporary of Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[87:2](sbe4520.htm#fr_230) These are the four
Pratyêkabuddhas; see [p. 35](sbe4510.htm#page_35), note
[2](sbe4511.htm#fn_130).

<span id="fn_230"></span>[87:3](sbe4520.htm#fr_231) The story of
Udâya*n*a (or perhaps Uddâyana) will be found in my Ausgewählte
Erzählungen in Mâhârâsh*t*rî, p. 28 ff. He was contemporary with
Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[87:4](sbe4520.htm#fr_232) He was Nandana, the
seventh Baladêva, son of king Agni*s*ikha of Benares.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[87:5](sbe4520.htm#fr_233) He was the son of
king Brahmarâ*g*a of Dvârakâvatî, and eldest brother of the Vâsudêva
Dvip*ri*sh*t*a or Dvipush*t*i.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[87:6](sbe4520.htm#fr_234) To render
a*n*a*tth*akati, of which the commentators offer several explanations,
rendering it anârttâkîrti and anash*t*akîrti. A various reading
â*n*a*tth*âkitti is mentioned, and explained â*gñ*â-artha-âk*ri*ti.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[88:1](sbe4520.htm#fr_235) Mahâbala was the son
of king Bala of Hastinâpura. He lived at the time of Vimala, the
thirteenth Tîrthakara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nineteenth Lecture. The Son of M*ri*gâ](sbe4521)
