[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4560)  [Next](sbe4562) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

## THIRTEENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### THE REAL TRUTH.

I shall now expound, in accordance with truth, the various qualities of
men; I shall explain the virtue and peace of the good, the vices and the
unrest of the wicked. (1)

Having learned the Law from men who exert themselves day and night, from
the Tathâgatas <span id="fr_953"></span>[1](#fn_946), they neglect the
conduct in which they had been instructed, and speak rudely to their
teacher. (2)

Those who explain the pure doctrine according to their individual
opinion, falsify it in repeating (it after their teachers); those who
speak untruth from pride of knowledge, are not capable of many virtues.
(3)

Those who on being questioned conceal the truth, defraud themselves of
the real good. These bad men who believe themselves good and are full of
deceit, will go to endless punishment. (4)

He who is of a wrathful disposition and calls everything by its true
name <span id="fr_954"></span>[2](#fn_947), who renews a composed
quarrel, will, like a blind man groping his way with

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

a stick, do harm to himself, being still subject to passion and
possessing evil Karman. (5)

He who is quarrelsome and talks improperly, is not impartial nor beyond
the reach of deceit <span id="fr_955"></span>[1](#fn_948); but he who
executes the commands (of his teacher) and controls himself, sees
nothing but the truth and is exempt from deceit. (6)

He who conforms to admonitions however many he receives, is kindly
spoken, subtile, manly, noble, and a well-doer; (such a man) is
impartial and beyond the reach of deceit. (7)

He who believes himself rich in control, or inconsiderately vaunts his
knowledge, or fancies himself purified by austerities, will look upon
other men as shadows. (8)

He is always turned round by delusion, and has no place in the Gôtra
where the Vow of Silence is practised (viz. in the *G*aina church), who
not being awakened puts himself forward in order to gain honours through
something different from control. (9)

A Brâhma*n*a or Kshattriya by birth, a scion of the Ugra <span
id="fr_956"></span>[2](#fn_949) race or a Li*kkh*avi <span
id="fr_957"></span>[3](#fn_950), who enters the order eating alms given
him by others, is not stuck up on account of his renowned Gôtra. (10)

His pedigree on his mother's and on his father's

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

side will be of no use to him, nothing will but right knowledge and
conduct: when after becoming a monk he acts like a householder, he will
not succeed in obtaining final Liberation. (11)

If a poor monk subsisting on the meanest food is attached to vanities,
desires fame, and not being awakened, (makes his monkhood) a means of
subsistence, he will suffer again and again (in the Circle of Births).
(12)

A monk, who is eloquent, speaks very well, has bright ideas, is clever,
possesses a fine intellect, and has purified his soul, may (perhaps)
despise other men on account of his intellect. (13)

Thus an intelligent monk who puts himself forward, has not yet realised
carefulness; or rather he is a weak-minded man who elated by his success
blames other men. (14)

A monk should combat pride of genius, pride of sanctity, pride of birth,
and (pride of good) living, which is enumerated as the fourth; such a
man is wise and of the right stuff. (15)

The wise leave off these kinds of pride, the pious do not cultivate
them; the great sages are above all such things as Gôtra (&c.), and they
ascend to the place where there is no Gôtra at all (viz. to Môksha).
(16)

A monk who looks upon his body as on a corpse and fully understands the
Law, will on entering a village or a town distinguish between what may
be accepted and what may not, and will not be greedy of food or drink.
(17)

A monk having conquered aversion to control and delight in sensual
objects, living in company with many brethren or leading a single life,
should

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

silently repeat to himself: 'A man must come and go (according to his
Karman) alone' (i.e. without deriving any help from others). (18)

Knowing it by intuition or having learned it from others, one should
teach the Law which is a benefit to men; the pious are not given to
blameable sinful practices. (19)

If (a monk preaches the Law to some one) whose disposition he has not
ascertained, that man, not believing (what he is taught), will become
angry, and may wound him in a way that will shorten or end his life.
When he knows their disposition, he (may teach) others the truth. (20)

A wise man by suppressing his Karman and his will should renounce his
interest in everything else. (For) through the objects of sight (i.e.
senses) which are causes of danger, men come to harm. Knowing the truth
with regard to movable and immovable beings (a monk should exert
himself) <span id="fr_958"></span>[1](#fn_951). (21)

Not desiring honour or fame, he should say nothing to anybody either to
please or to irritate him. Avoiding all evils, a monk should without
embarrassment and passion (preach the Law). (22)

Well considering (his duties) in accordance with truth, abstaining from
doing injury to living beings, not desiring life nor death, he should
wander about released from the Circle (of Births). (23)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_946"></span>[320:1](sbe4561.htm#fr_953) According to the
commentators, *G*aina teachers, inclusive of the schismatical ones, are
intended. Tathâgata is a synonym of Tîrthakara and Buddha; but it is
less frequently used by the *G*ainas than by the Bauddhas with whom it
is of very common occurrence.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[320:2](sbe4561.htm#fr_954) *G*aga*tth*abhâsî =
*g*agadarthabhâshin. *S*îlâṅka proposes also *g*ayârthabhâshin, who
speaks dogmatically.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[321:1](sbe4561.htm#fr_955) A*gh*a*ñgh*apatta.
*Gh*a*ñgh*â (tempest) = mâyâ.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[321:2](sbe4561.htm#fr_956) Concerning the
Ugras, see above, [p. 71](sbe4517.htm#page_71), note
[2](sbe4517.htm#fn_190).

<span id="fn_950"></span>[321:3](sbe4561.htm#fr_957) Le*kkh*ai.
According to the *G*ainas the Li*kkh*avi and Mallakis were the chiefs of
Kâ*s*i and Kô*s*ala. They seem to have succeeded the Aikshvâkas, who
ruled there in the times of the Râmâya*n*a. The Li*kkh*avis became a
powerful race, who held the supreme power in Eastern India during many
centuries after the beginning of our era.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[323:1](sbe4561.htm#fr_958) The commentators
make out the following meaning: A wise (preacher) should ascertain (his
hearers’) occupations and inclinations, and then (try to) better their
evil disposition. Through the objects of sight which are causes of
danger, men are led astray. A wise man knowing (the disposition of his
hearers should preach the Law which is wholesome) to all living beings
whether they move or not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 14: The Nirgrantha](sbe4562)
