[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4537)  [Next](sbe4539) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRTY-SIXTH LECTURE.

###### ON LIVING BEINGS AND THINGS WITHOUT LIFE <span id="fr_584"></span>[2](#fn_581).

Now learn from me with attentive minds the division of Living Beings and
Things without life <span id="fr_585"></span>[3](#fn_582), which a monk
must know who is to exert himself in self-control. (1)

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

The Living Beings and the Things without life make up this world (Lôka);
but the space where only Things without life are found is called the
Non-world (Alôka). (2)

The Living Beings and the Things without life will be described with
reference to 1. substance, 2. place, 3. time, and 4. development. (3)

A. Things without life.

Things without life are 1. possessing form, 2. formless; the formless
things are of ten kinds, those possessing form are of four kinds. (4)

\(1\) The ten kinds of formless things: 1. Dharma, 2. its divisions, 3.
its indivisible parts; 4. Adharma, 5. its divisions, 6. its indivisible
parts; 7. space,

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 8. its divisions,
9. its indivisible parts, and 10. time <span
id="fr_586"></span>[1](#fn_583). (5, 6)

Dharma and Adharma are co-extensive with the World (Lôka); space fills
the World and the Non-world (Alôka); time exists in what is called the
place of time <span id="fr_587"></span>[2](#fn_584). (7)

Dharma, Adharma, and Space are ever without beginning and end. (8)

And time also, if regarded as a continuous flow <span
id="fr_588"></span>[3](#fn_585), is called so (i.e. without beginning
and end); but with regard to an individual thing it has a beginning and
an end. (9)

\(2\) The four kinds of things possessing form are 1. compound things,
2. their divisions, 3. their indivisible parts, and 4. atoms <span
id="fr_589"></span>[4](#fn_586). (10)

Compound things and atoms occur as individual things and apart (or
different from others) <span id="fr_590"></span>[5](#fn_587), in the
whole world and in parts of the world; this is their distribution with
regard to place. (11)

Subtile things occur all over the world, gross things only in a part of
it.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

I shall now give their fourfold division with regard to time. (12)

With regard to the continuous flow (or development of a thing) it is
without beginning and without end; but with regard to its existence (as
an individual thing) it has both a beginning and an end <span
id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_588). (13)

The longest duration of Things without life possessing form is an
immeasurable <span id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_589) period; the shortest
one Samaya. (14)

The longest interruption <span id="fr_593"></span>[3](#fn_590) in the
existence of Things without life possessing form is an endless time; the
shortest one Samaya. (15)

Their development is fivefold: with regard to 1. colour, 2. smell, 3.
taste, 4. touch, and 5. figure. (16)

Those which develop with regard to colour are of five kinds: 1. black,
2. blue, 3. red, 4. yellow, 5. white. (17)

Those which develop with regard to smell are of two kinds: 1.
sweet-smelling substances, and 2. of bad smell. (18)

Those which develop with regard to taste are of five kinds: 1. bitter,
2. pungent, 3. astringent, 4. sour, and 5. sweet. (19)

Those which develop with regard to touch are of eight kinds: 1. hard, 2.
soft, 3. heavy, 4. light, 5. cold, 6. hot, 7. smooth, and 8. rough.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

In this way the substances have been declared, which develop with regard
to touch. (20, 21)

Those which develop with regard to figure are of five kinds: 1.
globular, 2. circular, 3. triangular, 4. square, and 5. long. (22)

Things of black colour are subdivided with regard to smell, taste,
touch, and figure. (23)

The same subdivision holds good with blue, red, yellow, and white
things. (24-27 <span id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_591))

Things of sweet smell are subdivided with regard to colour, taste,
touch, and figure; things of bad smell are similarly subdivided. (28,
29)

Things of bitter taste are subdivided with regard to colour, smell,
touch, and figure. (30)

The same subdivision holds good with pungent, astringent, sour, and
sweet things. (31-34)

Things of hard touch are subdivided with regard to colour, smell, taste,
and figure. (35)

The same subdivision holds good with soft, heavy, light, cold, hot,
smooth, and rough things. (36-42)

Things of globular figure are subdivided with regard to colour, smell,
taste, and touch. (43)

The same subdivision holds good with circular, triangular, square, and
long things. (44-47)

Thus the division of Things without life has briefly been told.

B. Living Beings.

I shall now, in due order, deliver the division of living beings. (48)

Living beings are of two kinds: 1. those still

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

belonging to the Sa*m*sâra, and 2. the perfected souls (siddhas). The
latter are of many kinds; hear me explain them. (49)

\(1\) The perfected souls are those of women, men, hermaphrodites, of
orthodox, heterodox, and householders. (50)

Perfection is reached by people of the greatest, smallest, and middle
size <span id="fr_595"></span>[1](#fn_592), on high places, underground,
on the surface of the earth, in the ocean, and in water (of rivers,
&c.). (51)

Ten hermaphrodites reach, at the same time, perfection, twenty women,
one hundred and eight men; four householders, ten heterodox, and one
hundred and eight orthodox monks. (52, 53)

Two individuals of the greatest size reach perfection (simultaneously),
four of the smallest size, and one hundred and eight of the middle size.
(54)

Four individuals reach perfection (simultaneously) on high places, two
in the ocean, three in water, twenty underground, and one hundred and
eight on the surface of the earth. (55)

From where are the perfected souls debarred? Where do the perfected
souls reside? Where do they leave their bodies, and where do they go, on
reaching perfection? (56)

Perfected souls are debarred from the non-world (Alôka); they reside on
the top of the world; they leave their bodies here (below), and go
there, on reaching perfection. (57)

Twelve Yô*g*anas above the (Vimâna) Sarvârtha is

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the place called Îshatprâgbhâra <span id="fr_596"></span>[1](#fn_593),
which has the form of an umbrella; (there the perfected souls go). (58)

It is forty-five hundred thousand Yô*g*anas long, and as many broad, and
it is somewhat more than three times as many in circumference. (59)

Its thickness is eight Yô*g*anas, it is greatest in the middle, and
decreases <span id="fr_597"></span>[2](#fn_594) toward the margin, till
it is thinner than the wing of a fly. (60)

This place, by nature pure, consisting of white gold, resembles in form
an open umbrella, as has been said by the best of *G*inas. (61)

(Above it) is a pure blessed place (called *S*îtâ), which is white like
a conch-shell, the aṅka-stone <span id="fr_598"></span>[3](#fn_595), and
Kunda-flowers; a Yô*g*ana thence is the end of the world. (62)

The perfected souls penetrate the sixth part <span
id="fr_599"></span>[4](#fn_596) of the uppermost Krô*s*a of the
(above-mentioned) Yô*g*ana. (63)

There at the top of the world reside the blessed perfected souls, rid of
all transmigration, and arrived at the excellent state of perfection.
(64)

The dimension of a perfected soul is two-thirds of the height which the
individual had in his last existence. (65)

The perfected souls, considered singly, (as individuals) have a
beginning but no end; considered

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

collectively <span id="fr_600"></span>[1](#fn_597) (as a class) they
have neither a beginning nor an end. (66)

They have no (visible) form, they consist of Life throughout, they are
developed into knowledge and, faith, and they possess paramount
happiness which admits of no comparison. (67)

They all dwell in one part of the world, and have developed into
knowledge and faith, they have crossed the boundary of the Sa*m*sâra,
and reached the excellent state of perfection. (68)

\(2\) Living beings which still belong to the Sa*m*sâra, are of two
kinds: a. movable, and b. immovable ones: the immovable ones are of
three kinds: (69)

α. Earth Lives, β. Water Lives, and γ. plants; these are the three kinds
of immovable living beings; now learn from me their subdivision. (70)

α. The Earth Lives are of two kinds: subtile and gross; and both of them
are either fully developed or undeveloped. (71)

The gross and fully developed are of two kinds: viz. smooth or rough.
The smooth ones are of seven kinds: (72)

Black, blue, red, yellow, white, pale dust, and clay.

The rough ones are of thirty-six kinds: (73)

Earth, gravel, sand, stones, rocks, rock-salt <span
id="fr_601"></span>[2](#fn_598), iron, copper, tin, lead, silver, gold,
and diamond; (74)

Orpiment, vermilion, realgar, Sâsaka <span
id="fr_602"></span>[3](#fn_599), antimony,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

coral, Abhrapa*t*ala, Abhravâluka; these are varieties of gross (Earth-)
bodies and kinds of precious stones. (75)

Hyacinth, natron, Aṅka, crystal, Lôhitâksha, emerald, Masâragalla,
Bhu*g*amô*k*aka, and sapphire; (76)

*K*andana, red chalk, Ha*m*sagarbha, Pulaka <span
id="fr_603"></span>[1](#fn_600), and sulphur; *K*andraprabha, lapis
lazuli, *G*alakânta, and Sûryakânta <span
id="fr_604"></span>[2](#fn_601). (77)

These thirty-six kinds of 'rough earth' have been enumerated. The
'subtile earth' is but of one kind, as there is no variety. (78)

The subtile species is distributed all over the world, but the gross one
(is found) in a part of the world only.

I shall now give their fourfold division with regard to time. (79)

With regard to the continuous flow (or development of an earth-body) it
is without a beginning and end; but with regard to its existence in its
present form it has both a beginning and end. (80)

Twenty-two thousand years is the longest duration of the Earth Lives;
its shortest is less than a muhûrta. (81)

The longest duration of the body of Earth Lives, if they do not leave
that (kind of) body <span id="fr_605"></span>[3](#fn_602), is an

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

immeasurable time; the shortest is less than one muhûrta. (82)

The longest interval between an Earth Life's leaving its body (till its
return to it), is an endless time; the shortest less than one Muhûrta.
(83)

Their varieties, caused by (difference of) colour, smell, taste, touch,
figure, and place, are (counted) by thousands. (84)

β. The Water Lives are of two kinds: subtile and gross ones; and both of
them are either fully developed or undeveloped. (85)

The gross and fully developed ones are of five kinds: pure water, dew,
exudations, fog, and ice. (86)

The 'subtile water' is of one kind, as there is no variety. The subtile
species is distributed all over the world, but the gross one (is found)
in a part of the world only. (87)

With regard to the continuous flow, &c. (as in verse 80).

Seven thousand years is the longest duration of the life of Water Lives,
&c. (as in verse 81). (All that has been said of Earth Lives in verses
82-84 is verbally repeated here of 'Water Lives.') (88-92)

γ. Plants are of two kinds: subtile and gross ones; and both of them are
either fully developed or undeveloped. (93)

The gross and fully developed plants are of two kinds: either many have
one body in common, or each has its own body. (94)

Those who severally have their own body are of

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

many kinds: trees, shrubby plants <span id="fr_606"></span>[1](#fn_603),
shrubs <span id="fr_607"></span>[2](#fn_604), big plants <span
id="fr_608"></span>[3](#fn_605), creeping plants <span
id="fr_609"></span>[4](#fn_606), grass <span
id="fr_610"></span>[5](#fn_607); (95)

Palms <span id="fr_611"></span>[6](#fn_608), plants of knotty stems or
stalks <span id="fr_612"></span>[7](#fn_609), mushrooms <span
id="fr_613"></span>[8](#fn_610), water-plants, annual plants <span
id="fr_614"></span>[9](#fn_611), and herbs <span
id="fr_615"></span>[10](#fn_612). These are called plants possessing
severally their own body. (96)

Those plants of which many have one body in common are of many
kinds <span id="fr_616"></span>[11](#fn_613): Âluya <span
id="fr_617"></span>[12](#fn_614), Mûlaya <span
id="fr_618"></span>[13](#fn_615), ginger; (97)

Harilî, Sirilî, Sassirilî, *G*âvaî, Kêyakandalî <span
id="fr_619"></span>[14](#fn_616), onion, garlic, plantain-tree,
Ku*d*uvvaya <span id="fr_620"></span>[15](#fn_617); (98)

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

Lôhi*n*îhûya, Thîhûya, Tuhaga, Ka*n*ha <span
id="fr_621"></span>[1](#fn_618), Va*gg*akanda <span
id="fr_622"></span>[2](#fn_619), Sûra*n*aya <span
id="fr_623"></span>[3](#fn_620); (99)

Assaka*nn*î <span id="fr_624"></span>[4](#fn_621), Sîhaka*nn*î,
Musu*ndh*î, turmeric, and many others besides. (100)

The subtile plants are of one kind, as there is no variety. Subtile
plants are distributed all over the world, gross plants (are found) in a
. part of the world only. (101)

With regard to the continuous flow, &c. (as in verse 80). (102)

Ten thousand years is the longest duration of the life of plants, &c.
(All as in verses 81-84. Substitute plants, which are here called
vanaspati and panaka, for Earth-bodies.) (103-106)

Thus the three kinds of immovable living beings have briefly been told.
I shall now explain in due order the three kinds of movable living
beings. (107)

*b*. The movable beings are α. the Fire Lives, α. the Wind Lives, and γ.
those with an organic body; these are the three kinds of movable beings.
Learn from me their subdivision. (108)

α. The Fire Lives are of two kinds: subtile and gross ones; and both of
them are either fully developed or undeveloped. (109)

The gross and fully developed ones are of many kinds: coal, burning
chaff, fire, and flame of fire; (110)

Meteors, and lightning, and many other kinds besides.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

The subtile Fire Lives are but of one kind, as there is no variety.
(111)

The subtile species, &c. (see verses 79-84. Substitute Fire Lives for
Earth Lives. In verses 114 f., corresponding to verses 81, 89, and 103,
read: 'the longest duration of the life of Fire Lives is three days,'
&c.; the rest as above). (112-117)

β. The Wind Lives are of two kinds, &c. (as in verse 109). (118)

The gross and fully developed ones are of five kinds: squalls <span
id="fr_625"></span>[1](#fn_622), whirlwinds <span
id="fr_626"></span>[2](#fn_623), thick winds <span
id="fr_627"></span>[3](#fn_624), high winds, low winds; (119)

And the Sa*m*vartaka <span id="fr_628"></span>[4](#fn_625) wind, &c.;
thus they are of many kinds <span id="fr_629"></span>[5](#fn_626).

The subtile Wind Lives are but of one kind, as there is no variety.
(120)

The subtile species, &c. (as above 79-84. Substitute Wind Lives for
Earth Lives. In verse 123, corresponding to 114, read: 'the longest
duration of the life of Wind Lives is three thousand years;' the rest as
above). (121-126)

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

γ. Movable beings with organic bodies (i.e. animals) are of four kinds:
i. those possessing two organs of sense, ii. those with three organs,
iii. those with four organs, iv. those with five organs. (127)

i\. Beings with two organs of sense are of two kinds: subtile and gross
ones. Both are either fully developed or undeveloped. Learn from me
their subdivision <span id="fr_630"></span>[1](#fn_627). (128)

Worms, Sômaṅgala, Alasa <span id="fr_631"></span>[2](#fn_628),
Mâivâhaya <span id="fr_632"></span>[3](#fn_629), Vâsîmuha <span
id="fr_633"></span>[4](#fn_630), shells, conches, Saṅkhâ*n*aga <span
id="fr_634"></span>[5](#fn_631); (i 29)

Pallôya, A*n*ullaya, cowries, leeches, *G*âlaga, and *K*anda*n*a <span
id="fr_635"></span>[6](#fn_632). (130)

These and others are the many kinds of beings with two organs of sense.
All of them live in a part of the world only, they do not live
everywhere. (131)

With regard to the continuous flow, &c. (as in verse 80). (132)

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The duration of the life of beings with two organs of sense is twelve
years at the utmost; the shortest is less than a muhûrta. (133)

The longest duration of the body of beings with two organs of sense is a
Sa*m*khyêya (or measurable time) if they do not leave that (kind of)
body; the shortest is less than one muhûrta. (134)

135, 136 = 83, 84. Substitute 'beings with two organs of sense' for
Earth Lives.

ii\. Beings with three organs of sense are of two kinds: subtile and
gross ones. Both are either fully developed or undeveloped. Learn from
me their subdivision. (137)

Kunthu <span id="fr_636"></span>[1](#fn_633), ants, bugs, Ukkala, white
ants, Ta*n*ahâra, Ka*tth*ahâra, Mâlûga <span
id="fr_637"></span>[2](#fn_634), Pattahâraga; (138)

Duga shining like lead, which originate in the kernel of the
cotton-seed, Sadâvarî, centipedes, Indagâiya; (139)

Cochineal, &c. Thus they are of many kinds. All of them live in a part
of the world only, they do not live everywhere. (140)

141-145 = 132-136. (Substitute 'beings with three organs of sense.' The
longest duration, &c., is forty-nine days, verse 142 = 133.)

iii\. Beings with four organs of sense are of two kinds: subtile and
gross ones. Both are either

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

developed or undeveloped. Learn from me their subdivision. (146)

Andhiya, Pottiyâ, flies, mosquitoes, bees, moths, Dhiṅka*n*a and
Kaṅka*n*a; (147)

Kukku*d*a <span id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_635), Siṅgirî*d*î,
Nandâvatta <span id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_636), scorpions, *D*ôla,
crickets, Viralî, A*kkh*ivêhaya; (148)

A*kkh*ila, Sâhaya A*kkh*irôdaya, Vi*k*itta, Vi*k*ittapattaya <span
id="fr_640"></span>[3](#fn_637), Uhil*mg*aliyâ, *G*alakârî, Nîyâ, and
Tantavagâiyâ. (149)

These and others are the beings with four organs of sense. All of them,
&c. (the rest as in verses 131-136. Substitute 'beings with four organs
of sense.' The longest duration, &c., is six months, verse 152 = 133).
(150-155)

iv\. Beings with five organs of sense are of four kinds: denizens of
hell, animals <span id="fr_641"></span>[4](#fn_638), men, and gods.
(156).

*a*. Denizens of hell are of seven kinds according to the seven hells;
they are called Ratnâbha, *S*arkarâbha, Vâlukâbha; (157)

Paṅkâbha, Dhûmâbha, Tamâ, and Tamatamâ. Thus the seven kinds of denizens
of hell have been enumerated. (158)

All the (denizens of hell) live in a part of the

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

world only; they do not live everywhere, &c. (as in verses 79 and 80).
(159, 160)

In the first hell the longest duration of their life is one Sâgarôpamâ;
the shortest is ten thousand years. (161)

In the second hell the longest duration of their life is three
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is one Sâgarôpamâ <span
id="fr_642"></span>[1](#fn_639). (162)

In the third hell the longest duration of their life is seven
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is three Sâgarôpamâs. (163)

In the fourth hell the longest duration of their life is ten
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is seven Sâgarôpamâs. (164)

In the fifth hell the longest duration of their life is seventeen
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is ten Sâgarôpamâs. (165)

In the sixth hell the longest duration of their life is twenty-two
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is seventeen Sâgarôpamâs. (166)

In the seventh hell the longest duration of their life is thirty-three
Sâgarôpamâs; the shortest is twenty-two Sâgarôpamâs. (167)

The length of the life of denizens of hell is also that of their
continuance in the same kind of body, with regard both to the longest
and shortest duration of it. (168)

Verses 169, 170 = 83, 84. (Substitute, denizens of hell.)

*b*. The animals which possess five organs of sense are of two kinds,
those which originate by generatio

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

aequivoca <span id="fr_643"></span>[1](#fn_640), and those which are
born from the womb. (171)

Either of them are again of three kinds: 1. aquatic, 2. terrestrial, and
3. aerial animals. Learn from me their subdivision. (172)

1\. Fishes, tortoises, crocodiles, Makaras, and Gangetic porpoises are
the five kinds of aquatic animals. (173)

174, 175 = 159, 160.

The longest duration of the life of aquatic animals is one Krore of
former years <span id="fr_644"></span>[2](#fn_641); the shortest is less
than one muhûrta. (176)

The longest duration of the aquatic animals’ continuance in the (same
kind of body) is from two to nine <span id="fr_645"></span>[3](#fn_642)
Krores of former years. (177)

178 = 83.

2\. Quadrupeds and reptiles are the two kinds of terrestrial animals.
The quadrupeds are of four kinds; listen to my description of them:
(179)

\(1\) Solidungular animals, as horses, &c.;

\(2\) Biungular animals, as cows, &c.;

\(3\) Multiungular animals, as elephants, &c.;

\(4\) Animals having toes with nails, as lions, &c. (180)

The reptiles are of two kinds: 1. those which walk on their arms, as
lizards, &c., and 2. those which move on their breast, as snakes, &c.
Both are again of many kinds. (181)

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

182, 183 = 159, 160.

The longest duration of the life of terrestrial animals is three
Palyôpamâs; the shortest is less than one muhûrta. (184)

The longest duration of the terrestrial animals’ continuance in the
(same kind of) body is three Palyôpamâs plus from two to nine Krores of
former years; the shortest is less than one muhûrta. (185)

186 = 83.

3\. Winged animals are of four kinds: those with membranous wings <span
id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_643), those with feathered wings, those with
wings in the shape of a box <span id="fr_647"></span>[2](#fn_644), and
those (which sit on) outspread wings <span
id="fr_648"></span>[3](#fn_645). (187)

188, 189 = 159, 160.

The longest duration of the life of aerial animals is an
Asa*m*khyêya-part of a Palyôpamâ <span id="fr_649"></span>[4](#fn_646);
the shortest is less than one muhûrta. (190)

The longest duration (of the aerial animals’ continuance in the same
kind of body) is an Asa*m*khyêya-part of a Palyôpamâ plus from two to
nine Krores of former years; the shortest is less than one muhûrta.
(191)

192, 193 = 159, 160.

*c*. Men are of two kinds; listen to my description of them: men
originating by generatio aequivoca <span
id="fr_650"></span>[5](#fn_647), and men born from the womb. (194)

Those who are born from the womb are of three

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

kinds: those living in the Karmabhûmi <span
id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_648), those living in the Akarmabhûmi, and
those living on the minor continents <span
id="fr_652"></span>[2](#fn_649). (195)

They have, in the same order, fifteen <span
id="fr_653"></span>[3](#fn_650), thirty <span
id="fr_654"></span>[4](#fn_651), and twenty-eight subdivisions. These
are the numbers handed down. (196)

Men originating by generatio aequivoca are of as many kinds. They all
live but in a part of the world. (197)

Verses 198-202 = 183-186. (Substitute, 'men' for 'terrestrial animals.')

*d*. Gods are of four kinds; listen to my description of them: 1.
Bhaumêyikas; 2. Vyantaras; 3. *G*yôtishkas; 4. Vaimânikas. (203)

There are ten kinds of Bhavanavâsins ( = Bhaumêyikas), eight of those
who live in woods ( = Vyantaras), five of *G*yôtishkas, and two of
Vaimânikas. (204)

1\. The Bhavanavâsins are: the Asura-, Nâga-, Suvar*n*a-, Vidyut-,
Agni-, Dvîpa-, Udadhi-, Vâta-, and Gha*n*ika-(Kumâras <span
id="fr_655"></span>[5](#fn_652)). (2(15)

2\. The eight kinds of Vyantaras are: Pi*s*â*k*as,

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhûtas, Yakshas,
Râkshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahôragas, and Gandharvas. (206)

3\. The moons, the suns, the Nakshatras, the planets, and the hosts of
stars are the fivefold dwellings of the *G*yôtishkas. (207)

4\. The Vaimânika gods are of two kinds: *a*´. those who are born in the
heavenly Kalpas, and *b*´. those who are born in the regions above
them <span id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_653). (208)

*a*´. The former are of twelve kinds: those who live in (the following
Kalpas, after which they are named): Saudharma, Î*s*âna, Sanatkumâra,
Mâhêndra, Brahmalôka, and Lantaka; (209)

Mahâ*s*ukla, Sahasrâra, Ânata, Prâ*n*ata <span
id="fr_657"></span>[2](#fn_654), Âra*n*a, and A*k*yuta. These are the
gods who are born in Kalpas. (210)

*b*´. The gods who are born in the regions above the Kalpas are of two
kinds: α´. the Graivêyakas <span id="fr_658"></span>[3](#fn_655), and
β´. the Anuttaras <span id="fr_659"></span>[4](#fn_656). The Graivêyakas
are of nine kinds. (211)

α´. The lowest of the lowest, the middle of the lowest, the highest of
the lowest, the lowest of the middle; (212)

The middle of the middle, the highest of the middle, the lowest of the
highest, the middle of the highest; (213)

The highest of the highest. These are the Graivêyaka gods.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

β´. The Vi*g*ayas, the Vai*g*ayantas, the *G*ayantas, the Aparâ*g*itas
(214)

And the Sarvârthasiddhas: these are the five kinds of Anuttara gods.

These and others besides are the many kinds of Vaimânika gods. (215-217
= 159-160)

The longest duration of the life of the Bhaumêyika gods is somewhat more
than a Sâgarôpamâ, the smallest ten thousand years. (218)

The longest duration of the life of the Vyantaras is one Palyôpamâ, the
shortest is ten thousand years. (219)

The longest duration of the life of the *G*yôtishkas is one Palyôpamâ
plus one hundred thousand years, the shortest is the eighth part of a
Palyôpamâ. (220)

The longest duration of life in the Saudharmakalpa is two Sâgarôpamâs,
the shortest is one Palyôpamâ. (221)

(In the same way (*a*) the longest, and (*b*) the shortest duration of
life in the remaining Kalpas and heavenly regions is given in the
original. I give in the sequel the substance only of each verse.)

In Î*s*âna Kalpa (*a*) is somewhat more than a Sâgarôpamâ, (*b*)
somewhat more than a Palyôpamâ. (222)

In Sanatkumâra Kalpa (*a*) is seven, (*b*) two Sâgarôpamâs. (223)

In Mâhêndra Kalpa (*a*) is somewhat more than seven Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*)
somewhat more than two. (224)

In Brahmalôka Kalpa (*a*) is ten Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) seven. (225)

In Lantaka Kalpa (*a*) is fourteen Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) ten. (226)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

In Mahâ*s*ukla Kalpa(*a*) is seventeen Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) fourteen <span
id="fr_660"></span>[1](#fn_657). (227)

In Sahasrâra Kalpa (*a*) is eighteen Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) seventeen. (228)

In Ânata Kalpa (*a*) is nineteen Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) eighteen. (229)

In Prâ*n*ata Kalpa (*a*) is twenty Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) nineteen. (230)

In Âra*n*a Kalpa (*a*) is twenty-one Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) twenty. (231)

In A*k*yuta Kalpa (*a*) is twenty-two Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) twenty-one.
(232)

In the first (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-three Sâgarôpamâs,
(*b*) twenty-two. (233)

In the second (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-four Sâgarôpamâs,
(*b*) twenty-three. (234)

In the third (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-five Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*)
twenty-four. (235)

In the fourth (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-six Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*)
twenty-five. (236)

In the fifth (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-seven Sâgarôpamâs,
(*b*) twenty-six. (237)

In the sixth (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-eight Sâgarôpamâs,
(*b*) twenty-seven. (238)

In the seventh (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is twenty-nine Sâgarôpamâs,
(*b*) twenty-eight. (239)

In the eighth (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is thirty Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*)
twenty-nine. (240)

In the ninth (Graivêyika region) (*a*) is thirty-one Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*)
thirty. (241)

In the four heavens (of the Anuttara gods), beginning

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

with Vi*g*aya <span id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_658), (*a*) is
thirty-three Sâgarôpamâs, (*b*) thirty-one. (242)

In the great Vimâna Sarvârtha(siddha) there is no difference between the
longest and shortest duration of life, but it is always thirty-three
Sâgarôpamâs. (243)

The longest and shortest duration of the gods' (continuance in the same
kind of) body is equal to that which has been given for their life.
(244, 245 <span id="fr_662"></span>[2](#fn_659), 246 = 159, 160)

We have described the Living Beings, the worldly and the perfected ones,
and we have described the Lifeless Things, those possessing form and
those without form. (247)

Having thus learned (the nature of) living beings and lifeless things
which is in accordance with the principles of reasoning <span
id="fr_663"></span>[3](#fn_660), and believing in it, a sage should
delight in self-control. (248)

After having lived as a *S*rama*n*a many years, a sage should mortify
himself <span id="fr_664"></span>[4](#fn_661) by the following religious
exercises. (249)

The longest duration of the mortification is twelve years; the middle,
one year; and the shortest, six months. (250)

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

In the first four years he should abstain from dressed food <span
id="fr_665"></span>[1](#fn_662), in the second four years he should keep
various fasts. (251)

During two years he should eat Â*k*âmla <span
id="fr_666"></span>[2](#fn_663) at the end of every second fast; in the
following half year he should keep not too long fasts. (252)

In the second half of the year he should keep long fasts. During the
whole year he should eat but small portions of Â*k*âmla <span
id="fr_667"></span>[2](#fn_663). (253)

During the (last) year a sage should make the ends of two consecutive
fasts meet <span id="fr_668"></span>[3](#fn_664), and should break his
fast after half a month or a whole month, (till he dies). (254)

The following (Bhâvanâs), Kandarpa-, Abhiyôgika-, Kilvisha-, Môha-, and
Asuratva-(Bhâvanâs <span id="fr_669"></span>[4](#fn_665)), will lead to
evil ways (i.e. bad births); they are obnoxious at the time of death.
(255)

Those souls who cherish heretical opinions, commit sins, and kill living
beings, will not reach Bôdhi at the time of death. (256)

Those souls who cherish orthodox opinions, do not commit sins, and are
enveloped in white Lê*s*yâ, will reach Bôdhi at the time of death. (257)

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

Those souls who cherish heretical opinions, commit sins, and are
enveloped in black Lê*s*yâ, will not reach Bôdhi at the time of death.
(258)

Those who love the creed of the *G*inas and piously practise it, will be
pure and free from the soil (of passions), and will (in due time) get
out of the Circle of Births. (259)

The miserable men who do not know the creed of the *G*inas, will many
times commit unholy suicide and die against their will. (260)

Those who are well versed in the sacred lore and possess much knowledge,
who awaken piety (in others) and appreciate their good qualities, are
for this very reason worthy to hear the doctrine of salvation <span
id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_666). (261)

He who by ribaldry and buffoonery, by his comical habits and appearance,
by jests and words amuses other people, realises the Kandarpa-Bhâvanâ.
(262)

Those who practise spells and besmear their body with ashes for the sake
of pleasure, amusement, or power, realise the Abhiyôgika-Bhâvanâ <span
id="fr_671"></span>[2](#fn_667). (263)

The deceitful man who reviles the sacred lore, the Kêvalins, the teacher
of the Law, the Satigha, and the monks, realises the Kilvishika-Bhâvanâ.
(264)

He who is continuously angry, and who puts his faith in prognostics,
realises the Asuratva-Bhâvanâ. (265)

Those who use weapons, eat poison, throw themselves

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

into fire or water, and use things not prescribed by the rules of good
conduct, are liable to be born and to die again and again. (Such persons
realise the Môha-Bhâvanâ.) (266)

The enlightened and liberated *Gñ*ât*ri*(putra) has thus delivered
Thirty-six Lectures of the Uttarâdhyayana <span
id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_668), which the pious <span
id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_669) approve of. (267)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[206:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_584) It will perhaps not
be amiss to give a systematic list of the subjects treated in this
lecture. The numbers refer to the verses.

A. Things without life, 3-48.  
   (1) Without form, 5-9.  
   (2) With form, 10-48.  
B. Living Beings, 48-246.  
   (1) Perfected souls, 50-68.  
   (2) Mundane Beings, 69-246.  
      *a*. Immovable Beings, 71-106.  
         α. Earth Lives, 71-84.  
         β. Water Lives, 85-92.  
         γ. Plants, 93-106.  
      *b*. Movable Beings, 108-246.  
         α. Fire Lives, 109-117.  
         β. Wind Lives, 118-126.  
         γ. Beings with an organic body, 127-246. <span id="page_207">p.
207</span>  
            i. With two organs of sense, 128-136.  
            ii. With three organs of sense, 137-145.  
            iii. With four organs of sense, 146-155.  
            iv. With five organs of sense, 156-246.  
               *a*. Denizens of hell, 157-170.  
               *b*. Animals (vertebratae), 171-193.  
                  1. Aquatic, 171-178.  
                  2. Terrestrial, 179-186.  
                  3. Aerial, 187-193.  
               *c*. Men, 194-202.  
               *d*. Gods, 203-246.  
                  1. Bhavanavâsin, 205, 218.  
                  2. Vyantara, 206, 219.  
                  3. *G*yôtishka, 207, 220.  
                  4. Vaimânika, 208, 221-246.  
                     *a*´. Living in Kalpas, 209, 210, 221-232.  
                     *b*´. Living above the Kalpas, 255.  
                        α´. Graivêyakas, 212, 213, 233-241.  
                        β´. Anuttaras, 214-217, 242, 243.

Appendix, 247-267.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[206:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_585) *G*îva and a*g*îva.
The former is defined in the Dîpikâ as upayôgavân in accordance with our
text, XXVIII, 10; the latter is also called pudgala.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[208:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_586) It is here called
addhâ-samaya, which may be translated real-time. It has no divisions or
parts as the other things, because of time only the present moment is
existent. And a moment cannot be divided.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[208:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_587) Time is only
present in the two and a half continents inhabited by men, and the
oceans belonging to them; beyond this sphere there is no time or, as the
Dîpikâ correctly remarks, no divisions of time.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[208:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_588) Sa*m*tati*m* pappa
= sa*m*tatim prâpya.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[208:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_589) According to the
Dîpikâ, we should have but two divisions, viz.: 1. compound things
(skandha, aggregates of atoms), and 2. not aggregated atoms; for Nos. 2
and 3 of our text are but subdivisions of No. 1.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[208:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_590) Êgattê*n*a
puhuttê*n*a = katvêna p*ri*thaktvêna.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[209:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_591) The meaning of this
verse is that a thing, as far as its material cause is concerned, has
always existed, and will ever exist under one form or other, but that
the individual thing in its present form has but a limited existence.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[209:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_592) Asa*m*khakâlam. See
above, [p. 42](sbe4512.htm#page_42), note [2](sbe4512.htm#fn_142).

<span id="fn_590"></span>[209:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_593) Antaram; the
interval between the thing being removed from its proper scene and
reaching it again (Ava*k*ûri and Dîpikâ).

<span id="fn_591"></span>[210:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_594) Each verse has the
same form as 23, only that another colour is substituted for black. In
the same way the subdivisions of smells, &c., are given. I give the
first verse of each class and abbreviate the rest.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[211:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_595) The greatest size
(ôgâha*n*â) of men is 500 dhanus, or 2,000 cubits, the smallest one
cubit.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[212:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_596) Similar details are
given in the Aupapâtika Sûtra (ed. Leumann, § 163 f.).

<span id="fn_594"></span>[212:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_597) According to the
commentator, who quotes scripture, it decreases an aṅgula every
Yô*g*ana.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[212:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_598) Compare XXXIV, 9
and note. The commentators here treat aṅka as a separate substance
without offering any explanation. The Dîpikâ writes sîtâ instead of
*s*îtâ.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[212:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_599) Or 333⅓ dhanus.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[213:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_600) The words
translated, 'considered singly' and 'considered collectively,' are
êgattê*n*a and puhuttê*n*a = êkatvêna and p*ri*thaktvêna. Their usual
meaning has been given in verse 11.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[213:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_601) Lava*n*âsê?

<span id="fn_599"></span>[213:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_602) Not in our
dictionaries; the commentators only say that it is a kind of mineral,
dhâtuvi*s*êsha. I give the Sanskrit names of <span id="page_214">p.
214</span> the stones, which cannot be identified with certainty, or are
not contained in the index of R. Garbe's work on the Indian minerals,
Leipzig, 1882.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[214:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_603) A medicinal earth,
commonly called Kaṅkush*th*a.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[214:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_604) The enumeration
contains thirty-nine, instead of thirty-six items, as stated in verses
73 and 76.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[214:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_605) The meaning seems
to be that souls of earth-bodies live in <span id="page_215">p.
215</span> earth-bodies, the time stated in verse 82, while the length
of each separate existence is determined in verse 81.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[216:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_606) Gu*kkh*a; it is
explained to denote such plants from the single root or bulb of which
come forth many stalks, e.g. V*ri*ntâka, Solanum Melongena.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[216:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_607) Gulma, similar to
the preceding class, but bringing forth twigs or stems, instead of
stalks, e.g. Navamâlikâ, Jasminum Sambac, Ka*n*avîra, &c.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[216:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_608) Latâ, as Lotus,
Pandanus, &c.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[216:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_609) Vallî, as gourds,
Piper Betel, &c.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[216:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_610) T*rin*a, grass. But
of the two examples given in the commentary, *g*u*ñg*uka is not in our
dictionaries, and Ar*g*una denotes usually a tree, Terminalia Arjuna.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[216:6](sbe4538.htm#fr_611) Valaya; so called
from their foliation.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[216:7](sbe4538.htm#fr_612) Parvaga, as
sugar-cane.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[216:8](sbe4538.htm#fr_613) Kuha*n*a, plants
which cause the earth to burst, as sarpa*kkh*atra, mushroom
(toad-stool).

<span id="fn_611"></span>[216:9](sbe4538.htm#fr_614) Ôshadhi, such
plants as die after having brought forth seed, as rice, &c.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[216:10](sbe4538.htm#fr_615) Haritakâya, as
ta*nd*ulêya, &c.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[216:11](sbe4538.htm#fr_616) The plants in the
following list are, according to the commentary, mostly bulbs, 'well
known in the countries where they grow.' Many of them are not in our
dictionaries. I give the Prâk*ri*t form of their names, and note the
Sanskrit equivalent when it can be identified.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[216:12](sbe4538.htm#fr_617) Âluka,
Amorphophallus Campanulatus.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[216:13](sbe4538.htm#fr_618) Mûlaka, radish.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[216:14](sbe4538.htm#fr_619) A various reading
has for the last two words (which might be differently divided), â
paikkêikandalî. The Kandalî, the plantain-tree, occurs in the next line
again.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[216:15](sbe4538.htm#fr_620) A various reading
is Ku*d*ambaya.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[217:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_621) Krish*n*akanda,
Nymphaea Rubra.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[217:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_622) Va*g*rakanda of the
Sanskrit Koshas.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[217:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_623) *S*ûra*n*a, Arum
Campanulatum.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[217:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_624) A*s*vakar*n*â.
A*s*vakar*n*a is a tree, Vatika Robusta.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[218:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_625) Utkalikâ,
intermittent winds.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[218:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_626) Ma*nd*alikâ =
vâtôlî.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[218:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_627) According to the
comm. these winds blow on the oceans which are situated below the
Ratnaprabhâ-hell, or which support the heavenly Vimânas, and have the
density of snow. Perhaps the notion is similar to that of the Hindu
astronomers, who fancied that the heavenly bodies were set in motion by
cords of wind called pravaha. See Sûrya Siddhânta II, 3.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[218:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_628) This seems to be
the hurricane which causes the periodical destruction of the world. But
Dêvêndra says: Sa*m*vartaka is a wind which carries grass, &c., from the
outside into a particular place.'

<span id="fn_626"></span>[218:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_629) Though in the
preceding verse it was said that there are five kinds of wind, six are
enumerated, and more are implied by the '&c:

<span id="fn_627"></span>[219:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_630) As many of these
lower animals are not known to us, I give the Prâk*ri*t names of those
which I cannot identify. Dêvêndra says: 'Some of them are well known,
the remaining ones are to be explained according to tradition.' The
explanation of this passage in the Ava*k*ûri is fuller.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[219:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_631) A small poisonous
animal. Petersburg Dictionary, s. v. According to the *G*îvavi*k*âra
V*ri*tti V, 16, they are earth-snakes (bhûnâga), which originate in the
rainy season when the sun is in A*s*leshâ, i.e. about the beginning of
July.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[219:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_632) Mât*ri*vâhaka.
According to the description of the Ava*k*ûri, the larvae of Phryganeae
seem intended. According to the *G*îvavi*k*âra V*ri*tti, they are called
*k*û*d*êlî in Guzeratî.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[219:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_633) Vâsîmukha,
explained: Whose mouth is like a chisel or adze. There are many insects,
e.g. the Curculionidae, which suit this description.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[219:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_634) *S*aṅkhânaka, very
small, conch-like animals.'

<span id="fn_632"></span>[219:6](sbe4538.htm#fr_635) *K*anda*n*a =
Akâv*ri*ksha (?). According to the *G*îvavi*k*âra V*ri*tti V, 16, they
are animals living in water and on land, and are called Aksha in the
vernacular (samayabhâshâ).

<span id="fn_633"></span>[220:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_636) Kunthu or
animalcules are also called A*n*uddharî, see concerning them, Kalpa
Sûtra, Rules for Yatis, § 44, part i, p. 304.--I give in the text the
Prâk*ri*t form of the words I cannot identify.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[220:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_637) Mâlûka is the name
of a plant, Ocimum Sanctum. It must, of course, here denote some
animal.--The *G*îvavi*k*âra enumerates many other animals, lice, bugs,
different kinds of larvae living in dung, corn, &c.--The t*rin*ahâra,
kâsh*th*ahâra, and patrahâra seem to denote different kinds of ants.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[221:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_638) Kukku*t*a is given
in the dictionaries as the name of a small lizard.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[221:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_639) Nandyâvarta occurs
elsewhere as the name of a particular fish, and of a shell. It can be
neither of these in our passage, as both animals belong to other classes
than the *K*aturindriyas.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[221:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_640) Etymologically:
with many-coloured wings. Probably butterflies are intended.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[221:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_641) Tirikkha = tiryak.
Apparently only the higher animals are intended by this term, the lower
animals, from the insects downwards, being enumerated in the preceding
classes of beings.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[222:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_642) It will be seen
that the longest duration of life in each hell is always equal to the
shortest in the preceding one.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[223:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_643) Sammûr*kh*ima. They
grow by assimilating the materials in their surrounding. According to a
second explanation, their internal organ does not fully develop.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[223:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_644) See page
[16](sbe4505.htm#page_16), note [1](sbe4505.htm#fn_88).

<span id="fn_642"></span>[223:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_645) This is, according
to the Ava*k*ûri, the meaning of puhutta*m* p*ri*thaktvam.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[224:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_646) E.g. the
*k*arma*k*a*t*akas or bats.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[224:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_647) Samudga. These
interesting birds are said to live outside the Mânushôttara, or world
inhabited by men.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[224:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_648) The comm. do not
tell us what kind of birds is intended.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[224:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_649) The comm. do not
explain this expression; the meaning, therefore, is doubtful. I give a
literal translation of it in this and the next. verse.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[224:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_650) See page
[223](#page_223), note [1](#fn_640), on verse 171.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[225:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_651) Concerning
Karmabhûmi, see part i, p.195, note 1. The Ava*k*ûri places the
Akarmabhûmi first, but the next verse proves that it originally stood in
the second place.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[225:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_652) These are seven
groups of islands situated off the eastern and western ends of the
Himâlaya, which are inhabited by fabulous races.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[225:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_653) According to the
Ava*k*ûri, there are five kinds in Bharata, five in Airâvata, and five
in Vidêha.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[225:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_654) Viz. five in each
of the six Akarmabhûmis: Haimavata, Harivarsha, Haira*n*yavata,
Dêvakuru, and Uttarakuru.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[225:5](sbe4538.htm#fr_655) According to the
commentaries the word kumâra is to be supplied after each of the ten
names.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[226:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_656) They are termed
Kalpôpaga and Kalpâtîta.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[226:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_657) I am not sure that
these are the correct Sanskrit forms of the two last Kalpas; the
original has Â*n*aya and Pâ*n*aya.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[226:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_658) I.e. those who live
on the neck (grîva), i.e. on the upper part of the universe.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[226:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_659) I.e. those above
whom there dwell no other gods.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[228:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_660) From this verse to
verse 241 the length of life increases by one Sâgarôpamâ in each
following class of gods.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[229:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_661) Viz. Vi*g*aya,
Vai*g*ayanta, *G*ayanta, and Aparâ*g*ita.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[229:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_662) Two MSS. (A and D)
insert after verses 245 the following two verses: The longest interval
between a Graivêyika's leaving his rank in Ânata, &c., and being again
born to it, is an endless time, the shortest is from two to nine years.
In the case of Anuttara gods the longest interval is a Sâgarôpamâ plus
one Sa*m*khyêya, the shortest is from two to nine years.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[229:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_663) Naya.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[229:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_664) The last
self-mortification, sa*m*lekhanâ, which is to end with death, is
intended here. Some details about it will be found in part i, p. 74 ff.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[230:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_665)
Vigaî-ni*gg*ûha*n*a. The meaning is that at the end of his fasts a monk
should eat â*k*âmla, nirvik*ri*tika, &c. In the Ava*k*ûri a verse from
the Ni*s*îtha*k*ûrni is quoted, which gives the same rule for the second
four years.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[230:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_667) Âyâma = â*k*âmla.
Is this the same thing as the âyâmaga = â*k*âmaka mentioned XV, 13? See
above, [p. 72](sbe4517.htm#page_72), note [2](sbe4517.htm#fn_192).

<span id="fn_664"></span>[230:3](sbe4538.htm#fr_668) Kô*d*îsahiyam
âyamam = kô*t*isahitam â*k*âmlam. The commentators give two explanations
of this phrase: (1) Having fasted one day, one should take â*k*âmla on
the next day; (2) one should on the second day continue to abstain from
â*k*âmla.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[230:4](sbe4538.htm#fr_669) The definition of
these technical terms is given below, verses 262 ff.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[231:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_670) Âlôkanâ =
*s*rama*n*aphalam. The Ava*k*ûri renders the last phrase: 'They are able
to bring about the salvation of others.' The original, however, has
sôu*m*, to hear.'

<span id="fn_667"></span>[231:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_671) The Abhiyôgidêvas
are genii who serve the gods. This Bhâvanâ leads to being born as an
Abhiyôgidêva; the next two Bhâvanâs, as a Kilvishadêva and an Asura.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[232:1](sbe4538.htm#fr_672) Uttara*ggh*âê in
the original. The commentators give uttara here the meaning pradhâna,
'best, prominent.' The same explanation is given by the scholiast on the
Nandî (Weber, Sacred Literature of the Jains, p.124). Perhaps the name
refers to the tradition that Mahâvîra recited at the time of his death
the thirty-six apu*tth*a-vâgara*n*âi*m*, which are identified by one
commentator of the Kalpa Sûtra (Lives of the *G*inas, § 147) with the
Uttarâdhyayana; for uttara also means 'last.'

<span id="fn_669"></span>[232:2](sbe4538.htm#fr_673) Bhavasiddhîya =
bhavasiddhika, explained by bhavya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 1: The Doctrine, Chapter 1](sbe4539)
