[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4524)  [Next](sbe4526) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TWENTY-THIRD LECTURE <span id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_312).

###### KÊ*S*I AND GAUTAMA.

There was a *G*ina, Pâr*s*va <span id="fr_314"></span>[3](#fn_313) by
name, an Arhat, worshipped by the people, who was thoroughly enlightened
and omniscient, a prophet of the Law, and a *G*ina. (1)

And there was a famous disciple of this Light of

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the World, the young *S*rama*n*a Kê*s*i, who had completely mastered the
sciences and right conduct. (2)

He possessed the light of *S*ruta and Avadhi knowledge <span
id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_314), and was surrounded by a crowd of
disciples; wandering from village to village he arrived in the town of
*S*râvastî. (3)

In the district of that town there is a park, called Tinduka; there he
took up his abode in a pure place to live and sleep in. (4)

Now at that time there lived the Prophet of the Law, the *G*ina, who in
the whole world is known as the venerable Vardhamâna. (5)

And there was a famous disciple of this Light of the World, the
venerable Gautama by name, who had completely mastered the sciences and
right conduct. (6)

He knew the twelve Aṅgas, was enlightened, and was surrounded by a crowd
of disciples; wandering from village to village he too arrived in
*S*râvastî. (7)

In the district of that town there is a park Kôsh*th*aka; there he took
up his abode in a pure place to live and sleep in. (8)

The young *S*rama*n*a Kê*s*i and the famous Gautama, both lived there,
protecting themselves (by the Guptis) and being careful. (9)

The pupils of both, who, controlled themselves, who practised
austerities, who possessed virtues, and who protected their Self, made
the following reflection: (10)

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

'Is our Law the right one, or is the other Law <span
id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_315) the right one? are our conduct and
doctrines right, or the other? (it)

'The Law as taught by the great sage Pâr*s*va, which recognises but four
vows <span id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_316), or the Law taught by
Vardhamâna, which enjoins five vows? (12)

'The Law which forbids clothes (for a monk), hr that which (allows) an
under and upper garment? Both pursuing the same end, what has caused
their difference?' (13)

Knowing the thoughts of their pupils, both Kê*s*i and Gautama made up
their minds to meet each other. (14)

Gautama, knowing what is proper and what is due to the older section (of
the church), went to the Tinduka park, accompanied by the crowd, his
pupils. (15)

When Kê*s*i, the young monk, saw Gautama approach, he received him with
all becoming attention. (16)

He at once offered Gautama the four pure kinds of straw and hay <span
id="fr_318"></span>[3](#fn_317) to sit upon. (17)

Kê*s*i, the young *S*rama*n*a, and the famous Gautama, sitting together,
shone forth with a lustre like that of sun and moon. (18)

There assembled many heretics out of curiosity, and many thousands of
laymen; (19)

Gods, Dânavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Râkshasas,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and Kinnaras (assembled there), and there came together invisible
ghosts <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_318) too. (20)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'I want to ask you something, holy man.' Then to
these words of Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: "Sir, ask
whatever you like." Then with his permission Kê*s*i spoke to Gautama:
(21, 22)

'The Law taught by the great sage Pâr*s*va, recognises but four vows,
whilst that of Vardhamâna enjoins five. (23)

'Both Laws pursuing the same end, what has caused this difference? Have
you no misgivings about this twofold Law, O wise man?' (24)

Then to these words of Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: "Wisdom
recognises the truth of the Law and the ascertainment of true things.
(25)

"The first <span id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_319) saints were simple but
slow of understanding, the last saints prevaricating and slow of
understanding, those between the two simple and wise; hence there are
two forms of the Law <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_320). (26)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

"The first could but with difficulty understand the precepts of the Law,
and the last could only with difficulty observe them, but those between
them easily understood and observed them." (27)

'Well, Gautama, you possess wisdom, you have destroyed my doubt; but I
have another doubt which you must explain to me, Gautama. (28)

'The Law taught by Vardhamâna forbids clothes, but that of the great
sage Pâr*s*va allows an under and upper garment. (29)

'Both Laws pursuing the same end, what has caused this difference? Have
you no misgivings about this twofold Law, O wise man?' (30)

To these words of Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: "Deciding the
matter by their superior knowledge, (the Tîrthakaras) have fixed what is
necessary for carrying out the Law. (31)

"The various outward marks (of religious men) have been introduced in
order that people might recognise them as such; the reason for the
characteristic marks is their usefulness for religious life and their
distinguishing character. (32)

"Now the opinion (of the Tîrthakaras) is that knowledge, faith. and
right conduct are the true causes of final liberation, (and not the
outward marks)." (33)

'Well, Gautama, you possess wisdom, you have destroyed my doubt; but I
have another doubt, which you must explain to me, Gautama. (34)

'Gautama, you stand in the midst of many

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

thousand (foes) who make an attack on you; how have you vanquished
them <span id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_321)? (35)

"By vanquishing one, five are vanquished; by vanquishing five, ten are
vanquished; by this tenfold victory, I vanquish all foes." (36)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama: 'Whom do you call a foe?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (37)

"Self is the one invincible foe, (together with the four) cardinal
passions <span id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_322), (viz. anger, pride,
deceit, and greed, they are five) and the (five) senses (make ten).
These (foes), O great sage, I have regularly vanquished." (38)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (19)

'We see many beings in this world who are bound by fetters; how have you
got rid of your fetters and are set free, O sage?' (40)

"Having cut off all fetters, and having destroyed them by the right
means, I have got rid of my fetters and am set free, O sage." (41)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama: 'What do you call fetters?'

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (42)

"Love, hatred, &c., are heavy fetters, attachment is a dangerous one;
having regularly destroyed them, I live up to the rules of conduct."
(43)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (44)

'O Gautama, in the innermost heart there grows a plant which brings
forth poisonous fruit; how have you torn it out?' (45)

"I have thoroughly clipped that plant, and torn it out altogether with
its roots; thus I have got rid of the poisonous fruit." (46)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call that plant?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (47)

"Love of existence is that dreadful plant which brings forth dreadful
fruit; having regularly torn it out, I live pleasantly." (48)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (49)

'Gautama, there is blazing up a frightful fire which burns <span
id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_323) the embodied beings; how have you put it
out?' (50)

"Taking water, excellent water, from (the river) produced by the great
cloud, I always pour it over my body; thus sprinkled the fire does not
burn me." (51)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call the fire?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (52)

"The passions are the fire; knowledge, a virtuous life, and penances are
the water; sprinkled

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

with the drops of knowledge the fire of the passions is extinguished and
does not burn me." (53)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (54)

'The unruly, dreadful, bad horse, on which you sit, runs about, Gautama!
how comes it to pass that it does not run off with you?' (55)

"I govern it well in its course by the bridle of knowledge; it does not
go astray with me, it keeps to the right path." (56)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call this horse?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (57)

"The mind is that unruly, dreadful, bad horse; I govern it by the
discipline of the Law (so that it becomes a well-) trained
Kambô*g*a-steed <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_324)." (58)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (59)

'There are many bad roads in this world, which lead men astray; how do
you avoid, Gautama, going astray as you are on the road?' (60)

"They all are known to me, those who are in the right path and those who
have chosen a wrong path; therefore I do not go astray, O sage!" (61)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call the path?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (62)

"The heterodox and the heretics have all chosen a wrong path; the right
path is that taught by the *G*inas; it is the most excellent path." (63)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (64)

'Is there a shelter, a refuge, a firm ground for the beings carried away
by the great flood of water? do you know the island, O Gautama?' (65)

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

"There is a large, great island in the midst of water, which is not
inundated by the great flood of water." (66)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call this island?' To these words
of Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (67)

"The flood is old age and death, which carry away living beings; Law is
the island, the firm ground, the refuge, the most excellent shelter."
(68)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (69)

'On the ocean with its many currents there drifts a boat; how will you,
Gautama, on board of it reach the opposite shore?' (70)

"A boat that leaks will not reach the opposite shore; but a boat that
does not leak, will reach it." (71)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call this boat?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (72)

"The body is the boat, life is the sailor, and the Circle of Births is
the ocean which is crossed by the great sages." (73)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (74)

'In this dreadfully dark gloom there live many beings; who will bring
light into the whole world of living beings?' (75)

"The spotless sun has risen which illuminates the whole world; he will
bring light into the whole world of living beings." (76)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What do you call this sun?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (77)

"Risen has he who put an end to the Circle of

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Births, the
omniscient *G*ina, the luminary, who brings light into the whole world
of living beings." (78)

'Well, Gautama, &c. (as in verse 28). (79)

'Do you, O sage, know a safe, happy, and quiet place for living beings
which suffer from pains <span id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_325) of body
and mind?' (80)

"There is a safe place in view of all, but difficult of approach, where
there is no old age nor death, no pain nor disease." (81)

Kê*s*i said to Gautama, 'What is  this place called?' To these words of
Kê*s*i Gautama made the following reply: (82)

"It is what is called Nirvâ*n*a, or freedom from pain, or perfection,
which is in view of all; it is the safe, happy, and quiet place which
the great sages reach. (83)

"That is the eternal place, in view of all, but difficult of approach.
Those sages who reach it are free from sorrows, they have put an end to
the stream of existence." (84)

'Well, Gautama, you possess wisdom, you have destroyed my doubt;
obeisance to you, who are not troubled by doubts, who are the ocean, as
it were, of all Sûtras.' (85)

After his doubt had been solved, Kê*s*i, of enormous sanctity, bowed his
head to the famous Gautama. (86)

And in the pleasant (Tinduka park) he sincerely adopted the Law of the
five vows, which was proclaimed by the first Tîrthakara, according to
the teaching of the last Tîrthakara. (87)

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

In that meeting of Kê*s*i and Gautama, knowledge and virtuous conduct
were for ever brought to eminence, and subjects of the greatest
importance were settled. (88)

The whole assembly was greatly pleased and fixed their thoughts on the
right way. They praised Kê*s*i and Gautama: 'May the venerable ones show
us favour!' (89)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_312"></span>[119:2](sbe4525.htm#fr_313) In this lecture we
have a very interesting legend about the way in which the union of the
old church of Pâr*s*va and the new church of Mahâvîra was brought about.
A revival of this ancient difference seems to have caused the united
church afterwards to divide again into the present *S*vêtâmbara and
Digambara sects. They do not continue the two primitive churches, but
seem to have grown out of the united church.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[119:3](sbe4525.htm#fr_314) Pâr*s*va is the
last but one Tîrthakara, his Nirvâ*n*a took place 250 years before that
of Mahâvîra. This statement, which has been generally accepted, is,
however, in seeming contradiction to the account of our text, according
to which a disciple of Pâr*s*va, who is called a young monk
kumâra-*s*rama*n*a, met Gautama, i.e. Sudharman, the disciple of
Mahâvîra. We therefore must take the word disciple, sîse, as
paramparâ*s*ishya, that is not in its literal sense. See note
[3](#fn_320), [p. 122](#page_122).

<span id="fn_314"></span>[120:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_315) These are the
second and third kinds of knowledge according to the *G*aina
classification. *S*ruta is the knowledge derived from the sacred books,
and avadhi is limited or conditioned knowledge. See Bhandarkar, Report,
p. 106.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[121:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_316) Viz. the Law of
Pâr*s*va or the Law of Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[121:2](sbe4525.htm#fr_317) Hence it is called
kâu*gg*âma *k*âturyâma. Chastity (maithunavirama*n*a) was not explicitly
enumerated, but it was understood to be contained in the fourth
commandment: to have no property (aparigraha).

<span id="fn_317"></span>[121:3](sbe4525.htm#fr_318) The four kinds of
straw are: sâlî vîhî koddava râlaga, to which is added hay: ra*nn*e
ta*n*â*n*i.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[122:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_319) Bhûya = bhûta,
explained Vyantara. The vantara or vânamantara are a class of ghosts.
The second part of the word apparently is tara 'crossing,' and the first
seems to contain an accusative va*m* or vâ*n*ama*m* which may be
connected with viha or vyôman 'air.'

<span id="fn_319"></span>[122:2](sbe4525.htm#fr_320) Those under the
first Tîrthakaras.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[122:3](sbe4525.htm#fr_321) The meaning of this
explanation is as follows. As the vow of chastity is not explicitly
mentioned among Pâr*s*va's four vows, but was understood to be
implicitly enjoined by them, it follows that only such men as were of an
upright disposition and quick understanding would not go astray by
observing the four vows literally, i.e. by not abstaining from sexual
intercourse, as it was not expressly forbidden.--The argumentation in
the text presupposes a decay of the morals of the monastic order to have
occurred between Pâr*s*va and Mahâvîra, and this is possible only on the
assumption of a sufficient interval of time having <span
id="page_123">p. 123</span> elapsed between the last two Tîrthakaras.
And this perfectly agrees with the common tradition that Mahâvîra came
250 years after Pâr*s*va.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[124:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_322) This question does
not refer to the difference in doctrines between Pâr*s*va and Mahâvîra,
but is discussed here, as the commentator states, for the benefit of the
pupils of both sages who are engaged in conversation. I think, however,
that this and the following questions are asked and answered here by the
disciples of the two Tîrthakaras for a better reason than that given by
the scholiast. For in them the leading topics of *G*ainism are treated
in a symbolical way. Gautama at once understands the true meaning of the
similes and interprets them to the satisfaction of Kê*s*i. In this way
the unity in doctrine subsisting between the Law of Pâr*s*va and that of
Mahâvîra is demonstrated to the hearers of the dispute, after the
differences had been explained away.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[124:2](sbe4525.htm#fr_323) Kashâya.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[125:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_324) In the original
'fire' is put in the plural because the four kashâyas or cardinal
passions are denoted by it.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[126:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_325) Kanthaka, see
above, p. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[128:1](sbe4525.htm#fr_326) Mâ*n*asê dukkhê
stands for mâ*n*asêhi*m* dukkhêhi*m*. It is an interesting instance of
the dropping of case affixes, which probably was more frequent in the
vernacular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-Fourth Lecture. The Samitis](sbe4526)
