[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4535)  [Next](sbe4537) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRTY-FOURTH LECTURE.

###### ON LÊ*S*YÂ <span id="fr_551"></span>[2](#fn_548).

I shall deliver in due order the Lecture on Lê*s*yâ; hear the nature of
the six Lê*s*yâs (produced by) Karman. (1)

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Hear 1. the names, 2. colours, 3. tastes, 4. smells, 5. touches, 6.
degrees, 7. character, 8. variety, 9. duration, 10. result, and 11. life
of the Lê*s*yâs. (2)

1\. They are named in the following order: black, blue, grey, red,
yellow, and white. (3)

2\. The black Lê*s*yâ has the colour of a rain-cloud, a buffalo's horn,
(the fruit of) Rish*t*aka <span id="fr_552"></span>[1](#fn_549), or the
eye of the wagtail. (4)

The blue Lê*s*yâ has the colour of the blue A*s*ôka <span
id="fr_553"></span>[2](#fn_550), the tail of the *K*asha <span
id="fr_554"></span>[3](#fn_551), or of lapis lazuli. (5)

The grey Lê*s*yâ has the colour of the flower of Atasî <span
id="fr_555"></span>[4](#fn_552), the feathers of the Kôkila, or the
collar of pigeons. (6)

The red Lê*s*yâ has the colour of vermilion, the rising sun, or the bill
of a parrot. (7)

The yellow Lê*s*yâ has the colour of orpiment, turmeric, or the flowers
of *S*a*n*a <span id="fr_556"></span>[5](#fn_553) and Asana <span
id="fr_557"></span>[6](#fn_554). (8)

The white Lê*s*yâ has the colour of a conch-shell, the aṅka-stone <span
id="fr_558"></span>[7](#fn_555), Kunda-flowers <span
id="fr_559"></span>[8](#fn_556), flowing milk, silver, or a necklace of
pearls. (9)

3\. The taste of the black Lê*s*yâ is infinitely more bitter than that
of Tumbaka <span id="fr_560"></span>[9](#fn_557), (the fruit of the)
Nimb-tree <span id="fr_561"></span>[10](#fn_558), or of Rôhi*n*î. (10)

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

The taste of the blue Lê*s*yâ is infinitely more pungent than
Trika*t*uka <span id="fr_562"></span>[1](#fn_559) and Hastipippalî. (11)

The taste of grey Lê*s*yâ is infinitely sourer than that of unripe Mango
and Kapittha <span id="fr_563"></span>[2](#fn_560). (12)

The taste of red Lê*s*yâ is infinitely more pleasant than that of ripe
Mango and Kapittha. (13)

The taste of yellow Lê*s*yâ is infinitely better than that of excellent
wine and various liquors, honey and Mairêyaka <span
id="fr_564"></span>[3](#fn_561). (14)

The taste of white Lê*s*yâ is infinitely better than that of dates,
grapes, milk, candied and pounded sugar. (15)

The smell of the bad Lê*s*yâs (viz. the three first) is infinitely worse
than that of the corpse of a cow, dog, or snake. (16)

The smell of the three good Lê*s*yâs is infinitely more pleasant than
that of fragrant flowers and of perfumes when they are pounded. (17)

5\. The touch of the bad Lê*s*yâs is infinitely worse than that of a
saw, the tongue of a cow, or leaf of the Teak tree. (18)

The touch of the three good Lê*s*yâs is infinitely more pleasant than
that of cotton, butter, or *S*irîsha-flowers <span
id="fr_565"></span>[4](#fn_562). (19)

6\. The degrees <span id="fr_566"></span>[5](#fn_563) of the Lê*s*yâs
are three, or nine,

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

or twenty-seven, or eighty-one, or two hundred and forty-three. (20)

7\. A man who acts on the impulse of the five Âsravas <span
id="fr_567"></span>[1](#fn_564), does not possess the three Guptis, has
not ceased to injure the six (kinds of living beings), commits cruel
acts, is wicked and violent, is afraid of no consequences <span
id="fr_568"></span>[2](#fn_565), is mischievous and does not subdue his
senses--a man of such habits develops the black Lê*s*yâ. (21, 22)

A man of the following qualities: envy, anger, want of self-control,
ignorance, deceit, want of modesty, greed, hatred, wickedness,
carelessness, love of enjoyment; a man who pursues pleasures and does
not abstain from sinful undertakings, who is wicked and violent--a man
of such habits develops the blue Lê*s*yâ. (23, 24)

A man who is dishonest in words and acts, who is base, not upright, a
dissembler and deceiver <span id="fr_569"></span>[3](#fn_566), a
heretic, a vile man, a talker of hurtful and sinful things, a thief, and
full of jealousy--a man of such habits develops the grey Lê*s*yâ. (25,
26)

A man who is humble, steadfast, free from deceit and inquisitiveness,
well disciplined, restrained, attentive to his study and duties <span
id="fr_570"></span>[4](#fn_567), who loves the Law and keeps it, who is
afraid of forbidden things and strives after the highest good--a man of
such habits develops the red Lê*s*yâ. (27, 28)

A man who has but little anger, pride, deceit, and greed, whose mind is
at ease, who controls himself,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

who is attentive to his study and duties, who speaks but little, is
calm, and subdues his senses--a man of such habits develops the yellow
Lê*s*yâ. (29, 30)

A man who abstains from constant thinking about his misery and about
sinful deeds, but engages in meditation on the Law and truth only <span
id="fr_571"></span>[1](#fn_568), whose mind is at ease, who controls
himself, who practises the Samitis and Guptis, whether he be still
subject to passion or free from passion, is calm, and subdues his
senses--a man of such habits develops the white Lê*s*yâ. (31, 32)

8\. There are as many varieties <span id="fr_572"></span>[2](#fn_569) of
Lê*s*yâs as there are Samayas <span id="fr_573"></span>[3](#fn_570) in
the innumerable Avasarpi*n*îs and Utsarpi*n*îs, and as there are
countless worlds. (33)

9\. Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and thirty-three Sâgarôpamâs plus
one muhûrta is the longest duration of the black Lê*s*yâ. (34)

Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and ten Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ
and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya is the longest duration of the blue
Lê*s*yâ. (35)

Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and three Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ
and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya is the longest duration of the grey
Lê*s*yâ. (36)

Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and two Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ
and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya is the longest duration of the red
Lê*s*yâ. (37)

Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and ten Sâgarôpamâs plus one muhûrta is
the longest duration of the yellow Lê*s*yâ. (38)

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

Half a muhûrta is the shortest, and thirty-three Sâgarôpamâs plus one
muhûrta is the longest duration of the white Lê*s*yâ. (39)

I have described above the duration of the Lê*s*yâs generally; I shall
now detail their duration in the four walks of mundane existence <span
id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_571). (40)

The shortest duration of the grey Lê*s*yâ (of a denizen of hell) is ten
thousand years, the longest three Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and
part of an Asa*m*khyêya. (41)

The shortest duration of the blue Lê*s*yâ (of a denizen of hell) is
three Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya, the
longest ten Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and a part of an
Asa*m*khyêya. (42)

The shortest duration of the black Lê*s*yâ (of a denizen of hell) is ten
Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya, the
longest thirty-three Sâgarôpamâs. (43)

I have described the duration of the Lê*s*yâs of denizens of hell; I
shall now describe that of animals, men, and gods. (44)

The duration of any of the Lê*s*yâs except the best (viz. white one) is
less than a muhûrta for (the lowest organisms), animals, and men <span
id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_572). (45)

Half a muhûrta is the shortest duration of the white Lê*s*yâ (of animals
and men), and the longest a Krore of former years <span
id="fr_576"></span>[3](#fn_573) less nine years. (46)

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

I have described the duration of the Lê*s*yâs of animals and men, I
shall now describe that of the gods. (47)

The shortest duration of the black Lê*s*yâ is ten thousand years, the
longest a Palyôpamâ and (a part of) an Asa*m*khyêya. (48)

The shortest duration of the blue Lê*s*yâ is equal to the longest of the
black one plus one Samaya; the longest is one Palyôpamâ plus a (greater
part of) an Asa*m*khyêya. (49)

The shortest duration of the grey Lê*s*yâ is equal to the longest of the
blue one plus one Samaya; the longest is one Palyôpamâ plus (a still
greater part of) an Asa*m*khyêya. (50)

I shall now describe the red Lê*s*yâ as it is with gods, Bhavanapatis,
Vyantaras, *G*yôtishkas, and Vaimânikas. (51)

The shortest duration of the red Lê*s*yâ is one Palyôpamâ, the longest
two Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and a part of an Asa*m*khyêya <span
id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_574). (52)

The shortest duration of the red Lê*s*yâ is ten thousand years, the
longest two Sâgarôpamâs plus one Palyôpamâ and a part of an
Asa*m*khyêya. (53)

The longest duration of the red Lê*s*yâ plus one Samaya is equal to the
shortest of the yellow Lê*s*yâ; its longest, however, is ten muhûrtas
longer. (54)

The longest duration of the yellow Lê*s*yâ plus one Samaya is equal to
the shortest of the white Lê*s*yâ; the longest, however, is thirty-three
muhûrtas longer. (55)

10\. The black, blue, and grey Lê*s*yâs are the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

lowest Lê*s*yâs; through them the soul is brought into miserable courses
of life. (56)

The red, yellow, and white Lê*s*yâs are the good Lê*s*yâs; through them
the soul is brought into happy courses of life. (57)

11\. In the first moment of these Lê*s*yâs when they are joined (with
the soul), the latter is not born into a new existence <span
id="fr_578"></span>[1](#fn_575). (58)

In the last moment of all these Lê*s*yâs when they are joined (with the
soul), the latter is not born into a new existence. (59)

While the last muhûrta is running and a part of it is still to come, the
souls with their Lê*s*yâs developed, go to a new birth. (60)

A wise man should, therefore, know the nature of these Lê*s*yâs; he
should avoid the bad ones and obtain the good ones. (61)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_548"></span>[196:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_551) The lê*s*yâs
(adhyavasâya vi*s*êshâ*h*) are different conditions produced in the soul
by the influence of different Karman; they are therefore not dependent
on the nature of the soul, but on the Karman which accompanies the soul,
and are, as it were, the reflection of the Karman on the soul, as stated
in the following verse from the Ava*k*ûri: k*ri*sh*n*âdidravyasâ*k*ivyât
pari*n*âmô ya âtmana*h* \| spa*t*ikasyêva tatrâya*m* lê*s*yâ*s*abda*h*
pravartate \|\| The alteration produced on the soul, just as on a
crystal by the presence of black things, &c., is denoted by the word
lê*s*yâ.' The Lê*s*yâ, or, according to the above explanation, what
produces Lê*s*yâ, is a subtile substance accompanying the soul; to it
are attributed the qualities described in this lecture.--The word lêsâ
is derived from klê*s*a; this etymology appears rather fanciful, but I
think it may be right. For the Lê*s*yâs seem to be the Klê*s*as, which
affect the soul, conceived as a kind of substance. The Sanskrit term
Lê*s*yâ is of course a hybrid word. It must, however, be stated that
lêsâ occurs also in the meaning 'colour,' e.g. Sûtrak*ri*t. I, 6, 13,
and that the Prâk*ri*t of klêsa is kilê*s*a.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[197:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_552) Sapindus Detergens.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[197:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_553) It is not the
common A*s*ôka, Jonesia Asoka, which has red flowers.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[197:3](sbe4536.htm#fr_554) Corarias Indica,
blue jay; according to some, a kingfisher.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[197:4](sbe4536.htm#fr_555) Linum
Usitatissimum, whose flowers are blue.--The word for grey is kâû =
kâpôta; in the comm., however, it is described as ki*mk*it k*ri*sh*n*â,
ki*mk*il lôhitâ, which would be rather brown. But the description given
in our verse leaves no doubt that grey colour is intended.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[197:5](sbe4536.htm#fr_556) Crotolaria Juncea.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[197:6](sbe4536.htm#fr_557) Terminalia
Tomentosa.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[197:7](sbe4536.htm#fr_558) Aṅka,
ma*n*ivi*s*êsha.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[197:8](sbe4536.htm#fr_559) Jasminum
Multiflorum.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[197:9](sbe4536.htm#fr_560) The gourd Lagenaria
Vulgaris.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[197:10](sbe4536.htm#fr_561) Azadirachta
Indica.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[198:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_562) The aggregate of
three spices, &c., black and long pepper and dry ginger.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[198:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_563) Feronia Elephantum.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[198:3](sbe4536.htm#fr_564) A kind of
intoxicating drink, extracted from the blossoms of Lythrum Fructicosum,
with sugar, &c.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[198:4](sbe4536.htm#fr_565) Acacia Sirisa.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[198:5](sbe4536.htm#fr_566) The Lê*s*yâs may
possess their qualities in a low, middle, or high degree; each of these
degrees is again threefold, viz. low, middle, and high. In this way the
subdivision is carried on up to 243.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[199:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_567) I.e. commits the
five great sins.--The following verses give the
character--laksha*n*a--of the Lê*s*yâs.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[199:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_568) This is, according
to the comm., the meaning of the word niddha*m*dhasapari*n*âmô.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[199:3](sbe4536.htm#fr_569)
Paliu*ñk*aga-uvahiya = pratiku*ñk*aka-upadhika.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[199:4](sbe4536.htm#fr_570) Yôgavân
upa*dh*ânavân.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[200:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_571) Literally: who
avoids the ârta and raudra dhyânas, and practises the dharma and *s*ukla
dhyânas. These terms cannot be adequately translated; the reader may
therefore be referred for details to Bhandarkar's Report, p. 110 ff.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[200:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_572) *Th*â*n*âi*m*
sthânâni.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[200:3](sbe4536.htm#fr_573) Samaya is the
smallest division of time = instant, moment.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[201:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_574) Viz. as denizens of
hell, brutes, men, and gods. Only the three first Lê*s*yâs lead to being
born in hell.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[201:2](sbe4536.htm#fr_575) The consequence of
this statement appears to be that at the expiration of the Lê*s*yâ a new
one is produced. The commentators, however, are not explicit on this
head.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[201:3](sbe4536.htm#fr_576) About the former
years, see above, [p. 16](sbe4505.htm#page_16), note
[1](sbe4505.htm#fn_88).

<span id="fn_574"></span>[202:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_577) This verse seems to
lay down the duration of the Lê*s*yâ in the case of common gods, while
the next one applies to Bhavanapatis, &c.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[203:1](sbe4536.htm#fr_578) The question
treated rather darkly in the next three verses is, according to the
comm., the following:--Every individual dies in the same Lê*s*yâ in
which he is born. When his Lê*s*yâ ends with his life, then the soul
must get a new Lê*s*yâ. Our verses state at which time the new Lê*s*yâ
comes into existence or is joined with the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirty-Fifth Lecture. The Houseless Monk](sbe4537)
