[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4505)  [Next](sbe4507) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOURTH LECTURE.

###### IMPURITY.

You cannot prolong your life <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_90),
therefore be not careless; you are past help when old age approaches.
Consider this: what (protection) will careless people get, who kill
living beings and do not exert themselves? (1)

Men who adhering to wrong principles acquire wealth by evil deeds, will
lose it, falling into the snares (of their passions) and being held
captive by their hatred. (2)

As the burglar <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_91) caught in the breach
of the wall perishes by the work the sinner himself had executed, thus
people in this life and the next cannot escape the effect of their own
actions. (3)

If a man living in the Sa*m*sâra does an action for the sake of somebody
else, or one by which he himself

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

also profits, then, at the time of reaping the fruit of his actions, his
relations will not act as true relations (i.e. will not come to his
help). (4)

Wealth will not protect a careless man in this world and the next.
Though he had seen the right way, he does not see it, even as one in the
dark whose lamp has suddenly been put out. (5)

Though others sleep, be thou awake! Like a wise man, trust nobody, but
be always on the alert; for dangerous is the time and weak the body. Be
always watchful like a Bhâru*nd*a <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_92)
bird! (6)

A monk should step carefully in his walk (i.e. in his life), supposing
everything to be a snare for him. First he must bestow care on his life
till he wins the stake (viz. enlightenment), and afterwards he should
despise it, annihilating his sins. (7)

By conquering his will, (a monk) reaches liberation, as a well-broken
horse which is clad in harness (goes to battle). Be watchful in your
young years; for thereby a monk quickly obtains liberation. (8)

'If he does not get (victory over his will) early, he will get it
afterwards;' such reasoning <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_93)
presupposes the eternity of human life. But such a man despairs when his
life draws to its close, and the dissolution of his body approaches. (9)

One cannot quickly arrive at discernment; therefore one should exert
one's self, abstain from pleasures, understand the world, be impartial
like

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

a sage, and guard one's self: (thus) never be careless. (10)

A *S*rama*n*a who again and again suppresses the effects of delusion,
and controls himself, will be affected in a rough way by external
things; but a monk should not hate them in his mind. (11)

External things weaken the intellect and allure many; therefore keep
them out of your mind. Keep off delusion, remove pride, do not practise
deceit, leave off greed. (12)

Heretics who are impure and vain, are always subject to love and hate,
and are wholly under the influence (of their passions). Despising them
as unholy men, desire virtues till the end of your life. (13)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[18:1](sbe4506.htm#fr_91) A similar expression
is used in Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga I, 2, 2, 21.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[18:2](sbe4506.htm#fr_92) Dêvêndra relates two
stories of burglars, one of which is supposed to be hinted at in the
text. It comes to this. A burglar is caught, in the breach he had
excavated, by the owner of the house, who takes hold of his feet
protruding from the breach. But the burglar's companion tries to drag
him out from the other side of the wall. In this position he is smashed
by the upper part of the wall coming down.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[19:1](sbe4506.htm#fr_93) Each of these birds
has two necks and three legs.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[19:2](sbe4506.htm#fr_94) Upamâ. Literally
translated: 'this is the comparison of those who contend that life is
eternal.' The commentator gives a forced interpretation of the first
part of the verse to bring about a comparison. But the meaning
comparison' will not suit the context, the word must here mean:
conclusion, reasoning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Lecture. Death Against One's Will](sbe4507)
