[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4565)  [Next](sbe4567) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SECOND LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### ON ACTIVITY <span id="fr_1033"></span>[2](#fn_1025).

O long-lived (*G*ambûsvâmin)! I (Sudharman) have heard the following
Discourse from the Venerable (Mahâvîra). We now come to the Lecture
called 'on Activity.' The contents of it are as follows:

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It treats,
briefly, of two subjects: merit and demerit.

(The former is when the Self is) at rest, (the latter, when it is) in
disturbance <span id="fr_1034"></span>[1](#fn_1026). (1)

Now the explanation <span id="fr_1035"></span>[2](#fn_1027) of the first
subject, viz. demerit, is as follows. Here in the East, West, North, and
South, (&c., all as in II, I, 12, down to) ugly men. (2)

And as regards committing of sin <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[3](#fn_1028), among denizens of hell, brute
animals, gods, men, and whatever other suchlike beings there be, the
sentient beings feel <span id="fr_1037"></span>[4](#fn_1029) the pain.
(3)

And these beings practise the following thirteen kinds of activity--

1\. sinning for one's interest;

2\. sinning without a personal interest;

3\. sinning by slaying;

4\. sinning through accident;

5\. sinning by an error of sight;

6\. sinning by lying;

7\. sinning by taking what is not freely given;

8\. sinning by a mere conceit;

9\. sinning through pride;

10\. sinning through bad treatment of one's friends;

11\. sinning through deceit;

12\. sinning through greed;

13\. actions referring to a religious life. (4)

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

1\. The first kind of committing sins is that prompted by a motive. This
is the case when a man for his own sake, for the sake of his relations,
his house, his family, his friends, for the sake of Nâgas, Bhûtas, or
Yakshas does injury to movable or immovable beings, or has it done by
another person, or consents to another's doing it. Thereby the, bad
Karman accrues to him. This is the first kind of committing sins, that
prompted by a motive. (5)

2\. We now treat of the second kind of committing sins, viz. that which
is not prompted by personal interest. This is the case when a man slays,
kills, cuts, pierces, hacks, mangles, or puts to death movable living
beings, not because he wants their body, skin, flesh, blood, heart,
bile, feathers of their tail, tail, big or small horns, teeth, tusks,
nails, sinews, bones, or marrow; nor because he has been wounded by
them, or is wounded, or will be wounded; nor in order to support his
children, or to feed his cattle, or to enlarge his houses, nor for the
maintenance of *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, nor for the benefit of his
body; setting aside reason a fool acquires the habit of cruelty, being a
wanton killer. (6)

This is the case when a man slays, &c. (see above) immovable living
beings as Ikka*t*a-reed, Ka*th*ina, *G*antuka-grass, Para-grass <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1](#fn_1030), Môksha-trees <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[2](#fn_1031), grass, Ku*s*a-grass, Ku*kkh*aka <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[3](#fn_1032), Pappaka <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[4](#fn_1033), or straw, not

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

in order to support his children, (&c., all down to) wanton killer. (7)

Or when a man on a marsh, a lake, a sheet of water, a pasture-ground, a
place surrounded by a ditch, a moat, a thicket, stronghold <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1](#fn_1034) in a thicket, forest, stronghold in a
forest, \[mountain, stronghold on a mountain <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[2](#fn_1035)\], piles up grass and lights a fire,
or has it lighted by another person, or consents to another's lighting
it. Thereby the bad Karman accrues to him. This is the second kind of
committing sins, that prompted by no personal interest. (8)

3\. We now treat of the third kind of committing sins, called slaying.
This is the case when a man thinking that some one has hurt, hurts, or
will hurt him, or one of his people, or somebody else, or one of that
person's people, kills movable and immovable beings, has them killed by
another person, or consents to another's killing them. Thereby the bad
Karman accrues to him. This is the third kind of committing sins, called
slaying. (9)

4\. We now treat of the fourth kind of committing sins, called
accidental <span id="fr_1044"></span>[3](#fn_1036). This is the case
when in marshes (&c., all as above, down to) strongholds in

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

a forest, a man who lives on deer, who likes deer, who dotes on deer,
goes a hunting deer. Fancying to see deer, he takes aim with his arrow
to kill the deer. Thinking that he will kill the deer, he kills a
partridge, or a duck, or a quail, or a pigeon, or a monkey, or a
francoline partridge. Here instead of one (being) he hurts another,
(therefore he is called) an accidental killer. (10)

This is the case when a man weeding rice, Kôdrava <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1](#fn_1037), panic seed, Paraka, or Râlaka, uses
his knife to cut some weeds. Fancying that he is cutting some
weed-grasses <span id="fr_1046"></span>[2](#fn_1038), he cuts rice (&c.,
down to) Râlaka. Here instead of one (plant) he hurts another;
(therefore he is called) an accidental killer. Thereby the bad Karman
accrues to him. This is the fourth kind of committing sins, called
accidental. (11)

5\. We now treat of the fifth kind of committing sins, viz. by an error
of sight. This is the case when a man living together with his mother,
father, brothers, sisters, wives, sons, daughters, or daughters-in-law,
and mistaking a friend for an enemy, kills the friend by mistake. (12)

This is the case when during a riot in a village <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[3](#fn_1039),

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

or a scot-free town, or a town with an earth wall, or a poor town, or an
isolated town, or a large town, or a sea-town, or a mine, or a
hermitage, or a halting-place of processions or caravans, or a capital,
a man mistaking for a robber one who is not, kills him by mistake.
Thereby the bad Karman accrues to him. This is the fifth kind of
committing sins, viz. by an error of sight. (13)

6\. We now treat of the sixth kind of committing sins, viz. by lying.
This is the case when a man for his own sake, or for the sake of his
relations, his house, or his servants tells lies, causes another person
to tell lies, or consents to another's telling lies. Thereby the bad
Karman accrues to him. This is the sixth kind of committing sins, viz.
by lying. (14)

7\. Now we treat of the seventh kind of committing sins, viz. by taking
what is not freely given. This is the case when a man for his own sake
(&c., as above) takes himself what is not freely given, has it taken by
another person, or consents to another's taking it. Thereby the bad
Karman accrues to him. This is the seventh kind of committing sins, viz.
by taking what is not freely given. (15)

8\. Now we treat of the eighth kind of committing sins, viz. by a mere
conceit. This is the case when a man, without being disappointed by
anybody in any way, meditates, melancholy, sorry, angry, downcast,
anxious in thoughts and ideas, plunged in a sea of sorrow and misery,
reposing his head on the palm of his hand, overcome by painful
reflections, and casting his eyes on the ground <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1](#fn_1040). There are four

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

mental, but real, conditions (of this kind), viz. wrath, pride, deceit,
and greed; for wrath, pride, deceit, and greed are mental conditions.
Thereby the bad Karman accrues to him. This is the eighth kind of
committing sins, viz. by a mere conceit. (16)

9\. Now we treat of the ninth kind of committing sins, viz. through
pride. This is the case when a man drunk (as it were) with pride of
caste, family, beauty, piety, knowledge, success, power,
intelligence <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1](#fn_1041), or any other kind
of pride, slights, blames, abuses, reviles, despises somebody else and
extols himself, (thinking:) 'he is my inferior, I am of better caste or
family, and possess greater power and other advantages.' When he leaves
this body and is only accompanied by his Karman, he, without a will of
his own, goes forth from womb to womb, from birth to birth, from death
to death, from hell to hell. He is cruel, stubborn, fickle, and proud.
Thereby the bad Karman accrues to him. This is the ninth kind of
committing sins, viz. through pride. (17)

10\. We now treat of the tenth kind of committing sins, consisting in
bad treatment of one's friends. This is the case when a man living
together with his mother, father, brothers, sisters, wives, sons,
daughters, or daughters-in-law, severely punishes even the smallest
offence of theirs; e.g. he ducks the offender <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[2](#fn_1042) in cold water, or pours hot water over
him, or scalds him with fire, or lashes his sides sore with a halter,
reed, rope <span id="fr_1051"></span>[3](#fn_1043), strap of leather,
whip, or

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

thong of a whip, or he beats the offender with a stick, bone, fist,
clod, or potsherd. When such a man is at home, (his people) are
miserable; but when he is abroad, they rejoice. Such a man, who is for
ever punishing, severely punishing, is hateful in this world and the
next, irritable, passionate, an extortioner <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1](#fn_1044). Thereby the bad Karman accrues to
him. This is the tenth kind of committing sins, consisting in bad
treatment of one's friends. (18)

11\. We now treat of the eleventh kind of committing sins, viz. through
deceit. Those who conceal their thoughts, who are shrouded in darkness,
who are light as the feather of an owl or heavy like a mountain, use
unworthy <span id="fr_1053"></span>[2](#fn_1045) speech though they be
Âryas. They believe themselves different from what they really are;
asked one thing, they answer another, they speak different from what is
to be spoken. (19)

As a man in whose body sticks an arrow <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[3](#fn_1046), does not extricate it (fearing the
pain), nor has it extricated by somebody else, nor destroys it, but
hides it; and the arrow, being not removed, goes deeper and deeper (in
the flesh); so a deceitful man, having practised deception, does not
confess it, expiate it, blame the deed to himself or others, does not
remove it, annihilate it, and endeavour not to do it again, does not
practise the prescribed austerities and penance. A deceitful man is
generally not trusted <span id="fr_1055"></span>[4](#fn_1047) in this
world, a deceitful man is not trusted in the next world. He blames and
reviles (the person

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

whom he has deceived), he praises himself, and rejoices, and does not
desist (from his vile practices); he conceals the wrong he has done to
others, and does not acquire a pure Lê*s*yâ. Thereby the bad Karman
accrues to him. This is the eleventh kind of committing sins, viz.
through deceit. (20)

12\. We now treat of the twelfth kind of committing sins, viz. through
greed. Those (heretical monks) who live in woods, in huts, about
villages, or practise some secret rites, are not well controlled, nor do
they well abstain (from slaying) all sorts of living beings. They employ
speech that is true and untrue at the same time <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1](#fn_1048): 'do not beat me, beat others; do not
abuse me, abuse others; do not capture me, capture others; do not
torment me, torment others; do not deprive me of life, deprive others of
life <span id="fr_1057"></span>[2](#fn_1049).' And thus they are given
to sensual pleasures, desire them, are held captive by them,
passionately love them for four or five years, for six or ten
years--(the period) may be shorter or longer. After having enjoyed these
pleasures, and having died at their allotted time, they will be born in
some places inhabited by Asuras and evildoers. And when they are
released therefrom, they will be born deaf and dumb, or blind <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[3](#fn_1050), or dumb by birth. Thereby the bad
Karman accrues to him. This is the twelfth kind of committing sins, viz.
through greed. (21)

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

These twelve kinds of committing sins should be well understood by a
pious *S*rama*n*a or Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1](#fn_1051).
(22)

13\. We now treat of the thirteenth kind of acquiring Karman, that
having reference to religious life <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[2](#fn_1052). A monk <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[3](#fn_1053) who controls himself for the benefit
of his soul, who in walking carefully avoids to cause the death of any
living creature <span id="fr_1062"></span>[4](#fn_1054), who uses gentle
and righteous speech <span id="fr_1063"></span>[5](#fn_1055), who
receives alms in a manner to avoid the forty-two faults <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[6](#fn_1056), who is careful in receiving and
keeping of things necessary for religious exercises <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[7](#fn_1057), who performs the operations of nature
(excrements, urine, saliva, corporal impurities and mucus) in an
unfrequented place <span id="fr_1066"></span>[8](#fn_1058), who is
careful with regard to mind, speech, and body <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[9](#fn_1059), who guards his mind, speech, and body
so as to protect his soul from passions <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[10](#fn_1060), who guards his senses, who leads a
chaste life regulated by the three Guptis, who carefully walks, stands,
sits down, lies down, and speaks, who carefully takes up and lays

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

down his cloth, alms-bowl, blanket, broom,--(even) such a monk performs
various subtile actions called îryapathika (if it did but consist in
moving an eyelash). This Karman is acquired and comes in contact (with
the soul) in the first moment, in the second moment it is experienced,
in the third it is destroyed; thus it is acquired, comes in contact
(with the soul), takes rise, and is destroyed. For all time to come (the
person in question) is exempt from Karman <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1](#fn_1061). Thereby the bad Karman accrues to
him <span id="fr_1070"></span>[2](#fn_1062). This is the thirteenth kind
of acquiring Karman, that inseparable from a religious life. (23)

All the Arhats and Bhagavats of the past, present, and future have told,
tell, and will tell, have declared, declare, and will declare the above
thirteen kinds of acquiring Karman. They have practised, practise, and
will practise the thirteenth kind of acquiring Karman. (24)

As a supplement <span id="fr_1071"></span>[3](#fn_1063) to the above
(discussion) will

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

now be told the subject of men's success by occult sciences. Some men
differing in intellect, will, character, opinions, taste, undertakings,
and plans, study various evil sciences; (25) viz. (the divination) from
terrestrial accidents, from strange phenomena <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1](#fn_1064), from dreams, from phenomena in the
air, from changes in the body, from sounds, from mystical signs <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[2](#fn_1065), from seeds <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[3](#fn_1066); (the interpretation of the) marks of
women, men, elephants, cows, partridges, cocks, ducks, quails, of
wheels, parasols, shields, sticks, swords, precious stones, jewels <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[4](#fn_1067); (26) the art to make one happy or
miserable, to make a woman pregnant, to deprive one of his wits;
incantations <span id="fr_1076"></span>[5](#fn_1068), conjuring <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[6](#fn_1069); oblations of substances; the martial
arts; the course of the moon, sun, Venus, and Jupiter; the falling of
meteors; great conflagration; divination from wild animals <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[7](#fn_1070), the flight of crows, showers of dust,
rain of blood, the Vaitâlî and Ardhavaitâlî arts <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[8](#fn_1071), the art of casting people asleep, of
opening doors, the art of *K*â*nd*âlas, of *S*abaras, of Dravi*d*as, of
Kaliṅgas, of Gau*d*as, of Gândhâras; the spells for making somebody fall
down, rise, yawn; for making him immovable, or cling to something; for
making him sick, or sound;

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

for making somebody go forth, disappear, (or come) <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[1](#fn_1072). These and similar sciences are
practised (by some men) for the sake of food, drink, clothes, a lodging,
a bed, and various objects of pleasure. They practise a wrong science,
the unworthy, the mistaken <span id="fr_1081"></span>[2](#fn_1073) men.
After having died at their allotted time, they will be born in some
places inhabited by Asuras and evildoers. And when they are released
therefrom, they will again be born deaf and dumb, or night-blind. (27)

Some man for his own sake or for the sake of his relations, family, or
servants, or entering the service of an acquaintance or neighbour of
his, becomes his companion or his helpmate, or he goes to meet him, or
he becomes a burglar, or a cut-purse, or he tends sheep, or he becomes a
hunter <span id="fr_1082"></span>[3](#fn_1074), or he catches birds, or
he uses nets (for catching deer), or he becomes a fisherman or a cowherd
or a slayer of cows or a dog-keeper or he hunts with dogs. (28)

A man, becoming the companion of another man, will follow him
everywhere, (and having inspired him with confidence) beats, cuts,
pierces; tears, thrashes, or puts him to death, and thereby gets his
food. By these very evil deeds he degrades himself <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[4](#fn_1075). (29)

A man, becoming the helpmate of another man, always attends on him, (and
having inspired him with confidence) beats, &c. (all down to) degrades
himself. (30)

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

A man, going to meet somebody, on the road, beats, &c. (all down to)
degrades himself. (3 I)

A man, becoming a burglar, breaks into a house and beats, &c. (all down
to) degrades himself. (32)

A man, becoming a cut-purse, cuts the purse and beats, &c. (all down to)
degrades himself. (33)

A man, becoming a tender of sheep, beats, cuts, pierces, tears,
thrashes, or puts to death a ram or some other animal. (The rest as
above.) (34)

A man, becoming a hunter, beats, &c. (all down to) puts to death a
buffalo or some other animal. (The rest as above.) (35)

A man, using nets (for catching deer), beats, &c., an antelope or some
other animal. (The rest as above.) (36)

A man, catching birds, beats, &c., a bird or some other animal. (The
rest as above.) (37)

A man, becoming a fisherman, beats, &c., a fish or some other animal.
(The rest as above.) (38)

A man, becoming a cowherd, beats, &c., a cow or some other animal. (The
rest as above.) (39)

A man, slaying cows, beats, &c., a cow or some other animal. (The rest
as above.) (40)

A man, becoming a dog-keeper, beats, &c., a dog or some other animal.
(The rest as above.) (41)

A man, becoming the helpmate of a dog-keeper, beats, &c., a dog or some
other animal. (The rest as above.) (42)

A man, rising in an assembly, may promise to kill some (animal) and he
will beat, &c., a partridge, duck, quail, pigeon, monkey, a francoline
partridge, or some other animal. (The rest as above.) (43)

A man, being angry for some reason, e.g. because

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

his granary or his liquor-cask runs short <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[1](#fn_1076), sets fire to the cornfields of the
householders or their sons, has the fire set by another person, or
consents to another's setting fire to them. (The rest as above.) (44)

A man, being angry for some reason, e.g. because his granary or
liquor-cask runs short, makes a deep cut in the strong limbs of the
camels, cows, horses, or donkeys of the householders or their sons, has
it made by another person, or consents to another's making the cut. (The
rest as above.) (45)

A man, being angry for some reason, e.g. because his granary or his
liquor-cask runs short, covers with brambles or twigs the householders',
or their sons', stable for the camels, cows, horses, or donkeys, and
burns them, or has them burnt by another person, or consents to
another's burning them. (The rest as above.) (46)

A man, being angry for some reason, &c. (as above), steals a
householder's or his sons’ earrings (or girdle) <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[2](#fn_1077), or jewels, or pearls, has them stolen
by another person, or consents to another's stealing them. (The rest as
above.) (47)

A man, being angry, &c. (as before), robs *S*rama*n*as or Brâhma*n*as of
their umbrella, stick, staff, small property, pot, chair, clothes,
blanket, leather boots, knife, or scabbard, has it done by another
person, or consents to another's robbing them. (The rest as above.) (48)

A man, without consideration (and without any

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

provocation), sets fire to the cornfields of the householders, &c. (All
as in § 44.) (49)

A man, without consideration, makes a deep cut in the strong limbs of
the camels, &c. (All as in § 45) (50)

A man, without consideration, covers with brambles and twigs the stables
for the camels, &c., and burns them, &c. (All as in § 46.) (51)

A man, without consideration, steals the earrings, &c. (All as in § 47.)
(52)

A man, without consideration, robs *S*rama*n*as or Brâhma*n*as of their
umbrella, &c. (All as in § 48.) (53)

A man, on seeing *S*rama*n*as or Brâhma*n*as (whom he detests), degrades
himself by various evil deeds. Either he gives them a slap with the open
hand to turn them away <span id="fr_1086"></span>[1](#fn_1078), or he
abuses them. And when the monk at the proper time calls (at his house on
the begging-tour), he does not give him alms (but says): those who
become *S*rama*n*as are the meanest workmen, men unable to support
(their family), low-caste men, wretches, idlers! (54)

Such men praise this life, this miserable life; they do nothing on
behalf of the next world; they suffer, grieve, blame themselves, grow
feeble, are afflicted, and undergo great pain; they do not cease to
cause others to suffer, grieve, &c., to slay and to put men in fetters;
and while they make suffer or kill, or make suffer and kill (beings),
and do various evil

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

deeds, they enjoy the excellent pleasures of human life; viz. such a man
eats at dinner-time, he drinks at drinking-time, he dresses himself at
dressing-time, he goes to bed at the proper time, and sleeps at
sleeping-time. Doing everything in its turn, he bathes, makes the
offering (to the house-gods) <span id="fr_1087"></span>[1](#fn_1079),
performs auspicious rites and expiatory acts, washes his head, hangs a
wreath round his neck, adorns himself with precious stones and golden
(trinkets), puts on (his head) a chaplet of flowers; with his body
strengthened, with a wreath hanging down to the girdle of his loins,
dressed in new clothes, his limbs and body anointed with sandal,
(sitting) on a large throne in a lofty upper room (of his house),
surrounded by women and a troop of followers, in the light (of torches)
burning the whole night, under the great din of uninterrupted
storytelling, dramatical plays, singing, and music, as beating of time,
performing on the Vî*n*â, Tûryâ, the great drum, and
Pa*t*upa*t*aha <span id="fr_1088"></span>[2](#fn_1080), he enjoys the
excellent pleasures of human life. (55)

When he gives an order to one man, even four or five men will, without
being asked, go up to him (and say): 'Speak, beloved of the gods, what
shall we do? what shall we fetch? what shall we give you? what (trinket)
shall we put on you? what is your heart's desire? what relishes your
mouth?'

Unworthy men who see him will say: 'Forsooth, this man is a god; this
man is the anointed of the gods, this man will support (us), as he
supports

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

others.' But noble men who see him will say: 'This man does cruel
actions, and maintains himself by them. His is the southern region, the
hell, the dark fortnight <span id="fr_1089"></span>[1](#fn_1081). In the
future he will not easily obtain enlightenment.' (56)

(The conduct described in the preceding) part <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[2](#fn_1082) is agreeable to some (heretical)
monks, to some householders, to men governed by love of life. This
conduct is unworthy, impure, void (of virtues), not holy, not right, not
eradicating sins; it is not the road to perfection, liberation,
Nirvâ*n*a, final delivery, not the road of those who are freed from all
misery; it is thoroughly untrue, and bad.

This is the explanation of the first subject, viz. demerit. (57)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now the explanation of the second subject, viz. merit, is as follows:

Here in the East, West, North, and South there are some men, viz. Âryas,
non-Âryas, (all down to) ugly men. They own fields and houses, (&c., all
as in II, 1, §§ 34-59, down to) reach final beatitude. (58)

(The conduct described in this) part is holy, right, (all just the
reverse of what was said in § 58, down to) thoroughly true, and good.
This is the explanation of the second subject, viz. merit. (59)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now the explanation of the third subject, viz. the mixed state, is as
follows:

Those who live in woods, in huts, near villages, (&c., all as above, §
21, down to) or blind. (The

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

conduct described in this) part is not holy, (&c., all as in § 57, down
to) thoroughly untrue, and bad.

This is the explanation of the third subject, viz. the mixed state. (60)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now the explanation of the first subject, viz. demerit, is as follows:

Here in the East, West, North, and South live some men; they are
householders, men of great desires, great undertakings, great
possessions, unrighteous men, men practising unrighteousness, very
unrighteous men, men speaking unrighteously, living unrighteously,
thinking unrighteously, given to unrighteousness, men of unrighteous
character and conduct, men gaining an unrighteous livelihood. (61)

They beat, cut <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1](#fn_1083), pierce, skin,
are bloody-handed, violent, cruel, wicked, rash; they habitually
practise bribery <span id="fr_1092"></span>[2](#fn_1084), fraud, deceit,
imposture, dishonesty, and trickery; they are of bad character and
morals, they are difficult to please, they do not abstain from killing
living beings; as long as they live they do not abstain from wrath,
(&c., all as in II, 1, 51, down to) the sin of wrong belief; nor from
bathing, rubbing, painting, anointing themselves; from sounds, touches,
tastes, colours, smells; from wreaths and ornaments; from cars,
carriages, vehicles, litters, swings <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[3](#fn_1085), coach and pair <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[4](#fn_1086), palankins <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[5](#fn_1087), beds, seats;

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

from enjoying a ride or drive; from having many followers; from buying,
selling, doing business with Mâshas <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1](#fn_1088), half Mâshas, and Rupees; from silver,
gold, riches, corn, precious stones, pearls, conches, stones, and
corals; from using wrong weights and measures; from undertakings and
slaughter; from working and making others work; from cooking and making
others cook; from cutting, pounding, threatening, beating, binding,
killing, and causing pain; and whatever other suchlike wicked and sinful
actions of worthless men there be, that cause pains to other beings:
these men do not abstain from them as long as they live. (62)

As some idle, cruel men wantonly injure Kalama <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[2](#fn_1089), Masûra <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[3](#fn_1090), sesamum, Mudga <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[4](#fn_1091), beans, Nishpâva <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[5](#fn_1092), Kulattha <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[6](#fn_1093), Âlisanda <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[7](#fn_1094), Êlami*kkh*a <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[8](#fn_1095), so an idle, cruel man wantonly hurts
partridges, ducks, quails, pigeons, francoline partridges, deer,
buffaloes, boars, iguanas, tortoises, and snakes.

A man will (occasionally) severely punish even the smallest offence of
his domestics, viz. a slave or messenger or hired servant or
vassal <span id="fr_1104"></span>[9](#fn_1096) or parasite; e.g. punish
him, pull out his hair, beat him, put him in irons, in fetters, in
stocks, into prison, screw up in a pair of shackles (his hands and feet)

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

and break them, cut off his hands or feet or ears or nose or lips or
head or face (?) <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1](#fn_1097), pierce his
feet, tear out his eyes, teeth, tongue, hang him, brush him, whirl him
round, impale him, lacerate him, pour acids (in his wounds), belabour
him with cutting-grass, bind him to a lion's tail (!), or a bull's tail,
burn him in a wood on fire, let him be devoured by crows and vultures,
stop his food and drink, keep him a prisoner for life, let him die any
of these horrid deaths. (63)

A man will (occasionally) severely punish even the smallest offence of
his next of kin, viz. his mother or father or brother or sister or wife
or sons or daughters or daughters-in-law; e.g. he ducks the offender in
cold water, (&c., all as in § 18, down to) hateful in this world and the
next. They suffer, grieve, blame themselves, grow feeble, are afflicted,
and undergo great pain; they do not cease to cause others to suffer,
grieve, &c., to slay and to put men in fetters <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[2](#fn_1098). (64)

And thus they are given to sensual pleasures, desire them, are held
captive by them, passionately love them for four or five years, for six
or ten years --the period may be shorter or longer <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[3](#fn_1099). Having enjoyed pleasures, having
produced the effects of iniquity, having acquired the Karman of many
sinful actions which generally bear him downwards, (he goes to the
bottom of the hell) <span id="fr_1108"></span>[4](#fn_1100). As a ball
of

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

iron or stone, when thrown in the water, sinks below the surface of the
water till it stops at the bottom, so a man of the sort we are treating
of, who is full of Karman, full of sin, full of demerit, full of
disgrace <span id="fr_1109"></span>[1](#fn_1101), full of iniquity, full
of wicked thoughts, deceit, imposture, and fraud, and, as a rule, kills
animals, having died at the allotted time, will sink below this earth,
and go to the bottom of the hell. (65)

These hells are round inside, square outside, on their floor razorlike
arrows are thick-set (and covered with flowers), they are filled with
perpetual darkness, never lighted up by the planets, moon, sun,
Nakshatras, and stars; their floor is slippery with a coating of marrow,
fat, flesh, blood, and matter, and besmeared with grease; these hells
are impure, smelling detestably, black, of the colour of fire, very
rugged, difficult to pass, horrid. And horrid are the pains in these
hells. (66)

And those who are condemned to live in these hells, do not sleep nor
slumber, nor do they get any consolation <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[2](#fn_1102) or comfort or recreation or
encouragement; but the denizens of hell there suffer exquisite, great,
deep, hard, rough, violent, painful, sharp, intolerable agonies. (67)

As a tree growing on a hill falls by its weight when its roots are cut,
on a low, rugged, inaccessible place, so a man of the sort we are
treating of

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

wanders from womb to womb, from birth to birth, from death to death,
from hell to hell, from pain to pain. His is the southern region, the
hell, the dark fortnight <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1](#fn_1103). In the
future he will not easily obtain enlightenment. (The . conduct described
in the preceding) part is unworthy, impure, (&c., see § 57, all down to)
it is thoroughly untrue, and bad. This is the explanation of the first
subject, viz. demerit. (68)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now the explanation of the second subject, viz. merit, is as follows:

Here in the East, West, North, and South there are some such men as
abstain from undertakings and possessions, righteous men, men practising
righteousness, (&c., all as in § 58, but substitute 'righteous' for
'unrighteous,' down to) men gaining a righteous livelihood. They are of
good character and morals, they are easy to please and good. They
abstain from killing living beings as long as they live, (&c., all just
the reverse of what was said in § 62, down to) whatever other suchlike
wicked actions there be, that cause pains to other beings: these men
abstain from them as long as they live. (69)

There are such monks as in walking carefully avoid to occasion the death
of any living creature, (&c., all as in § 23, down to) as lead chaste
lives regulated by the three Guptis, as are free from anger, pride,
deceit, and greed, as are calm, tranquil, passionless, happy, free from
the Âsravas, and bondage, without sorrow; as water does not adhere to a
copper vessel, or collyrium to mother-of-pearl

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (so sins find no
place in them); their course is unobstructed like that of Life; like the
firmament they want nothing to support them; like the wind they know no
obstacles; their heart is pure like the water (of rivers or tanks) in
autumn; like the leaves of a lotus they cannot be soiled by anything;
their senses are well protected like the limbs of a tortoise; they are
single and alone like the horn of a rhinoceros; they are free like
birds; they are always waking like the fabulous bird Bhâru*nd*a; they
are valorous like elephants, strong like bulls, difficult to attack like
lions, steady and firm like Mount Mandara, deep like the ocean, mild
like the moon, refulgent like the sun, pure like excellent gold; like
the earth they patiently bear everything; like a well-kindled fire they
shine in their splendour <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1](#fn_1104). (70)

There are no obstacles anywhere for these reverend men. The obstacles
have been declared to be of four kinds, viz. animals born from eggs,
viviparous animals, things belonging to somebody, articles necessary for
religious exercises <span id="fr_1113"></span>[2](#fn_1105). In
whichever direction they want to go, there they meet with no obstacle;
but being pure and free, full of learning, control, and austerities,
they purify themselves. (7I)

These reverend men practise the following mode

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

of living which just suffices for carrying on existence; they eat but
one meal in two, three, four, five, six, seven days, in half a month, in
one, two, three, four, five, six months; they (have vowed to) live on
such food only as has been taken out of the cooking-vessel, or as is
still in it, or the first kind of food in one place and the second in
another, or on low food, or bad food, or food collected in small bits,
or food given with a dirty hand, or the reverse, or food given with a
hand, &c. soiled by it; they (have vowed to) accept such alms only as
are within sight (when they beg), or are out of sight, as they are asked
whether they would accept, or as they are not asked about, as are given
with contempt, or the reverse; they beg (in houses where they are)
unknown, or when food is scarce <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1](#fn_1106);
they accept only such things as are at hand, or only a limited number of
gifts, or only a fixed quantity of food; they beg according to the rules
(laid down for begging); they eat low food or bad food or tasteless food
or badly tasting food or rough food or disagreeable food; they lead a
low or mean life; they drink sour gruel, they eat nothing seasoned with
ghee or similar materials; they do not drink liquors or eat meat, they
do not eat highly-flavoured food; they eat standing, or supported by
something, or sitting on a stool or an armchair; they lie down stretched
out like a stick, or curved like a bent piece of wood <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[2](#fn_1107); they sit in the sun,

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

they go naked <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1](#fn_1108); they do not
scratch themselves; they do not spit; they do not cut their beard, hair,
and nails, they do not take any care of their person. (72)

Living in this way they practise many years *S*rama*n*ahood, and if then
they fall sick, or even if they do not, they refuse food and omit many
meals by abstaining from food. When they have attained that for whose
sake they went about naked and bald-headed, did not bathe, nor clean
their teeth, nor protect their head from the sun, nor wear shoes; they
slept on the bare ground or a plank or a piece of wood, plucked out
their hair, led a life of chastity, entered the houses of strangers, and
bore, with indifference, success, failure, honour, disgrace, slights,
blame, reviling, threatening, beating, all sorts of hardships <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[2](#fn_1109), and the twenty-two calamities and
troubles; (when they have attained their end), they reach, while they
are breathing their last, the highest knowledge and faith, called
Kêvala, which is infinite, supreme, unobstructed, unimpeded, complete
and full; and then they obtain absolute perfection, enlightenment,
deliverance, final beatitude, and put an end to all misery. (73)

Some become liberated <span id="fr_1118"></span>[3](#fn_1110) without
assuming another body (after quitting the last). But others, having died
at the allotted time, are, on account of a residue

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

of (good) Karman, born in one of the regions of the gods. Among very
beautiful, very splendid, very excellent, very glorious, very strong,
very powerful, very happy (gods), they become very beautiful, very
splendid, &c., gods <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1](#fn_1111); their
breasts shining with necklaces; their arms encumbered with bracelets and
armrings; wearing ear-ornaments <span id="fr_1120"></span>[2](#fn_1112)
which play on their cheeks, and earrings which hang down to the
bracelets on their upper arms; wearing various ornaments on their hands;
their crowns adorned with gay wreaths; putting on highly perfumed,
excellent clothes; using beautiful, excellent garlands and ointments;
their splendid body ornamented with a long down-reaching garland; having
divine colours, touches, constitution (of the body), and rank; lighting
up and illumining all ten quarters (of the universe) with their divine
beauty, splendour, lustre, brightness, brilliancy, and light; beautiful
when they go, beautiful when they rest, and happy also in the time to
come.

(The conduct described in the preceding) part is worthy, pure, (&c., see
§ 57, all down to) it is thoroughly true, and good.

This is the explanation of the second subject, viz. merit. (74)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now the explanation of the third subject, viz. the mixed state, is as
follows:

Here in the East, West, North, and South there are some such men as have
few desires, few undertakings, few possessions, righteous men, men

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

practising righteousness, (&c., all as in § 69, down to) men gaining a
righteous livelihood. They are of good character and morals, easy to
please, and good. They abstain, as long as they live, from one kind of
killing living beings, but they do not abstain from another, (&c.,
similar as in § 62, all down to) whatever suchlike wicked actions there
be, that cause pains to other beings, from some of them these men
abstain as long as they live, from others they do not abstain. (75)

There <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1](#fn_1113) are, for instance,
followers of the *S*rama*n*as, who comprehend (the doctrine about)
living beings and things without life, who understand (the difference
between) virtues and sins, who are well grounded in (the knowledge of)
the Âsravas, Sa*m*vara, the realisation and annihilation (of Karman),
the subject of actions <span id="fr_1122"></span>[2](#fn_1114), bondage,
and final liberation; who, without anybody to back them <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[3](#fn_1115), cannot be seduced from the creed of
the Nirgranthas by hosts of gods, Asuras, Nâgas, Suvar*n*as, Yakshas,
Râkshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Garu*d*as, and snake-gods; who have no
doubts, scruples, or misgivings about this creed of the Nirgranthas, but
have grasped its meaning, got hold of its meaning, got information about
its meaning, ascertained its

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

meaning, and understood its meaning; whose very marrow <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1](#fn_1116) of the bones has been penetrated by
their love (for the Nirgrantha creed), avowing that it alone is true,
and all others futile. They keep the bar <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[2](#fn_1117) (of their gates) raised and their door
open, having no desire to enter a stranger's house or his seraglio. They
strictly keep the Pôsaha-fast on the fourteenth and eighth days of the
month, on certain festivals <span id="fr_1126"></span>[3](#fn_1118), and
on full-moon days. They provide the Nirgrantha *S*rama*n*as with pure
acceptable food, drink, dainties and spices, with clothes, alms-bowls,
blankets and brooms, with drugs and medicines, with stools, planks,
beds, and couches. They purify themselves by practising the *S*ilavratas
and Gu*n*avratas <span id="fr_1127"></span>[4](#fn_1119), the
Virama*n*a, the Pratyâkhyâna,

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

the Pôsaha-fasts, and austerities which they have vowed to perform <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1](#fn_1120). (76)

Living in this way they are for many years followers of the
*S*rama*n*as, and if then they fall sick, or even if they do not, they
refuse food and omit many meals by abstaining from food. Having
confessed their sins and expiated them, and having attained
perfection <span id="fr_1129"></span>[2](#fn_1121), they die at their
allotted time, to be born again as gods in one of the regions of the
gods, (&c., all as in § 74, down to) it is thoroughly true, and good.

This is the explanation of the third subject, viz. the mixed state. (77)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

He who does not practise cessation <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[3](#fn_1122) (from sin), is called a foolish man;
he who practises cessation (from sin), is called a wise man; he who in
one regard practises cessation (from sin) and in another does not, is
said to be in a state partaking of that of a wise man and that of a
foolish man.

The conduct of him who does not practise cessation from all (sins), is
that of a man who kills living creatures; it is unworthy, (&c., all down
to) thoroughly untrue, and bad.

The conduct of him who practises cessation from all (sins), is that of a
man who does not kill living creatures; it is worthy, pure, (&c., all
down to) thoroughly true, and good.

The conduct of a man who in one regard practises cessation from all
(sins) and in another does not, is

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

that of a man who kills some living creatures and does not kill others;
it is worthy, pure, (&c., all down to) thoroughly true, and good. (78)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Those whom we have been treating of, fall under the two heads: merit and
demerit; (the former is when the Self is) at rest, (the latter, when it
is) in disturbance.

Now the explanation of the first subject is as follows:

There are enumerated three hundred and sixty-three philosophical
schools <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1](#fn_1123): those of the Kriyâvâda,
those of the Akriyâvâda, those of the A*gñ*ânikavâda, and those of the
Vainayikavâda. These (philosophers) teach final beatitude, they teach
final deliverance, they speak as *S*râvakas, they speak as teachers of
*S*râvakas <span id="fr_1132"></span>[2](#fn_1124). (79)

All these philosophers, founders of systems of their own, differing in
intellect, will, character, opinions, taste, undertakings, and plans,
formed one large circle, and every one of them stood in his place.

One man took hold of a vessel quite full of

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

burning coals by an iron pair of tongs, and addressed those
philosophers, founders of systems of their own, differing in intellect,
(&c., all down to) undertakings and plans, in the following way:
'Heighho! ye philosophers, (&c., all down to) undertakings and plans!
take this vessel full of burning coals and hold it for a minute in your
hands! But do not take hold of it by a pair of tongs, nor put out the
fire, nor come to the help of one of your own creed or of an alien creed
(by putting out the fire, &c.); but fair and honest <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1](#fn_1125), without using any trick, stretch out
your hands.' Having thus spoken, the man took hold of the vessel quite
full of burning coals by an iron pair of tongs, and (offered to) put it
in the hands of those philosophers. But the philosophers, (&c., all down
to) undertakings and plans, held back their hands. On this the man
addressed all the philosophers, (&c., all down to) undertakings and
plans, in the following way: 'Heighho, ye philosophers, (&c., all down
to) undertakings and plans! why do you hold back your hands?' 'Our hand
will be burned.' 'What then, if it is burned?' '(We shall suffer) pain.'
'Because you are afraid of pain, you hold back your hands!' (So are all
creatures averse to pain). This is a maxim of general application <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[2](#fn_1126), it is a true principle, a religious
reflection <span id="fr_1135"></span>[3](#fn_1127); this maxim, this
principle, this religious reflection holds good with regard to every
(living being). Therefore those *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as who say
that all sorts of living beings may be beaten or treated with violence
or abused or tormented

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

or deprived of life, will in the time to come <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1](#fn_1128) suffer cutting or piercing, will
experience birth, old age, death, conception in the womb, the Circle of
Births, regeneration, existence as a foetus, the whole scale of mundane
existences, and suffer a variety of pains <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[2](#fn_1129), (80)

They will many times undergo punishment, pulling out of the hair,
threatening, putting in irons, (&c., similar as in § 63, all down to)
whirling round; (they will witness) the death of their mothers, fathers,
brothers, sisters, sons, daughters, and daughters-in-law; (they will
experience) poverty, bad luck, company of hated people, separation from
those whom they love, misery, and despair; they will again and again
wander about in the beginningless and endless, immense wilderness of the
fourfold Sa*m*sâra. They will not reach perfection, (&c., all down to)
not put an end to all misery.--This is a maxim of general application,
(&c., all down to) holds good with regard to every (living being). (81)

But those *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as who say that all sorts of living
beings should not be beaten, &c., will in the time to come not suffer
cutting, &c. They will not undergo many punishments, (&c., all just the
reverse of what has been said in §§ 80, 81, down to) put an end to all
misery. (82)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Thus those beings who practise the first twelve kinds of actions <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[3](#fn_1130), have not attained perfection, (&c.,
all down to) have not, nor do, nor will put an end to all misery. (83)

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

But those beings who practise the thirteenth kind of action, have
attained perfection, (&c., all down to) have put, or put, or will put an
end to all misery. (84)

Thus a monk who obtains his soul's good and benefit, who guards himself,
who (well directs the functions) of his soul, who well exerts himself,
who protects himself (from evil), who is careful of himself, who saves
himself (from the Sa*m*sâra), should withhold his soul (from the twelve
kinds of committing sins). (85)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[355:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1033) Kiriyâ*th*â*n*ê =
kriyâsthânam, literally, the subject of activity.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[356:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1034) Upa*s*ânta and
anupa*s*ânta.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[356:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1035) Vibhaṅga, more
literally, case.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[356:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1036) Da*nd*asamâdâna,
explained pâpôpâdâna.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[356:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1037) A difference is
made between feeling (anubhavanti) and knowing (vidanti): (1) the
sa*ñgñ*ins or rational beings feel and know impressions; (2) the Siddhas
only know them; (3) the reasonless beings only feel them; (4) things
without life neither know nor feel them. Sentient beings are those in
Nos. 1 and 3.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[357:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1038) Compare
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II, 2, 3, 18, note 1. One MS. reads êraga for paraga.
Êraka is the name of a reed.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[357:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1039) Môksha is the
name of a tree = mushkaka. The Â*k*ârâṅga and one of our MSS. have
môraga, peacocks' feathers. But that is out of place here.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[357:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1040) Ku*kkh*a is a
white water-lily. The Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra has ku*kk*aka = kûr*k*aka, brush.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[357:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1041) Pa*kk*aka in the
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[358:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1042) Or a group of
trees.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[358:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1043) A nearly
identical enumeration of places occurs in Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II, 3, 3, 2.
The words in brackets seem to be added later; for *S*îlâṅka does not
comment upon them, and expressly mentions ten places. They are generally
omitted in the sequel when the same passage occurs again.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[358:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1044) Akasmâdda*nd*ê.
The commentators remark that the word akasmât is in Magadha pronounced
by the people as in Sanskrit. The fact is that we meet here and in the
end of the next paragraph with the spelling akasmât, while in the middle
of the paragraphs it is spelled akamhâ, which is the true Prâk*ri*t
form.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[359:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1045) Paspalum
Sobriculatum.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[359:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1046) They are
specialised in the text as *S*yâmaka*m* tri*n*a*m*, mukundaka
vrîhiûsita, and kâlêsuka. Only the two first are mentioned in our
dictionaries.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[359:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1047) In the Dipikâ the
following versus memorialis is quoted, in which the names of places
mentioned in the text are defined: grâmô v*ri*tyâ v*ri*ta*h* syân
nagaram uru*k*aturgôpurôdbhâsi*s*ôbham khê*t*a*m* nadyadrivêsh*t*a*m*
pariv*ri*tam abhita*h* kharva*t*am parvatêna \| grâmair yuktam
ma*t*ambam dalitada*s*a*s*atai*h* (?) pattana*m* ratnayônir
drô*n*âkhya*m* sindhuvêlâvalayitam atha sambâdhana*m*
vâ<sup>ऽ</sup>dri*sri*ṅge \|\| It will be seen that the meaning of these
terms given in this verse differs from that given in notes
[3](sbe4532.htm#fn_473)-[11](sbe4532.htm#fn_481), [p.
176](sbe4532.htm#page_176).

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[360:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1048) The same passage
occurs Kalpa Sûtra, Lives of the *G*inas, § 92, part i, p. 249.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[361:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1049) These are the
eight kinds of pride, madasthânâni.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[361:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1050) The original has
kâya*m*, the body.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[361:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1051) Nettê*n*a =
nêtrê*n*a. The commentator says that it is a particular tree; but I
think the usual meaning of nêtra, viz. rope, suits better.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[362:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1052) Pi*tth*ima*m*sî,
literally, who eats the flesh of the back.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[362:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1053) Anârya.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[362:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1054) Salya.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[362:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1055) Pa*kk*âyâti,
pratyâyâti. Dîpikâ: avi*s*vâsyatayâ pratyâyâti prakhyâti*m* yâti.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[363:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1056) Concerning the
fourfold division of speech see above, [p. 335](sbe4565.htm#page_335),
and part i, p. 150, note 2.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[363:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1057) The meaning is
that Brahmans declare it a capital crime to kill a Brahman, but a venial
one to kill a Sûdra.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[363:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1058) Tammûyattâe =
tamômûkatvêna, explained either, blind by birth, or absolutely stupid or
ignorant.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[364:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1059) The Karman of the
preceding twelve kinds of sins is called sâmparâyika (see p. 298, n. 3).
It takes hold of the Atman till it is annihilated; it is a lasting
Karman, while that described in the next paragraph is of a momentary
existence.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[364:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1060) Iriyâvahiya =
îryapathika or airyapathika. The term îryapatha literally means, way of
walking, but technically it denotes the actions of which the life of a
correct ascetic consists, and airyapathika, therefore, is the Karman
inseparable from it.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[364:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1061) The text consists
of a string of technical terms, many of which have been explained
already. I here incorporate the explanation in the translation. For more
particulars see Bhandarkar's Report, p. 98.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[364:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1062) Îryâsamita.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[364:5](sbe4566.htm#fr_1063) Bhâshâsamita.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[364:6](sbe4566.htm#fr_1064) Êsha*n*âsamita.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[364:7](sbe4566.htm#fr_1065)
Bhâ*nd*amâtrâdânanikshêpa*n*asamita.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[364:8](sbe4566.htm#fr_1066)
U*kk*âra-prasrava*n*a-*s*lêshma-*g*alla-*s*riṅghâ*n*a-parish*th*âpanikâ-samita.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[364:9](sbe4566.htm#fr_1067) Ma*n*a*h*-, vâk-,
kâya-samita.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[364:10](sbe4566.htm#fr_1068) Mana*h*-, yak-,
kâya-gupta.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[365:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1069) An almost
identical passage occurs in the Uttarâdhyayana XXIX, § 71, above p. 372.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[365:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1070) This typical
passage is repeated here though it is apparently out of place.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[365:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1071) Not only this
paragraph but also all that follows up to the last paragraph seems to be
a later addition. For in the last paragraph the subject treated of in §§
1-27 is taken up again and brought to its conclusion. After the
supplement §§ 25-27 a separate treatise on the main subject is inserted
§§ 28-60 (28-57 on demerit, 58-59 on merit, § 60 on a mixed state);
after this follows a similar treatise in §§ 61-77 (61-68 on demerit,
69-74 on merit, 75-77 on a mixed state). In § 78 we have again a
supplement, and §§ 79-82 contain another supplement (or perhaps two). §§
83-85 give the conclusion of the first treatise (§§ 1-24) and must
originally have followed immediately after § 24. So we have here,
besides some appendices, three distinct original treatises on the same
subject, very awkwardly pieced together to form one continuous lecture.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[366:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1072) E. g. the
laughing of monkeys.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[366:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1073) Laksha*n*a. The
mystical signs meant are the svastika, &c.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[366:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1074) Vya*ñg*ana. The
seeds are sesamum, beans, &c.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[366:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1075) Kâki*n*î,
rendered ratna in the commentary.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[366:5](sbe4566.htm#fr_1076) Âtharva*n*î.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[366:6](sbe4566.htm#fr_1077) Pâka*s*âsanî =
indra*g*âla.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[366:7](sbe4566.htm#fr_1078) M*ri*ga*k*akra.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[366:8](sbe4566.htm#fr_1079) According to the
commentary the Vaitâlî art teaches to raise a stick (? da*nd*am
utthâpayati, perhaps to lay a punishment on somebody) by spells; and the
Ardhavaitâlika, to remove it. In Pâli vêtala*m* means the magic art of
bringing dead bodies to life by spells, see Childers' Dictionary of the
Pâli Language, sub voce.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[367:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1080) Âyama*n*i*m*, it
is omitted in some MSS. and in the commentaries.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[367:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1081) Vipratipanna.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[367:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1082) Sôvariya,
translated saukarika.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[367:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1083) I.e. he will be
born in one of the low courses of existence.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[369:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1084) Khaladâ*n*ê*n*a
vâ surâthâlaê*n*a vâ. My translation is conjectural.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[369:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1085) Gu*n*a; omitted
in the printed text.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[370:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1086) A*kkh*arâê
apphâlettâ bhavai = apsarâyâ*s* *k*apu*t*ikâyâs âsphâlayitâ bhavati. I
am not sure that I have hit the meaning; apsarâ is perhaps derived from
apasârayati, the word is wanting in our dictionaries.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[371:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1087) Compare Kalpa
Sûtra. Lives of the *G*inas, § 66, notes. Our commentator explains the
prâya*sk*itta (expiatory acts) as ceremonies counteracting bad dreams.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[371:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1088) Compare Kalpa
Sûtra, Lives of the *G*inas, § 14, part i, p. 223.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[372:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1089) For according to
the commentaries the worst of all regions is the south, the worst state
of being that of denizens of hell, and the dark fortnight is the worse
half of the month.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[372:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1090) *Th*â*n*ê =
sthânam.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[373:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1091) These words are
in the 2nd person sing. of the imperative, which, according to Pâ*n*ini
III, 4, 2, may be used to express a repeated or habitual action.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[373:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1092) Utku*ñk*ana.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[373:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1093) Gilli,
purushadvayôtkshiptâ *gh*ôllikâ.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[373:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1094) Thilli,
explained: a vehicle drawn by a pair of mules; but, according to Leumann
s*v*., saddle.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[373:5](sbe4566.htm#fr_1095)
Sîyasandimâ*n*iyâ, explained *s*ibikâvi*s*êsha.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[374:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1096) Mâsha is a weight
of gold.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[374:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1097) A sort of rice.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[374:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1098) A sort of pulse
or lentil.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[374:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1099) A sort of
kidney-bean.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[374:5](sbe4566.htm#fr_1100) Probably Dolichos
Sinensis.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[374:6](sbe4566.htm#fr_1101) A sort of pulse,
Dolichos Uniflorus.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[374:7](sbe4566.htm#fr_1102) I cannot identify
this plant, our dictionaries do not contain this or a similar word.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[374:8](sbe4566.htm#fr_1103) This word ought
perhaps to be divided in two; êlâ are cardamoms, but what mi*kkh*a is I
cannot say.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[374:9](sbe4566.htm#fr_1104) Bhâgilla =
bhâgika, one who gets the sixth part of the products (e.g. of
agriculture) of the work for which he is hired.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[375:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1105) The following two
words, vêga*kkh*ahiya and aṅga*kkh*ahiya, I cannot translate.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[375:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1106) Compare § 55.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[375:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1107) Compare § 21.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[375:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1108) These words from
the end of the paragraph are to be supplied here, or rather the
following passage has been inserted in the <span id="page_376">p.
376</span> middle of the sentence so that it is apparently cut in two,
of which the first lacks the verb.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[376:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1109) There is,
apparently, a pun in the three words va*gg*a, paṅka, ayasa, for they
mean also steel, mud, iron.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[376:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1110) Mui*m* or sâya*m*
or sui*m*. The Dîpikâ has *s*ruti. The following words are rati,
dh*ri*ti, mati.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[377:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1111) Compare § 56 and
note [1](#fn_1081) on [p. 372](#page_372).

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[378:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1112) The same passage
occurs, mutatis mutandis, in the Kalpa Sûtra, Lives of the *G*inas, §
118; see part i, p. 261, and notes 1 and 2.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[378:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1113) The author of the
Dîpikâ offers diverse interpretations of this division of obstacles,
which are apparently guesses and not based on a solid tradition. In the
parallel passage of the Kalpa Sûtra, § 119, the division is according
to: matter, space, time, and affects.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[379:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1114) The author of the
Dîpikâ states that such monks beg in the morning.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[379:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1115) Laga*nd*asâi*n*ô.
They lie in such a position that only their heels and head, or the back
touch the ground.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[380:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1116) I leave out
agattayâ or agamayâ, which is not explained in the Dîpikâ.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[380:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1117) Grâmaka*nt*aka,
either the abuse met with in villages, or the objects of the senses
(indriyagrâma).

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[380:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1118) Bhayantârô
bhavanti. Bhayantârô is explained: who go (gantâra*h*) from bhava to
Môksha.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[381:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1119) The following
description contains passages recurring in the Kalpa Sûtra, §§ 14, 15.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[381:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1120) Kar*n*apî*th*a.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[382:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1121) *S*îlâṅka says
with regard to § 76: 'The MSS. of the text generally differ from one
another in this passage; the text commented upon in the *T*îkâ does not
agree with that of any MS. I therefore comment upon the text exhibited
in one MS. If, therefore, my text does not agree with that (of the
reader) he should not be alarmed.' All the MSS. I use have the same
text, that of the commentator. It is characteristic of the way in which
Harshakula, the author of the Dîpikâ, worked, that he copies *S*îlâṅka's
above remark with some verbal alterations.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[382:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1122) Kriyâdhikara*n*a.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[382:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1123) Asahâyâ.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[383:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1124) Here the
commentator inserts the following story: In Râ*g*ag*ri*ha lived a friar
versed in magic arts; he carried off every woman he saw. On the citizens
complaining about the rape, the king resolved to find out and punish the
man. Catching sight of him at last on the fifth day, the king went after
him till the friar disappeared in a hollow tree of the park, which led
to an underground room. There the king followed and killed him. He
released all the women whom the friar had captured. But one of them
would not return to her husband, being desperately smitten with love for
her seducer. On the advice of some wise men she was made to drink the
friar's (pounded) bones mixed up with milk. This took the spell off her
and cured her of her strange passion.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[383:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1125) Ûsiyaphaliha =
u*kkh*ritaparigha. The commentator mistakes phaliha for spa*t*ika, and
vainly labours to make out a sound meaning.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[383:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1126) Uddish*t*a.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[383:4](sbe4566.htm#fr_1127) Concerning the
Gu*n*avratas see Bhandarkar's Report, 1883, 1884, p. 114. The
*S*îlavratas are apparently identical with the A*n*uvratas, ibidem.
Hoernle translates this passage: by exercises in the moral restraints
(imposed) by the religious vows as well as in the (general)
renunciations and (special) Pôsaha-abstinences. Uvâsaga Dasâo,
translation, p. 41.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[384:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1128) The same passage
occurs below, 7, 4, and Aupapâtika Sûtra, § 124. Upâsakada*s*â, § 66.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[384:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1129) Samâdhi, which is
elsewhere explained by môksha, but in our case it cannot be final
liberation, but a state of purity of the soul.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[384:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1130) Virati.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[385:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1131) According to the
commentators there are 180 schools of Kriyâvâdins, 84 of Akriyâvâdins,
67 of A*gñ*ânikavâdins, and 32 of Vainayikavâdins. These numbers are
arrived at by calculation, not by actual observation. E.g. the 180
possible schools of the Kriyâvâdins are calculated in the following way.
The nine categories of the *G*ainas are: *g*îva, a*g*îva, âsrava,
sa*m*vara, nir*g*arâ, pu*n*ya, pâpa, bandha, and môksha. Each of them
may be regarded as svata*h* and parata*h*, as nitya and anitya with
regard to kâla, î*s*vara, âtma, niyati, and svabhâva. By multiplying 9
successively in 2, 2, 5, we find 180 to be the number of possible
schools of Kriyâvâdins.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[385:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1132) I.e. they learn
these heresies from their teachers, and teach them to their pupils.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[386:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1133)
Niyâgapa*d*ivanna.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[386:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1134) Tulâ.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[386:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1135) Samôsara*n*a =
samavasara*n*a, explained: dharmavi*k*âra, viz. of the true adage:
âtmavat sarvabhûtâni ya*h* pa*s*yati sa pa*s*yati.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[387:1](sbe4566.htm#fr_1136) Âgantu.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[387:2](sbe4566.htm#fr_1137) Kalaṅkalîbhâva.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[387:3](sbe4566.htm#fr_1138) Described in §§
5-21. See [p. 365](#page_365), note [3](#fn_1063).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 2, Lecture 3: Knowledge of Food](sbe4567)
