[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4530)  [Next](sbe4532) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

### TWENTY-NINTH LECTURE.

###### THE EXERTION IN RIGHTEOUSNESS.

O long-lived (*G*ambûsvâmin)! I (Sudharman) have heard the following
discourse from the venerable (Mahâvîra).

Here, forsooth, the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, of the Ka*s*yapa Gôtra,
has delivered this lecture called the exertion in righteousness. Many
creatures, who truly believe in the subject (taught in this lecture),
put their faith in it, give credence to it, accept it, practise it,
comply with it, study it, understand it, learn it, and act up to it
according to the precept (of the *G*inas) <span
id="fr_422"></span>[1](#fn_421)--have obtained perfection,
enlightenment, deliverance, final beatitude, and have put an end to all
misery.

This lecture treats of the following subjects:

1\. sa*m*vêga, longing for liberation;

2\. nirvêda, disregard of worldly objects;

3\. dharma*s*raddhâ, desire of the Law;

4\. gurusâdharmika*s*u*s*rûsha*n*â, obedience to co-religionists and to
the Guru.

5\. âlô*k*anâ, confession of sins before the Guru;

6\. nindâ, repenting of one's sins to oneself;

7\. garhâ, repenting of one's sins before the Guru;

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

8\. sâmâyika, moral and intellectual purity of the soul;

9\. *k*aturvi*ms*atistava, adoration of the twenty-four *G*inas;

10\. vandana, paying reverence to the Guru;

11\. pratikrama*n*a, expiation of sins;

12\. kâyôtsarga, a particular position of the body;

13\. pratyâkhyâna, self-denial;

14\. stavastutimaṅgala, praises and hymns;

15\. kâlasya pratyupêksha*n*â, keeping the right time;

16\. prâya*sk*ittakara*n*a, practising penance;

17\. kshamâpana, begging forgiveness;

18\. svâdhyâya, study;

19\. vâ*k*anâ, recital of the sacred texts;

20\. parip*rikkh*anâ, questioning (the teacher);

21\. parâvartanâ, repetition;

22\. anuprêkshâ, pondering;

23\. dharmakathâ, religious discourse;

24\. *s*rutasyârâdhanâ, acquisition of sacred knowledge;

25\. êkâgramana*h*sannivê*s*anâ, concentration of thoughts;

26\. sa*m*yama, control;

27\. tapas, austerities;

28\. vyavadâna, cutting off the Karman;

29\. sukhâ*s*âta, renouncing pleasure;

30\. apratibaddhatâ, mental independence;

31\. vi*k*itra*s*ayanâsanasêvanâ, using unfrequented lodgings and beds;

32\. vinivartanâ, turning from the world;

33\. sambhôgapratyâkhyâna, renouncing collection of alms in one district
only;

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

34\. upadhipratyâkhyâna, renouncing articles of use;

35\. âhârapratyâkhyâna, renouncing food;

36\. kashâyapratyâkhyâna, conquering the passions;

37\. yôgapratyâkhyâna, renouncing activity;

38\. *s*arîrapratyâkhyâna, renouncing the body;

39\. sahâyapratyâkhyâna, renouncing company;

40\. bhaktapratyâkhyâna, renouncing all food;

41\. sadbhâvapratyâkhyâna, perfect renunciation;

42\. pratirûpatâ, conforming to the standard;

43\. vaiyâv*ri*tya, doing service;

44\. sarvagu*n*asampûr*n*atâ, fulfilling all virtues;

45\. vîtarâgatâ, freedom from passion;

46\. kshânti, patience;

47\. mukti, freedom from greed;

48, âr*g*ava, simplicity;

49\. mârdava, humility;

50\. bhâvasatya, sincerity of mind;

51\. kara*n*asatya, sincerity of religious practice;

52\. yôgasatya, sincerity of acting;

53\. manôguptatâ, watchfulness of the mind;

54\. vâg-guptatâ, watchfulness of the speech;

55\. kâyaguptatâ, watchfulness of the body;

56\. mana*h*samâdhâra*n*â, discipline of the mind;

57\. vâksamâdhâra*n*â, discipline of the speech;

58\. kâyasamâdhâra*n*â, discipline of the body;

59\. *gñ*ânasampannatâ, possession of knowledge;

60\. dar*s*anasampannatâ, possession of faith;

61\. *k*âritrasampannatâ, possession of conduct;

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

62\. *s*rôtrêndriyanigraha, subduing the ear;

63\. *k*akshurindriyanigraha, subduing the eye;

64\. ghrâ*n*êndriyanigraha, subduing the organ of smell;

65\. *g*ihvêndriyanigraha, subduing the tongue;

66\. spar*s*anêndriyanigraha, subduing the organ of touch;

67\. krôdhavi*g*aya, conquering anger;

68\. mânavi*g*aya, conquering pride;

69\. mâyâvi*g*aya, conquering deceit;

70\. lôbhavi*g*aya, conquering greed;

71\. prêmadvêshamithyâdar*s*a*n*avi*g*aya, conquering love, hate, and
wrong belief;

72\. *s*ailê*s*î, stability;

73\. akarmatâ, freedom from Karman.

1\. Sir, what does the soul obtain by the longing for liberation? By the
longing for liberation the soul obtains an intense desire of the Law; by
an intense desire of the Law he quickly arrives at an (increased)
longing for liberation; he destroys anger, pride, deceit, and greed,
which reproduce themselves infinitely; he acquires no (bad) Karman, and
ridding himself of wrong belief which is the consequence of the latter,
he becomes possessed of right faith; by the purity of faith some will
reach perfection after one birth; nobody, however, who has got this
purity, will be born more than thrice before he reaches perfection. (1)

2\. Sir, what does the soul obtain by disregard of worldly objects <span
id="fr_423"></span>[1](#fn_422)? By disregard of worldly objects the
soul quickly feels disgust for pleasures enjoyed by gods, men, and
animals; he becomes indifferent to

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

all objects; thereby he ceases to engage in any undertakings, in
consequence of which he leaves the road of Sa*m*sâra and enters the road
to perfection. (2)

3\. Sir <span id="fr_424"></span>[1](#fn_423), what does the soul obtain
by the desire of the Law? By the desire of the Law the soul becomes
indifferent to pleasures and happiness to which he was attached; he
abandons the life of householders, and as a houseless monk he puts an
end to all pains of body and mind, which consist in (the suffering of)
cutting, piercing, union (with unpleasant things), &c.; and he obtains
unchecked happiness. (3)

4\. By obedience to co-religionists and to the Guru the soul obtains
discipline (vinaya). By discipline and avoidance of misconduct (towards
the teacher <span id="fr_425"></span>[2](#fn_424)) he avoids being
reborn as a denizen of hell, an animal, a (low) man, or a (bad) god; by
zealous praise of, devotion to, and respect for (the Guru) he obtains
birth as a (good) man or god, gains perfection and beatitude, does all
praiseworthy actions prescribed by discipline, and prevails upon others
to adopt discipline. (4)

5\. By confession of sins (before the Guru) the soul gets rid of the
thorns, as it were, of deceit, misapplied austerities <span
id="fr_426"></span>[3](#fn_425), and wrong belief, which obstruct the
way to final liberation and cause an endless migration of the soul; he
obtains simplicity, whereby the soul which is free from deceit does not
acquire that Karman which results in his having a carnal desire for a
woman or eunuch <span id="fr_427"></span>[4](#fn_426), and annihilates
such Karman as he had acquired before. (5)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

6\. By repenting of one's sins to oneself the soul obtains repentance,
and becoming indifferent by repentance he prepares for himself an
(ascending) scale of virtues <span id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_427), by
which he destroys the Karman resulting from delusion. (6)

7\. By repenting of one's sins before the Guru the soul obtains
humiliation; feeling humiliated, he will leave off all blameable
occupations <span id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_428), and apply himself to
praiseworthy occupations, whereby a houseless monk will stop infinite
disabling <span id="fr_430"></span>[3](#fn_429) developments. (7)

8\. By moral and intellectual purity (literally, equilibrium) the soul
ceases from sinful occupations. (8)

9\. By the adoration of the twenty-four *G*inas the soul arrives at
purity of faith. (9)

10\. By paying reverence (to the Guru) the soul destroys such Karman as
leads to birth in low families, and acquires such Karman as leads to
birth in noble families; he wins the affection of people, which results
in his being looked upon as an authority, and he brings about general
goodwill. (10)

11\. By expiation of sins he obviates transgressions of the vows;
thereby he stops the Âsravas, preserves a pure conduct, practises the
eight articles <span id="fr_431"></span>[4](#fn_430), does not neglect
(the practice of control), and pays great attention to it. (11)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

12\. By Kâyôtsarga he gets rid of past and present (transgressions which
require) Prâya*sk*itta <span id="fr_432"></span>[1](#fn_431); thereby
his mind is set at ease like a porter who is eased of his burden; and
engaging in praiseworthy contemplation he enjoys happiness. (12)

13\. By self-denial he shuts, as it were, the doors of the Âsravas; by
self-denial he prevents desires rising in him; by prevention of desires
he becomes, as it were, indifferent and cool towards all objects. (13)

14\. By praises and hymns he obtains the wisdom consisting in knowledge,
faith, and conduct; thereby he gains such improvement, that he will put
an end to his worldly existence <span id="fr_433"></span>[2](#fn_432),
(or) be born afterwards in one of the Kalpas and Vimânas <span
id="fr_434"></span>[3](#fn_433). (14)

15\. By keeping the right time he destroys the Karman which obstructs
right knowledge. (15)

16\. By practising Prâya*sk*itta <span id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_431)
he gets rid of sins, and commits no transgressions; he who correctly
practises Prâya*sk*itta, gains the road and the reward of the road <span
id="fr_436"></span>[4](#fn_434), he wins the reward of good conduct.
(16)

17\. By begging forgiveness he obtains happiness of mind; thereby he
acquires a kind disposition towards all kinds of living beings <span
id="fr_437"></span>[5](#fn_435); by this

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

kind disposition he obtains purity of character and freedom from fear.
(17)

18\. By study he destroys the Karman which obstructs right knowledge.
(18)

19\. By the recital of the sacred texts he obtains destruction of
Karman, and contributes to preserve the sacred lore, whereby he acquires
the Law of the Tîrtha <span id="fr_438"></span>[1](#fn_436), which again
leads him to the complete destruction of Karman, and to the final
annihilation of worldly existence. (19)

20\. By questioning (the teacher) he arrives at a correct comprehension
of the Sûtra and its meaning, and he puts an end to the Karman which
produces doubts and delusion. (20)

21\. By repetition he reproduces the sounds (i.e. syllables) and commits
them to memory. (21)

22\. By pondering (on what he has learned) he loosens the firm hold
which the seven kinds of Karman, except the Âyushka <span
id="fr_439"></span>[2](#fn_437) (have upon the soul); he shortens their
duration when it was to be a long one; he mitigates their power when it
was intense; (he reduces their sphere of action when it was a wide
one) <span id="fr_440"></span>[3](#fn_438); he may either acquire
Âyushka-karman or not, but he no more accumulates Karman which

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

produces unpleasant feelings, and he quickly crosses the very large
forest of the fourfold Sa*m*sâra, which is without beginning and end.
(22)

23\. By religious discourses he obtains destruction of the Karman; by
religious discourses he exalts the creed, and by exalting the creed he
acquires Karman, which secures, for the future, permanent bliss. (23)

24\. By acquisition of sacred knowledge he destroys ignorance, and will
not be corrupted by worldliness. (24)

25\. By concentration of his thoughts he obtains stability of the mind.
(25)

26\. By control he obtains freedom from sins. (26)

27\. By austerities he cuts off the Karman <span
id="fr_441"></span>[1](#fn_439). (27)

28\. By cutting off the Karman he obtains (the fourth stage of pure
meditation characterised by) freedom from actions, by doing no actions
he will obtain perfection, enlightenment, deliverance, and final
beatitude, and will put an end to all misery. (28)

29\. By renouncing pleasures he obtains freedom from false longing,
whereby he becomes compassionate, humble, free from sorrow, and destroys
the Karman produced by delusion regarding conduct. (29)

30\. By mental independence he gets rid of attachment, whereby he will
concentrate his thoughts (on the Law), and will for ever be without
attachment and fondness (for worldly things). (30)

31\. By using unfrequented lodgings and beds he obtains the Gupti of
conduct, whereby he will use

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

allowed food, be steady in his conduct, be exclusively delighted with
(control), obtain a yearning for deliverance, and cut off the tie of the
eightfold Karman. (31)

32\. By turning from the world he will strive to do no bad actions, and
will eliminate his already acquired Karman by its destruction; then he
will cross the forest of the fourfold Sa*m*sâra. (32)

33\. By renouncing collection of alms in one district only <span
id="fr_442"></span>[1](#fn_440) he overcomes obstacles <span
id="fr_443"></span>[2](#fn_441); unchecked by them he exerts himself to
attain liberation; he is content with the alms he gets, and does not
hope for, care for, wish, desire, or covet those of a fellow-monk; not
envying other monks he takes up a separate, agreeable lodging <span
id="fr_444"></span>[3](#fn_442). (33)

34\. By renouncing articles of use <span id="fr_445"></span>[4](#fn_443)
he obtains successful study; without articles of use he becomes exempt
from desires, and does not suffer misery. (34)

35\. By renouncing (forbidden) food he ceases to act for the sustenance
of his life; ceasing to act for the sustenance of his life he does not
suffer misery when without food. (35)

36\. By conquering his passions he becomes free from passions; thereby
he becomes indifferent to happiness and pains. (36)

37\. By renouncing activity he obtains inactivity, by ceasing to act he
acquires no new Karman, and destroys the Karman he had acquired before.
(37)

38\. By renouncing his body he acquires the pre-eminent virtues of the
Siddhas, by the possession

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of which he goes to the highest region of the universe, and becomes
absolutely happy. (38)

39\. By renouncing company he obtains singleness; being single and
concentrating his mind, he avoids disputes, quarrels, passions, and
censoriousness, and he acquires a high degree of control, of Sa*m*vara,
and of carefulness <span id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_444). (39)

40\. By renouncing all food he prevents his being born again many
hundreds of times. (40)

41\. By perfect renunciation <span id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_445) he
enters the final (fourth stage of pure meditation), whence there is no
return; a monk who is in that state, destroys the four remnants of
Karman which even a Kêvalin possesses, viz. vêdanîya, âyushka, nâman,
and gôtra <span id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_446); and then he will put an
end to all misery. (41)

42\. By conforming to the standard of monks <span
id="fr_449"></span>[4](#fn_447) he obtains ease, thereby he will be
careful, wear openly the excellent badges of the order, be of perfect
righteousness, possess firmness and the Samitis, inspire all beings with
confidence, mind but few things <span id="fr_450"></span>[5](#fn_448),
subdue his senses, and practise, in a high degree, the Samitis and
austerities. (42)

43\. By doing service he acquires the Karman

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

which brings about for him the nâman and gôtra of a Tîrthakara. (43)

By fulfilling all virtues he secures that he will not be born again;
thereby he will become exempt from pains of the body and mind. (44)

45\. By freedom from passion he cuts off the ties of attachment and
desire; thereby he becomes indifferent to all agreeable and disagreeable
sounds, touches, colours, and smells. (45)

46\. By patience he overcomes troubles. (46)

47\. By freedom from greed he obtains voluntary poverty, whereby he will
become inaccessible to desire for property. (47)

48\. By simplicity he will become upright in actions, thoughts, and
speech, and he will become veracious; thereby he will truly practise the
Law. (48)

49\. By humility he will acquire freedom from self-conceit; thereby he
will become of a kind and meek disposition, and avoid the eight kinds of
pride. (49)

50\. By sincerity of mind he obtains purity of mind, which will cause
him to exert himself for the fulfilment of the Law which the *G*inas
have proclaimed; and he will practise the Law in the next world too.
(50)

51\. By sincerity in religious practice he obtains proficiency in it;
being proficient in it he will act up to his words. (51)

52\. By sincerity of acting he will become pure in his actions. (52)

53\. By watchfulness <span id="fr_451"></span>[1](#fn_449) of the mind
he concentrates his thoughts; thereby he truly practises control. (53)

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

54\. By watchfulness of speech he keeps free from prevarication; thereby
he enables his mind to act properly. (54)

55\. By watchfulness of the body he obtains Sa*m*vara <span
id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_450); thereby he prevents sinful Âsravas.
(55)

56\. By discipline of the mind he obtains concentration of his thoughts;
thereby he obtains development of knowledge, which produces
righteousness and annihilates wrong belief. (56)

57\. By discipline of the speech he obtains development of faith,
whereby he acquires facility of becoming enlightened, and destroys
preventing causes. (57)

58\. By discipline of the body he obtains development of conduct, which
causes him to conduct himself according to the regulation; thereby he
destroys the four remnants of Karman which even a Kêvalin
possesses <span id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_451); after that he obtains
perfection, enlightenment, deliverance, and final beatitude, and he puts
an end to all misery. (58)

59\. By possession of knowledge he acquires an understanding of words
and their meaning; thereby he will not perish in the forest of the
fourfold Sa*m*sâra; as a needle with its thread will not be lost, thus
the soul possessing the sacred lore <span
id="fr_454"></span>[3](#fn_452) will not be lost in the Sa*m*sâra; he
performs all prescribed actions relating to knowledge, discipline,
austerities, and conduct, and well versed in his

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

own and in heterodox creeds he will become invincible. (59)

60\. By possession of faith he annihilates wrong belief which is the
cause of worldly existence, and he will not lose his inner light; but he
endues his Self with the highest knowledge and faith, and purifies
it <span id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_453). (60)

61\. By possession of conduct he obtains a stability like that of the
king of mountains <span id="fr_456"></span>[2](#fn_454) (viz. Mêru),
whereby a houseless monk destroys the four remnants of Karman which even
a Kêvalin possesses; after that he obtains perfection, enlightenment,
deliverance, and final beatitude, and puts an end to all misery. (61)

62\. By subduing the organ of hearing he overcomes his delight with or
aversion to all pleasant or unpleasant sounds, he acquires no Karman
produced thereby, and destroys the Karman he had acquired before. (62)

63-66. (All this applies also to his) subduing the organs of sight, of
smelling, of tasting, and of touch (with regard to) pleasant colours,
smells, tastes, and touches. (63-66)

67\. By conquering anger he obtains patience; he acquires no Karman
productive of anger <span id="fr_457"></span>[3](#fn_455), and destroys
the Karman he had acquired before. (67)

68\. By conquering pride he obtains simplicity, &c. (as in 67,
substituting pride for anger). (68)

69\. By conquering deceit he obtains humility, &c. (as in 67,
substituting deceit for anger). (69)

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

70\. By conquering greed he obtains content, &c. (as in 67, substituting
greed for anger). (70)

71\. By conquering love, hate, and wrong belief he exerts himself for
right knowledge, faith, and conduct, then he will cut off the fetters of
the eightfold Karman; he will first destroy the twenty-eight kinds <span
id="fr_458"></span>[1](#fn_456) of Karman, which are productive of
delusion; (then) the five kinds of obstruction to right knowledge <span
id="fr_459"></span>[2](#fn_457), the nine kinds of obstruction to right
faith <span id="fr_460"></span>[3](#fn_458), and the five kinds of
obstacles (called Antarâya): the last three remnants of Karman he
destroys simultaneously; afterwards he obtains absolute knowledge and
faith, which is supreme, full, complete, unchecked, clear, faultless,
and giving light (or penetrating) the whole universe; and while he still
acts <span id="fr_461"></span>[4](#fn_459), he acquires but such Karman
as is inseparable from religious acts <span
id="fr_462"></span>[5](#fn_460); the pleasant feelings (produced by it)
last but two moments: in the first moment it is acquired, in the second
it is experienced, and in the third it is destroyed; this Karman is
produced, comes into contact (with the soul), takes rise, is
experienced, and is destroyed; for all time to come he is exempt from
Karman. (71)

72\. Then <span id="fr_463"></span>[6](#fn_461) when his life is spent
up to less than

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

half a muhûrta, he discontinues to act, and enters upon the (third
degree of) pure meditation <span id="fr_464"></span>[1](#fn_462), from
which there is no relapse (to lower degrees), and which requires most
subtile functions only (of his organs); he first stops the functions of
his mind, then the functions of speech, then those of the body, at last
he ceases to breathe. During the time required for pronouncing five
short syllables, he is engaged in the final pure meditation, in which
all functions (of his organs) have ceased, and he simultaneously
annihilates the four remnants of Karman, viz. vêdanîya, âyushka, nâman,
and gôtra <span id="fr_465"></span>[2](#fn_463). (72)

73\. Then having, by all methods, got rid of his audârika, kârma*n*a
(and tai*g*asa) bodies, the soul takes the form of a straight line, goes
in one moment, without touching anything and taking up no space,
(upwards to the highest Akâ*s*a), and there develops into its natural
form, obtains perfection, enlightenment, deliverance, and final
beatitude, and puts an end to all misery. (73)

This indeed is the subject of the lecture called exertion in
righteousness, which the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra has told, declared,
explained, demonstrated. (74)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[158:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_422) Here we have no
less than ten verbs, many of which are synonyms, with probably no
well-defined difference in their meaning. This heaping of synonymous
words is a peculiarity of the archaic style. The commentators always
labour hard to assign to each word an appropriate meaning, but by
sometimes offering different sets of explanations they show that their
ingenuity of interpretation was not backed by tradition.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[161:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_423) Or aversion to the
Circle of Births.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[162:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_424) In this way all
paragraphs up to § 72 open with a question of always the same form. I
drop the question in the sequel.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[162:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_425) Atyâ*s*âtana.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[162:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_426) Nidâna, cf. [p.
60](sbe4515.htm#page_60), n. [2](sbe4515.htm#fn_173).

<span id="fn_426"></span>[162:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_427) This is the meaning
of the words itthîvêya napu*m*sagavêya*m* <span id="page_163">p.
163</span> = strîvêda, napu*m*sakavêda, as explained by the commentators
on XXXII, 102.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[163:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_428)
Kara*n*agu*n*a*s*rêdhîm pratipadyatê. It is difficult to render this
phrase adequately; the meaning is that by successively destroying moral
impurities one arrives at higher and higher virtues.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[163:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_429) Yôga, i.e. the
cause of the production of Karman.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[163:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_430) Ghâti, compare
Bhandarkar, Report, p. 93, note \*.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[163:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_431) See Twenty-fourth
Lecture, p. 129 ff.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[164:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_435) Expiatory rites,
âlô*k*anâ, &c.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[164:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_433) Antakriyâ,
explained by mukti.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[164:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_434) The Kalpas and the
Vimânas are the heavens of the Vaimânika gods, see below, [p.
226](sbe4538.htm#page_226).

<span id="fn_434"></span>[164:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_436) By road is meant
the means of acquiring right knowledge, and by the reward of the road,
right knowledge. The reward of good conduct is mukti.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[164:5](sbe4531.htm#fr_437)
Savvapâ*n*abhûya*g*îvasattâ. The prâ*n*as possess from two to four
organs of sense, the *g*îvas five, the bhûtas are plants, and the
sattvas are all remaining beings.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[165:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_438) According to the
commentaries, by Tîrtha are meant the Ga*n*adharas.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[165:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_439) Concerning the
eight kinds of Karman, see XXXIII, 2 and 3, [p.
192](sbe4534.htm#page_192). Âyushka is that Karman which determines the
length of time which one is to live. A somewhat different explanation of
this Karman is given by Bhandarkar, loc. cit., p. 97, note.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[165:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_440) The passage in
question is an addition in some MSS., as the commentators tell us. The
meaning seems to be that the Karman which was attached to many parts of
the soul is restricted to fewer places by the influence of the purity
superinduced on the soul by pondering.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[166:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_441) Vyavadâna is the
cutting off of the Karman and the subsequent purity of the soul.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[167:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_442) Sambhôga =
êkama*nd*alyâm âhârakara*n*am.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[167:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_443) Âlambanâ,
glânatâdi.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[167:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_444) Du*kk*a*m*
suhase.g*g*a*m* uvasa*m*pa*gg*ittâ*n*a*m* viharai.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[167:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_445) Except such as are
obligatory, e.g. his broom, the mukhavastrikâ, &c.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[168:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_446) Samâhiê = samâhita
or samâdhimân.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[168:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_447) Sadbhâva
pratyâkhyâna. The Dîpikâ gives the following explanation: he makes the
renunciation in such a way that he need not make it a second time.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[168:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_448) Vêdanîya is that
Karman which produces effects that must be experienced, as pleasure or
pain; âyushka is the Karman that determines the length of life; nâman
and gôtra cause him to be born as such or such an individual in this or
that family; see Thirty-third Lecture, verses 2 and 3, [p.
192](sbe4534.htm#page_192) f.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[168:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_449) Explained:
sthavirakalpasâdhuvêshadhâritvam.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[168:5](sbe4531.htm#fr_450) Appa*d*ilêha =
alpapratyupêksha; he has to inspect few things, because he uses only
few.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[169:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_451) Gupti.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[170:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_452) For Sa*m*vara and
Âsrava, see above, [p. 55](sbe4514.htm#page_55), note
[1](sbe4514.htm#fn_165), and [p. 73](sbe4517.htm#page_73), note
[2](sbe4518.htm#fn_197).

<span id="fn_451"></span>[170:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_453) See above, § 41.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[170:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_454) Here is a pun on
the word sutta = sûtra, which means thread and Sûtra, sacred lore, or
knowledge acquired by the study of the Sûtras.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[171:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_455) I.e. makes it
contain nothing foreign to its own nature.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[171:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_456) Sêlêsî =
*s*ailê*s*î; *s*ailê*s*a is Mêru, and its avasthâ, or condition, is
*s*ailê*s*î.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[171:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_457) Or, perhaps, which
results in experiencing anger.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[172:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_458) There are sixteen
kashâyas, nine nô-kashâyas, and three môhanîyas.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[172:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_459) These are the
obstacles to the five kinds of knowledge: mati, *s*ruta, avadhi,
mana*h*paryâya, kêvala.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[172:3](sbe4531.htm#fr_460) They are: the
obstacles to *k*akshurdar*s*ana, to a*k*akshurdar*s*ana, to
avadhidar*s*ana, and to kêvaladar*s*ana, and five kinds of sleep
(nidrâ). Concerning Antarâya, see [p. 193](sbe4535.htm#page_193).

<span id="fn_459"></span>[172:4](sbe4531.htm#fr_461) Sayôgin, i.e. while
he has not yet reached the fourteenth gu*n*asthâna, the state of a
Kêvalin.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[172:5](sbe4531.htm#fr_462) Airyapathika.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[172:6](sbe4531.htm#fr_463) I.e. when he has
become a Kêvalin, as described in the preceding paragraph.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[173:1](sbe4531.htm#fr_464) Sukladhyâna.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[173:2](sbe4531.htm#fr_465) See note on § 41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirtieth Lecture. The Road of Penance](sbe4532)
