[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4520)  [Next](sbe4522) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NINETEENTH LECTURE.

###### THE SON OF M*RI*GÂ.

In the pleasant town of Sugrîva, which is adorned with parks and
gardens, there was the king Balabhadra and M*ri*gâ, the principal queen.
(1)

Their son Bala*s*rî, also known as M*ri*gâputra (i.e. son of M*ri*gâ),
the darling of his father and mother, was crown-prince, a (future) lord
of ascetics. (2)

In his palace Nandana he dallied with his wives, like the god
Dôgundaga <span id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_235), always happy in his
mind. (3)

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Standing at a window of his palace <span
id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_236), the floor of which was inlaid with
precious stones and jewels, he looked down on the squares, places, and
roads of the town. (4)

Once he saw pass there a restrained *S*rama*n*a, who practised penance,
self-restraint, and self-control, who was full of virtues, and a very
mine of good qualities. (5)

M*ri*gâputra regarded him with fixed eyes, trying to remember where he
had seen the same man before. (6)

While he looked at the saint, and his mind became pure, the remembrance
of his former birth carne upon him as he was plunged in doubt. (7)

When the remembrance of his former birth came upon the illustrious
M*ri*gâputra, he remembered his previous birth and his having been then
a *S*rama*n*a. (8)

Being not delighted with pleasures, but devoted to self-control, he went
to his father and mother, and spoke as follows: (9)

'I have learned the five great vows; (I know) the suffering (that awaits
the sinner) in hell or in an existence as a brute; I have ceased to take
delight in the large ocean (of the Sa*m*sâra); therefore, O mother,
allow me to enter the order. (to)

'O mother, O father, I have enjoyed pleasures which are like poisonous
fruit: their consequences are painful, as they entail continuous
suffering. (11)

'This body is not permanent, it is impure and of

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

impure origin; it is but a transitory residence (of the soul) and a
miserable vessel of suffering. (12)

'I take no delight in this transitory body which one must leave sooner
or later, and which is like foam or a bubble. (13)

'And this vain human life, an abode of illness and disease, which is
swallowed up by old age and death, does not please me even for a moment.
(14)

'Birth is misery, old age is misery, and so are disease and death, and
ah, nothing but misery is the Sa*m*sâra, in which men suffer distress.
(15)

'Leaving behind my fields, house, and gold, my son and wife, and my
relations, leaving my body needs must, one day, depart. (16)

'As the effect of Kimpâka-fruit <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_237) is
anything but good, so the effect of pleasures enjoyed is anything but
good. (17)

'He who starts on a long journey with no provisions, will come to grief
on his way there, suffering from hunger and thirst. (18)

'Thus he who without having followed the Law, starts for the next world,
will come to grief on his way there, suffering from illness and disease.
(19)

'He who starts on a long journey with provisions, will be happy on his
way there, not suffering from hunger and thirst. (20)

'Thus he who after having followed the Law, starts for the next world,
will be happy on his journey there, being exempt from Karman and
suffering. (21)

'As when a house is on fire, the landlord carries away valuable things
and leaves behind those of

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

no value; so when the whole world is on fire, as it were, by old age and
death, I shall save my Self, if you will permit me.' (22, 23)

To him his parents said: "Son, difficult to perform, are the duties of a
*S*rama*n*a; a monk must possess thousands of virtues. (24)

"Impartiality towards all beings in the world, whether friends or
enemies, and abstention from injury to living beings throughout the
whole life: this is a difficult duty. (25)

"To be never careless in abstaining from falsehood, and to be always
careful to speak wholesome truth: this is a difficult duty. (26)

"To abstain from taking of what is not given, even of a toothpick, &c.;
and to accept only alms free from faults: this is a difficult duty. (27)

"To abstain from unchastity after one has tasted sensual pleasures, and
to keep the severe vow of chastity: this is a very difficult duty. (28)

"To give up all claims on wealth, corn, and servants, to abstain from
all undertakings, and not to own anything: this is a very difficult
duty. (29)

"Not to eat at night any food of the four kinds <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_238), not to put away for later use or to
keep a store (of things one wants): this is a very difficult duty. (30)

"Hunger and thirst, heat and cold, molestation by flies and gnats,
insults, miserable lodgings, pricking grass, and uncleanliness, blows
and threats, corporal punishment and imprisonment, the mendicant's life
and fruitless begging: all this is misery. (31, 32)

"Such a life is like that of pigeons (always afraid of

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

dangers); painful is the plucking out of one's hair; difficult is the
vow of chastity and hard to keep (even) for a noble man. (33)

"My son, you are accustomed to comfort, you are tender and cleanly <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_239); you are not able, my son, to live as a
*S*rama*n*a. (34)

"No repose as long as life lasts; the great burden 4 of duty is heavy
like a load of iron, which is difficult to be carried, O son. (35)

"As it is difficult to cross the heavenly Ganges, or to swim against the
current, or to swim with one's arms over the sea, so it is difficult to
get over the ocean of duties. (36)

"Self-control is untasteful like a mouthful of sand, and to practise
penance is as difficult as to walk on the edge of a sword. (37)

"It is difficult (always to observe the rules of) right conduct with
one's eyes for ever open like (those of) a snake <span
id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_240), O son; it is difficult to eat iron
grains, as it were. (38)

"As it is very difficult to swallow burning fire, so is it difficult for
a young man to live as a *S*rama*n*a. (39)

"As it is difficult to fill a bag <span id="fr_242"></span>[3](#fn_241)
with wind,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

so is it difficult for a weak man to live as a *S*rama*n*a. (40)

"As it is difficult to weigh Mount Mandara in a balance, so it is
difficult to live as a *S*rama*n*a with a steady and fearless mind. (41)

"As it is difficult to swim over the sea with one's arms, so it is
difficult for one whose mind is not pacified, (to cross) the ocean of
restraint. (42)

"Enjoy the fivefold <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_242) human
pleasures. After you have done enjoying pleasures, O son, you may adopt
the Law." (43)

He answered: 'O father and mother, it is even thus as you have plainly
told; but in this world nothing is difficult for one who is free from
desire. (44)

'An infinite number of times have I suffered dreadful pains of body and
mind, repeatedly misery and dangers. (45)

'In the Sa*m*sâra, which is a mine of dangers and a wilderness of old
age and death, I have undergone dreadful births and deaths. (46)

'Though fire be hot here, it is infinitely more so there (viz. in
hell) <span id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_243); in hell I have undergone
suffering from heat. (47)

'Though there may be cold here, it is of infinitely greater intensity
there; in hell I have undergone suffering from cold. (48)

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

'An infinite number of times have I been roasted over a blazing fire in
an oven, screaming loud, head down and feet aloft. (49)

'In the desert which is like a forest on fire, on the Va*g*ravâlukâ and
the Kadambavâlukâ <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_244) rivers, I have
been roasted an infinite number of times. (50)

'Being suspended upside down over a boiler, shrieking, with no relation
to help me, I was cut to pieces with various saws <span
id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_245), an infinite number of times. (51)

'I have suffered agonies when I was fastened with fetters on the huge
*S*âlmalî tree, bristling with very sharp thorns, and then pushed up and
down. (52)

'An infinite number of times have I been crushed like sugar-cane in
presses, shrieking horribly, to atone for my sins, great sinner that I
was. (53)

'By black and spotted wild dogs <span id="fr_247"></span>[3](#fn_246) I
have, ever so many times, been thrown down, torn to pieces, and
lacerated, screaming and writhing. (54)

'When I was born in hell for my sins, I was cut, pierced, and hacked to
pieces with swords and daggers, with darts and javelins. (55)

'I have been forcibly yoked to a car of red-hot iron full of fuel <span
id="fr_248"></span>[4](#fn_247), I have been driven on with a goad

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and thongs, and have been knocked down like an antelope <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_248). (56)

'On piles, in a blazing fire, I have forcibly been burnt and roasted
like a buffalo, in atonement for my sins. (57)

'An infinite number of times have I violently been lacerated by birds
whose bills were of iron and shaped like tongs, by devilish
vultures <span id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_249). (58)

'Suffering from thirst I ran towards the river Vaitara*n*î to drink its
water, but in it I was killed (as it were) by blades of razors <span
id="fr_251"></span>[3](#fn_250). (59)

'When suffering from the heat, I went into the forest in which the trees
have a foliage of daggers; I have, ever so many times, been cut to
pieces by the dropping dagger-leaves. (60)

'An infinite number of times have I suffered hopelessly from mallets and
knives, forks and maces, which broke my limbs. (61)

'Ever so many times have I been slit, cut, mangled, and skinned with
keen-edged razors, knives, and shears. (62)

'As <span id="fr_252"></span>[4](#fn_251) an antelope I have, against my
will, been

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

caught, bound, and fastened in snares and traps, and frequently I have
been killed. (63)

'As a fish I have, against my will, been caught with hooks and in
bow-nets; I have therein been scraped, slit, and killed, an infinite
number of times. (64)

'As a bird I have been caught by hawks, trapped in nets, and bound with
bird-lime, and I have been killed, an infinite number of times. (65)

'As a tree I have been felled, slit, sawn into planks, and stripped of
the bark by carpenters with axes <span id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_252),
hatchets, &c., an infinite number of times. (66)

'As iron I have been malleated, cut, torn, and filed by
blacksmiths <span id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_253), an infinite number of
times. (67)

'I have been made to drink hissing molten copper, iron, tin, and lead
under horrid shrieks, an infinite number of times. (68)

'You like meat minced or roasted; I have been made to eat, ever so many
times, poisoned meat, and red-hot to boot. (69)

'You like wine, liquor, spirits, and honey <span
id="fr_255"></span>[3](#fn_254); I have been made to drink burning fat
and blood. (70)

'Always frightened, trembling, distressed, and suffering, I have
experienced the most exquisite pain and misery. (71)

'I have experienced in hell sharp, acute and

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

severe, horrible, intolerable, dreadful, and formidable pain. (72)

'O father, infinitely more painful is the suffering in hell than any
suffering in the world of men. (73)

'In every kind of existence I have undergone suffering which was not
interrupted by a moment's reprieve.' (74)

To him his parents said: "Son, a man is free to enter the order, but it
causes misery to a *S*rama*n*a that he may not remedy any ailings." (75)

He answered: 'O father and mother, it is even thus as you have plainly
told; but who takes care of beasts and birds in the woods? (76)

'As a wild animal <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_255) by itself roams
about in the woods, thus I shall practise the Law by controlling myself
and doing penance. (77)

'When in a large forest a wild animal falls very sick at the foot of a
tree, who is there to cure it? (78)

'Or who will give it medicine? or who will inquire after its health? or
who will get food and drink for it, and feed it? (79)

'When it is in perfect health, it will roam about in woods and on (the
shores of) lakes in search of food and drink. (80)

'When it has eaten and drunk in woods and lakes, it will walk about and
go to rest according to the habits of wild animals. (81)

'In the same way a pious monk goes to many places and walks about just
as the animals, but afterwards he goes to the upper regions. (82)

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

'As a wild animal goes by itself to many places, lives in many places,
and always gets its food; thus a monk on his begging-tour should not
despise nor blame (the food he gets). (83)

'I shall imitate this life of animals.' "Well, my son, as you please."
With his parents' permission he gave up all his property. (84)

'I shall imitate this life of animals, which makes one free from all
misery, if you will permit me.' "Go, my son, as you please." (85)

When he had thus made his parents repeat their permission, he gave up
for ever his claims in any property, just as the snake casts off its
slough. (86)

His power and wealth, his friends, wives, sons, and relations he gave up
as if he shook off the dust from his feet, and then he went forth. (87)

He observed the five great vows, practised the five Samitis, and was
protected by the three Guptis <span id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_256); he
exerted himself to do mental as well as bodily penance. (88)

He was without property, without egoism, without attachment, without
conceit <span id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_257), impartial towards all
beings, whether they move or not. (89)

He was indifferent to success or failure (in begging), to happiness and
misery, to life and death, to blame and praise, to honour and insult.
(90)

He turned away from conceit and passions, from injurious, hurtful, and
dangerous actions <span id="fr_259"></span>[3](#fn_258), from gaiety and
sadness; he was free from sins and fetters. (91)

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

He had no interest in this world and no interest in the next world; he
was indifferent to unpleasant and pleasant things <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_259), to eating and fasting. (92)

He prevented the influx of Karman (âsrava) through all bad
channels <span id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_260); by meditating upon
himself he obtained praiseworthy self-purification and sacred knowledge.
(93)

Thus he thoroughly purified himself by knowledge, right conduct, faith,
penance, and pure meditations, and after having lived many years as a
*S*rama*n*a, he reached perfection after breaking his fast once only
every month. (94, 95)

Thus act the enlightened ones, the learned, the clever; like
M*ri*gâputra they turn away from pleasures. (96)

When you have heard the words of the illustrious and famous son of
M*ri*gâ, his perfect practise of austerities, and his liberation, famous
in the three worlds, you will despise wealth, the cause of misery, and
the fetter of egoism, the cause of many dangers, and you will bear the
excellent and pleasant yoke of the Law that leads to the great happiness
of Nirvâ*n*a. (97, 98)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[88:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_236) According to the
commentators the Dôgundaka gods are the trâyastri*ms*a gods. The
Sanskrit of dôgundaga would be dvikundaka.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[89:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_237) I separate the words
pâsây<sup>ऽ</sup>âlôya*n*a*tth*iô. The commentators take them for a
compound; but then the preceding part of the sentence would not
construe. It is an irregular sandhi, instances of which, however, are
not unfrequent.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[90:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_238) Cucumis Colocynthus.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[91:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_239) I.e. food, drink,
dainties, and spices.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[92:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_240) Literally, well
washed or bathed.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[92:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_241) This appears to be
the meaning of the words ahîv<sup>ऽ</sup>êgantadi*tth*îê. We might
perhaps take ahîv for ahiva*m* = ahivat, in which case the construction
of the sentence would be grammatically correct. An alternative rendering
would be: '(A monk) like a snake must have his eyes always open on the
difficult conduct, O son.' It is a well-known fact that snakes cannot
shut their eyes as other animals.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[92:3](sbe4521.htm#fr_242) Kotthala, a
Dê*s*î-word for ku*s*ûla, granary, see Hêma*k*andra, Dê*s*î Kôsha 2, 48.
The commentators render it by 'cloth.'

<span id="fn_242"></span>[93:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_243) Viz. those of the
five senses.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[93:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_244) The description of
hell is a favourite theme with the monks of all ages and all religions;
and the *G*aina monks are not behind others in the treatment of this
gruesome subject. A detailed description of the different hells will be
found in the fifth lecture of the first book of the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga. I
remember a yati showing me, with much complacency, a manuscript of the
latter work adorned with lively illustrations of the most exquisite
tortures.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[94:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_245) These are two rivers
in hell; the sand of the one consists of va*g*ra (either steel-filings
or diamonds), and that of the other, of turmeric.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[94:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_246)
Karavattakarakayâîhi*m* = karapattrakraka*k*âdibhi*h*.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[94:3](sbe4521.htm#fr_247) Kôlasu*n*aya,
explained by *s*ûkara*s*van, hog-dog, which may be a kind of hog or dog,
probably the latter.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[94:4](sbe4521.htm#fr_248) Samilâ *g*ue. The
commentators render *g*ue by yuga and yuta, and do not explain samilâ,
which they treat as a Sanskrit word. I think it is the Prâk*ri*t of
samidh, compare vi*gg*ulâ = vidyut, salilâ = sarit.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[95:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_249) Ro*ggh*o = *ris*ya,
see Hêma*k*andra, Dê*s*î Kôsha 7, 12.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[95:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_250) *Dh*aṅka g*ri*dhra.
The commentators offer no explanation of *dh*aṅka, but only say that
they are not real vultures as there are no animals in hell. Therefore
they must be vaikriya, i.e., in our case, demons who have adopted the
shape of vultures.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[95:3](sbe4521.htm#fr_251) The water of the
river Vaitara*n*î consists of a very caustic acid.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[95:4](sbe4521.htm#fr_252) Here and in the
following verses the suffering of M*ri*gâputra as an animal and a plant
seems to be described. But in verse 68 the scene is again laid in hell.
The first word in verse 63, &c., 'as,' would literally be 'like' (viva
in the original text), but in rendering it by 'like,' we have to assume
that as a denizen of hell he is treated in the manner described, which
seems rather strained.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[96:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_253) Kuhâ*d*â =
ku*th*âra; comp. piha*d*a = pi*th*ara. The form kuhârâ occurs in
Guzeratî, Sindhî, and Panjâbî.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[96:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_254) Kumâra; this is
obviously the modern kamâr 'blacksmith' (derived from karmakâra); and it
is of interest to find this form in an old text like the Uttarâdhyayana.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[96:3](sbe4521.htm#fr_255) To render surâ,
sîdhu, mairêya, and madhu.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[97:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_256) Miga = m*ri*ga,
literally 'antelope;' but here as frequently the word has apparently the
more general meaning 'wild animal.'

<span id="fn_256"></span>[98:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_257) See notes
[2](sbe4514.htm#fn_159) and [3](sbe4514.htm#fn_160) on [p.
50](sbe4514.htm#page_50).

<span id="fn_257"></span>[98:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_258) Gârava = gaurava or
garva. Dîpikâ: *ri*ddhigârava-rasagârava-sâtâgârava iti
garvatrayarahita*h*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[98:3](sbe4521.htm#fr_259) To render
da*nd*asallabhaêsu.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[99:1](sbe4521.htm#fr_260)
Vâsî*k*anda*n*akappô. The author of the Ava*k*ûri explains this phrase
thus: he did not like more a man who anoints himself with sandal than a
mason. Apparently he gives to vâsa the meaning 'dwelling;' but I think
that the juxtaposition of *k*andana calls for a word denoting a
bad-smelling substance, perhaps ordure.'

<span id="fn_260"></span>[99:2](sbe4521.htm#fr_261) Literally 'door.'
The meaning of the line will be fully rendered and the simile at least
partially be preserved by the following less literal translation: he
shut the door, as it were, to evil influences. For the âsrava, see
above, [p. 55](sbe4514.htm#page_55), note [1](sbe4514.htm#fn_165).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twentieth Lecture. The Great Duty of the Nirgranthas](sbe4522)
