[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4522)  [Next](sbe4524) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### TWENTY-FIRST LECTURE.

###### SAMUDRAPÂLA.

In *K*ampâ there lived a *S*râvaka, the merchant Pâlita, who was a
disciple of the noble and venerable Mahâvîra. (1)

As a *S*râvaka he was well versed in the doctrines of the Nirgranthas.
Once he went by boat to the town of Pihu*nd*a on business. (2)

A merchant gave him his daughter while he was doing business in
Pihu*nd*a. When she was big with child, he took her with him on his
returning home. (3)

Now the wife of Pâlita was delivered of a child at sea; as the boy was
born at sea (samudra), he was named Samudrapâla. (4)

Our merchant, the *S*râvaka, went leisurely to Kampâ, to his house; in
his house the boy grew up surrounded by comfort. (5)

He studied the seventy-two arts, and acquired knowledge of the
world <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_280); he was in the bloom of

youth, and had a fine figure and good looks. (6) His father procured him
a beautiful wife, Rûpi*n*î, with whom he amused himself in his pleasant
palace, like a Dôgundaga god <span id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_281). (7)

Once upon a time he saw from the window of his palace a man sentenced to
death, dressed for execution, on his way to the place of execution. (8)

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

Agitated by what he saw, Samudrapâla spoke thus: 'Of wicked actions this
is the bad result.' (9)

He became enlightened at once, the venerable man, and he was immensely
agitated; he took leave of his parents, and entered the state of
houselessness. (10)

Abandoning the great distress to which the worldly <span
id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_282) are liable, the great delusion, and
whatever causes fear, one should adopt the Law of monks <span
id="fr_284"></span>[2](#fn_283), the vows, the virtues, and the
(endurance of) calamities. (11)

One should keep the five great vows, viz. not to kill, to speak the
truth, not to steal, to be chaste, to have no property whatever; a wise
man should follow the Law taught by the *G*inas. (12)

A monk should have compassion on all beings, should be of a forbearing
character, should be restrained and chaste, and abstaining from
everything sinful; he should live with his senses under control. (13)

Now and then <span id="fr_285"></span>[3](#fn_284) he should travel in
one country,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

taking into consideration its resources and his own ability; like a lion
he should not be frightened by any noise; and whatever words he hears,
he should not make an improper reply. (14)

In utter indifference he should walk about, and bear everything, be it
pleasant or unpleasant; he should not approve of everything everywhere,
nor care for <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_285) respectful treatment
or blame. (15)

There are many opinions here among men, which a monk places in their
true light; there will rise many dangerous and dreadful calamities,
caused by gods, men, or animals, which are difficult to be borne and
cause easily-discouraged men to sink under them; but a monk who comes in
contact with them will not be afraid, like a stately elephant at the
head of the battle. (16, 17)

Cold and heat, flies and gnats, unpleasant feelings, and many diseases
attack the body; without flinching <span id="fr_287"></span>[2](#fn_286)
he should bear them, and should

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

not recall to his memory the pleasures he once enjoyed. (18)

Giving up love, hatred, and delusion, a monk who is always careful and
who is steadfast even as Mount Mêru cannot be shaken by the storm,
should bear calamities, guarding himself. (19)

A great sage should be neither too elevated by pride nor too humble, he
should not care for respectful treatment nor blame; an ascetic who has
ceased (to act), will by means of his simplicity enter the path of
Nirvâ*n*a. (20)

He is neither grieved nor pleased (by anything) <span
id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_287), he abandons his relations with men, he
ceases (to act), is intent on the benefit of his soul, he strives for
the highest good (viz. mukti), and uses the means to reach it, free from
sorrow, egoism, and any kind of property. (21)

A merciful (monk) should use beds distant from others, which are not got
ready for his sake <span id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_288) nor strewn
(with leaves or things considered to be possessed of life); he should
sustain such hardships as the sages are accustomed to. (22)

The great sage (Samudrapâla), understanding the sacred lore and
practising completely the best Law, shone forth like the sun in the sky,
being possessed of the highest knowledge and glory. (23)

Having annihilated his Karman both meritorious

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and sinful, being steadfast <span id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_289), and
free from all fetters, Samudrapâla crossed the ocean-like Flood of
worldly existence and obtained exemption from transmigration. (24)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[108:1](sbe4523.htm#fr_281) To render
nîtikôvida.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[108:2](sbe4523.htm#fr_282) For Dôgundaga, see
above, [p. 88](sbe4520.htm#page_88), note [2](sbe4521.htm#fn_235).

<span id="fn_282"></span>[109:1](sbe4523.htm#fr_283) Saggantha =
sagrantha, which is obviously the opposite of nirgrantha. The
commentators correct sa*m*ga*m*tha in sa*m*ga*m* *k*a. The original
reading is in MS. B. A. has sa*m*ga*m*tha, and so had C. originally, but
it corrects the tha into *k*a. According to the commentators we should
translate: abandoning worldly attachment which causes great distress,
great delusion, black (Lê*s*yâ), and dangers, one should, &c.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[109:2](sbe4523.htm#fr_284) Paryâya-dharma.
Paryâya means a state under which a substance presents itself. Here is
meant the state of the soul in pravra*g*yâ, i.e. *s*râma*n*ya-paryâya;
compare the expressions *kh*admastha-paryâya and kêvali-paryâya.
Paryâya-dharma is here equal to prayra*g*yâ-dharma, Law of the monks.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[109:3](sbe4523.htm#fr_285) Kâlê*n*a kâla*m*,
the commentators supply kurvan, and explain the passage as follows:
kâlêna, i.e. in a paurushî (four <span id="page_110">p. 110</span>
hours) less one quarter of it, kâlam, i.e. what is proper for the time.
The meaning would be 'doing at every time what is proper or prescribed
to do at it.' But this explanation looks very artificial; I think that
the expression kalê*n*a kâla*m* is an adverb of the same type as
ma*ggh*a*m* ma*ggh*ê*n*a and many others.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[110:1](sbe4523.htm#fr_286) Sa*mg*ae. This word
may be sa*m*yata in this place; but in verse 20, where the same line
occurs again, it cannot be so interpreted, because there the word
sa*mg*ae occurs twice; once it has the meaning of sa*mg*ata, but in the
passage under discussion it must be a verb, and it is rendered there
sa*ñg*ayet = saṅga*m* kuryât by the commentators.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[110:2](sbe4523.htm#fr_287) Akukkuô, translated
akukû*g*a, derived from the root kû*g* 'to warble, to groan;' it would
therefore mean 'without complaint.' But in I, 30 we have appakukkuê,
derived from the root ku*k* to bend, to be crooked,' and it is rendered
alpaspandana. The same meaning applies in the present case.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[111:1](sbe4523.htm#fr_288) This is the meaning
commonly given to the frequently occurring phrase arairaisahe. Another
interpretation is: sa*m*yamâ-sa*m*yamavishayê, tâbhyâ*m* na bâdhatê.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[111:2](sbe4523.htm#fr_289) Nirôvalêvâi =
nirupalipta. By upalêpa may be meant 'dirt,' but the author of the
Ava*k*ûri explains upalêpa as consisting in abhishvaṅga affection: It is
almost impossible to render satisfactorily so vague an expression.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[112:1](sbe4523.htm#fr_290) Niranga*n*a =
sa*m*yamê ni*sk*ala, immovable with regard to self-control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-Second Lecture. Rathanêmi](sbe4524)
