[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4564)  [Next](sbe4566) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

# SECOND BOOK <span id="fr_984"></span>[1](#fn_977).

## FIRST LECTURE <span id="fr_985"></span>[2](#fn_978),

###### CALLED

###### THE LOTUS.

O long-lived (*G*ambûsvâmin)! I (Sudharman) have heard the following
Discourse from the Venerable (Mahâvîra). We now come to the Lecture
called 'the Lotus.' The contents of it are as follows: (1)

There is a lotus-pool containing much water and mud, very full and
complete, answering to the idea (one has of a lotus-pool), full of white
lotuses, delightful, conspicuous, magnificent, and splendid. (2)

And everywhere all over the lotus-pool there grew many white lotuses,
the best of Nymphaeas, as we are told, in beautiful array, tall,
brilliant, of fine colour, smell, taste, and touch, (&c., all down to)
splendid. (3)

And in the very middle of this lotus-pool there grew one big white
lotus, the best of Nymphaeas,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

as we are told, in an excellent position, tall, (&c., all down to)
splendid. (4)

\[§§ 3 and 4 are to be repeated with the word 'all' or 'whole' added to
'lotus-pool' <span id="fr_986"></span>[1](#fn_979).\] (5)

Now there came a man from the Eastern quarter to the lotus-pool, and
standing on the bank of it he saw that one big white lotus, (&c., as
above). Now this man spoke thus: 'I am a knowing, clever, well-informed,
discerning, wise, not foolish man, who keeps the way, knows the way, and
is acquainted with the direction and bent of the way. I shall fetch that
white lotus, the best of all Nymphaeas.' Having said this the man
entered the lotus-pool. And the more he proceeded, the more the water
and the mud (seemed to) extend. He had left the shore, and he did not
come up to the white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas, he could not get back
to this bank, nor to the opposite one, but in the middle of the
lotus-pool he stuck in the mud. (6)

This was the first man. Now (we shall describe) the second man. There
came a man from the Southern quarter to the lotus-pool, and standing on
the bank of it he saw that one big white lotus (&c., all as above).
There he saw one man who had left the shore, but had not come up to the
white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas, who could not get back to his bank,
nor to the opposite one, but stuck in the mud in the middle of the
lotus-pool. Now the second man spoke of the first man thus: 'This man is
not knowing, not clever, (&c., see above, all down to) not acquainted
with the direction and bent

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

of the way.' For that man said: 'I am a knowing, (&c., all down to) I
shall fetch that white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas.' But this white
lotus, the best of Nymphaeas, cannot be got in the way this man tried.
(7)

'However, I am a knowing, clever, (&c., all down to the end of the
paragraph) he stuck in the mud.' This was the second man. (The same
thing happened to a third and a fourth man, who came from the Western
and Northern quarters respectively, and saw two and three men
respectively sticking in the mud. Some MSS. give the story at length,
others abbreviate it.) (8, 9)

Now a monk living on low food and desiring to get to the shore (of the
Sa*m*sâra), knowing, clever, (&c., all down to) acquainted with the
direction and bent of the way, came to that lotus-pool from some one of
the four quarters or from one of the intermediate points (of the
compass). Standing on the bank of the lotus-pool he saw the one big
white lotus, (&c., as above). And he saw there those four men who having
left the shore, (&c., all as above) stuck in the mud. Then the monk
said: 'These men are not knowing, (&c., all down to) not acquainted with
the direction and bent of the way; for these men thought: We shall fetch
that white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas. But this white lotus, the best
of Nymphaeas, cannot be got in the way these men tried. I am a monk
living on low food, (&c., all down to) acquainted with the direction and
bent of the way. I shall fetch that white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas.'
Having said this the monk did not enter the lotus-pool; but standing on
the bank of it he raised his voice: 'Fly up,

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O white lotus,
best of Nymphaeas!' And the white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas, flew up.
(10)

I have told you, O long-lived *S*rama*n*as, a simile <span
id="fr_987"></span>[1](#fn_980); you must comprehend the meaning of
it <span id="fr_988"></span>[2](#fn_981). The Nirgrantha monks and nuns
worshipped and praised the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, and then spoke
thus: 'You have told, O long-lived *S*rama*n*a, the simile, but we do
not comprehend its meaning, O long-lived *S*rama*n*a!' The Venerable
Ascetic Mahâvîra addressed the crowd of Nirgrantha monks and nuns, and
spoke thus: Ah, you long-lived *S*rama*n*as! I shall tell, declare,
explain, expound, and demonstrate it with its meaning, reasons, and
arguments. Thus I say: (11)

O long-lived *S*rama*n*as <span id="fr_989"></span>[3](#fn_982),
meaning <span id="fr_990"></span>[4](#fn_983) the world I spoke of the
lotus-pool. Meaning Karman I spoke of the water. Meaning pleasures and
amusements I spoke of the mud. Meaning people in general I spoke of
those many white lotuses, the best of Nymphaeas. Meaning the king I
spoke of the one big white lotus, the best of Nymphaeas. Meaning
heretical teachers I spoke of those four men. Meaning the Law I spoke of
the monk. Meaning the church <span id="fr_991"></span>[5](#fn_984) I
spoke of the bank. Meaning the preaching of the Law I spoke of (the
monk's) voice. Meaning Nirvâ*n*a I spoke of (the lotus') flying up.
Meaning these things, O long-lived *S*rama*n*as, I told this (simile).
(12)

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

Here in the East, West, North, and South many men have been born
according to their merit, as inhabitants of this our world, viz. some as
Âryas, some as non-Âryas, some in noble families, some in low families,
some as big men, some as small men, some of good complexion, some of bad
complexion, some as handsome men, some as ugly men. And of these men one
man is king, who is strong like the great Himavat, Malaya, Mandara, and
Mahêndra mountains, (&c., all down to) who governs his kingdom in which
all riots and mutinies have been suppressed <span
id="fr_992"></span>[1](#fn_985).

And this king had an assembly of Ugras <span
id="fr_993"></span>[2](#fn_986) and sons of Ugras, Bhôgas <span
id="fr_994"></span>[2](#fn_986) and sons of Bhôgas, Aikshvâkas and sons
of Aikshvâkas, *Gñ*ât*ri*s and sons of *Gñ*ât*ri*s, Kauravas and sons of
Kauravas, warriors and sons of warriors, Brâhma*n*as and sons of
Brâhma*n*as, Li*kkh*avis and sons of Li*kkh*avis, commanders and sons of
commanders, generals and sons of generals. (13)

And of these men some one <span id="fr_995"></span>[3](#fn_987) is full
of faith. Forsooth, the *S*rama*n*as or Brâhma*n*as made up their mind
to go to him. Being professors of some religion (they thought) 'We shall
teach him our religion.' (And they said): 'Know this, dear sir, that we
explain and teach this religion well. (14)

'Upwards from the soles of the feet, downwards

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

from the tips of the hair on the head, within the skin's surface is
(what is called) Soul <span id="fr_996"></span>[1](#fn_988), or what is
the same, the Âtman. The whole soul lives; when this (body) is dead, it
does not live. It lasts as long as the body lasts, it does not outlast
the destruction (of the body). With it (viz. the body) ends life. Other
men carry it (viz. the corpse) away to burn it. When it has been
consumed by fire, only dove-coloured bones remain, and the four bearers
return with the hearse to their village. Therefore there is and exists
no (soul different from the body). Those who believe that there is and
exists no (such soul), speak the truth. Those who maintain that the soul
is something different from the body, cannot tell whether the soul (as
separated from the body) is long or small, whether globular or circular
or triangular or square or sexagonal or octagonal or long, whether black
or blue or red or yellow or white, whether of sweet smell or of bad
smell, whether bitter or pungent or astringent or sour or sweet, whether
hard or soft or heavy or light or cold or hot or smooth or rough. Those,
therefore, who believe that there is and exists no soul, speak the
truth. Those who maintain that the soul is something different from the
body, do not see the following (objections): (11)

'As a man draws a sword from the scabbard and shows it (you, saying):
"Friend, this is the sword, and that is the scabbard," so nobody can
draw (the soul from the body) and show it (you, saying): "Friend, this
is the soul, and that is the body." As a man draws a fibre from a stalk
of Mu*ñg*a grass and shows it (you, saying): "Friend, this is the stalk,
and that is the fibre;" or takes a bone out of the flesh, or the

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

seed of Âmalaka <span id="fr_997"></span>[1](#fn_989) from the palm of
his hand, or a particle of fresh butter out of coagulated milk, and
shows you both things separately <span id="fr_998"></span>[2](#fn_990);
or as he presses oil from the seed of Atasî <span
id="fr_999"></span>[3](#fn_991), and shows the oil and oil-cake
separately, or as he presses the juice from the sugar-cane, and shows
the juice and the molasses <span id="fr_1000"></span>[4](#fn_992)
separately, so nobody can show you the soul and the body separately. The
same applies also when fire is churned from Ara*n*i-wood. Those who
believe that there is and exists no soul, speak the truth. Those who say
that the soul is different from the body, are wrong.' (16)

This murderer says: 'Kill, dig, slay, burn, cook, cut or break to
pieces, destroy! Life ends here; there is no world beyond.'

These (Nâstikas) cannot inform <span id="fr_1001"></span>[5](#fn_993)
you on the following points: whether an action is good or bad,
meritorious or not, well done or not well done, whether one reaches
perfection or not, whether one goes to hell or not. Thus undertaking
various works they engage in various pleasures and amusements for their
own enjoyment. (17)

Thus some shameless men becoming monks propagate a Law of their own. And
others believe it, put their faith in it, adopt it, (saying:) 'Well, you
speak the truth, O Brâhma*n*a, (or) O *S*rama*n*a! We shall present you
with food, drink, spices, and sweetmeats, with a robe, a bowl, or a
broom.'

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

Some have been induced to honour them, some have made (their proselytes)
to honour them. (18)

Before (entering an order) they were determined to become *S*rama*n*as,
houseless, poor monks who would have neither sons nor cattle, to eat
only what should be given them by others, and to commit no sins. After
having entered their order they do not cease (from sins), they
themselves commit sins, they cause others to commit sins, and they
assent to another's committing sins. Thus they are given to pleasures,
amusements, and sensual lust; they are greedy, fettered, passionate,
covetous, the slaves of love and hate; therefore they cannot free
themselves (from the Circle of Births), nor free anybody else from it,
nor free any other of the four kinds of living beings from it. They have
left their former occupations, but have not entered the noble path. They
cannot return (to worldly life), nor get beyond it; they stick (as it
were) in pleasures and amusements. Thus I have treated of the first man
(as one who believes that) soul and body are one and the same thing.
(19)

Now I shall treat of the second man <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1](#fn_994) (as one who believes that) everything
consists of the five elements.

Here in the East, (&c., see §§ 13, 14, all down to) teach this religion
well. (20)

'There are five elements <span id="fr_1003"></span>[2](#fn_995) through
which we explain

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

whether an action is good or bad, (&c., see § 18, all down to) hell or
not. Everything down to a blade of grass (consists of them). (21)

'And one should know the intermixture <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1](#fn_996) of the elements by an enumeration of
them. Earth is the first element, water the second, fire the third, wind
the fourth, and air the fifth. These five elements are not created,
directly or indirectly, nor made; they are not effects nor products;
they are without beginning and end; they always produce effects, are
independent of a directing cause or everything else; they are eternal.
Some, however, say that there is a Self besides the five elements. What
is, does not perish; from nothing nothing comes. (22)

All living beings, all things, the whole world consists of nothing but
these (five elements). They are the primary cause of the world, even
down to a blade of grass. (23)

'A man buys and causes to buy, kills and causes to kill, cooks and
causes to cook, he may even sell and kill a man. Know, that even in this
case he does not do wrong.'

These (Nâstikas) cannot inform you, (&c., see §§ 15-18, all down to)
they stick (as it were) in pleasures and amusements.

Thus I have treated of the second man (who believes that) everything
consists of the five elements. (24)

Now I shall treat of the third man (who believes that) the Self <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[2](#fn_997) is the cause of everything.

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

Here in the East, (&c., see §§ 12, 13, all down to) teach this religion
well. (25)

'Here all things have the Self for their cause and their object, they
are produced by the Self, they are manifested by the Self, they are
intimately connected with the Self, they are bound up in the Self.

'As, for instance, a tumour is generated in the body, grows with the
body, is not separate from the body, but is bound up in the body: so all
things have the Self for their cause, (&c., all as above).

'As, for instance, a feeling of indisposition is generated in the body,
grows with the body, is never separate from the body, but is bound up in
the body: so all things have the Self for their cause, (&c., all as
above).

'As, for instance, an anthill is made of earth, grows through earth, is
not separate from earth, but is bound up in earth: so all things, (&c.,
all as above).

'As, for instance, a tree springs up on earth, grows on earth, is not
separate from earth, but is bound up in earth: so all things, (&c., all
as above).

'As, for instance, a lotus springs up in earth, grows on earth, is not
separate from earth, but is bound up in earth: so all things, (&c., all
as above).

'As, for instance, a mass of water is produced by water, grows through
water, is not separate from water, but is bound up in water: so all
things, (&c., all as above).

'As, for instance, a water-bubble is produced in water, grows in water,
is not separate from water,

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

but is bound up in water: so all things, (&c., all as above). (26)

'And the twelve Aṅgas, the Canon of the Ga*n*ins <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1](#fn_998), which has been taught, produced, and
declared by the *S*rama*n*as, the Nirgranthas, viz. the Â*k*ârâṅga (all
down to) the D*ri*sh*t*ivâda, is wrong, not true, not a representation
of the truth; but this (our doctrine) is correct, is true, is a
representation of the truth.'

The (heretics in question) make this assertion, they uphold this
assertion, they (try to) establish this assertion.

Therefore they cannot get out of the misery produced by this (error),
even as a bird cannot get out of its cage. (27)

These (heretics) cannot inform you, (&c., see §§ 16-19, all down to)
they stick, as it were, in pleasures and amusements.

Thus I have treated of the third man (who believes that) the Self is the
cause of everything. (28)

Now I shall treat of the fourth man who believes that Fate is the cause
of everything.

Here in the East, (&c., see §§ 12, 13, all down to) teach this religion
well. (29)

'There are two (kinds of) men. One man admits action, another man does
not admit action. Both men, he who admits action, and he who does not
admit action, are alike, their case is the same, because they are
actuated by the same force <span id="fr_1007"></span>[2](#fn_999). (30)

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

'An ignorant man thinks about the cause as follows: "When I suffer,
grieve, blame myself, grow feeble <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1](#fn_1000), am afflicted, or undergo great pain,
I have caused it; or when another man suffers, &c., he has caused it."
Thus an ignorant man thinks himself or another man to be the cause of
what he or the other man experiences. (31)

'A wise man thinks about the cause as follows: "When I suffer, &c., I
did not cause it; and when another man suffers, &c., he did not cause
it <span id="fr_1009"></span>[2](#fn_1001)."

'A wise man thinks thus <span id="fr_1010"></span>[3](#fn_1002) about
the cause of what he himself or another man experiences. I say this:
"Movable or immovable beings in all the four quarters thus (i.e. by the
will of Fate) cone to have a body, to undergo the vicissitudes of life,
to lose their body, to arrive at some state of existence, to experience
pleasure and pain <span id="fr_1011"></span>[4](#fn_1003)."'

Entertaining such opinions these (heretics) cannot inform you, (&c., as
in § 17, down to the end). (32)

These worthless men entertain such opinions, and believe in them till
they cannot return, (&c., as in § 19 down to) amusements.

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

I have treated of the fourth man who believes that Fate is the cause of
everything. (33)

These four men, differing in intellect, will, character, opinions,
taste, undertakings, and plans, have left their former occupations, but
have not entered the noble path. They cannot return (to worldly life)
nor get beyond it; they stick (as it were) in pleasures and amusements.
(34)

I say: here in the East, West, North, and South there are some men, viz.
Âryas, non-Âryas, (&c., as in § 13, all down to) ugly men. They own
small or large houses and fields, they own few or many servants and
peasants. Being born in such-like families, they renounce (their
possessions) and lead a mendicant's life. Some leave their kinsmen and
their property to lead a mendicant's life; others, who have no kinsmen
nor property, lead a mendicant's life. Whether they have kinsmen and
property or not, they renounce them and lead a mendicant's life. (35)

Previously, however, they thought thus: 'Here, indeed, a man, who is on
the point of turning monk, makes the following reflections with regard
to different things: I possess fields, houses, silver, gold, riches,
corn, copper, clothes, real valuable property, as riches, gold, precious
stones, jewels, pearls, conches, stones, corals, rubies <span
id="fr_1012"></span>[1](#fn_1004). I enjoy sounds, colours, smells,
tastes, and feelings of touch. These pleasures and amusements belong to
me, and I belong to them.' (36)

A wise man, previously, should thus think to

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

himself: 'Here, indeed, some painful illness or disease might befall me,
unwished for, unpleasant, disagreeable, nasty <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[1](#fn_1005), painful and not at all pleasant. O ye
dear pleasures, take upon you this painful illness or disease, unwished
for, unpleasant, disagreeable, nasty, painful and not at all pleasant,
that I may not suffer, grieve, blame myself, grow feeble, be afflicted,
and undergo great pain <span id="fr_1014"></span>[2](#fn_1006). Deliver
me from this painful illness or disease, (&c., all as above).' But this
desire of his has never yet been fulfilled. (37)

Here, in this life, pleasures and amusements are not able to help or to
save one. Sometimes a man first forsakes pleasures and amusements,
sometimes they first forsake him. Pleasures and amusements are one
thing, and I am another. Why then should we be infatuated with pleasures
and amusements which are alien (to our being)? Taking this into
consideration, we shall give up pleasures and amusements. A wise man
thinks them alien to himself. (38)

There are things more intimately connected with me, viz. my mother,
father, brother, sister, wife, children, grandchildren,
daughters-in-law, servants, friends, kinsmen, companions, and
acquaintances. These my relations belong to me, and I belong to them. A
wise man, previously, should think thus to himself: 'Here, indeed, some
painful illness or disease might befall me, (&c., all as in § 37 down to
the end, but substitute "relations" for "pleasures"). (39)

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

'Or some painful illness or disease, unwished for, (&c., all down to)
not at all pleasant might befall my dear relations. I will take upon me
this painful illness or disease, &c., that they may not suffer, (all
down to) undergo great pain. I will deliver them from this painful
illness or disease.' But this desire of his has never yet, been
fulfilled. For one man cannot take upon himself the pains of another;
one man cannot experience what another has done <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1](#fn_1007). (40)

Individually a man is born, individually he dies, individually he falls
(from this state of existence), individually he rises (to another) <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[2](#fn_1008). His passions <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[3](#fn_1009), consciousness, intellect,
perceptions, and impressions belong to the individual exclusively. Here,
indeed, the bonds of relationship are not able to help nor save one.
(All as in § 38 down to the end; substitute 'bonds of relationship' for
'pleasures and amusements.') (40

There are things more intimately connected with me, viz. my hands, feet,
arms, legs, head, belly, character, life, strength, colour, skin,
complexion, ear, eye, nose, tongue, and touch; they are part and parcel
of me. But I grow old with regard to life, strength, (all down to)
touch. The strong joints become loose, the body is furrowed with
wrinkles, the black hair turns white, even this dear body which has
grown with food, must be relinquished in due time.

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Making such
reflections, a monk should lead a mendicant's life and know that all
things are divided into living beings and things without life, (and
living beings again into) movable and immovable ones. (42)

Here, indeed, householders are killers (of beings) and acquirers of
property, and so are even some *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as. They
themselves kill movable and immovable living beings, have them killed by
another person, or consent to another's killing them. (43)

Here, indeed, householders are killers (of beings) and acquirers of
property, and so are even some *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as. They
themselves acquire sentient or senseless objects of pleasure, have them
acquired by another person, or consent to another's acquiring them. (44)

Here, indeed, householders are killers (of beings) and acquirers of
property, and so are even some *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as. But I am no
killer (of beings) nor an acquirer of property. Relying upon <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1](#fn_1010) householders and such *S*rama*n*as and
Brâhma*n*as as are killers (of beings) and acquirers of property, we
shall lead a life of chastity. (He should, however, part company with
them.) (The pupil asks): What is the reason thereof? (The teacher
answers): As before (their ordination they were killers of beings), so
(they will be) afterwards, and vice versâ. It is evident that
(householders) do not abstain (from sins) nor exert themselves (in
control); and (as monks) they will relapse into the same (bad habits).
(45)

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

The householders and those *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, who are killers
(of beings) and acquirers of property, commit sins both (from love and
hatred). But a monk who takes this into consideration, should lead a
life subject to neither (love nor hatred). (46)

I say: in the East, West, North, and South (a true monk) will have
renounced works, be exempt from works, will have put an end to them.
This has been taught (by the prophets, &c.). (47)

The Venerable One has declared that the cause (of sins) are the six
classes of living beings, earth-lives, &c. As is my pain when I am
knocked of-struck with a stick, bone, fist, clod, or potsherd; or
menaced, beaten, burned, tormented, or deprived of life; and as I feel
every pain and agony from death down to the pulling out of a hair: in
the same way, be sure of this, all kinds of living beings feel the same
pain and agony, &c., as I, when they are ill-treated in the same
way <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1](#fn_1011). For this reason all sorts
of living beings should not be beaten, nor treated with violence, nor
abused, nor tormented, nor deprived of life <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[2](#fn_1012). (48)

I say: the Arhats and Bhagavats of the past, present, and future, all
say thus, speak thus, declare thus, explain thus: all sorts of living
beings should not be slain, nor treated with violence, nor abused, nor
tormented, nor driven away. This constant, permanent, eternal, true Law
has been taught by wise men who comprehend all things. Thus a monk
abstains from (the five cardinal sins) slaughter of living beings, &c.
He does not clean his teeth with

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

a tooth-brush <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1](#fn_1013), he does not
accept collyrium, emetics, and perfumes. (49)

A monk who does not act, nor kill, who is free from wrath, pride,
deceit, and greed, who is calm and happy, should not entertain the
following wish: May I, after my departure from this world, by dint of my
intellect, knowledge, memory, learning, or of the performance of
austerities, religious duties, chastity, or of this habit to eat no more
than is necessary to sustain life, become a god at whose command are all
objects of pleasure, or a perfected saint who is exempt from pain and
misery. (Through his austerities) he may obtain his object, or he may
not obtain it. (50)

A monk should not be infatuated with sounds, colours, smells, tastes,
and feelings of touch; he should abstain from wrath, pride, deceit, and
greed, from love, hate, quarrel, calumny, reviling of others, aversion
to control and delight in sensual things, deceit and untruth, and the
sin of wrong belief. In this way a monk ceases to acquire gross Karman,
controls himself, and abstains from sins. (51)

He does not kill movable or immovable beings, nor has them killed by
another person, nor does he consent to another's killing them. In this
way a monk ceases to acquire gross Karman, controls himself, and
abstains from sins. (52)

He does not acquire sentient or senseless objects of pleasure, nor has
them acquired by another person, nor does he consent to another's
acquiring them. In this way, (&c., all as above). (53)

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

He does no actions arising from sinful causes <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1](#fn_1014), nor has them done by another person,
nor does he consent to another's doing them. In this way (&c., all as
above). (54)

A monk should not take food, drink, dainties, and spices when he knows
that (the householder) to satisfy him, or for the sake of a
co-religionist, has bought or stolen or taken it, though it was not
given nor to be taken, but was taken by force, by acting sinfully
towards all sorts of living beings <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[2](#fn_1015); nor does he cause another person to
eat it, nor does he consent to another's eating it. In this way (&c.,
all as above). (55)

A monk may think as follows: The (householders) have the means (to
procure food for those) for whose sake it is prepared; viz. for
himself <span id="fr_1024"></span>[3](#fn_1016), his sons, daughters,
daughters-in-law, nurses, relations, chiefs, male and female slaves,
male and female servants; for a treat of sweetmeats, for a supper, for a
breakfast the collation has been prepared. This food is to be eaten by
some people, it is prepared by some one else, it is destined for some
one else, it is free from the faults occasioned either by the giver or
by the receiver or by the act of receiving it <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[4](#fn_1017), rendered pure <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[5](#fn_1018), rendered free from living
matter <span id="fr_1027"></span>[6](#fn_1019), wholly free from living
things <span id="fr_1028"></span>[7](#fn_1020), it has been begged, has
been given to the monk on account of his profession <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[8](#fn_1021),

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

it has been collected in small bits <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1](#fn_1022), it is food fit for a learned monk, it
is lawful to eat it at the present occasion, it is of the prescribed
quantity, it greases, as it were, the axle of the carriage and anoints
the sore, being just sufficient to enable one to practise control and to
carry the burden of it; he should consume that food (without delay) even
as the snake returning to its hole; that is to say: one should eat when
it is time for eating, drink when it is time for drinking, dress when it
is time for dressing, seek cover when it is time for seeking cover, and
sleep when it is time for sleeping. (56)

A monk who knows the proper measure (in all things) travelling in one
direction or other, should teach, explain, and praise (the Law), preach
it unto those who exert themselves well, and to those who do not, to all
who come to listen. (He should preach to them): indifference for the
peace of mind, cessation of passion, Nirvâ*n*a, purity, simplicity,
humility, freedom from bonds <span id="fr_1031"></span>[2](#fn_1023). He
should preach the Law which prohibits to kill any living being, after
having well considered it. (57)

When a monk preaches the Law, he should preach it not for the sake of
food, drink, clothes, resting-place, or lodging, nor for any objects of
pleasure; but he should preach the Law indefatigably, for no other
motive than the annihilation of Karman. (58)

Those heroes of faith who are instructed in the Law by such a monk and
exert themselves well, are

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

possessed of all (virtues), abstain from all (sins), cease from all
(passions), conduct themselves well in every way, and reach final
beatitude. (59)

Such a monk searches the Law, knows the Law, and endeavours to gain
Liberation; as it has been said: 'He may get the white lotus, the best
of Nymphaeus, or he may not get it.' Such a monk knows and renounces
actions, worldly occupations, and the life of a householder; he is free
from passions, possesses the Samitis, is wise, always exerts himself; he
is to be called: a *S*rama*n*a, a Brâhma*n*a, calm, a subduer of his
senses, guarding himself, liberated, a seer, a sage, virtuous, wise, a
monk, living on low food, desiring to get to the shore (of the
Sa*m*sâra), fulfilling the general and particular virtues <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1](#fn_1024). (60)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_977"></span>[335:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_984) With the exception
of the fifth and sixth lectures, the whole Book (*s*rutaskandha) is in
prose. I have adhered to the subdivision of the lectures exhibited in
the Bombay edition, which, on the whole, agrees with that of most MSS.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[335:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_985) The lectures of
this Book are called, according to the Niryukti, Great (mahâ) Lectures.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[336:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_986) In the text the
words savvâvanti *k*a *n*a*m* are prefixed to the text of §§ 3 and 4. I
give the explanation of *S*îlâṅka.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[338:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_987) Nâê = *gñ*âtam,
literally, that which is known.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[338:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_988) In the text the
sentence closes with bhante, a word frequently used in addressing
members of the order.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[338:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_989) These words are in
the original repeated in each of the following sentences. I drop them in
the translation.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[338:4](sbe4565.htm#fr_990) Appâha*tt*u =
atmany âh*ri*tya, literally, having in my mind.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[338:5](sbe4565.htm#fr_991) Dharmatîrtha.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[339:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_992) This is one of the
var*n*aka or typical descriptions which are so frequent in the canonical
books. The full text is given in the Aupapâtika Sûtra, ed. Leumann, §
II, p. 26 f. Of the many meanings the word var*n*aka may have,
'masterpiece' seems the one in which it must be taken here. Many
var*n*akas are, partly at least, composed in a curious metre which I
have named Hypermetron, see Indische Studien, vol. xvii, pp. 389 ff.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[339:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_994) Concerning the
Ugras and Bhôgas compare note [2](sbe4517.htm#fn_190) on [p.
71](sbe4517.htm#page_71).

<span id="fn_987"></span>[339:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_995) Apparently the king
is meant.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[340:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_996) *G*îva.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[341:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_997) Emblica
Myrobalanos.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[341:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_998) I have somewhat
condensed this passage.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[341:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_999) Ayau*tt*asî in
Prâk*ri*t; it is Linum Usitatissimum.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[341:4](sbe4565.htm#fr_1000) *Kh*ôya. See
Grierson, Peasant Life of Bihar, p. 236. The word is apparently derived
from root kshud.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[341:5](sbe4565.htm#fr_1001) Pa*d*ivêdenti =
prativêdayanti. The commentators, however, explain it as 'understand.'

<span id="fn_994"></span>[342:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1002) According to the
commentators the Lôkâyatikas or the Sâṅkhyas are intended. The latter
explain the whole world as developed from the Prâk*ri*ti or chaos, and
contend that the âtman does not act. The Lôkâyatikas deny the separate
existence of the âtman, and maintain that the elements are called âtman
when they manifest intellect (*k*aitanya).

<span id="fn_995"></span>[342:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1003) Mahabbhûya =
mahâbhûta.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[343:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1004) Samavâya.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[343:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1005) The word used in
the text is îsara = î*s*vara, but afterwards purisa = purusha is used in
its place. Both words are synonymous <span id="page_344">p. 344</span>
with âtman, the first may denote the highest âtman as in the Yôga
philosophy, or the paramâtman as in the Vêdânta.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[345:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1006) Ga*n*ipi*d*aga.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[345:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1007) Viz. Fate. For it
is their destiny to entertain one belief or the other, and they are not
amenable to it. This is the interpretation of the commentators. But to
the phrase kâra*n*am âpanna they give here a meaning different from that
in the following paragraphs. I therefore propose the following
translation of the end of the <span id="page_346">p. 346</span>
paragraph: 'are equally (wrong), (err) alike as regards the cause (of
actions).'

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[346:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1008) Tippâmi,
explained 'lose strength of body.' The word cannot be t*ri*pyâmi,
because it means 'I am satisfied.' The word is probably derived from the
root tik 'to kill.' Tippâmi would be an irregular passive, just as
sippâmi from si*k*, see Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung,
vol. xxvii, p. 250. Leumann, Aupapâtika Sûtra, glossary s*v*.
tippa*n*ayâ, explains this word by 'crying' on the authority of
Abhayadêva. Either meaning suits the passages where it occurs in our
text.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[346:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1009) But Fate is the
cause.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[346:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_1010) That is to say,
that Fate distributes pleasure and pain.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[346:4](sbe4565.htm#fr_1011) I render the
rather ambiguous expressions in the original according to the
interpretation of the commentators.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[347:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1012) The same
enumeration of valuable things occurs elsewhere, e.g. Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas, § 90.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[348:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1013) The original has
six synonyms for disagreeable, which it is impossible to render
adequately in English.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[348:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1014) The same words
occurred in § 31.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[349:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1015) I.e. his Karman.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[349:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1016) According to the
commentators the last two passages should be translated: 'individually
he leaves (his possessions, &c.), individually he is joined (to them).'

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[349:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_1017) *Gh*a*ñgh*â =
kalaha.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[350:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1018) Nissâe =
ni*s*rayâ, explained â*s*rayê*n*a.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[351:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1019) The text repeats
the phrases just translated.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[351:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1020) The same words
form the text of the homily in Â*k*ârâṅga I, 4.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[352:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1021) Or rather a piece
of wood with which the Hindus rub their teeth.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[353:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1022) Sâmparâyika. The
commentators say: ta*k* *k*a
pradvêshanihnavamâtsaryântarâyâ*s*âtanôpaghâtair badhyatê.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[353:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1023) Compare
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II, I, I, II.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[353:3](sbe4565.htm#fr_1024) Apparently the
householder is intended.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[353:4](sbe4565.htm#fr_1025) Udgama, utpâdanâ,
êsha*n*â. See above, [p. 131](sbe4526.htm#page_131), note
[7](sbe4526.htm#fn_337).

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[353:5](sbe4565.htm#fr_1026) *S*astrâtîtam.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[353:6](sbe4565.htm#fr_1027)
*S*astrapari*n*âmitam.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[353:7](sbe4565.htm#fr_1028) Avihi*m*sitam.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[353:8](sbe4565.htm#fr_1029) Vaishikam.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[354:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1030) Samudânikam, i.e.
as bees collect honey from many flowers. Cf. [p.
80](sbe4519.htm#page_80), note [1](sbe4519.htm#fn_207).

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[354:2](sbe4565.htm#fr_1031) Compare
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra I, 7, 4, I, part i, p. 68, note 3.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[355:1](sbe4565.htm#fr_1032)
*K*ara*n*akara*n*apâravid. *K*ara*n*a is explained by mûlagu*n*a,
kara*n*a by uttaragu*n*a. The mûlagu*n*as consist in the observance of
the five vows, the uttaragu*n*as are the five Samitis, the three Guptis,
&c., in short, the duties of a monk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 2, Lecture 2: On Activity](sbe4566)
