[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft015)  [Next](gft017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### In Roumania.

In 1387 Mircea I., woiwode of Wallachia, by a charter still preserved in
the archives of Bucharest, renewed a grant made about 1370 by his uncle
Vladislav to the monastery of St. Anthony at Voditza of forty *salaschi*
('tents' or families) of Atsegane. Which shows that already the
Roumanian Gypsies were serfs; and serfs they continued till 1856. To the
*Proceedings* of the Royal Geographical Society (vol. i., Lond., 1857,
pp. 37-41) Mr. Samuel Gardner, H.M. Consul at Jassy, contributed some
interesting 'Notes on the Condition of the Gypsy Population of
Moldavia.' 'The Tzigans,' he says, 'are an intelligent and industrious
race, and in their general condition of prædial slavery (for few are in
reality emancipated) are a reproach to the country and to the
Government. Many of them are taught arts. They are the blacksmiths,
locksmiths, bricklayers, masons, farriers, musicians, and cooks
especially, of the whole country. . . . They dwell in winter in
subterranean excavations, the roof alone appearing above ground, and in
summer in brown serge tents of their own fabric. . . . The children, to
the age of ten or twelve, are in a complete state of nudity; but the men
and women, the latter offering frequently the most symmetrical form and
feminine beauty, have a rude clothing. Their implements and carriages,
of a peculiar construction, display much ingenuity. They are in fact
very able artisans and labourers, industrious and active, but are
cruelly and barbarously treated. In the houses of their masters they are
employed in the lowest offices, live in the cellars, have the lash
continually applied to them, and are still subjected to the iron collar
and a kind of spiked iron mask or

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

helmet, which they are obliged to wear as a mark of punishment and
degradation for every petty offence.' The Gypsies of Wallachia and
Moldavia are referred to in eleven original documents of the fourteenth,
fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries. Every one of these documents speaks
of them as serfs, but we get never a hint of when they were first
reduced to serfdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Chaltsmide](gft017.md)
