[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft064)  [Next](gft066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="an_05"></span>

# CHAPTER II

# ROUMANIAN-GYPSY STORIES

### No. 5.--The Vampire

THERE was an old woman in a village. And grown-up maidens met and span,
and made a 'bee.' <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) And the young
sparks came and laid hold of the girls, and pulled them about and kissed
them. But one girl had no sweetheart to lay hold of her and kiss her.
And she was a strapping lass, the daughter of wealthy peasants; but
three whole days no one came near her. And she looked at the big girls,
her comrades. And no one troubled himself with her. Yet she was a pretty
girl, a prettier was not to be found. Then came a fine young spark, and
took her in his arms and kissed her, and stayed with her until
cock-crow. And when the cock crowed at dawn he departed. The old woman
saw he had cock's feet. <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40.md) And she kept
looking at the lad's feet, and she said, 'Nita, my lass, did you see
anything?'

'I didn't notice.'

'Then didn't I see he had cock's feet?'

'Let be, mother, I didn't see it.'

And the girl went home and slept; and she arose and went off to the
spinning, where many more girls were holding a 'bee.' And the young
sparks came, and took each one his sweetheart. And they kissed them, and
stayed a while, and went home. And the girl's handsome young

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

spark came and took her in his arms and kissed her and pulled her about,
and stayed with her till midnight. And the cock began to crow. The young
spark heard the cock crowing, and departed. What said the old woman who
was in the hut, 'Nita, did you notice that he had horse's hoofs?'

'And if he had, I didn't see.'

Then the girl departed to her home. And she slept and arose in the
morning, and did her work that she had to do. And night came, and she
took her spindle and went to the old woman in the hut. And the other
girls came, and the young sparks came, and each laid hold of his
sweetheart. But the pretty girl looks at them. Then the young sparks
gave over and departed home. And only the girl remained neither a long
time nor a short time. Then came the girl's young spark. Then what will
the girl do? She took heed, and stuck a needle and thread in his back.
And he departed when the cock crew, and she knew not where he had gone
to. Then the girl arose in the morning and took the thread, and followed
up the thread, and saw him in a grave where he was sitting. Then the
girl trembled and went back home. At night the young spark that was in
the grave came to the old woman's house and saw that the girl was not
there. He asked the old woman, 'Where's Nita?'

'She has not come.'

Then he went to Nita's house, where she lived, and called, 'Nita, are
you at home?'

Nita answered, \['I am'\].

'Tell me what you saw when you came to the church. For if you don't tell
me I will kill your father.'

'I didn't see anything.'

Then he looked, <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) and he killed her
father, and departed to his grave.

Next night he came back. 'Nita, tell me what you saw.' I didn't see
anything.'

'Tell me, or I will kill your mother, as I killed your father. Tell me
what you saw.'

'I didn't see anything.'

Then he killed her mother, and departed to his grave. Then the girl
arose in the morning. And she had twelve

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

servants. And she said to them, 'See, I have much money and many oxen
and many sheep; and they shall come to the twelve of you as a gift, for
I shall die to-night. And it will fare ill with you if you bury me not
in the forest at the foot of an apple-tree.'

At night came the young spark from the grave and asked, Nita, are you at
home?'

'I am.'

'Tell me, Nita, what you saw three days ago, or I will kill you, as I
killed your parents.'

'I have nothing to tell you.'

Then he took and killed her. Then, casting a look, he departed to his
grave.

So the servants, when they arose in the morning, found Nita dead. The
servants took her and laid her out decently. They sat and made a hole in
the wall and passed her through the hole, and carried her, as she had
bidden, and buried her in the forest by the apple-tree.

And half a year passed by, and a prince went to go and course hares with
greyhounds and other dogs. And he went to hunt, and the hounds ranged
the forest and came to the maiden's grave. And a flower grew out of it,
the like of which for beauty there was not in the whole kingdom. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md) So the hounds came on her monument, where
she was buried, and they began to bark and scratched at the maiden's
grave. Then the prince took and called the dogs with his horn, and the
dogs came not. The prince said, 'Go quickly thither.'

Four huntsmen arose and came and saw the flower burning like a candle.
They returned to the prince, and he asked them, 'What is it?'

'It is a flower, the like was never seen.'

Then the lad heard, and came to the maiden's grave, and saw the flower
and plucked it. And he came home and showed it to his father and mother.
Then he took and put it in a vase at his bed-head where he slept. Then
the flower arose from the vase and turned a somersault, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md) and became

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

a full-grown maiden. And she took the lad and kissed him, and bit him
and pulled him about, and slept with him in her arms, and put her hand
under his head. And he knew it not. When the dawn came she became a
flower again.

In the morning the lad rose up sick, and complained to his father and
mother, 'Mammy, my shoulders hurt me, and my head hurts me.'

His mother went and brought a wise woman and tended him. He asked for
something to eat and drink. And he waited a bit, and then went to his
business that he had to do. And he went home again at night. And he ate
and drank and lay down on his couch, and sleep seized him. Then the
flower arose and again became a full-grown maiden. And she took him
again in her arms, and slept with him, and sat with him in her arms. And
he slept. And she went back to the vase. And he arose, and his bones
hurt him, and he told his mother and his father. Then his father said to
his wife, 'It began with the coming of the flower. Something must be the
matter, for the boy is quite ill. Let us watch to-night, and post
ourselves on one side, and see who comes to our son.'

Night came, and the prince laid himself in his bed to sleep. Then the
maiden arose from the vase, and became there was never anything more
fair--as burns the flame of a candle. And his mother and his father, the
king, saw the maiden, and laid hands on her. Then the prince arose out
of his sleep, and saw the maiden that she was fair. Then he took her in
his arms and kissed her, and lay down in his bed, slept till day.

And they made a marriage and ate and drank. The folk marvelled, for a
being so fair as that maiden was not to be found in all the realm. And
he dwelt with her half a year, and she bore a golden boy, two apples in
his hand. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) And it pleased the prince
well.

Then her old sweetheart heard it, the vampire who had made love to her,
and had killed her. He arose and came to her and asked her, 'Nita, tell
me, what did you see me doing?'

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

'I didn't see anything.'

'Tell me truly, or I will kill your child, your little boy, as I killed
your father and mother. Tell me truly.'

'I have nothing to tell you.'

And he killed her boy. And she arose and carried him to the church and
buried him.

At night the vampire came again and asked her, 'Tell me, Nita, what you
saw.'

'I didn't see anything.'

'Tell me, or I will kill the lord whom you have wedded.'

Then Nita arose and said, 'It shall not happen that you kill my lord.
God send you burst.' <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

The vampire heard what Nita said, and burst. Ay, he died, and burst for
very rage. In the morning Nita arose and saw the floor swimming two
hand's-breadth deep in blood. Then Nita bade her father-in-law take out
the vampire's heart with all speed. Her father-in-law, the king,
hearkened, and opened him and took out his heart, and gave it into
Nita's hand. And she went to the grave of her boy and dug the boy up,
applied the heart, and the boy arose. And Nita went to her father and to
her mother, and anointed them with the blood, and they arose. Then,
looking on them, Nita told all the troubles she had borne, and what she
had suffered at the hands of the vampire.

<span class="small">The word *cĭohanó*, which throughout I have rendered
'vampire,' is of course identical with Paspati's Turkish-Rómani
*tchovekhano*, a 'revenant' or spectre, which, according to Miklosich,
is an Armenian loan-word, and in other Gypsy dialects of Europe means
'wizard, witch.' This vampire story is a connecting link between the two
meanings <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md); but whether the story
itself is of Gypsy or of non-Gypsy origin is a difficult question. We
have four versions of it--two of them Gypsy, viz., this from Roumania,
and one in Friedrich Müller's *Beiträge*; and two non-Gypsy, viz.,
Ralston's 'The Fiend' (*Russian Folk-tales*, pp. 10-17), and one from
Croatia (Krauss's *Sagen and Märchen der Sudslaven*, i. 293). Hahn's
'Lemonitza' (ii. 27) also offers analogies. Krauss's and Müller's are
both much inferior to Ralston's and our Roumanian-Gypsy one; and of
them, although Ralston's opens best, yet its close is immeasurably
inferior. For in it, as in the Hungarian-Gypsy variant, the flower
transforms itself merely to eat and drink. But Ralston's story, it
will</span>

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

probably be urged, [as](errata.htm#2.md) a typical Russian story, so must
needs be of Russian origin. To which I answer, Irish-wise, with the
question, How then did it travel to Croatia, to the Gypsies of Hungary
and Roumania? That the Gypsies, with never a church, should make church
bells might seem unlikely, did we not know that at Edzell, in
Forfarshire, there is a church bell that was cast by Gypsies in 1726. So
Gypsy story-tellers may well have devised some domestic narratives for
their auditors, not for themselves. And this story is possibly theirs
who tell it best.

The merest glance at Ralston or Krauss will suffice to show that the
Gypsy and Gentile stories are identical, that the likeness between them
is no chance one, but that there has been transmission--either the
Gypsies have borrowed from the Gentiles, or the, Gentiles have borrowed
from the Gypsies. Ralston and Krauss are readily accessible to the
general folklorist; of Friedrich Müller's version I append this brief
résumé. It is compounded of the first half of his No. 4, which drifts
off into quite another story about a dove and a soldier, and of the
second half of his number No. 2, which opens with a variant of

Grimm's 'Robber Bridegroom' (cf. *infra*, No. 47, notes):--

The Holy Maid will not marry. The devil creeps in at window. '"Now, thou
fair maiden, wilt thou come to me or no?" "No"--this said the
maiden--"to a dead one say I it, but to a living one No."' Devil kills
first her father, next her mother; lastly threatens herself. She tells
the gravedigger, ' Bear me not over the door \[this supplies a lacuna in
the Roumanian-Gypsy version\], but bury me in a grave under the
threshold, and take me not out from there.' The girl then dies and is
buried. Flower grows out of grave. King sees it and sends coachman to
pluck it. He cannot \[supplies lacuna\], but king does, and takes it
home. At night the flower turns into a girl and eats. Servant sees and
tells. King watches next night. The girl bids him pluck the flower with
a clean white cloth with the left hand, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) then she will never change back into a
rose, but remain a maiden \[supplies lacuna\]. King does so, and she
marries him on condition he will never force her to go to church
\[supplies lacuna\]. He rues his promise when he sees the other kings
going to church with their wives. She consents: 'But now, as thou wilt,
I go. Thy God shall be also my God.' When she comes into church, there
are the twelve robbers \[story reverts here to the first half of No.
2\]. The robber cuts her throat and she dies. ' If she is not dead, she
is still alive.'

It will be seen 'that, rude and corrupt as these two fragments are, they
supply some details wanting in the Roumanian-Gypsy version. They cannot,
then, be borrowed from it, but it and they are clearly alike derived
from some older, more perfect original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[14:1](gft065.htm#fr_39.md) *Kláka*. 'Claca,' says
Grenville Murray, 'signifies a species of assembly very popular in
Wallachia. If any family has some particular work to do on any
particular account, they invite the neighbourhood to come and work for
them. When the work is completed there is high glee, singing and
dancing, and story-telling.'--*Doine; or, Songs and Legends of Roumania*
(Lond. 1854), p. 109 n.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[14:2](gft065.htm#fr_40.md) In Wlislocki, p. 104
*note*, the devil has a duck's foot. In F. A. Steel's *Indian Wide-awake
Stories*, p. 54, the hero detects a ghost by her feet being set on hind
part before.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[15:1](gft065.htm#fr_41.md) On p. 110 Dr. Barbu
Constantinescu gives a long and terrific formula for bewitching with the
evil eye.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[16:1](gft065.htm#fr_42.md) The notion of a dead
girl turning into a flower is very common in Indian folk-tales. *Cf*.
Maive Stokes's *Indian Fairy Tales*, pp. 145, 149, 244, 247, 248, 252,
etc.; and Mary Frere's *Old Deccan Days*, No. 6, 'Little Surya Bai,' pp.
79-93.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[16:2](gft065.htm#fr_43.md) *Dá pes pe sherésti*,
lit. gave, or threw, herself on her head. In Gypsy stories this
undignified proceeding almost invariably precedes every transformation.
*Cf*. <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>'The Red King and the Witch,' 'The
Snake who became the King's Son-in-law,' 'Tropsyn,' etc.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[17:1](gft065.htm#fr_44.md) For golden boy *cf*.
Dr. Barbu Constantinescu's own ' The Golden Children,' No. 18, also
Hahn, ii. 293. The two apples seem to be birth-marks.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[18:1](gft065.htm#fr_45.md) For the bursting of
monsters, *cf*. Dasent's *Tales from the Norse*, pp. 27, 240; and
Ralston, p. 130.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[18:2](gft065.htm#fr_46.md) Our queen's
great-great-great-grandfather, George I., was a firm believer in the
vampire superstition (Horace Walpole's *Letters*, vol. i. p. cix.).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[19:1](gft065.htm#fr_47.md) *Cf*. Grimm, No. 56,
'Sweetheart Roland,' i. 226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 6.--God's Godson](gft066.md)
