[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft065)  [Next](gft067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="an_06"></span>

### No. 6.--God's Godson

There was a queen. From youth to old age that queen never bore but one
son. That son was a hero. So soon as he was born, he said to his father,
'Father, have you no sword or club?'

'No, my child, but I will order one to be made for you.'

The son said, 'Don't order one, father: I will go just as I am.'

So the son took and departed, and journeyed a long while, and took no
heed, till he came into a great forest. So in that forest he stretched
himself beneath a tree to rest a bit, for he was weary. And he sat there
a while. Then the holy God and St. Peter came on the lad; and he was
unbaptized. So the holy God asked him, 'Where are you going, my lad?'

'I am going in quest of heroic achievements, old fellow.'

Then the holy God thought and thought, and made a church. And he caused
sleep to fall on that lad, and bade St. Peter lift him, and went with
him to the church, and gave him the name Handak. And the holy God said
to him, 'Godson, a hero like you there shall never be any other; and do
you take my god-daughter.'

For there was a maiden equally heroic, and equally baptized by God. And
she was his god-daughter, and he told his godson to take her. And he
gave him a wand of good fortune and a sword. And he endowed him with
strength, and set him down. And his godfather departed to heaven, like
the holy God that he was.

And Handak perceived that God had endowed him with strength, and he set
out in quest of heroic achievements, and journeyed a long while, and
took no heed. So he came into a great forest. And there was a dragon
three hundred years old. And his eyelashes reached down to the ground,
and likewise his hair. And the lad went to him and said, 'All hail.'

'You are welcome.'

Soon as that hero \[the dragon\] heard his voice, he knew that it was
God's godson.

And the lad, Handak, asked him, 'Does God's god-daughter dwell far
hence?'

'She dwells not far; it is but a three days' journey.'

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

And the lad took and departed, and journeyed three days until he came to
the maiden's. Soon as the maiden saw him, she recognised him for her
godfather's godson. And she let him into her house, and served up food
to him, and ate with him and asked him, 'What seek you here, Handak?'

He said, 'I have come on purpose to marry you.'

'With whom?'

'With myself an you will.'

She said, 'I will not have it so without a fight.'

And the lad said, 'Come let us fight.'

And they fell to fighting, and fought three days; and the lad vanquished
her. And he took her, and went to their godfather. And he crowned them
and made a marriage. And they became rulers over all lands. And I came
away, and told the story.

<span class="small">This story, though poor as a story, is yet
sufficiently curious. Tweedledum and Tweedledee, in *Alice in
Wonderland*, are suggested by the 'not without a fight'; but I can offer
no real variant or analogue of 'God's Godson.' It is noteworthy,
however, that the holy God and St. Peter occur in another of Barbu
Constantinescu's Roumanian-Gypsy stories,. 'The Apples of Pregnancy,'
No. 16, and baptize another boy in Miklosich's Gypsy story from the
Bukowina, No. 9, 'The Mother's Chastisement'; whilst we get Christ and
St. Peter in a Catalonian-Gypsy story (cited under No. 60). For the
nuptial crown in the last line but two, *cf*. Ralston's *Songs of the
Russian People*, pp. 198, 270, 306. See also the Roumanian-Gypsy story
of 'The Prince and the Wizard,' No. 15, for an heroic hero,
nought-heeding, who sets out in quest of heroic achievements.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 7.--The Snake who became the King's Son-in-law](gft067)
