[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft061)  [Next](gft063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_02"></span>

### No. 2.--Baldpate

In those days there was a man built a galleon; he manned her; he would
go from the White Sea to the Black Sea. He landed at a village to take
in water; there he saw four or five boys playing. One of them was bald.
He called him. 'Where's the water?' he asked. Baldpate showed him; he
took in water.

'Wilt come with me?'

'I will, but I've a mother.'

'Let's go to your mother.' They went to her.

'Will you give me this boy?'

'I will.'

The captain paid a month's wages; he took the lad. They weighed anchor;
they came to a large village; they landed to take in water.

The king's son went out for a walk, and he sees a dervish with a girl's
portrait for sale. The king's son bought it; it was very lovely. The
girl's father had been working at it for seven years. The king's son set
it on the fountain, thinking, Some one of those who come to drink the
water will say, 'I've seen that girl.' The captain came ashore; he took
in water; he lifted up his eyes, and saw the portrait. 'What a beauty!'
He went aboard, and said to his crew, 'There's a beauty yonder, I've
never seen her like.'

Baldpate said, 'I'm going to see.'

Baldpate went. The moment he saw the portrait, he burst out laughing.
'It's the dervish's daughter. How do they come by her?'

Hardly had he said it when they seized him and brought him to the
palace. Baldpate lost his head the moment they seized him. But two days
later they came to him: 'This girl, do you know her?'

'Know her? why, we were brought up together. Her mother is dead; she
suckled both her and me.'

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

'If they bring you before the king, fear not.'

He came before the king.

'This girl, do you know her, my lad?'

'I do, we grew up together.'

'Will you bring her here?'

'I will. Build me a gilded galleon; give me twenty musicians; let me
take your son with me; and let no one gainsay whatever I do. Then I will
go. I shall take seven years to go and come.'

They took their bread, their water for seven years; they set out. They
went to the maiden's country. At break of day Baldpate brought the
galleon near the maiden's house; the maiden's house was close to the
sea. Baldpate said, 'I'll go upon deck for a turn; don't any of you show
yourselves.' He went up; he paced the deck.

The dervish's daughter arose from her sleep. The sun struck on the
galleon; it struck, too, on the house. The girl went out, rubs her eyes.
A man pacing up and down. She bowed forward and saw our Baldpate. She
knew him: 'What wants he here?'

'What seek you here?'

'I've come for you, come to see you; it is so many years since I've seen
you. Come aboard. Your father, where's he gone to?'

'Don't you know that my father has been painting my portrait? He's gone
to sell it; I'm expecting him these last few days.'

'Come here, and let's have a little talk.'

The girl went to dress. Baldpate went to his crew. Hide yourselves;
don't let a soul be seen; but the moment I get her into the cabin, do
you cut the ropes; I shall be talking with her.'

She came into the cabin; they seated themselves; they talk; the galleon
gets under weigh. He privily brought in the king's son.

'Who is this?' said the girl. 'I am off.'

'Are you daft, my sister? Let's have some sweetmeats.' He gave her some;
they intoxicated the girl.

'A little music to play to you,' said Baldpate.

He went, brought the musicians; they began to play. The girl said, 'I'm
up, I'm off; my father's coming.'

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

'Sit down a bit, and let them play to you.' They play their music; she
hears not the departure of the galleon.

'I'm off,' said the girl to Baldpate.

She went on deck and saw where her home was. 'Ah! my brother, what have
you done to me?'

'Done to you! he who sits by you is the son of the king, and I'm come to
fetch you for him.'

She wept and said, 'What shall I do? shall I fling myself into the sea?'
No, she went and sat down by the king's son. Plenty of music and
victuals and drink. Baldpate is sitting up aloft by himself; he is
captain. They eat, they drink; he stirred not from his post.

Two or three days remained ere they landed. At break of dawn three birds
perched on the galleon; no one was near him. The birds began talking: 'O
bird, O bird, what is it, O bird? The dervish's daughter eats, drinks
with the son of the king; she knows not what will befall them.'

'What will?' the other birds asked.

'As soon as he arrives, a little boat will come to take them off. The
boat will upset, and the dervish's daughter and the king's son will be
drowned; and whoever hears it and tells will be turned into stone to his
knees.'

Baldpate listens; he is alone.

Early next morning the birds came back again. They began talking
together: 'O bird, O bird, what is it, O bird? The dervish's daughter
and the king's son eat, drink; they know not what will befall them. As
soon as they land, as soon as they enter the gate, the gate will tumble
down, it will crush them and kill them; and whoever hears it and tells
will be turned into stone to the back.'

Day broke; the birds came back. 'O bird, O bird, what is it, O bird? The
dervish's daughter eats, drinks; she knows not what will befall her.'

'What will?' the other birds asked.

'The marriage night a seven-headed dragon will come forth, and he will
devour the king's son and the dervish's daughter; and whoever hears it
and tells them will be turned into stone to the head.'

Baldpate says, all to himself, 'I shan't let any boats come.' He arose;
he came opposite the palace; some boats came to take off the maiden.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

'I want no boats.' Instead he spread his sails. The galleon backed, the
galleon went ahead. One and all looked: 'Why, he will strand the
galleon!'

'Let him be,' said the king, 'let him strand her.'

He stranded the galleon.

Baldpate said to the king, 'When I started to fetch this girl, did I not
tell you you must let me do as I would? No one must interfere.'

He took the girl and the prince; he came to the gate. 'Pull it down.'

'Pull it down, why?' they asked.

'Did I not tell you no one must interfere?'

They set to and pulled it down. They went up, sat down, ate, drank,
laugh, and talk.

The worm gnaws Baldpate within.

Night fell; they will bed the pair. Baldpate said; 'Where you sleep I
also will sleep there.'

'The bridegroom and bride will sleep there; you can't.'

'What's our bargain?'

'Thou knowest.'

They went, they lay down; Baldpate took his sword, he lay down, he
covered his head. At midnight he hears a dragon coming. He draws his
sword; he cuts off its heads; he puts them beneath his pillow. The
king's son awoke, and sees his sword in his hands. He cried, 'Baldpate
will kill us.'

The father came and asked, 'What made you call out, my son?'

'Baldpate will kill us,' he answered.

They took and bound Baldpate's arms.

Day broke; the king summoned him. 'Why have you acted thus? Seven years
you have gone, you have journeyed, and brought the maiden; and now you
have risen to slay them.'

'What could I do?'

'You would kill my son, then will I kill you.'

'Thou knowest.'

They bind his arms, they lead him to cut off his head. As he went,
Baldpate said to himself; 'They will cut off my head. If I tell, I shall
be turned into stone. Come, bring me to the king; I have a couple of
words to say to him.'

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

They brought him to the king.

'Why have you brought him here?'

'He has a couple of words to say to you.'

'Say them, my lad.'

'I, when I went to fetch the dervish's daughter, I was sitting alone on
the galleon; your son was eating, drinking with the maiden. One morning
three birds came; they began talking: "O bird, O bird, what is it, O
bird? The dervish's daughter eats, drinks with the son of the king; she
knows not what will befall her. And whoever hears it and tells will be
turned into stone to his knees." No one but I was there; I heard it.'

As soon as Baldpate had said it, he was turned into stone to his knees.
The king, seeing he was turned into stone, said, 'Prithee, my lad, say
no more.'

'But I will,' Baldpate answered, and went on to tell of the gate; he was
turned into stone to his back.

'The third time the birds came and talked together again, and I heard
(that was why I wished to sleep with them): "A seven-headed dragon will
come forth; he will devour them." And if you believe it not, look under
the pillow.'

They went there; they saw the heads.

'It was I who killed him. Your son saw the sword in my hands, and he
thought I would kill them. I could not tell him the truth.'

He was turned into stone to his head, They made a tomb for him.

The king's son arose; he took the road; he departed. 'Seven years has he
wandered for me, I am going to wander seven years for him.'

The king's son went walking, walking. In a certain place there was
water; he drank of it; he lay down. Baldpate came to him in a dream:
'Take a little earth from here, and go and sprinkle it on the tomb. He
will rise from the stone.'

The king's son slept and slept. He arose; he takes some of the earth; he
went to the tomb; he sprinkled the earth on it. Baldpate arose. 'How
sound I've been sleeping!' he said.

'Seven years hast thou wandered for me, and seven years I have wandered
for thee.'

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

He takes him, he brings him to the palace, he makes him a great one.

<span class="small">Miklosich's Bukowina-Gypsy story, 'The Prince, his
Comrade, and Nastasa the Fair' (No. 24) presents analogies; but
'Baldpate' is identical with Grimm's No. 6, 'Faithful John,' i. pp. 23
and 38, where in the variant the third peril is a *seven*-headed dragon.
*Cf*. also Wolf's *Hausmärchen* (Gött. 1851), p. 383; Basile's
*Pentamerone* (1637), iv. 9; Hahn, i. 201-208, and ii. 267-277; and
especially the Rev. Lal Behari Day's *Folk-tales of Bengal* (London,
1883), pp. 39-52, the latter half of 'Phakir Chand.' Here two immortal
birds warn the minister's son of four perils threatening the king's
son:--(1) riding an elephant; (2) from *fall of gate*; (3) choking by
fish-head; (4) cobra. Penalty of telling, to be turned into statue.
Another Indian version is 'Rama and Luxman; or, the Learned Owl,' in
Mary Frere's *Old Deccan Days*, No. 5, pp. 66-78, whose ending is very
feeble. See also Reinhold Köhler's *Aufsätze über Märchen and
Volkslieder* (Berlin, 1894), pp. 24-35.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 3.--The Riddle](gft063.md)
