[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft040)  [Next](gft042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Kounavine.

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

Lastly, in the *Gypsy Lore Journal* for April and July 1890, were two
long articles by Dr. A. B. Elysseeff--'Kounavine's Materials for the
Study of the Gypsies.' According to these, Michael Ivanovitch Kounavine
(1820-81) studied medicine at Moscow, and then having passed as doctor,
for the thirty-five years 1841-76 wandered from Gypsy camp to Gypsy camp
in Europe, Northern Africa, and Asia. Eight of those years were passed
amongst the Gypsies of Germany, Austria, Southern France, Italy,
England, and Spain; twelve amongst those of Asia Minor, Armenia,
Mesopotamia, Kurdistan, Iran, Hindustan, and the Deccan; ten amongst
Russian Gypsies; and then from the Caucasus 'the indefatigable traveller
followed the transition of the European Gypsies into those of Kurdistan,
and all along the Ural Mountains into those of Central Asia and Turan,
on this occasion revisiting India and the ranges of Tian-Shan and the
Himalayas.' Meanwhile he collected an 'immense store of materials,
consisting of 123 tales, 80 traditions and legends, 62 ritual songs, and
120 smaller products of Gypsy poetry. . . . In the ancient legends the
mythological elements assert themselves most strongly, and the
characteristic features of the Hindu mythology are there so evident,
that even the names in these tales recall the analogous divinities of
the Hindu theology. These are *Baramy*, the proto-divinity, *Jandra*,
the sun-god, *Laki*, *Matta*, *Anromori*, and others, in which one
cannot fail to recognise the Hindu *Brama*, *Indra*, *Lakshmi*, *Máta*
(*Prithik*, earth-mother), as well as the Zendic name of *Ariman*. . . .
In the traditions and historical narratives one meets with classic names
of towns known to the Greek geographers, such as *Batala*, *Pourini*,
*Espadi*, *Rikoi*, *Bikin*, and *Babili*, in which it is not difficult
to recognise the ancient towns *Pattala*, *Poura*, *Aspadana*
(*Ispahan*), *Rhagæ*, *Beikind*, and *Babylon*, cited by Arrian and
other historians and geographers.'

These are the merest pickings from Dr. Kounavine's 'colossal'
collections, which perished, alas! with him somewhere in Siberia, and
are known to us only through an elaborate abstract drawn up in 1878 by
Dr. Elysseeff, since himself also dead. First printed in the
*Transactions* of the Russian Geographical Society (1882), that
abstract, thanks to Dr. Kopernicki, appeared in English in the *Gypsy
Lore Journal*, where it occupied twenty-five pages. It was quite right
it should appear there; still, I cannot feel absolutely certain that
there ever was any Dr. Kounavine at all. If there was, I am certain that
nine-tenths of the discoveries claimed for him are the merest moonshine.
To maintain that the Gypsies of England, France, Spain, and Italy
arrived at their present habitats from

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Africa by way of
Sicily, is, as has been shown, to evince a crass ignorance of the Rómani
language. Equally absurd is it to maintain that 'every Gypsy dialect
contains a large number of words of non-Aryan origin: Aramaic, Semitic,
and even Mongol words form 25 per cent. of the Gypsy vocabulary taken in
its largest sense.' For this implies that Aramaic is non-Semitic, as
though one should speak of Gaelic and Celtic, or of German and Teutonic.
Again, what of the sketch-map, according to which Dr. Kounavine seems to
have found 'fragmentary and confused traces of a primitive mythology'
somewhere about Newtown in Montgomeryshire and round the Cambridgeshire
Wash? Newtown is a Welsh-Gypsy centre (I had shown it be such in 1880);
but unquestionably its Gypsies would have retained some recollection of
a visit from a mysterious Rómani-speaking foreigner, even after the
lapse of thirty or forty years.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Theory as to Gypsy Folk-tales](gft042)
