[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft047)  [Next](gft049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tokens of Recent Diffusion.

Sometimes, however, it seems to me, we get sure tokens of recent
diffusion. Thus in the folk-tales to which Sir George Cox, Professor de
Gubernatis, and their fellow-mythologists assign a prehistoric
antiquity, one of the commonest incidents is where the hero and heroine,
flying from a demon, magician, or ogre (the heroine's father often),
transform themselves into a church and priest. We find the incident in
Lorraine, Brittany, Picardy, many parts of both Germany and Italy, the
Tyrol, Transylvania, Hungary, Croatia, Russia, Spain, Portugal, and

<span id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brazil, as well as
among the Gypsies of Turkey, the Bukowina, and Galicia Of. Cosquin, i.
106; and my own pp. [127](gft094.htm#page_127),
[196](gft110.htm#page_196)). What was the prehistoric form of the
*church*? Was it a tope, a stone circle, something of the kind? That
well may be. But how comes it that the development of the prehistoric
form has in all these widely-separated countries reached exactly the
same stage, and there stopped? Why has not the stone circle become in
one case a stone-heap with a stone-breaker, in another a pound with a
horse in it, in a third a field with a rubbing-post? Why always the
modern Christian notion of a church? But the difficulty vanishes if one
may suppose that the Gypsies, starting from the Balkan Peninsula at a
date when churches were familiar objects, which a pursuer would
naturally pass, carried with them the modern version of the story to
Russia, Spain, and the other countries in which it is told to-day.
Similarly, in Gypsy stories, and in stories current in countries wide
apart, one finds such incidents as the hero falling in love through a
*portrait*, the hero playing *cards* with the devil, the hero carrying a
Bellerophon *letter*, the hero looking through an all-seeing
*telescope*. Such stories in their original form may be of indefinable
antiquity; but the recurrence of their developed form amongst Slays and
Teutons and Celts would seem to be due to recent transmission, unless
one is prepared to maintain that our primæval Aryan ancestors were
acquainted with portrait-painting, with playing-cards, with the art of
writing, and with telescopes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Anthropological Theory](gft049)
