[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft060)  [Next](gft062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="an_01"></span>

# GYPSY FOLK-TALES

# CHAPTER I

# TURKISH-GYPSY STORIES

### No. 1.--The Dead Man's Gratitude <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

A KING had three sons. He gave the youngest a hundred thousand piastres;
he gave the same to the eldest son and to the middle one. The youngest
arose, he took the road; wherever he found poor folk he gave money;
here, there, he gave it away; he spent the money. His eldest brother
went, had ships built to make money. And the middle one went, had shops
built. They came to their father.

'What have you done, my son?'

'I have built ships.'

To the youngest, 'You, what have you done?'

'I? every poor man I found, I gave him money; and for poor girls I paid
the cost of their marriage.'

The king said, 'My youngest son will care well for the poor. Take
another hundred thousand piastres.'

The lad departed. Here, there, he spent his money; twelve piastres
remained to him. Some Jews dug up a corpse and beat it.

'What do you want of him, that you are beating him?'

'Twelve piastres we want of him.'

'I'll give you them if you will let him be.'

He gave the money, they let the dead man be. He arose and departed. As
the lad goes the dead man followed him. 'Where go you?' the dead man
asked.

'I am going for a walk.'

'I'll come too; we'll go together; we will be partners.'

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

'So be it.'

'Come, I will bring you to a certain place.'

He took and brought him to a village. There was a girl, takes a husband,
lies with him; by dawn next day the husbands are dead.

'I will hide you somewhere; I will get you a girl; but we shall always
be partners.'

He found the girl (a dragon came out of her mouth).

'And this night when you go to bed, I too will lie there.'

He took his sword, he went near them. The lad said, 'That will never do.
If you want her, do you take the girl.'

'Are we not partners? You, do you sleep with her; I also, I will sleep
here.'

At midnight he sees the girl open her mouth; the dragon came forth; he
drew his sword; he cut off its three heads; he put the heads in his
bosom; he lay down; he fell asleep. Next morning the girl arose, and
sees the man her husband living by her side. They told the girl's
father. 'To-day your daughter has seen dawn break with her husband.'

'That will be the son-in-law,' said the father.

The lad took the girl; he is going to his father.

'Come,' said the dead man, 'let's divide the money.' They fell to
dividing it.

'We have divided the money; let us also divide your wife.'

The lad said, 'How divide her? If you want her, take her.'

'I won't take her; we'll divide.'

'How divide?' said the lad.

The dead man said, 'I, I will divide.'

The dead man seized her; he bound her knees. 'Do you catch hold of one
foot, I'll take the other.'

He raised his sword to strike the girl. In her fright the girl opened
her mouth, and cried, and out of her mouth fell a dragon. The dead man
said to the lad, 'I am not for a wife, I am not for any money. These
dragon's heads are what devoured the men. Take her; the girl shall be
yours, the money shall be yours. You did me a kindness; I also have done
you one.'

'What kindness did I do you?' asked the lad.

'You took me from the hands of the Jews.'

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The dead man departed to his place, and the lad took his wife, went to
his father.

In his introduction to the *Pantschatantra* (Leip. 1859), i. 219-221,
Benfey cites an Armenian version of this story that is practically
identical. Compare also the English 'Sir Amadas' (c. 1420), first
printed in Weber's *Metrical Romances* (Edinb. 1810, iii. 243-275)
Straparola (1550) xi. 2 ('The Simpleton,' summarised in Grimm, ii. 480);
'The Follower' or 'The Companion' of Asbjörnsen (Dasent's *Tales from
the Fjeld*, p. 68), on which Andersen founded his 'Travelling
Companion'; 'The Barra Widow's Son' (Campbell's *Tales of the West
Highlands*, No. 32, ii. 110); Hahn, ii. 320; Cosquin, i. 208, 214;
Hinton Knowles' *Folk-tales of Kashmir*, pp. 39-40; Wratislaw's *Sixty
Slavonic Folk-tales*, No. 18 (Polish); and especially Reinhold Köhler in
*Orient and Occident* (1864, ii. 322-9, and iii. 93-103). What should be
of special interest to English folklorists, is that Asbjörnsen's
'Follower' forms an episode in our earliest version (Newcastle-on-Tyne,
1711) of 'Jack the Giant-killer.' *Cf*. pp. 67-71 of J. O. Halliwell's
*Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales* (1849), where we get the redemption
of a dead debtor (who is *not* grateful), a witch-lady who visits an
evil spirit, and the cutting off of that evil spirit's head by a comrade
clad in a coat of darkness. The resemblance has never been noticed
between the folk-tale and the Book of Tobit, where Tobit shows his
charity by burying the dead; the archangel Raphael plays the part of the
'Follower' (in both 'Sir Amadas' and the Russian version the Grateful
Dead returns as an angel); Sara, Tobias's bride, has had seven husbands
slain by Asmodeus, the evil spirit, before they had lain with her;
Raguel, Sara's father, learns of Tobias's safety on the morning after
their marriage; Tobias offers half his goods to Raphael; and Raphael
then disappears. The story of Tobit has certainly passed into Sicilian
folklore, borrowed straight, it would seem, from the Apocrypha, as 'The
History of Tobià and Tobiòla' (Laura Gonzenbach's *Sicil. Märchen*, No.
89, ii. 177); but the Apocryphal book itself is plainly a corrupt
version of the original folk-tale.

Madame Darmesteter's *Life of Renan* (1897), contains at p. 251 the
following passage:--'That night he told us the story of the Babylonian
Tobias. Rash and young, this Chaldæan brother of our Tobit, discouraged
by the difficult approaches of prosperity, had entered into partnership
with a demi-god or Demon, who made all his schemes succeed and pocketed
fifty per cent. upon the profits. The remaining fifty sufficed to make
Tobias as rich as Oriental fancy can imagine. The young man fell in
love, married his bride, and brought her home. On the threshold stood
the Demon: "How about my fifty per cent?" The Venus d’Ille, you see, was
not born yesterday. From the dimmest dawn of time sages have taught us
not to trust the gods too far.'

Unluckily there seems to be no authority whatever for this alleged
Chaldæan version, which should obviously come closer to the folk-tale
than to the Book of Tobit. At least, Professor Sayce writes word:--'The
passage in Madame Darmesteter's *Life of Renan* must be based

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="small">on an error, for no such story--so far as I
know--has ever been found on a cuneiform tablet. It may have originated
in a mistranslation of one of the contract-tablets; but if so, the
mistranslation must have appeared in some obscure French publication,
perhaps a newspaper, which I have not seen.' Alack! and yet our
folk-tale remains perhaps the oldest current folk-tale in the
world.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[1:1](gft061.htm#fr_37) Told by an old sedentary
Gypsy woman of Adrianople.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 2.--Baldpate](gft062)
