[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft021)  [Next](gft023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Gypsy Language.

It is a relief to turn from the thousand and one appellations under
which Gypsies have been known at different times and in different
countries, to the sure and unerring light that their language throws on
their history. Though never a chronicler or traveller had written, we
yet could feel confident from Rómani that the forefathers of our English
Gypsies must for a long period have sojourned in a Greek-speaking
country. Among the Greek loan-words in the Anglo-Rómani dialect are
*drom*, road, (δρόμος), *chírus*, time (καιρός), *éfta*, seven (ἑπτά),
*énnea*, nine (ἐννέα), *fóros*, market-town (φόρος), *fílisin*, mansion
(φυλακτήριον), *kekávi*, kettle (κακκάβη), *kókalo*, bone (κόκαλον),
*kóli*, anger (χολή), *kúriki*, Sunday (κυριακή), *misáli*, table
(μενσάλι), *óchto*, eight (ὀκτώ), *pápin*, goose (πάππια), *pápus*,
grandfather (πάππος), *sápin*, soap (σαποῦνι), *shámba*, frog (ζάμπα),
*síma*, to pawn (σημάδι), *skámin*, chair (σκαμνί), *soliváris*, reins
(σολιβάρι), *stádi*, hat (σκιάδι), *wagóra*, fair (ἀγορά), *wálin*,
bottle (ὑαλί), and *zímin*, soup (ζουμί). The total number of Greek
loan-words in the different Gypsy dialects may be about one hundred; and
the same loan-words occur in dialects as widely separate as those of
Roumania, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Lithuania, Russia, Scandinavia,
Germany, Italy, the Basque Country, Spain, and Brazil. This is important
as indicating that the modern Gypsies of Europe are descended not from
successive waves of Oriental immigration, but all from the self-same
European-Gypsy stock, whenever that stock may have first been
transplanted to Europe. It conclusively negatives the Kounavine theory
that the Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Basque, and French
Gypsies arrived at their present habitats by way of Africa, and the
Scandinavian Gypsies by way of the Ural Mountains. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md)

Slavonic loan-words come next to the Greek: English Rómani has some
thirty of the former, against fifty of the latter. There are also a few
words of Persian, Armenian, Roumanian, Magyar, and German origin; but
the question of the presence or the absence of Arabic words in European
Rómani is hardly yet determined. According to Professor De Goeje (1875;
trans. in MacRitchie's *Gypsies of India*, 1886, pp. 54-5), there are at
least ten such words; according to Miklosich (*Ueber die Mundarten*,
etc., part vi. 1876, pp. 63-64), there are none. *Kótor*, a piece, for
instance, by De Goeje is derived from the Arabic *kot’a*, by Miklosich
from the Armenian *kotor*. Neither, however, of the two scholars seems
to have recognised the possible importance of the presence or the
absence (especially the absence) of Arabic elements. Rómani contains
Persian words, *e.g.* *ambról*, a pear; would it not have certainly
contained also Arabic words if the ancestors of our modern European
Gypsies had sojourned in Persia, or even passed through Persia, at a
date later than the Arab conquest of Persia? If Miklosich is right in
his contention that there are no Arabic words in European Rómani, it
follows almost inevitably that the Gypsies must have passed through
Persia on their way to Europe at some date prior to the middle of the
seventh century A.D.

Important as are the borrowings of Rómani for helping us to trace the
Gypsies' wanderings, they can barely amount to a twentieth of the total
vocabulary (five thousand words rich, perhaps). The words of that
[vocabulary](errata.htm#1.md) for 'water' and 'knife' are in Persia *páni*,
*cheri* (1823); in Siberia, *panji*, *tschuri* (1878); in Armenia,
*pani*, *churi* (1864); in Egypt, *páni*, *chúri* (1856); in Norway,
*pani*, *tjuri* (1858); in England *pani*, *churi* (1830); in, probably,
Belgium,

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

*panin*, *chouri* (1597); in Brazil, *panin*, *churin* (1886)--where
spelling and dates are those of the works whence these words have been
taken. Over and above the identity in every Rómani dialect of these two
selected words--and there are hundreds more like them--they are also
identical with the Hindustani pani and churl, familiar to all
Anglo-Indians. And to cite but a few more instances, 'nose,' 'hair,'
'eye,' 'ear' are in Turkish Rómani *nak*, *bal*, *akh*, *kann*; in
Hindustani, *nak*, *bal*, *akh*, *kan*: whilst 'Go, see who knocks at
the door' in the one language is *Jâ, dik kon chalavéla o vudár*, and in
the other *Jâ, dekh kon chaláya dvár ko*. This discovery was not made
till long after specimens of Rómani had been published--by Andrew Boorde
(1542), whose twenty-six words, jotted down seemingly in a Sussex
alehouse, were intended to illustrate the 'speche of Egipt'; by
Bonaventura Vulcanius (1597), whose vocabulary of seventy-one words,
collected apparently in Belgium, fills up some blank pages in a Latin
work on the Goths; and by Ludolphus (1691), whose thirty-eight words are
embedded in his huge *Commentarius ad Historian Æthiopicam*. In 1777
Rüdiger first compared with Hindustani some specimens of Rómani got from
a Gypsy woman at Halle, and in 1782 he published the result of the
comparison in his *Neuester Zuwachs der Sprachkunde*. In 1783
Grellmann's *Historischer Versuch über die Zigeuner* reaped all the
fruits of Rüdiger's research; and William Marsden the same year was
independently led to a like discovery (*Archæologia*, 1785, pp. 382-6).
Grellmann, whose work has still a high value, leapt naturally enough to
the conclusion that the Gypsies who showed themselves in western Europe
in 1417 had, newly come also to south-eastern Europe, and were a
low-caste Indian tribe expelled from their native country about 1409 by
Tamerlane. In 1783 the older languages of India were a sealed book to
Europeans; and Grellmann's opinion found almost universal approval for
upwards of sixty years. Now, however, thanks to the linguistic labours
of Pott, Ascoli, and Miklosich, combined with the historical researches
of Bataillard and Hopf, the question has assumed a new aspect. For while
on the one hand it has been demonstrated that south-east Europe had its
Gypsies long before 1417, so on the other Rómani has been shown to be a
sister, not a daughter--and it may be an elder sister--of the seven
principal New Indian dialects. Not a few of its forms are more primitive
than theirs, or even than those of Pali and the Prakrits--*e.g.* the
Turkish Rómani vast, hand (Sansk. *hasta*, Pali *hattha*), and *vusht*,
lip (Sansk. *ostha*, Pali *ottha*). In his *Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
Zigeunermundarten* (iv. 1878, pages 45-54) Miklosich collected a number
of such forms; but

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Miklosich it was
who also pointed out there that many of the seeming archaisms of Rómani
may be matched from the less-known dialects of India, especially
north-west India--that we find, for example, in Dardu both *hast* and
*usht*. I have not the faintest notion what was Professor Sayce's
authority for his statement that 'the grammar and dictionary of the
Romany prove that they started from their kindred, the Jats, on the
north-western coast of India, near the mouth of the Indus, not earlier
than the tenth century of the Christian era' (*The Science of Language*,
ii. 325). So far as I know, the only attempted comparison between Rómani
and Játáki was made by myself ('Gipsies,' *Enc. Brit.*, x. 618); and its
results seemed wholly unfavourable to the Jat theory of the Gypsies'
origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxxiii:1](gft022.htm#fr_11.md) No Greek loan-word
has more interest for us than *paramísi* or *paramísa*, a story (Mod.
Gk. παραμύθι). It occurs in the dialects of the Roumanian, Hungarian,
Bohemian, Polish, German, and English Gypsies. I heard it myself first
in 1872 near Oxford, from old Lolli Buckland, in the curious sense of
stars:--'As you kístas kérri ke-râti, réia, túi’ll dik the *paramíshis*
vellin’ avri adré the leeline' (As you ride home this evening, sir,
you'll see the stars coming out in the darkness). How she came to apply
the word thus, I cannot say, perhaps from the mere jingle of stars and
stories, perhaps from the notion of the stars foretelling the future.
Again, in 1879, from one of the Boswells, I heard the verb *páramis*,
'to talk scandal, tell tales.' And lastly, Mr. Sampson got *paramissa*
in its proper sense of 'story' from the old tinker Philip Murray, who,
though no Gypsy himself, had an unrivalled knowledge of Gypsydom and
Rómani (*Gyp. Lore Jour.*, iii. 97).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gypsies as Nomads](gft023.md)
