[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft086)  [Next](gft088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_27"></span>

### No. 27.--Tropsyn

There was a poor man, and he had four sons. And they went out to
service, and went to a gentleman to thrash wheat. And they received so
much wheat for a wage, and brought it to their father. 'Here, father,
eat; we will go out to service again.' And they went again to a
gentleman, who was to. give them each a horse at the year's end. And the
youngest was called Tropsyn; and the gentleman made him his groom. And a
mare brought forth a colt; and that colt said, 'Tropsyn, take me. The
year is up now.'

The gentleman said, 'Choose your horses.'

So the three elder brothers chose good horses; but Tropsyn said, 'Give
me this horse, master.'

'What will you do with it? it's so little.'

'So it may be.'

Tropsyn took it and departed; and the colt said, 'Let me go, Tropsyn, to
my dam to suck.'

And he let it go, and it went to its dam, and came back a horse to
terrify the world.

'Now mount me.'

He mounted, and the horse flew. He caught up his brothers, and his
brothers asked him, 'Where did you get that horse from?'

'I killed a gentleman, and took his horse.'

'Let's push on, and escape.'

Night fell upon them as they were passing a meadow, and in that meadow
they saw the light of a fire. They made for the light. It was an old
woman's, and she was a witch, and had four daughters. And they went
there, and went into the house; and Tropsyn said, 'Good-night.'

'Thank you.'

'Can you give us a night's lodging?'

'I'm not sure; my mother is not at home. When she comes you had better
ask her.'

The mother came home. 'What are you wanting, young fellows?'

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

'We've come to demand your daughters in marriage.'

'Good.'

She made them a bed on the ground with its head to the threshold, and
her daughters' with its head to the wall. And the old woman sharpened
her sword to cut off their heads. And Tropsyn took his brothers' caps,
and put them on the girls' heads. And the old woman arose, and kept
feeling the caps, and keeps cutting off the heads, and killed her
daughters.

Tropsyn arose, and led his brothers outside. 'Come, be off.' And he
arose, Tropsyn; and the old woman had a golden bird in a cage; and
Tropsyn said to the horse, 'I will take a feather of the bird.'

And the horse said, 'Don't.'

'Bah! I will.' And he took a feather, and put it in his pocket.

And they mounted their horses and rode away, and went to a city. There
was a great lord, a count; and he asked them, 'Where are you going?'

'We are going to service.'

'Take service with me, then.'

And that lord was still unmarried. And they went to him, and he gave
them each a place. One he set over the horses, and one he set over the
oxen, and one he set over the swine; and Tropsyn he made coachman. Of a
night Tropsyn stuck the feather in the wall, and it shone like a candle.
And his brothers were angry, and went to their master. 'Master, Tropsyn
has a feather, such that one needs no candle--of gold.'

The master called: 'Tropsyn, come here, bring me the feather.'

Tropsyn brought it, and gave it to his master. The master liked him
better than ever, and the brothers went to the master, and said to him,
'Master, Tropsyn has said that he'll bring the bird alive.'

The master called Tropsyn. 'Tropsyn, bring me the bird. If you don't, I
shall cut off your head.'

He went to his horse. 'What am I to do, horse, for the master has told
me to bring the bird?'

'Fear not, Tropsyn; jump on my back.'

So he mounted the horse, and rode to the old woman's.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the horse said
to him, 'Turn a somersault, <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md) and
you'll become a flea, and creep into her breast and bite her. And she'll
fling off her smock, and do you go and take the bird.'

And he took the bird, and departed to his master; the master made him a
lackey.

And there was in the Danube a lady, a virgin; and of a Sunday she would
go out on the water in a boat. And his brothers came to their master and
said, 'Master, Tropsyn boasts that he'll bring the lady from the bottom
of the Danube.'

'Tropsyn, come here. What is this you've been boasting, that you'll
bring me the lady?'

'I didn't.'

'You've got to, else I shall cut off your head.'

He went to his horse. 'What am I to do, horse, for how shall I bring
her?'

And the horse said, 'Fear not, let him give you twelve hides and a jar
of pitch, <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84.md) and put them on me, and
let him make you a small ship, not big, and let him put various drinks
in the ship. And do you hide yourself behind the door. And she will
come, and drink brandy, and get drunk, and sleep. And do you seize her,
and jump on my back with her, and I will run off home.'

The horse ran home to the master, and Tropsyn gave her to his master in
the castle. The count shut the doors, and set a watch at the window to
prevent her escape, for she was wild. The count wanted to marry her; she
will not.

Let them bring my herd of horses, then I will marry you. He who brought
me, let him bring also my horses.'

The count said, 'Tropsyn, bring the horses.'

Tropsyn went to his horse. 'What am I to do, horse? How shall I bring
the horses from the Danube?'

'Come with me, fear not.'

When he came to the Danube, the horse leapt into the Danube, and caught
the mother of the horses by the mane, and led her out. And Tropsyn
caught her, and mounted her, and galloped off. And the whole herd came
forth, and ran after their dam home to the count's palace. The lady
cried ' Halt!' to the horses.

The count wants to marry her. She says, 'Let him milk

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

my mares, and when you have bathed in their milk, then I will marry
you.'

The count cried, 'Tropsyn, milk the mares.'

And Tropsyn went to his horse. 'What shall I do, horse? How shall I milk
the mares?'

'Fear not, for I will catch her by the mane, and do you milk, and fear
not.'

And he milked a whole caldron full.

And the lady said, 'Make a fire, and boil the milk.'

And they made a fire, and the milk boils.

'Now,' said the lady, 'let him who milked the mares bathe in the milk.'

And the count said, 'Tropsyn, go and bathe in the milk.'

He went to the horse. 'What shall I do, horse? for if I bathe, then I
shall die.'

The horse said, 'Fear not, lead me to the caldron; I will snort through
my nostrils, and breathe out frost.'

He led the horse; the horse snorted through his nostrils; then the milk
became lukewarm. Then he leapt into the caldron, and fair as he was
before, he came out fairer still. When he came out, the horse snorted
through his nostrils, and breathed fire into the caldron, and the milk
boiled again.

And the lady said to the count, 'Go thou too and bathe in the milk, then
will I live with thee.'

The count went to the caldron and said, 'Tropsyn, bring me my horse.'

Tropsyn brought him his horse; the horse trembled from afar. The count
leapt into the caldron; only bones were to be seen at the bottom of the
caldron.

Then cried the lady, 'Come hither, Tropsyn; thou art my lord, and I am
thy lady.'

<span class="small">Of this Bukowina-Gypsy story we have [a very
interesting Welsh-Gypsy version](gft088.htm#an_28.md), taken down in Rómani
from Matthew Wood's recitation by Mr. Sampson, and thus epitomised by
him in English:--</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[106:1](gft087.htm#fr_83.md) See footnotes
([1](gft065.htm#fn_42), [2](gft065.htm#fn_43).md) on [p.
16](gft065.htm#page_16.md).

<span id="fn_84"></span>[106:2](gft087.htm#fr_84.md) No use is made of
these. Was the ship to be made of them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 28.--The Beautiful Mountain](gft088.md)
