[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft074)  [Next](gft076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_15"></span>

### No. 15.--The Prince and the Wizard

There was a king, and he had an only son. Now, that lad was heroic,
nought-heeding. And he set out in quest of heroic achievements. And he
went a long time nought-heeding. And he came to a forest, and lay down
to sleep in the shadow of a tree, and slept. Then he saw a dream, that
he arises and goes to the hill where the dragon's horses are, and that
if you <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md) keep straight on you will
come to the man with no kidneys, screaming and roaring. So he arose and
departed, and came to the man with no kidneys. And when he came there,
he asked him, 'Mercy! what are you screaming for?'

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

He said, 'Why, a wizard has taken my kidneys, and has left me here in
the road as you see me.'

Then the lad said to him, 'Wait a bit longer till I return from
somewhere.'

And he left him, and journeyed three more days and three nights. And he
came to that hill, and sat down, and ate, and rested. And he arose and
went to the hill. And the horses, when they saw him, ran to eat him. And
the lad said, 'Do not eat me, for I will give you pearly hay <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) and fresh water.'

Then the horses said, 'Be our master. But see you do as you've
promised.'

The lad said, 'Horses, if I don't, why, eat me and slay me.'

So he took them and departed with them home. And he put them in the
stable, and gave them fresh water and pearly hay. And he mounted the
smallest horse, and set out for the man with no kidneys, and found him
there. And he asked him what was the name of the wizard who had taken
his kidneys.

'What his name is I know not, but I do know where he is gone to. He is
gone to the other world.'

Then the lad took and went a long time nought-heeding, and came to the
edge of the earth, and let himself down, and came to the other world.
And he went to the wizard's there, and said, 'Come forth, O wizard, that
I may see the sort of man you are.'

So when the wizard heard, he came forth to eat him and slay him. Then
the lad took his heroic club and his sabre; and the instant he hurled
his club, the wizard's hands were bound behind his back. And the lad
said to him, 'Here, you wizard, tell quick, my brother's kidneys, or I
slay thee this very hour.'

And the wizard said, 'They are there in a jar. Go and get them.'

And the lad said, 'And when I've got them, what am I to do with them?'

The wizard said, 'Why, when you've got them, put them in water and give
him them to drink.'

Then the lad went and took them, and departed to him.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And he put the
kidneys in water, and gave him to drink, and he drank. And when he had
drunk he was whole. And he took the lad, and kissed him, and said, 'Be
my brother till my death or thine, and so too in the world to come.'

So they became brothers. And having done so, they took and journeyed in
quest of heroic achievements. So they set out and slew every man that
they found in their road. Then the man who had had no kidneys said he
was going after the wizard, and would pass to the other world. Then they
took and went there to the edge of the earth, and let themselves in. And
they came there, and went to the wizard. And when they got there, how
they set themselves to fight, and fought with him two whole days. Then
when the lad, his brother, took and hurled his club, the wizard's hands
were bound behind his back. And he cut his throat, and took his houses,
made them two apples. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md)

And they went further, and came on a certain house, and there were three
maidens. And the lad hurled his club, and carried away half their house.
And when the maidens saw that, they came out, and saw them coming. And
they flung a comb on their path, and it became a forest--no needle could
thread it. So when the lad saw that, he flung his club and his sabre.
And the sabre cut and the club battered. And it cut all the forest till
nothing was left.

And when the maidens saw that they had felled the forest, they flung a
whetstone, and it became a fortress of stone, so that there was no
getting further. And he flung the club, and demolished the stone, and
made dust of it. And when the maidens saw that they had demolished the
stone, they flung a mirror before them, and it became a lake, and there
was no getting over. And the lad flung his sabre, and it cleft the
water, and they passed through, and went there to the maidens. When they
came there they said, 'And what were you playing your cantrips on us
for, maidens?'

Then the maidens said, 'Why, lad, we thought that you were coming to
kill us.'

Then the lad shook hands with them, the three sisters, and said to them,
'There, maidens, and will you have us?'

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

And they took them to wife--one for himself, and one for him who had
lost his kidneys, and one they gave to another lad. And he went with
them home. And they made a marriage.

And I came away, and I have told the story.

<span class="small">And a very quaint story it is; to the best of my
knowledge, that rarest of all things, a new one. 'God's Godson,' [No.
6](gft066.htm#an_06.md), also offers an instance of an heroic hero,
nought-heeding, who sets out in quest of heroic achievements; and we
find the same notion in a good many folk-tales of South-east Europe,
*e.g.* in the Croatian story of 'Kraljevitch Marko' (Wratislaw, No. 52,
p. 266). For the comb, whetstone, and mirror, *cf*. Ralston, p. 142, and
the Bukowina-Gypsy story, 'Made over to the Devil' ([No.
34](gft094.htm#an_34).md), where it is a whetstone, a comb, and a
towel.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62:1](gft075.htm#fr_61.md) This change from the
third to the second person is in the original.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63:1](gft075.htm#fr_62.md) What 'pearly hay' is I
know not, but it stands so in the original.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64:1](gft075.htm#fr_63.md) The last four words
fairly beat me, but such seems their literal meaning. In the Roumanian
rendering, 'le-a facut doue mere.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 16.--The Apples of Pregnancy](gft076.md)
