[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft055)  [Next](gft057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Irish and Gypsy Folk-tales.

It is hard to conceive how stories told by Welsh Gypsies should have
been derived from West Highland folk-tales; of the alternative notion
that the West Highland folk-tales may have originally been derived from
Gypsies we get one pretty strong confirmation--the identity of
Campbell's 'Knight of Riddles' ([No. 22](gft082.htm#an_22).md) and the
Turkish-Gypsy story of 'The Riddle' ([No. 3](gft063.htm#an_03).md).
Reinhold Köhler, in *Orient and Occident*, ii. 320, failed to find in
all Europe's folklore any parallel to the latter, the essential, half of
the Gaelic story; but the knight's daughter's plaid there is clearly the
Highland version of the princess's chemise in the Gypsy story. Campbell,
too, is sore put to it how the Rhampsinitus story can have found its way
to Dumbartonshire (i. 352), or a tale from Boccaccio to Islay (ii. 14),
or one from Straparola to Barra (ii. 238). But all three stories are
known to the Gypsies; there, then, is a solution of Campbell's
perplexities. So that if Campbell's stories and the Welsh-Gypsy stories
had stood alone, I should, I believe, have urged that alternative
notion. But they do not, for in several cases the Welsh-Gypsy stories
resemble Irish Gaelic versions a great deal more closely than they do
the Scottish ones. Thus, in Mr. Curtin's *Myths and Folklore of
Ireland* <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) (1890.md) is 'The Son of the
King of Erin and the Giant of Loch Lein,' pp. 32-49, a variant of
Campbell's 'Battle of the Birds'; the following brief abstract of it
will show how exactly it tallies with our 'Green Man of Noman's Land'
([No. 62](gft122.htm#an_62).md)--Prince *plays cards* with giant, and
*wins* two estates. Plays again, and wins golden-horned cattle. Plays
again, and *loses his head*, so has to give himself up to giant *in a
year and a day*. On his way to giant's he *lodges with three old women,
sisters, each of whom gives him a ball of thread for guide*. Near the
giant's castle he *comes on a lake*, in which giant's *three* daughters
are *bathing*. He *seizes* the clothes of the *youngest one*, and to get
them back she promises to save him from danger. The giant *sets him
tasks--to clean stable, to thatch stable with birds' feathers* (*no two
alike*), and to bring down crow's *one egg* from a tree covered with
*glass*, nine hundred feet high. *The youngest daughter helps him in
all* three *tasks*, for the third task making him strip the flesh from
her bones, and use the bones as *steps* for

<span id="page_lxxix">p. lxxix</span>

climbing. Coming down, he *misses* the last bone, and she *loses her
little* toe. The prince goes home, and is to be married to the daughter
of the King of Lochlin \[Denmark\], but the giant and his daughter are
invited to the wedding. Then, as in Campbell's tale, the giant's
daughter 'threw two grains of wheat in the air, and there came down on
the table two pigeons. The cock pigeon pecked at the hen and pushed her
off the table. Then the hen called out to him in a human voice, "You
wouldn't do that to me the day I cleaned the stable for you."' So, too,
the hen reminds the cock of the second and third tasks <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md); and, awakened at last to remembrance, the
prince weds the giant's daughter.

Clearly, the readiest explanation of the likeness between 'The Green Man
of Noman's Land' and the Scottish and Irish stories would be that these
last are both derived from Gypsies; but then of Gypsies in Ireland our
knowledge is almost *nil*. In a letter of 8th February 1898, Mr. William
Larminie, of Bray, Co. Wicklow, the author of *West Irish Folk-tales*
(1893), writes:--'I have never heard of Irish Gypsies proper. They seem
never to have settled in the country for some reason.' On the other
hand, three or four English-Gypsy families of my acquaintance have
certainly travelled Ireland during the last thirty years; Simson's
*History of the Gipsies* (1865) contains allusions on pp. 325-8, 356-8,
etc., to visits of 'Irish Gipsies' to Scotland; and, according to a note
by Mr. Ffrench of Donegal in the *Gypsy Lore Journal* for April 1890, p.
127, 'there are two tribes of Gypsy-folk in Ireland. The first are real
Gypsies; the second are what are called "Gilly Goolies," and are only
touched on the Gypsies, *i.e.* have a strain of Gypsy blood in their
veins, and follow the mode of life followed by the Gypsies.' Moreover,
the Irish novelist, William Carleton (1794-1869), in his Autobiography
(1896), i. 212, shows that 'Scottish gipsies' did visit mid-Ireland
about 1814 and earlier. 'My eldest married sister, Mary,' he writes,
'lived (about the period when I, having been set apart for the Church,
commenced my Latin) in the townland of a place called Ballagh, Co.
Roscommon, remarkable for the beauty of its lough. It was during the
Easter holidays, and I was on a visit to her. At that time it was not
unusual for a small encampment of the Scottish gipsies to pass over to
the north of Ireland, and indeed I am not surprised at it, considering
the

<span id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span>

extraordinary curiosity, not to say enthusiasm, with which they were
received by the people. The men were all tinkers, and the women thieves
and fortune-tellers--but in their case the thief was always sunk in the
fortune-teller.' And he goes on to describe how he had his own fortune
told with a pack of cards by one of the women, 'a sallow old pythoness.'

One may not build upon so slight a superstructure, though at the same
time it should be borne in mind that nothing, absolutely nothing, was
known of the Welsh Gypsies till 1875. Where, however, as in England,
Gypsies have certainly been roaming to and fro for centuries, nothing
seems to me likelier than the trans-mission by them of folk-tales. For I
know by frequent journeyings with them how the Gypsy camp is the
favourite nightly rendezvous of the lads and lasses from the
neighbouring village. All the amusement they can give their guests, the
Gypsies give gladly; and stories and songs are among their best
stock-in-trade.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[lxxviii:1](gft056.htm#fr_32.md) It is a great pity
Mr. Curtin has not specified when, where, and from whom he got his
stories; all we are told is that they were collected by him 'personally
in the West of Ireland, in Kerry, Galway, and Donegal, during the year
1887.' It is almost incomprehensible that he never alludes once to
Campbell's collection.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[lxxix:1](gft056.htm#fr_33.md) These two birds,
which recur also in Norse, Swedish, and German versions of the story
(*Orient and Occ*. ii. 108-9), at once recall the parrot and the *mainá*
in 'The Bél-Princess' (Maive Stokes's *Indian Fairy Tales*, pp. 149-150)
whose discourse revives the prince's recollections. See also p. 412 of
Mrs. Steel's *Wide-awake Stories*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gypsy story-tellers](gft057.md)
