[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft049)  [Next](gft051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Gypsy savagery.

It is an interesting, the most interesting theory; still I cannot
forbear pointing out that many of Mr. Lang's survivals of dead Teutonic
savagery are living realities in Gypsy tents. Matty Cooper, discoursing
to his 'dear little wooden bear,' and offering it beer to drink; 'Gypsy
Mary,' who 'washed herself away from God Almighty'; Riley Smith and
Emily Pinfold,

<span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span>

who both 'sold their blood to the Devil'; Mrs. Draper, who vowed that,
sooner than touch beer or spirits, she would go to Loughton churchyard,
and drink the blood of her dead son lying there; Riley Bosville with his
two wives, and old Charles Pinfold with his three; Lementina Lovell, who
heard the fairy music; her grandson, Dimiti, who lay awake once in Snaky
Lane, and watched the little fairies in the oak-tree; and Ernest Smith
(1871-98), who one July night in the grounds of the Edinburgh Electrical
Exhibition of 1890 saw 'two dear little teeny people, about two feet
high, and he upp’d and flung stones at ’em'--I myself have known eight
of these Gypsies, and kinsfolk of the two others. It is not sixteen
years since an English Gypsy girl, to work her vengeance on her false
Gentile lover, cut the heart out of a living white pigeon, and flung the
poor bird, yet struggling, on the fire. It is barely fifty years since
old Mrs. Smith was buried at Troston, near Ixworth, after travelling
East Anglia for half a century with a sparrow, which, like the raven in
Grimm's story, told her all manner of secrets. (*Cf*. Mr. Lang's '4.
Savage idea.--Animals help favoured men and women.) Then, there is the
Gypsy system of *tabu*, by which wife and child renounce for ever the
favourite food or drink of the dead husband or father, or the name of
the deceased is dropped clean out of use, any survivors who happen to
bear it adopting another. There is the belief in the evil eye; there are
caste-like rules of ceremonial purity; and on the Continent there is, or
was lately, actual idolatry--tree-worship among German Gypsies, and the
worship of the moon-god, Alako, among their brethren of Scandinavia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cannibalism](gft051.md)
