[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft078)  [Next](gft080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_19"></span>

### No. 19.--The Two Children

Somewhere there was a hunter's son, a soldier; and there was also a
shoemaker's daughter. She had a dream that if he took her to wife, and
if she fell pregnant by him, she would bring forth twins--the boy with a
golden star upon his breast, and the girl with a golden star upon the
brow. And he presently took her to wife. And she was poor, that
shoemaker's daughter; and he was rich. So his parents did not like her
for a daughter-in-law. She became with child to him; and he went off to
serve as a soldier. Within a year she brought forth. When that befell,
she had twins exactly as she had said. She bore a boy and a girl; the
boy had a golden star upon his breast, and the girl had a golden star
upon her brow. But his parents threw the twins into diamond chests,
wrote a label for each of them, and put it in the chest. Then they let
them swim away down the Vah river. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Then my God so ordered it, that there were two fishers, catching fish.
They saw those chests come swimming down the river; they laid hold of
both of them. When they had done so, they opened the chests, and there
were the children alive, and on each was the label with writing. The
fishers took them up, and went straight to the church to baptize them.

So those children lived to their eighth year, and went already to
school. And the fishers had also children of their own, and used to beat
them, those foundlings. He, the boy, was called Jankos; and she,
Marishka:

And Marishka said to Jankos, 'Let us go, Jankos mine, somewhere into the
world.'

Then they went into a forest, there spent the night. There they made a
fire, and Marishka fell into a slumber, whilst he, Jankos, kept up the
fire. There came a very old stranger to him, and he says to him, says
that stranger, 'Come with me, Jankos, I will give you plenty of money.'

He brought him into a vault; there a stone door opened before him; the
vault was full, brim full of money. Jankos took two armfuls of money. It
was my God who was there with him, and showed him the money. He took as
much as he could carry, then returned to Marishka. Marishka was up
already and awake; she was weeping--'Where, then, is Jankos?'

Jankos calls to her, 'Fear not, I am here; I am bringing you plenty of
money.'

My God had told him to take as much money as he wants; the door will
always be open to him. Then they, Jankos and Marishka, went to a city;
he bought clothes for himself and for her, and bought himself a fine
house. Then he bought also horses and a small carriage. Then he went to
the vault for that money, and helped himself again. With the shovel he
flung it on the carriage; then he returned home with so much money that
he didn't know what to do with it.

Then he ordered a band to play music, and arranged for a ball. Then he
invited all the gentry in that country, invited all of them; and his
parents too came. This he did that he might find out who were his
parents. Right enough they came; and he, Jankos, at once knew his
mother--my

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God had ordained
it, that he at once should know her. Then he asks his mother, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) does Jankos, what a man deserved who ruins
two souls, and is himself alive.

And she says, the old lady, 'Such a one deserves nothing better than to
have light set to the fagot-pile, and himself pitched into the fire.'

That was just what they did to them, pitched them into the fire; and he
remained there with Marishka. And the gentleman cried then, 'Hurrah!
bravo! that's capital.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[72:1](gft079.htm#fr_66) Slov. Vah, Ger. Waag, a
river of Northern Hungary.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[74:1](gft079.htm#fr_67) By rights this question
should be put to the grand-parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 20.--Mare's Son](gft080)
