[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft019)  [Next](gft021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Komodromoi.

What it was first directed my attention to the Komodromoi of Byzantine
writers I cannot be positive, but I am pretty sure it was something
somewhere in Pott. Not in any of the 1034 pages of his *Zigeuner in
Europa and Asien* (2 vols.; Halle, 1844-45), for I have once more gone
through that stupendous work, [but](errata.htm#0.md) perhaps in a letter,
perhaps in a conversation, or perhaps in one of his contributions to the
*Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft*. Anyhow, I am
sure no work hitherto on the Gypsies has cited this extract from Du
Cange's *Glossarium ad Scriptores Mediæ et Infimæ Græcitatis* (Paris,
1688):--

'κωμοδρόμοι, interdum κομοδρόμοι, *Circulatores*, atque adeò *Fabri
ærarij* qui per pagos cursitant: ut hodie passim apud nos, quos
*Chaudroniers* dicimus. Lexicon MS. ad Schedographiam:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Βαβαὶ, θαυμαστικόν ἐστι, Βάναυσος, ὁ χαλκεύς τε,  
Καὶ χρυσοχόος, λέγεται, ἀλλὰ καὶ κωμοδρόμος.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Glossæ Græcobarb.
Ἀκμὼν, σίδηρον ἐφ᾽ ᾧ χαλκεὺς, χαλκεύει, ἤγουν ἀκμόνιν ὁπου κομοδρομεύει
ὁ κομοδρόμος. Alibi, Ἀκροφύσια, τὰ ἄκρα τῶν ἀσκῶν, ἐν οἷς οἰ χαλκεῖς τὸ
πῦρ ἐκφυσῶσιν· αἱ ἄκραι, ἤγουν ἡ ἄκρες τῶν ἀσκῶν ἤ ἀσκιῶν, μεθ᾽ αἷς
ὁποίαις φυσοῦσιν οἱ κομοδρόμοι τὴν φωτίαν. Theophanes, an. 17
Justiniani: τὶς ἐκ τῶν Ἰταλῶν χῶρας κομοδρόμος,--ἔχων μεθ᾽ ἑαυτο̃υ κύνα
ξανθὸν καὶ τυφλὸν, etc. Constantinus de Adm. Imp. c. 50, p. 182, καὶ ἀπὸ
τοῦ θέματος τῶν Ἀρμενιακῶν εἰς τὸ τοῦ Χαρσιανοῦ θέμα μετέθησαν ταῦτα τὰ
βάνδα, ἤτοι ἡ τοῦ κομοδρόμου τοποτηρεσία Ταβίας, καὶ εἰς τὴν τούρμαν τοῦ
Χαρσιανοῦ τὴν εἰρημένην προςετέθησαν. Anonymus de Passione Domini:

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> καί ὅτε φθάσωσιν
εἰς τὸυ τόπον, ἐλθὼν ὁ κομοδόμος ἀς σταυρώσει αὐτὸν, etc. Occurrit
præterea in Annalib. Glycæ.'

Dictionaries are not as a rule lively reading; but every line almost in
this extract has its interest. *Komodromos*, 'village-roamer,' is
certainly a vague term, but no vaguer than *landlooper*, which does in
Dutch stand for 'Gypsy,' as *landlouper* does for 'vagrant' in Lowland
Scotch. Du Cange's own definition of *komodromoi* as roamers
(*circulatores*) and coppersmiths who rove about the country, like those
in our midst whom we call *Chaudronniers*, must have been meant by him
to apply to Gypsies, and to Gypsies only. The modern Roumanian and
Hungarian Gypsies are divided into certain classes--*Caldarari*
(chaudronniers or caldron-smiths), *Aurari* (gold-workers), etc.; and
Bataillard's note prefixed to most of his monographs runs--'L’auteur
recevrait avec reconnaissance toute communication relative aux Bohémiens
hongrois voyageant hors de leur pays (vrais nomades pourvus de tentes et
de chariots, la plupart *chaudronniers*).' Next, the six passages quoted
by Du Cange show that the *komodromos* was variously or conjointly a
coppersmith (*chalkeus*) and a gold-worker (*chrysochoos*, defined by Du
Cange as 'aurifer, aurarius'). The Gypsy *Aurari* have practised
gold-washing in Wallachia and Transylvania from time immemorial
(Grellmann, *Die Zigeuner*, 2nd ed. 1787, pp. 105-112); but we have also
many indications of the Gypsies as actual goldsmiths. Captain Newbold
says that the Persian Gypsies 'sometimes practise the art of the gold
and silver smith, and are known to be forgers of the current coin of
Persia. These are the *zergars* (lit. "workers in gold") of the tribe'
(*Jour. Roy. Asiatic Soc.*, vol. xvi. 1856, p. 310). The Egyptian
Gypsies, he tells us, at Cairo 'carry on the business of tinkers and
black-smiths, and vend ear-rings, amulets, bracelets, and instruments of
iron and brass' (*ib*. p. 292). The Gypsy bronze and brass founders of
Western Galicia and the Bukowina--the only Gypsy metallurgists of whom,
thanks to Kopernicki, we possess really full information--are called
*Zlotars* and *Dzvonkars*, Ruthenian words meaning 'gold-smiths' and
'bell-makers.' They are no longer workers in gold, but they do make
rings, crosses, clasps, ear-rings, etc., of brass and German silver
(Bataillard, *Les Zlotars*, 1878, 70 pages). Henri van Elven, in 'The
Gypsies in Belgium' (*Gypsy Lore Journal*, ii. 139), says: 'The women
wear bracelets and large earrings of gold, copper, or bronze, seldom of
silver; while all the Gypsies wear earrings \[*cf. supra*, [p.
xii](gft005.htm#page_xii.md).\]. It appears to me that the Gypsy jewels and
the metal-work of their pipes have not yet been sufficiently studied. In
the fabrication of these objects they

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

must have preserved something typical and antique, which would
contribute to the comparative study of their ancient industries. I
remember seeing some rings, cast in bronze, of which the setting was
ornamented with a double or a single cross, and whose ornamentation
recalled the *motifs* of the Middle Ages, the style being evidently
Oriental. Their walking-sticks are topped with copper or bronze
hatchets, but more frequently with round knobs, which are hollow, and
which hold their money, the lid being screwed off and on. These Gypsies
were tin-workers, repairing metal utensils, and also basket-makers.' The
Gypsies, says Dr. R. W. Felkin, 'appear to be on friendly terms with the
natives of the country, and curiously enough they are said to have
introduced the art of filigree work and gold-beating into Darfûr'
('Central African Gypsies,' *Gypsy Lore Journal*, i. 221). Even the
Brazilian Gypsies of 1816, as we have seen from Koster's Travels, sold
gold and silver trinkets.

The reference to the anvil and to the bellows of skins with which the
*komodromoi* blew up their furnace recalls the passage cited from Arnold
von Harff on p. xx., where, about 1497, he described the anvil and the
bellows of the Modone Gypsies. Gypsy bellows are figured in Bataillard's
*Les Zlotars*, in Van Elven's article, and in *Die Metalle bei den
Naturvölkern* of Richard Andree (Leip. 1884, p. 83). Arthur J. Patterson
in *The Magyars: their Country and Institutions* (1869, ii. 198) writes:
'A curious consequence of their practising the art of the smith is that
a Gypsy boy is in Hungary called *purde*, which is generally supposed to
be the equivalent in the Gypsy language for "boy." It is really the
imperative mood of the verb "to blow," for, while the Gypsy father is
handling the hammer and the tongs, he makes his son manage the bellows.'
Small points enough these, but they must be viewed in relation to the
metallurgical monopoly still largely enjoyed by the Gypsies in
south-east Europe and in Asia Minor. So exclusively was the smith's a
Gypsy (and therefore a degrading) craft in Montenegro that, when in 1872
the Government established an arsenal at Rieka, no natives could be
found to fill its well-paid posts. And in a very long letter of 21st
January 1880, the late Mr. Hyde Clarke wrote to me that 'over more than
one sanják of the Aidin viceroyalty the Gypsies have still a like
monopoly of iron-working; the *naalband*, or shoeing-smith, being no
smith in our sense at all. He is supplied with shoes of various sizes by
the Gypsies, and only hammers them on.' It is most unlikely that, if
recent comers to the Levant, the Gypsies should have acquired such a
monopoly; it is obvious that, if they possessed that monopoly a thousand
years ago, these *komodromoi* must have been Gypsies.

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

For Du Cange's first three quotations I can assign no dates, but
Theophanes Isaurus was born in 758 and died in 818; the seventeenth year
of Justinian would be 544 A.D.--a very early date at which to find a
Gypsy from Italy, 'having with him a blind yellow dog.' The dates of the
Emperor Constantinus Porphyrogenitus are 905-959; I own I can make
little of this passage from his *Liber de administrando Imperio*, but
*thema*, *bandon*, *topoteresia*, and *tourma* seem all to be words for
administrative divisions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxiv:1](gft019.htm#fr_6.md) According to Captain
Newbold, the Gypsies of Syria and Palestine 'vend charms, philtres,
poisons, and drugs of vaunted efficacy'; in 1590 Katherene Roiss, Lady
Fowlis, was 'accusit for sending to the Egyptianis, to haif knawledge of
thame how to poysoun the young Laird of Fowlis and the young Lady
Balnagoune.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nails of Crucifixion](gft021.md)
