[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft116)  [Next](gft118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span id="an_57"></span>

### No. 57.--Ashypelt

Once there was an old man and an old ’ooman livin' in the Forest o’
Dean. They ’ad twelve sons, and there was one son called Ashypelt. He
was the youngest son, and they didn't never think but very little o’
Ashypelt, as ’ee was allus used to be i’ the esshole under the fire, an’
the brothers used to spit on ’im and laugh at ’im an’ make fun of ’im
an’ that. He never spoke, didn't Ashypelt, nor hear nuthin’. These
eleven brothers--they was nearly allus felling timber and that--used to
go, they used to go off tel Saturdays for a week. They used to do that
very reglar, and were bringing a lot of money in for the old man and the
old ’ooman.

So the old ’ooman sez one day, 'Well, John, I sez, I think you an’ me
’as got enough money now to live on which will keep we all the days of
our life. An’ we'll tell ’em to-night'--it was on a Saturday, an’ they
was comin’ home again, they was comin' home with all the week's
wages--'we'll say to ’em as the pressgang ’as been after ’em, as they've
got to ’ear as we've got eleven very fine sons, and they wants to make
soldiers of ’em. So I'll begin a-cryin’ when they comes ’ere to-night,
and I'll say to ’em, "O my very dear sons, the pressgang's been after
yous ’ere to-day. They want yous to go for soldiers, an’ the best you
can do, my dear children"--the old ’ooman was cryin' very much, makin’
herself so--"is to go to sleep in the barn." An’ we'll put ’em to sleep
in the barn, an’ give ’em their week's victuals with ’em' (what they
used to take reglar), sez the old ’ooman to the old man. 'We can soon
put Ashypelt out o’ the road.' (He was listenin’ all the time, the poor
Ashypelt, listenin’ wot the old ’ooman was sayin'.) 'Soon as we've put
the eleven sons in the barn we'll set fire to ’em about twelve o'clock
and burn ’em: that's the best way to take it out of ’em. We'll burn
’em,' she sez.

Poor Ashypelt gets up out o’ the esshole--this was about the hour of
eleven: they was sittin’ up till twelve to set the barn afire. He goes
up to the barn, an’ ’ee throws ’is brothers up one after another neck
and crop--an’ they was goin’ to kill ’im--an’ their week's victuals.

'Oo are you?' they sez.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

'I am your brother Ashypelt,' he sez, 'I am your brother Ashypelt.'

So one looks at ’im, an’ another looks at ’im, to find a certain mark as
they know to him. They went to kill poor Ashypelt for throwing them up.

He sez, 'My father and mother is goin’ to set you afire, all the lot o’
you, that's the reason they put you in the barn. An’ come with me up on
that back edge, an’ you'll see the barn goin’ afire directly,' sez
Ashypelt.

They sat on this high edge tel twelve o'clock come, an’ they was lookin’
out, an’ they seen the old ’ooman an’ the old man go with a lantern, an’
puttin’ a light to the barn an’ all the straw what was in it. So they
thanked Ashypelt very much for savin’ their lives, but they didn't
injure their father or mother; but they all started to go on the road
together. They comes to twelve cross-roads; an’ poor Ashypelt, never
bein’ out o’ the esshole before, ’ee took very sleepy, through bein’ a
very ’ot day.

So one brother sez to the other, 'We'll all take a road to ourselves.
Each one will take a road, an’ in twelve months an’ a day we'll all meet
’ere agen.'

So poor Ashypelt the sun overcame ’im, an’ ’im never bein’ out o’ the
esshole, ’ee fell asleep; an’ each brother left a mark on the road which
way they went, for ’im to go ’is road to ’imself. When poor Ashypelt
wakened up, ’ee began lookin’ round ’im an’ rubbin’ ’is eyes. They left
’im a very old nasty lane to go up, an old nasty lane with the mud up to
your knees. Poor Ashypelt bein’ very weak, he got fast several times
goin’ up this old lane, an’ tumbled down in the mud; an’ the ’edges was
growed very high with ’em so meetin’ together; and the briers was
scratching poor Ashypelt's eyes very near out, as ’ee was goin’ up this
old lane. ’Ee travels on, over high dales an’ lofty mountains, where the
cock never crowed and the divel never sounded ’is bugle horn. It'll last
tel to-morrow night, but I don't mean to half tell you so long. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) But poor Ashypelt got benighted up this
old lane. ’Ee used to fall asleep, bein’ summer-time, an’ very early in
the mornin’ come daylight ’ee wakens up, an’ ’ee kept on the same old
lane all the way he was goin’. ’Ee travels on tel ’ee come to a castle
an’ a new ’ouse, where

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

there was a man, an’ ’ee axed this man could ’ee give ’im a job.

’Ee sez, 'Yes, Ashypelt, I can give you a job,' ’ee sez. ’Ee sez, 'Wot
can you do?'

Ashypelt sez, 'I can do everythink as you try to put me to.' 'Well,
Ashypelt,' ’ee sez, 'I'll give you fifty pounds to sleep into the castle
all night, an’ a good suit o’ clo’es.'

'Oh! yes,' ’ee sez; 'I'll sleep there,' ’ee sed.

So ’ee sez to Ashypelt, ’ee sez, 'You shall have a good bag o’ nuts to
crack an’ plenty o’ ’bacca to smoke, an’ a good fire to sit by,' ’ee
sez.

But ’ee allowed him no can o’ beer to drink, plenty o’ water, so as he
wouldn't get trussicated. An’ ’appen about eleven o'clock at night ’ee
sez, 'Now Ashypelt, it is about the time you've got to come in along o’
me.'

So ’ee takes Ashypelt with ’im about eleven o'clock to this castle. ’Ee
opens the door, an’ ’ee sez, 'There you are, go an’ take your seat, an’
sit down.' ’Ee sez, 'Here is your bag o’ nuts, an’ plenty o’ ’bacca to
smoke.'

So just now Ashypelt was sittin’ down, an’ just about the hour o’ twelve
’ee could ’ear a lot o’ noise about the room. ’Ee looks around behind
’im at the door, an’ ’ee sees a man naked.

So ’ee sez, 'Come up to the fire an’ warm you. You looks very cold.'

It was a sperrit, you see. ’Ee wouldn't come up to the fire, so Ashypelt
went an’ fetched im. Ashypelt sez, 'Will you ’ave a smoke?' ’ee sez, an’
’ee takes an’ ’ee fills ’im a new pipe. ’Ee sez, 'Will you crack some
nuts?'

So ’ee smoked all poor Ashypelt's ’bacca, an’ cracked all ’is nuts, an’
poor Ashypelt ’ad none. But ’ee sez, 'You are a very greedy fellow
indeed, I must say,' ’ee sed, 'after a man bringing you up to warm you
at the fire, an’ taking every-think off ’im.'

Just about the hour o’ two o'clock away goes this man from ’im. So
therefore Ashypelt sits contented down afore the fire to hisself.

So next mornin’ the master sez to ’im at the hour o’ six o'clock, 'Are
you alive, Ashypelt?'

'Oh! yes,' ’ee sez to ’im, 'I am alive, sir. An’ there came a very rude
man ’ere last night, an’ took all my

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ’bacca, an’
cracked all my nuts off me,' ’ee sez, 'for the kindness I done for ’im.
’Ee was naked, an’ I axed ’im to ’ave a warm.'

'Well,' ’ee sez to Ashypelt, 'come along an’ ’ave some breakfast,
Ashypelt.' An’ ’ee takes ’im to the new ’ouse from the castle, to ’ave
some breakfast. 'Would you wish to stop another night, Ashypelt?' ’ee
sez, 'an’ I'll give you another fifty pounds.'

'Oh! yes,' sez Ashypelt, ’im never seein’ anythin’, an’ never knowin’
wot sperrits or ghostses was, ’im bein’ allus in the esshole.

So all day Ashypelt went up an’ down the garden, an’ learnin’ ’ow to dig
in the garden an’ one thing or another, tel eleven o'clock came again
the next night.

'Well, come, Ashypelt, my lad,' ’ee sed, 'it's time for you to go back
to your room agen now.'

So the next night ’ee gave ’im very near ’alf a pound o’ ’bacca to smoke
an’ a bigger bag o’ nuts. So about the hour o’ twelve o'clock ’ee turns
round to the door again, an’ there was five or six of these ghostses
came in to ’im this time an’ sperrits. So there was one stood up in the
corner in ’is skeleton. There was five more runnin’ up and down the room
pitity-pat, pitity-pat.

'Come up to the fire,' Ashypelt sez, 'an’ warm yous. Yous looks very
cold all runnin’ about naked,' ’ee sed. ’Ee sez, 'There's some ’bacca
there an’ some pipes. ’Ave a smoke apiece.'

So this poor fellow stood up in the corner.

'You come ’ere,' sed Ashypelt; 'you looks very cold, you're nuthin’ but
bones.'

But ’ee gave Ashypelt no answer. So Ashypelt comes up to ’im, to pull
’im out up to the fire, an’ ’ee ’appened to give ’im a bit of a touch
round the neck--somewhere under the jaw, I think it was--as ’ee wouldn't
come for ’im. This fellow tumbled all into pieces, in small bits o’
pieces about ’alf an inch, tumbled all into pieces when Ashypelt ’it
’im.

'Now, Ashypelt,' sez one of ’em, 'if you don't put that fellow up agen
as you fun’ ’im, we'll revour you alive.'

Poor Ashypelt got fixing one little bone on top of another, an’ one
little bone on top of another, but ’ee got tumblin’ them down as quick
as ’ee was fixing them very near.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Well, ’ee fixed
an’ fixed at last tel it come very near one o'clock that ’ee was bein’
with ’im, but ’ee got ’em together agen. So away they all goes just
about two o'clock an’ leaves ’im; an’ when ’ee come to look for the
’bacca, every morsel ’ad gone, ’ee never ’ad one pipeful.

'Well,' ’ee sez, 'they're a greedy lot o’ fellows, them is,' ’ee sez.
'They served me worse agen to-night,' ’ee sez. So ’ee comes an’ sits
’imself down completely by ’is own fire agen.

Next morning at the hour o’ six o'clock the master comes for ’im agen.
'Are you alive, Ashypelt?' ’ee sez.

'Oh! yes,' ’ee sez, 'I'm alive.'

He sez, 'Did you ’ear anythin’ last night?'

'Yes,' sez Ashypelt, 'there come a lot o’ greedy fellows ’ere, an
’smoked all my ’bacca an’ cracked all my nuts off me.'

So ’ee sez, 'Come on down, Ashypelt, an’ ’ave your breakfast.' ’Ee takes
’im to the new ’ouse to ’ave ’is breakfast. But after ’ee 'd ’ad ’is
breakfast, ' Now, Ashypelt,' ’ee sez, 'I will give you another fifty to
stop another night.'

Well, poor Ashypelt, never ’avin’ no money, ’ee sed, Yes, ’ee would do
it. Well, ’ee took ’im, as usual, up an’ down the garden agen next day
with ’im, taking ’im up an’ down the garden tel eleven o'clock come the
next night.

'So now, Ashypelt, my boy, it's time for me to take you up to your
room,' ’ee sez. 'I'll give you a little extra ’bacca to-night. I'll give
you a pound, an’ a bigger bag o’ nuts--altogether it might be a gohanna
\[guano\] bag o’ nuts--an' a pound o’ ’bacca.'

So ’ee fastened ’em into the room before Ashypelt comes, an’ ’ee leaves
’im sittin’ ’down comfortable to ’isself ’avin’ a bit o’ a smoke o’ ’is
’bacca. But ’ee ’eard one o’ the terriblest noises ’ee ever ’eard in ’is
life shoutin’ blue wilful murders, but ’ee couldn't see nuthin'. This
was at the hour o’ twelve. Bangin’ one of ’is doors wide open, in comes
a man to ’im with ’is throat cut from ’ere to there. Ashypelt axed ’im
to come an’ ’ave a pipe o’ bacca, an’ to ’ave a warm. Well, poor
Ashypelt never seein’ nuthin’, ’ee wasn't frightened a bit.

So the man sez to ’im, 'Now, Ashypelt, my boy, I see you are not
frightened. Come with me, an’ I'll show you where I lies. My brother ’as
killed me--it's my brother what gives you this money to stop ’ere. You
come with me, Ashypelt, down these steps.'

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

He took ’im down steps, down steps, down steps. Ashypelt axed ’im ’ow
much further ’ee ’ad to go, an’ it ’ad been very dark goin’ down these
steps. Ashypelt couldn't see ’is way, but when ’ee got to the bottom
there was a very fine light.

'Now, Ashypelt,' ’ee sez, 'come with me,' ’ee sez. ' I'm that man as you
struck in the room an’ knocked all to pieces. Now, Ashypelt, I'll make
you a gentleman for life if you'll do one thing for me. Come along o’
me,' ’ee sez to Ashypelt. Then ’ee sez, 'Lift up that flag,' ’ee sez.

'No, sir,' sez Ashypelt, 'I can't lift it up,' ’ee sez to ’im; 'but lift
it you.'

'Put your ’and down to it, an’ try to lift it up,' ’ee sed.

Ashypelt done what ’ee told ’im, puttin’ ’is ’and down to lift the flag,
an’ he draws the flag up. What was under that but a big pot o’ gold
spade-ace guineas an’ that.'

So ’ee sez, 'Come along o’ me, Ashypelt,' ’ee sez, 'on further,' ’ee
sez. ’Ee sez, 'Rise that flag up, Ashypelt.'

Ashypelt doin' so, ’ee told ’im to rise one flag up, ’ee sez, 'Rise the
other one, Ashypelt, next to it.'

Ashypelt rises the other one, an’ there this ’ere skeleton was lyin’ in
the coffin. That's where ’ee was buried; ’is brother buried ’im there
into the coffin. This was the older brother tel what the one was that
was alive, that was dead. But they got fallin’ out which would ’ave the
castle. The next brother killed the old one, an’ buried ’im there.

'Now,' sez this man with his throat cut from ’ere to there, 'Ashypelt, I
want you to do me a favourite, an’,' ’ee sez, 'you'll never be troubled
no more.' You can sleep in that room all your lifetime,' ’ee sez,
'nuthin’ will ever trouble you no more. Now, in the mornin’,' ’ee sez,
'when my brother comes for you, ’ee'll ax you what sort o’ night's rest
you ’ad. So you say, "All right, only they smoked all my ’bacca an’
cracked all my nuts agen." An’ the first town you get to, Ashypelt, an’
you leaves here, you make a report as ’ee's killed ’is own brother; an’
when they calls for witnesses, Ashypelt, I'll repear into the hall with
my throat cut from ’ere to there. You can come back, Ashypelt, an’ take
the castle, 'cause there's nobody takes the castle barrin’ me an’ my
brother.'

So Ashypelt goes to the next town as ’ee could meet with,

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

an' ’ee goes an’ makes a ’larm to a magistrate; an’ the magistrate sent
some pleecemen with ’im, back to fetch this gentleman, an’ Ashypelt goes
with ’em.

'Hello!' sez ’ee to Ashypelt,' what brings you back ’ere?' ’ee sed.

So the pleeceman got close to this man. 'For you,' ’ee sez, an’ catches
'out of ’im, 'They are come back for you, for killin’ yourn brother,'
takin’ im' off back to the town agen, an’ Ashypelt along with ’im,
takin’ ’im an’ tryin’ ’im. When they were tryin’ ’im, at the hour o’
twelve the magistrate cries out for witnesses, an’ the man repears with
’is throat cut from ’ere to there, just as they cried out for witnesses.
'Is brother got life--twenty years; an’ ’ee died shortly after ’ee got
life. ’Ee broke ’is ’eart.

Well, Ashypelt goes back to the castle an’ lives there, an’ got a
servant or two with ’im into the castle. One day ’ee bethought 'isself
about ’is brothers where ’ee ’ad to meet them. ’Ee gets a pair of ’orses
and a carriage, an’ ’ee buys eleven suits o’ clo’es, thinkin’ upon ’is
poor brothers. So ’ee drives ahead until ’ee comes to these twelve
roads, where ’ee ’ad to meet ’em twelve months an’ a day. So ’ee was
drivin’ up to these ’ere twelve roads, an’ there they was all lyin'
down.

'Hello! my men,' ’ee sez, 'what are you men all lyin’ down for?'
(Ashypelt bein’ dressed up, lookin’ gentleman, they didn't know ’im.)

'We're waitin’ for a brother of ours by the name o’ Ashypelt,' they sed.

'Would you know ’im if you would see ’im?' ’ee sed.

'Oh! yes, we would know ’im very well. Twelve months an’ a day we ’ad to
meet on these roads.'

So ’ee sez to ’em, 'I'm your brother Ashypelt,' ’ee sed to the one.

So they looks at ’im.

'If you're our brother Ashypelt, show your arm; you ’ave a mark on it
what we know to.'

So they looks at this mark.

'Oh! it is my brother Ashypelt,' they sez, blessin’ ’im an’ kissin' ’im
an’ slobberin’, an’ so on.

So ’ee gives ’em a suit o’ clo'es apiece, these eleven brothers, to put
on.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

'Now,' ’ee sez, 'I think we'll go back an’ see the old ’ooman an’ the
old man, how they are gettin’ on, from ’ere,' sez Ashypelt to ’is
brothers. 'An’ when we get nigh ’ome, you eleven brothers stop behind,
an’ I'll drive up to the little farm, an’ ax the old lady what came of
her eleven sons what she ’ad.'

So poor Ashypelt drives up to the ’ouse.

'Hello! my old lady,' ’ee sez, 'what's come of all the eleven sons as
you ’ad?'

'Oh!' sez ’er, 'they all went off for soldiers.'

So ’ee calls ’is eleven brothers up, an’ ’ee sez, 'Didn't you try to
burn my eleven brothers in that barn,' ’ee sez, 'when you set the barn
alight, an’ told ’em as the pressgang o’ soldiers was after ’em?'

So she sez, 'No--true--no,' she sed.

I tell you, sir, they give me a shilling for telling you that lie.

The name *Ashypelt* (Scottish *Ashypet*, Irish *Ashiepelt*, etc.; *cf*.
*Engl. Dialect Dict*., pp. 80, 8i) must be of Teutonic origin--akin to
the familiar High German *Aschenbrödel* ('Cinderella') and the Norse
*Askefot* ('Boots'). The form coming nearest to it is also the oldest
known to me: the mystic, Johann Tauler (*c*. 1300-61), says, in the
*Medulla Animæ*, 'I thy stable-boy and poor Aschenbaltz.' See Grimm's
*Household Tales*, i. 366-7. In another story told by Cornelius Price,
The Black Dog of the Wild Forest,' the hero is hidden by an old witch in
the ash-hole under the fire. In the Polish-Gypsy tale of 'A Foolish
Brother and a Wonderful Bush' ([No. 45](gft105.htm#an_45)), that brother
crouches over his stove; in Dasent's *Tales from the Norse*, Boots sits
all his life in the ashes (pp. 90, 232, 382); in Ralston's story 'Ivan
Popyalof' (p. 66), from the Chernigof government, the third brother, a
simpleton, 'for twelve whole years lay among the ashes from the stove,
but then he arose and shook himself, so that six poods of ashes fell off
from him'; and in Leger's Bohemian story (*Contes Slaves*, p. 130) of
'La Montre Enchantée,' which is a variant of our [No.
54](gft114.htm#an_54), the third brother, a fool, does nothing but
begrime himself with the cinders from the stove. The idea, then, extends
beyond the Teutonic area; but how the name *Ashypelt* has found its way
to South Wales is past my telling.

Compare Grimm's No. 4 (i. 11), 'The Story of the Youth who went forth to
learn what Fear was,' with the variants on pp. 342-347; also a fragment
from Calver, Derbyshire, 'The Boy who Feared Nothing,' in Addy's
*Household Tales*. From a London tinker Campbell of Islay got a story of
a cutler and a tinker who 'travel together, and sleep in an empty
haunted house for a reward. They are beset by ghosts and spirits of
murdered ladies and gentlemen, and the inferior, the tinker, shows most
courage, and is the hero. "He went into the cellar to draw beer, and
there he found a little chap a-sittin'’ on a barrel with a red cap

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="small">on ’is ’ed; and sez he, sez he, 'Buzz.' 'Wot's
Buzz?' sez the tinker. 'Never you mind wot's buzz,' sez he. 'That's
mine; don't you go for to touch it,'" etc., etc., etc.' (*Tales of the
West Highlands*, vol. i. p. xlvii.). And in vol. ii. p. 276, Campbell
gives a Gaelic story, The Tale of the Soldier' (our [No.
74](gft134.htm#an_74)), which was told by a tinker.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[236:1](gft117.htm#fr_132) See note
[1](gft114.htm#fn_121) on [p. 212](gft114.htm#page_212).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 58.--Twopence-Halfpenny](gft118)
