[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft104)  [Next](gft106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span id="an_45"></span>

# CHAPTER VI

# POLISH-GYPSY STORIES

### No. 45.--Tale of a Foolish Brother and of a Wonderful Bush

THERE was once a poor peasant who had three sons, two of them wise and
one foolish. One day the king gave a feast, to which everybody was
invited, rich and poor. These two wise brothers set out for the feast
like the rest, leaving the poor fool at home, crouching over the stove.
He thereupon besought his mother to allow him to go after his brothers.
But the mother answered, 'Fool that thou art! thy brothers go thither to
tell tales, whilst thou, thou knowest nothing. What then couldst thou
tell?' Still the fool continues to beg his mother to let him go, but
still she refuses. 'Very well! if thou wilt not let me go there, with
the help of God I shall know what to do.'

Well, one day the king contrived a certain tower. He then placed his
daughter on' the second story, and issued a proclamation that whoever
should kiss his daughter there should have her in marriage. Well,
various princes and nobles hastened to the place; not one of them could
reach her. The king then decreed that the peasants were to come. This
order reached the house where dwelt the peasant who had three sons, two
wise and one foolish. The two wise brothers arose and set out. The fool
feigned to go in search of water, but he went to a bush and struck it
three times with a stick. Whereupon a fairy appeared, who demanded,
'What wouldst thou?' 'I wish to have a horse of silver, garments of
silver, and a sum of money.'

After he had received all these things, he set out on his way. Whom
should he happen to overtake on the road but his two wise brothers.

'Whither are you going?' he asked of them.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

'We are going to a king's palace--his who has contrived this tower, upon
the second story of which he has placed his daughter; and he has
proclaimed that whoever kisses her shall become her husband.'

The fool got off his horse, cut himself a cudgel, and began to beat his
two brothers; finally he gave them each three ducats. The two brothers
did not recognise him, and so he went on by himself, unknown. When he
had come to the king's palace all the great lords looked with admiration
at this prince, mounted on a silver steed, and clad in garments of
silver. He leapt up with a great spring towards the princess, and almost
got near enough to kiss her. He fell back again, and then, with the help
of the good God, he took his departure. These noblemen then asked of one
another, 'What is the meaning of this? He had scarcely arrived when he
all but succeeded in kissing the princess.'

The fool then returned home, and went to the bush, and struck it thrice.
The fairy again appeared, and asked of him, 'What is thy will?' He
commanded her to hide his horse and his clothes. He took his buckets
filled with water and went back into the house.

'Where hast thou been?' asked his mother of him.

'Mother, I have been outside, and I stripped myself, and (pardon me for
saying so) I have been hunting lice in my shirt.'

'That is well,' said his mother, and she gave him some food. On the
return of the two wise brothers their mother desired them to tell her
what they had seen.

'Mother, we saw there a prince mounted on a silver steed, and himself
clad in silver. He had overtaken us by the way, and asked us whither we
were going. We told him the truth, that we were going to the palace of
the king who had contrived this tower, on the second story of which he
had placed his daughter, decreeing that whosoever should get near enough
to give her a kiss should marry her. The prince dismounted, cut himself
a cudgel, and gave us a sound beating, and then gave us each three
ducats.'

The mother was very well pleased to get this money; for she was poor,
and she could now buy herself something to eat.

Next day these two brothers again set out. The mother cried to her
foolish son, 'Go and fetch me some water.' He

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

went out to get the water, laid down his pails beside the well, and went
to the bush; he struck it thrice, and the fairy appeared to him. 'What
is thy will?'

'I wish to have a horse of gold and golden garments.'

The fairy brought him a horse of gold, golden garments, and a sum of
money. Off he set, and once more he over-took his brothers on the road.
This time he did not dismount, but, cudgel in hand, he charged upon his
brothers, beat them severely, and gave them ten ducats apiece. He then
betook himself to the king. The nobles gazed admiringly on him, seated
on his horse of gold, himself attired in a golden garb. With a single
bound he reached the second story, and gave the princess a kiss. Well,
they wished to detain him, but he sprang away, and fled like the wind,
with the help of the good God. He came back to his bush, out of which
the fairy issued, and asked him, 'What wilt thou?'

'Hide my horse and my clothes.'

He dressed himself in his wretched clothes, and went into the house
again.

'Where hast thou been?' asked his mother.

'I have been sitting in the sun, and (excuse me for saying it) I have
been hunting lice in my shirt.'

She answered nothing, but gave him some food. He went and squatted down
behind the stove in idiot fashion. The two wise brothers arrived. Their
mother saw how severely they had been beaten, and she asked them, 'Who
has mauled you so terribly?'

'It was that prince, mother.'

'And why have you not laid a complaint against him before the king?'

'But he gave us ten ducats apiece.'

'I will not send you any more to the king,' said the mother to them.

'Mother, they have posted sentinels all over the town to arrest him, the
prince; for he has already kissed the king's daughter, after doing which
he took to flight. Then the sentinels were posted. We are certain to
catch this prince.'

The fool then said to them, 'How will you be able to seize him, since
evidently he knows a trick or two?'

'Thou art a fool,' said the two wise brothers to him; 'we are bound to
capture him.'

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

'Capture away, with the help of the good God,' replied the fool.

Three days later the two wise brothers set out, leaving the fool
cowering behind the stove.

'Go and fetch some wood,' called his mother to him.

He roused himself and went, with the good God. He came to the bush, and
struck it three times. The fairy issued out of it and asked, 'What dost
thou demand?'

'I demand a horse of diamonds, garments of diamonds, and some money.'

He arrayed himself and set out. He overtook his two brothers, but this
time he did not beat them; only he gave them each twenty ducats. He
reached the king's city, and the nobles tried to seize him. He sprang up
on to the second story, and for the second time he kissed the princess,
who gave him her gold ring. Well, they wished to take him, but he said
to them, 'If you had all the wit in the world you could not catch me.'
But they were determined to seize him. He fled away like the wind. He
came to the bush; he struck it thrice; the fairy issued from it and came
to him, and took his horse and his clothes. He gathered some wood, and
returned to the house; his mother is pleased with him and says, 'There,
now! that is how thou shouldst always behave'; and she gave him
something to eat. He went and crouched behind the stove. His two
brothers arrived; the mother questioned them.

'Mother,' they answered, 'this prince could not be taken.'

'And has he not given you a beating?'

'No, mother; on the contrary, he gave us each twenty ducats more.'

'To-morrow,' said the mother, 'you shall not go there again.' And the
two brothers answered, 'No, we will go there no more.'

Aha! so much the better.

This king gave yet another feast, and he decreed that 'All the princes,
as many as there shall be of them, shall come to my palace so that my
daughter may identify her husband among them.' This feast lasted four
days, but the husband of the princess was not there. What did this king
do? He ordained a third feast for beggars and poor country-folk, and he
decreed that 'Every one come, be he

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

blind or halt, let him not be ashamed, but come.' This feast lasted for
a week, but the husband of the princess was not there. What then did the
king do? He sent his servants with the order to go from house to house,
and to bring to him the man upon whom should be found the princess's
ring. 'Be he blind or halt, let him be brought to me,' said the king.

Well, the servants went from house to house for a week, and all who were
found in each house they called together, in order to make the search.
At last they came to this same house in which dwelt the fool. As soon as
the fool saw them he went and lay down upon the stove. In came the
king's servants, gathered the people of the house together, and asked
the fool, 'What art thou doing there?'

'What does that matter to you?' replied the fool.

And his mother said to them, 'Sirs, he is a fool.'

'No matter,' said they, 'fool or blind, we gather together all whom we
see, for so the king has commanded us.'

They make the fool come down from the stove; they look; the gold ring is
on his finger.

'So, then, it is thou that art so clever.'

'It is I.'

He made ready and set out with them. He had nothing upon him, this fool,
but a miserable shirt and a cloak all tattered and torn. He came to the
king, to whom the servants said, 'Sire, we bring him to you.'

'Is this really he?'

'The very man.'

They show the ring.

'Well, this is he.'

The king commanded that sumptuous garments be made for him as quickly as
possible. In these clothes he presented a very comely appearance. The
king is well pleased; the wedding comes off; and they live happily, with
the help of the good God.

Some time after, another king declared war against this one: 'Since thou
hast not given thy daughter in marriage to my son, I will make war
against thee.' But this king, the fool's father-in-law, had two sons.
The fool also made preparations, and went to the war. His two
brothers-in-law went in advance; the fool set out after them. He took a
short cut, and, having placed himself on their line of march

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

he sat down on the edge of a pond, and amused himself hunting frogs.
These two wise brothers-in-law came up.

Just look at him, see what he is doing; he is not thinking of the war,
but only amusing himself hunting frogs.'

These two brothers went on, and this fool mounted his horse, and went to
his bush; he struck it thrice, and the fairy appeared before him.

What demandest thou?'

'I demand a magnificent horse and a sabre with which I may be able to
exterminate the entire army, and some of the most beautiful clothes.'

He speedily dressed himself; he girded on this sabre; he mounted his
horse, and set forth with the help of God. Having overtaken these two
brothers-in-law by the way, he asked them, 'Whither are you bound?'

'We are going to the war.'

'So am I; let us all three go together.'

He reached the field of battle; he cut all his enemies to pieces; not a
single one of them escaped.

He returned home, this fool, with his horse and all the rest; he hid his
horse and his sabre and all the rest, so that nobody would know anything
of them. These two brothers arrived after the fool had returned. The
king asked them, Were you at the war, my children?'

'Yes, father, we were there, but thy son-in-law was not there.'

'And what was he about?'

'He! he was amusing himself hunting frogs; but a prince came and cut the
whole army to pieces; not a soul of them has escaped.'

Then the king reproached his daughter thus: 'What, then, hast thou done
to marry a husband who amuses himself catching frogs?'

'Is the fault mine, father? Even as God has given him to me, so will I
keep him.'

The next day those two sons of the king did not go to the war, but the
king himself went there with his son-in-law. But the fool mounted his
horse the quickest and set out first; the king came after, not knowing
where his son-in-law. had gone. The king arrived at the war, and found
that his son-in-law had already cut to pieces the whole of the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

enemy's army. And therefore the other king said to this one that
henceforth he would no more war against him. They shook hands with each
other, these two kings. The fool was wounded in his great toe. His
father-in-law noticed it, he tore his own handkerchief and dressed the
wounded foot; and this handkerchief was marked with the king's name. The
fool got home quickest, before his father-in-law; he pulled off his
boots and lay down to sleep, for his foot pained him. The king came
home, and his sons asked him, 'Father, was our brother-in-law at the
war?'

'No, I saw nothing of him, he was not there; but a prince was there who
has exterminated the whole army. Then this king and I shook hands in
token that never more should there be war between us.'

Then his daughter said, 'My husband has my father's handkerchief round
his foot.'

The king bounded forth; he looked at the handkerchief: it is his! it
bears his name.

'So, then, it is thou who art so clever?'

'Yes, father, it is I.'

The king is very joyful; so are his sons and the queen, and the wife of
this fool--all are filled with joy. Well, they made the wedding over
again, and they lived together with the help of the good, golden God.

<span class="small">*Cf*. Ralston's 'Princess Helena the Fair'
(Afanasief, from Kursk Government), pp. 256-9; and Dasent's 'Princess on
the Glass Hill' (Pop. *Tales from the Norse*), pp., 89-103. The latter
half, however, closely resembles the latter half of Dasent's 'The
Widow's Son' (*ib*. pp. 400-404), as also that of Gonzenbach's Sicilian
story, 'Von Paperarello,' No. 67 (ii. 67), whose opening suggests our
[No. 9](gft069.htm#an_09.md), 'The Mother's Chastisement.' Matthew Wood's
Welsh-Gipsy story, 'The Dragon' ([No. 61](gft121.htm#an_61).md), offers
analogies. There Jack gets (1) black horse and black clothes, (2) white
horse and white clothes, (3) red horse and red clothes. The Polish-Gypsy
story is strikingly identical with 'The Monkey Prince' in Maive Stokes's
*Indian Fairy Tales*, No. 10, p. 41.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 46.--Tale of a Girl who was sold to the Devil, and of her
Brother](gft106.md)
