[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gft101)  [Next](gft103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_42"></span>

### No. 42.--The Dragon

There was a great city. In that city was great mourning; every day it
was hung with black cloth and with red. There was in a cave a great
dragon; it had four-and-twenty heads. Every day must he eat a woman--ah!
God! what can be done in such a case? It is clean impossible every day
to find food for that dragon. There was but one girl left. Her father
was a very wealthy man; he was a king; over all kings he was lord. And
there came a certain wanderer, came into the city, and asked what's new
there.

They said to him, 'Here is very great mourning.'

'Why so? any one dead?'

'Every day we must feed the dragon with twenty-four heads. If we failed
to feed him, he would crush all our city underneath his feet.'

'I'll help you out of that. It is just twelve o'clock; I will go there
alone with my dog.'

He had such a big dog: whatever a man just thought of, that dog
immediately knew. It would have striven with the very devil. When the
wanderer came to the cave, he kept crying, 'Dragon, come out here with
your blind mother. Bread and men you have eaten, but will eat no more.
I'll see if you are any good.'

The dragon called him into his cave, and the wanderer said to him, 'Now
give me whatever I ask for to eat and to drink, and swear to me always
to give that city peace, and never to eat men, no, not one. For if ever
I hear of your doing so I shall come back and cut your throat.'

'My good man, fear not; I swear to you. For I see you're a proper man.
If you weren't, I should long since

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

have eaten up you and your dog. Then tell me what you want of me.'

'I only want you to bring me the finest wine to drink, and meat such as
no man has ever eaten. If you don't, you will see I shall destroy
everything that is yours, shall shut you up here, and you will never
come out of this cave.'

'Good, I will fetch a basket of meat, and forthwith cook it for you.'

He went and brought him such meat as no man ever had eaten. When he had
eaten and drunk his fill, then the dragon must swear to him never to eat
anybody, but sooner to die of hunger.

'Good, so let us leave it.'

He went back, that man, who thus had delivered the city, so that it had
peace. Then all the gentlemen asked him what he wanted for doing so
well. The dragon from that hour never ate any one. And if they are not
dead they are still alive.

<span class="small">This story belongs to the 'Valiant Little Tailor'
group ([No. 21](gft081.htm#an_21).md). The maiden-tribute is a familiar
feature; the Tobit-like dog seems superfluous, but *cf*. Hahn's No. 22,
i. 170, ii. 217. English-Gypsy women wear black and red in
mourning.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 43.--The Princess and the Forester's Son](gft103.md)
