[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft137)  [Next](gft139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOHN BUNYAN.

Folk-tales are scarcely literature, but a question affecting the world's
literature arises out of these Gypsy folk-tales. Was the author of *The
Pilgrim's Progress* an English peasant or a Gypsy half-breed? The Rev.
J. Brown, in John Bunyan . his *Life, Times, and Work* (1885), shows
that the family of Bunyan--a name spelt in thirty-four different
ways--was established in Bedfordshire as early at least as 1199, and
that in 1327 a William Bownon was living at Elstow on the very spot
where John Bunyan was born in 1628. There is a gap in the Bunyan annals
between 1327 and 1542, when one finds a William Bonyon of Elstow, as in
1548 a Thomas Bonyon, aged forty-six or more. Next come a Thomas Bunyon,
'Pettie Chapman,' who died in 1641, and his son, also Thomas Bunyon
(1603-76), who, says Mr. Brown, is 'usually spoken of as a tinker, but
describes himself as a "braseyer."' This second Thomas took for his
second wife in 1627 an Elstow woman, Margaret Bentley (1603-44), and
John was the first child of that marriage. He, as every one knows, was
an itinerant though house-dwelling tinker (Brown, pp. 64, 119, 158,
etc.); and his eldest son, John, 'was brought up to the ancestral trade
of a brazier, and carried on business in Bedford till his death in 1728'
(*id*. pp. 201-2). That is all of the essential to he gleaned about
Bunyan's pedigree; we know nothing as to his grandmother or
great-grandmother.

With this evidence, then, before him, Canon Venables pronounced, in the
*Dictionary of National Biography* (vii., 1886, p. 276), that 'the
antiquity of the family in Bunyan's native county effectually disposes
of the strange hallucination, which even Sir Walter Scott was disposed
to favour, that the Bunyans, "though reclaimed and settled," may have
sprung from the Gipsy tribe.' By no means necessarily, as may be seen
from a single example. During 1870-75 I often came across members of the
Bunce family in Oxfordshire, Wilts, Herts, and Somerset. Stephen Bunce,
of Wiltshire yeoman ancestry, had thirty years earlier married Phoebe
Buckland, a thorough-bred Gypsy woman, had himself turned tent-dweller,
and 'travelled' the southern counties till his death. They had a largish
family; and many, perhaps most, of their sons and daughters have married
Gypsies of more or less purity. One son was (and maybe is still) a small
farmer and horse-dealer,

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

living in a house of his own at Pewsey. Now, if a son or a grandson of
his rose to eminence, he could not by Canon Venables' argument be a
Gypsy, because, forsooth! the Bunces are an old Wiltshire family.

The chief upholder of Bunyan's Gypsy ancestry was Mr. James Simson, a
Scoto-American of New York, the editor of Walter Simson's *History of
the Gipsies* (1865); and author of *John Bunyan and the Gipsies* (1882)
and a whole host of similar pamphlets. He pointed out that Bunyan writes
in his *Grace Abounding*: 'For my descent, it was, as is well known to
many, of a low and inconsiderable generation; my father's house being of
that rank that is meanest and most despised of all the families of the
land.' And again: 'After I had been thus for some considerable time,
another thought came into my mind, and that was, whether we were of the
Israelites or no. For, finding in the Scriptures that they were once the
peculiar people of God, thought I, if I were one of this race, my soul
must needs be happy. Now, again, I found within me a great longing to be
resolved about this question, but could not tell how I should. At last,
I asked my father, who told me, No, we were not.' And yet again: 'I
often, when these temptations had been with force upon me, did compare
myself to the case of such a child whom some Gipsy hath by force took up
in her arms, and is carrying from friend and country.'

Kidnapping has never been a Gypsy practice (*In Gypsy Tents*, pp.
244-46), nor, though it were, would a Gypsy, even a converted Gypsy, be
likely to use it as an illustration. But Mr. Simson's two first passages
are really pertinent. The Anglo-Israelite craze was not devised till
1793; and it is hard to conceive why about 1645 an English peasant-boy
should have speculated on a Jewish origin for himself and his kindred.
But with a Gypsy it would not the least surprise me. I hardly ever see
Frampton Boswell, an English Gypsy of fifty, but he returns to the
question, 'And there's one thing, Mr. Groome, I've been wanting to ask
you about, and that is where you think our people originated.' Hindoos,
Jews, and Egyptians are regularly passed in review, but Frampton cannot
make up his mind, as neither can he about Rómani, except that 'for
certain ’tisn't one of the Seven Languages.'

Tinker in Bunyan's day indubitably carried a suggestion at least of
Gypsydom. I have not been able to see *The Tinker of Turvey*, <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_149) or *Canterbury Tales* (Lond. 1630, ed.
by J. O. Halliwell), to which Mr. Brown refers, but from his few
quotations on p. 34 it seems evident that that 'strolling Tincker and
brave mettle-man' regarded himself as something widely different from an
ordinary English artificer. Sir Thomas Overbury in his well-known
*Characters* (1614) describes 'The Tinker,' the companion of whose
travels 'is some foul sun-burnt quean, that since the terrible statute
recanted gypsism and is turned pedlaress. So marches he all

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

over England with his bag and baggage,' etc. In an article by A. H. A.
Hamilton on 'Quarter Sessions under Charles i. from original records of
Devon' (*Fraser's Mag.*, Jan. 1877) is a quotation concerning 'sundry
suspect persons, Roagues both sturdy and begging vagrant, some whereof
pretend to be petty chapmen \[like Bunyan's grandfather\], others
peddlers, others glassmen, tynckers, others palmesters, fortune readers,
Egiptians, and the like.' *Brazier* is a frequent designation of Gypsies
at the present day--*e.g.* the baptismal register of Hill, Sutton
Coldfield, has 'Jan. 27, 1866, Miriam Kate Agnes, daughter of Benjamin
and Mira Boswell, cutler and brazier'; and that of Boothroyd, Dewsbury,
has 'Mary Jane d<sup>r</sup> of Thomas and Mary Green, Dewsbury Moor,
Brazier of the Gipsey tribe.' The occurrence in the Bunyan pedigree of
such Gypsy 'Christian' names as Mantis and Perun, Delarīfa and Meralíni,
would be a strong point, but is entirely lacking. On the other hand,
'gaujified' or gentilised Gypsies often drop such names; two brothers of
my acquaintance, Oti and Lazzy, became thus plain William and George. A
contemporary description of Bunyan (Brown, p. 399) as 'tall of stature,
strong-boned, though not corpulent, somewhat of a ruddy face, with
sparkling eyes . . . his hair reddish,' runs rather against the theory
of Bunyan's Gypsy ancestry, but not conclusively, for I have known two
Gypsy brothers, one very swarthy, the other red-haired.

The strongest corroboration of that theory was unknown to both Mr.
Simson and Mr. Brown. In *Notes and Queries* for January 24, 1891, p.
67, 'R.' cited an entry from the parish register of St. Mary's,
Launceston: '1586, March the ivth daie was christened Nicholas, sonne of
James Bownia, an Egiptia rogue.' Here 'Egiptia' (? Egiptiā) must stand
for 'Egiptian'; 'Bownia' similarly should be 'Bownian,' and, if so, we
have veritable Gypsy Bunyans. It may seem a far cry from Launceston in
Cornwall to Elstow in Bedfordshire, were nomads not in case; in time,
the interval between this baptism and the birth of 'the inspired tinker'
is but forty-two years.

But, anyhow, whether Bunyan was Gypsy <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_150) or Gentile, folk-tales (*plus* the
Bible) seem to me quite as likely a source of inspiration for his
*Pilgrim's Progress* and *Holy War* as (say) the fourteenth century
*Pélerinage de l’Homme* or the siege of the Anabaptists at Münster. I do
not believe this has ever before been suggested; I will merely suggest
it, and leave the working out of it to folklorists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[294:1](gft138.htm#fr_150) Turvey, a parish
near Elstow, was a Gypsy abode long after Bunyan's day; at it, in
1822-25, Legh Richmond buried two Gypsies--James Smith, and his
mother-in-law, Elizabeth Robinson, both of the reputed age of 105.
Robinson was a surname of descendants of Bunyan.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[295:1](gft138.htm#fr_151) There are those to
whom the notion will seem monstrous that the author of *The Pilgrim's
Progress* should have been 'a gipsy!' I would remind such that at the
present day there is Mr. George Smith, the Converted Gypsy, of the
Potteries, who conducts missions in Edinburgh and other large cities. I
have never heard him myself, but I am assured by a competent judge that
he is a really eloquent preacher. Then there was William Mitchel
(1672-1740), the Edinburgh 'Tinklarian Doctor,' author of a score of
prophetical pamphlets. There was Thomas Wright, the tinker Berean of
Barnsley, who baptized Ebenezer Elliott in 1781. And there was the
founder of the American Shakers, 'Mother' Ann Lee (1736-86), a
Manchester blacksmith's illiterate daughter, who married in 1762 the
blacksmith Abraham Stanley. The conjunction of the surnames Lee and
Stanley, of the smith's craft, and of the illiteracy, renders it almost
certain in my mind that these were Gypsies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](gft139)
