[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft105)  [Next](gft107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_46"></span>

### No. 46.--Tale of a Girl who was sold to the Devil, and of her Brother

Once upon a time there lived a countryman and his old wife; he had three
daughters, but he was very poor. One

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

day he and his young daughter went into the forest to gather mushrooms.
And there he met with a great lord. The old peasant bared his head, and,
frightened at the sight of the nobleman, said apologetically, 'I am not
chopping your honour's wood with my hatchet, I am only gathering what is
lying on the ground.'

'I would willingly give thee all this forest,' replies the nobleman; and
he then asks the peasant if that is his wife who is with him.

'No, my lord, she is my daughter.'

'Wilt thou sell her to me?'

'Pray, my lord, do not mock and laugh at my daughter, since none but a
great lady is a fitting match for your lordship.'

'That matters little to thee; all thou hast to do is to sell her to me.'

As the peasant did not name the price he asked for her, the nobleman
give him two handfuls of ducats. The peasant, quite enraptured, grasped
the money, but instead of going home to his wife, he went to a Jew's. He
asked the Jew to give him something to eat and drink, but the Jew
refused, being certain that he had no money to pay him with; however, as
soon as the peasant had shown him the large sum that he had, the
delighted Jew seated him at the table and gave him food and drink. He
made the old peasant drunk, and stole away all his money. The peasant
went home to his wife. She asked him where had he left his daughter?

'Wife, I have placed her in service with a great lord.'

The wife asked him if he had brought anything to her. He replied that he
was himself hungry, but that this nobleman had said to him that he had
taken one daughter, and that he would take the two others as well. His
wife bade him take them away. He went away with these two daughters, and
one of them he sold to another lord. This one gave him a hatful of
money. Then the peasant said to his remaining daughter, 'Wait for me
here in the forest; I will bring thee something to eat and drink; do not
stray from here.' He went to the same Jew that had robbed him of his
money. This Jew again stole from him the money he had received from the
other lord. The peasant returned to his daughter, and brought her some
bread, which she ate with

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

delight. There came a third nobleman, who purchased this third girl.

'Do not go to the Jew,' said this lord to the peasant, 'but go straight
home to thy wife, and hand over thy money to her, so that she may take
charge of it; else this Jew will rob thee once more.'

The peasant went home to his wife, who was very glad.

This great lord spoke thus to him: 'There is in a forest a beautiful
castle covered with silver. Go to the town, buy some fine horses and
harness, engage some peasants to work, and rest thou thyself; make the
peasants do the work.'

He got into a carriage; he took his peasants; and they set out with the
help of God. They came, by a magnificent road, smooth as glass, into a
great forest. They met a beggar, who asked this great lord (this
peasant, once poor, now grown rich) where his daughters were.

Soon after these peasants discover that they are clean bewildered; they
find themselves surrounded by deep ravines and insurmountable obstacles,
so that they cannot get out, for they have lost their way.

There came an old beggar who asked them, 'Why do you tarry here? why are
you not getting on?'

'Alas!' they answered, 'we cannot get out of this; we had a beautiful
road, but we have lost it.'

'Whip up your horses a bit,' said the old man, 'perhaps they will go
on.'

A lad touched up the horses, and all of a sudden the peasants see a
magnificent road before them. They wish to thank this beggar, but he has
vanished. The peasants fall to weeping, for, say they to themselves,
'This was no beggar; more likely was it the good God himself.' They
reach the castle; the peasant is in ecstasies with it. The peasants work
for him, and he and his wife take their ease.

Ten years rolled by. Once he had three daughters, whom he had already
forgotten. 'The good God,' said he, 'gave me three daughters, but I have
never yet had a son.'

One day the good God so ordered it that this peasant woman was brought
to bed. She was delivered (pray excuse me) of a boy. This boy grew
exceedingly; he was already three years old; he was very intelligent.
When he was

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

twelve years old his father put him to school. He was an apt scholar: he
knew German, and could read anything.

One day this boy, having returned home, asked his father, 'How do you
do, father?' His mother gave him some food, and sent him to bed. Next
day he got up, and went to school. Two little boys who passed along said
the one to the other, 'There goes the little boy whose father sold his
daughters to the devils.' The boy reached the school filled with anger;
he wrote his task quickly, for he could not calm his angry feelings. He
went home to his father as quickly as possible; he took two pistols, and
called on his father to come to him. As soon as his father came into the
room, the boy locked the door on them both.

'Now, father, tell me the truth; had I ever any sisters? If you do not
confess the truth to me, I will fire one of these pistols at you and the
other at myself.'

The father answered, 'You had three sisters, my child, but I have sold
them to I know not whom.'

He sent his father to the town, and bade him, 'Buy for me, father, an
apple weighing one pound.'

The father came back home, and gave the apple to his son. The latter was
delighted with it, and he made preparations for going out into the
world. He embraced his father and mother. 'The good God be with you,' he
said to them, 'for it may be I shall never see you more; perchance I may
perish.'

He came to a field, where he saw two boys fighting terribly. The father
of these two boys had, when dying, left to the one a cloak and to the
other a saddle. The little boy went up to these boys and asked them,
'What are you fighting about?'

'Excuse us, my lord,' replied the younger, 'our parents are dead; they
have left to one of us a cloak and to the other a saddle; my elder
brother wants to take both cloak and saddle, and not to give me
anything.'

This little nobleman said to them, 'Come now, I will put you right. Here
is an apple which I will throw far out into this field; and whichever of
you gets it first shall have both of these things.'

He flung away the apple, and while the boys were running to get it, this
little nobleman purloined both cloak and

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

saddle. He resumed his journey, and went away, with the help of God. He
came to a field, he stopped, he examined the cloak he had just stolen,
and to the saddle he cried, 'Bear me away to where my youngest sister
lives.' The saddle took hold of him, lifted him into the air, and
carried him to the dwelling of his youngest sister. He cried to his
youngest sister, ' Let me in, sister.'

Her answer was, ' Twenty years have I been here, and have never seen
anybody all that time; and you--you will break my slumber.'

'Sister, if you do not believe I am your brother, here is a handkerchief
which will prove that I am.'

His sister read thereon the names of her father, her mother, and her
brother. Then she let him enter, and fainted away. 'Where am I to hide
you now, brother? for if my husband comes he will devour you.'

'Have no fear on my account,' he replied, 'I have a cloak which renders
me invisible whenever I wear it.'

Her husband came home; she served some food to him; and then, employing
a little artifice, ' Husband,' she said, 'I dreamt that I had a
brother.'

'Very good.'

'If he were to come here, you would not harm him, would you, husband?'

'What harm should I do to him? I would give him something to eat and to
drink.'

At this she called out, 'Brother, let my husband see you.'

The young lad's brother-in-law saw him, and was greatly pleased with his
appearance; he gave him food and something to drink. He went out and
called his brothers. They, well satisfied with the state of things,
entered, along with the boy's two other sisters. The latter were
brimming over with delight. A lovely lady also came, who enchanted him.

'Is this young lady married?' he asked his sister.

'No,' she replied, 'she has no husband; you can marry her if you like.'

They fell in love with each other; they were married.

Ten years they lived there. At last this youth said to his sister, 'I
must return home to my father; perchance he is dead by now.'

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

He got up next morning; his brother-in-law gave him large sums of gold
and silver.

They drew near to the house, he and his wife. Not far from this house
was a small wood through which they had to pass, and in it they noticed
a beautiful wand.

'Let us take this wand,' said his wife to him, 'it is very pretty; we
will plant it at home.'

He obeyed her, and took the wand. He reached the house; the father was
very happy that his son was now married.

Five years passed away. The good God gave them a son. He went to the
town to invite the godfathers. After the christening they came back from
church; they ate, they drank, and at last everybody went away; he
remained alone with his wife. One day he went to the town. When he came
home, he saw that his wife was no longer there, and that the sapling
also had disappeared. (It was no sapling, but a demon.) He began to
lament.

'Why do you lament?' asked his father.

'Do not anger me, father,' he said, 'for I am going out into the world.'

He got ready for the road; he set out. He came into a great forest. As
it was beginning to rain, he took shelter under an oak; and in that very
oak his wife was concealed. He slept for a little while; then he heard a
child weeping.

'Who is this that is crying?' he asked of his wife.

'It is your child.'

And he recognised her and cried, 'Wife, hearken to what I am going to
say to you. Ask this dragon of yours where it is that he hides the key
of his house.'

'Very well,' she assented.

The dragon came home; she flung her arms round his neck and said to him,
'Husband, tell me truly, where is the key of our house?'

What good would it do you if I told you?' he replied. 'Well, then,
listen. In a certain forest there is a great cask; inside this cask
there is a cow; in this cow there is a calf; in this calf a goose; in
this goose a duck; in this duck an egg; and it is inside this egg that
the key is to be found.'

'Very good; that is one secret I know.'

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

She then asked him wherein lay his strength.

The dragon owned this to his wife: 'When I am dressed as a lord, I
cannot be killed; neither could any one kill me when I am dressed as a
king; but it is only at the moment I am putting on my boots that I can
be killed.'

'Very good; now I know both these secrets.'

He smelt at his feather, and all his three brothers-in-law appeared
beside him. They lay in wait till the moment when the dragon was drawing
on his boots, and then they slew him. They betook themselves to that
forest, they smashed the cask, they killed the cow that was inside it,
they killed the goose that was inside the calf, then the duck that was
inside the goose; they broke open the egg, and out of it they drew the
key. He took this key, he came back to where his wife was, he opened the
oak, and he let his wife out.

'Now, my brothers-in-law, the good God be with you. As for me, I am
setting out to follow my way of happiness; now I shall no more encounter
any evil thing.'

He returned with his wife to his father's house. His father was very
glad to see him come back with his wife; he gave them something to eat
and drink, and he said to his son, 'Hearken to me now, my child. We are
old now, I and my wife; thou must stay beside me.'

And he answered him, 'It is well, my father; if thou sendest me not
away, I will dwell with thee.'

<span class="small">This story of the prig of a little nobleman--a blend
of George Washington and little Lord Fauntleroy--is somewhat incoherent,
and presents a good many obvious lacunæ. Thus Kopernicki remarks, 'the
narrator had omitted to mention the feather in the fourth paragraph from
the end. In many Polish and Russniak tales one meets with a bird's
feather or a horse-hair possessing the magical power of making anybody
immediately appear. One has only to burn this feather a little, and then
to smell it. In this Gypsy tale, therefore, the hero's brothers-in-law
had evidently given him such a feather at the time of his departure. But
the narrator had forgotten to mention this though he remembered the
feather when he reached that point at which the hero had need of it to
summon his brothers-in-law to kill the dragon.' Such a feather, however,
is by no means exclusively Slavonic; it occurs in our Roumanian-Gypsy
story ([No. 10](gft070.htm#an_10)), and in a Turkish-Gypsy one (Paspati,
p. 523): 'He gave the old man a feather, and he said to the old man,
"Take it and carry it to your daughter, and if she puts it in the fire I
will comer."' *Cf*. too, Hahn, i. 93; Carnoy and Nicolaides'</span>

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

*Traditions de l’Asie Mineure* (1889), p. 140; Legrand's *Contes Grecs*
0881), pp. 69, 71, 72, 73 (hero burns bee's wing with a cigar), 89; and
the Arabian Nights ('Conclusion of the Story of the Ladies of
Baghdad'):--'She gave me a lock of her hair, and said, "When thou
desirest my presence, burn a few of these hairs, and I will be with thee
quickly."' Precisely the same idea occurs frequently in F. A. Steel's
*Wide-awake Stories* from the Panjab and Kashmir: *e.g.* 'Only take this
hair out of my beard; and if you should get into trouble, just burn it
in the fire. I'll come to your aid' (p. 13; *cf*. also pp. 32, 34,
413-14, and Knowles's *Folk-tales of Kashmir*, pp. 3, 12).

I can offer no exact variant of this story, but many analogies suggest
themselves, *e.g.* in [No. 5](gft065.htm#an_05), 'The Three Princesses
and the Unclean Spirit,' in [No. 44](gft104.htm#an_44), 'The Three
Dragons,' and in 'The Weaver's Son and the Giant of the White Hill'
(Curtin's *Myths and Folklore of Ireland*, p. 64), where also one gets
the wool, fin, and feather. For the invisible cloak, *cf*. Clouston, i.
72, etc. In Maive Stokes's *Indian Fairy Tales*, No. 22, p. 156, the
hero finds four fakirs quarrelling for the possession of a travelling
bed, a Fortunatus bag, a water-supplying stone bowl, and a stick and
rope that bind and lay on. He shoots four arrows, and whilst the fakirs
are searching for the fourth one, decamps with these objects (so, too,
Knowles's *Folk-tales of Kashmir*, p. 87). An invisible cap occurs in F.
A. Steel's *Wide-awake Stories*, p. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 47.--The Brigands and the Miller's Daughter](gft107)
