[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bosc10)  [Next](bosc12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# Chapter IX

### On Their Principal Feasts and Dances

As on all their feast days, dancing was the principal ceremony, I will
endeavor to describe many of the ludicrous customs attending it. Such
was the delight with which they took part in their festivities, that
they often continued dancing day and night, and sometimes entire weeks.
Their whole heart and soul were wrapt up in the amusement, and hardly a
day passed, without some portion of it being devoted to this insipid and
monotonous ceremony. Chinigchinich gave to them as a religious precept,
that they should adhere strictly to this custom, and once, previous to
his death, whilst dancing, he was carried up among the stars. So this
accounts for the enthusiasm universally observed among them on such
occasions, and whoever did not take an active part in the festival, they
believed would be chastised, and hated by him.

The costume used by them, called the *tobet*, has been already mentioned
in a previous chapter, when describing the dress of the "capitans" or
"puplem;" but perhaps, it would not be out of place to repeat the same,
and in addition, to give a description of that generally worn by the
females. In the first place, they fixed upon the head a kind of wig,
called "*emetch*," that was made secure, by a braid of hair passed
around the head, into which, they inserted various kinds of feathers,
forming a crown, or as they termed it, an "*eneat*;" then, their
covering for the body,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

was also prepared from the feathers of different kinds of birds, which
were sewed together, and like a sort of petticoat reached down to their
knees--this they called a "*paelt*." The parts exposed, were generally
painted red and black, and not unfrequently, white.

The females painted their faces, breasts and arms, with a sort of brown
varnish, imparting a glossy, and rather a disgusting appearance to their
persons. From their necks, was suspended a variety of ornaments, such as
beads, and pieces of shells. They never danced with the males, but each
sex by itself, notwithstanding all danced at the same time, and after
this manner. The males formed a file by themselves, and directly behind
them, say two or three yards distant, the women were placed in like
manner, and the musicians seated themselves upon the ground in front of
all.

Many of their dances were very modest and diversified by a number of
grotesque movements, so that for a short time one could look on, and
witness their performances with some degree of pleasure; but they had no
variety of figures, or songs, and kept on in the same monotonous
movement. There were persons selected from both sexes to conduct the
music, and for this purpose they had a kind of instrument, which they
called "*paail*."

The most celebrated of all their feasts, and which was observed yearly,
was the one they called the "*Panes*," signifying a bird feast.
Particular adoration was observed by them, for a bird resembling much in
appearance the common buzzard, or vulture, but of larger dimensions. The
day selected for the feast, was made known to the public on the evening
previous to its celebration, and preparations were made immediately for
the erection of their Vanquech, into which, when completed, and on the
opening of the festival, they carried the Panes in solemn procession,
and placed it upon the altar erected for the purpose. Then, immediately,
all the young, married and unmarried females, commenced running to and
fro, with great rapidity; some in one direction, and some in another,
more like distracted, than rational beings; continuing thus racing, as
it were, whilst the elder class of both sexes remained silent spectators
of the scene. The "*Puplem*," painted as has been heretofore described,
looking like so many devils, in the meantime dancing around their adored
"Panes."

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

These ceremonies being concluded, they seized upon the bird, and carried
it in procession to the principal Vanquech, or temple, all the assembly
uniting in the grand display--the Puplem preceding the same, dancing and
singing. Arriving there, they killed the bird without losing a particle
of its blood. The skin was removed entire, and preserved with the
feathers, as a relic, or for the purpose of making their festival
garment, "*Paelt*." The carcass they interred within the temple, in a
hole prepared previously, around which, all the old women soon
collected, who, while weeping and moaning most bitterly, kept throwing
upon it various kinds of seeds, or particles of food, and exclaiming at
the same time, "Why did you run away? would you not have been better
with us? you would have made pinole as we do, and if you had noit run
away, you would not have become a 'Panes!'" Other expressions equal in
simplicity, were made use of, and as the ceremony was concluding, the
dancing commenced again, and continued for three days and nights,
accompanied with all the brutalities to which they were subject.

The Indians state that said "Panes" was once a female, who ran off and
retired to the mountains, when accidentally meeting with
"Chinigchinich," he changed her into a bird, and their belief is, that
notwithstanding they sacrificed it every year, she became again
animated, and returned to her home among the mountains. But the
ridiculous fable does not end here; for they believed, as often as the
bird was killed, it became multiplied; because, every year, all the
different Capitanes celebrated the same feast of *Panes*, and were firm
in the opinion that the birds sacrificed, were but one, and the same
female. They had no evidence, however, of where she lived, or where she
originated, and neither were the names of her parents known. The
commemoration of the festival, was in compliance with the commands given
to them by Chinigchinich.

The kind of dance common among these natives, was introduced by first
preparing a large bonfire, around, and into which, the men promiscuously
jumped, until all the fire was extinguished. The females stood a short
distance from the scene, keeping up a continual screaming, and moaning,
during the ceremony, and not until every particle of the fire was
destroyed did the crying cease--then dancing commenced. Should it so
happen, that they were not successful in extinguishing the flames, or if
there should remain, and be discovered afterwards, any

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

sparks, the dancing did not take place immediately; but they remained
silent and discontented. It was a bad omen, and signified the approach
of some calamity. This dance was generally performed at night, but when
introduced in their large feasts, and danced during the day, then, in
addition to the ceremonies already described, they despatched one of the
most active of the tribe in quest of water, which, invariably, was
brought from a great distance, and from a place designated. When
obtained, they emptied the same into a hole previously prepared within
the Vanquech. Then all went up into the temple, each one in his turn,
blowing with his mouth upon the water, and uttering expressions which
were apparently designed to curse and not to bless; however, the latter
was the interpretation given to me, and when this was done, they went up
again in the same order to sprinkle their faces with the dirty water.
The women remained some distance off, and on no account were they
allowed to touch it.

Another dance equally ludicrous among these natives, was conducted as
follows. The males commenced, first dancing alone, and continued to do
so for a short time, when they formed themselves in a line, and one of
the females came forward in front of them, with her arms folded upon her
breast, and danced up and down the file with many graceful turns, and
movements, which were several times repeated, when she retired, and the
males resumed their part of the performances--and so they continued
dancing, the males and females alternately, until it was time to change
the monotony. They had another dance, very similar, with this
exception--that the female was entirely exposed, and whilst she was
singing and displaying her person in many disgusting attitudes, the
spectators, men, women and children, all formed a circle around her.
This immodest exhibition was also one of the teachings of Chinigchinich,
but was introduced twice, only, during the year, and then outside of the
town.

They had another, which was introduced on the occasion of the son of the
puplem, or chief's first appearing in public, adorned with the *Tobet*.
Not only every one in the place was invited to attend on that day, but
also many from the neighboring towns, and the arrangements were as
follows. When all were congregated together, the youth was brought
forward, and they put upon him the paelt, or robe of feathers, such as

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

was used by Chinigchinich, afterwards the crown, and then the exposed
parts of his person, they painted black and red. Thus arrayed, he
commenced dancing, with the *paail* in his right hand, keeping time to
the music of the singers, that did not cease until the lad was
completely exhausted. If he were unable to dance, then, one of the
Puplem was dressed in like manner, who, placing him upon his shoulder,
danced before the assembly. After this was accomplished, one of the
women rose up; a sister, an aunt, or some one nearly related to the
youth, in all cases, however, a young person, who immediately disrobing
herself, danced in presence of the multitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of Many of Their Extravagances](bosc12.md)
