[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

# Characteristic Anecdotes

A chief of a rancheria, or village, not far distant from the Presidio of
St. Diego, who had observed, with much attention, the manner and
authority with which the "*Comandante*" governed his officers and
soldiers, as well as the inhabitants of the place, had heard, also, that
the King of Spain was their grand chief, to whom, they all owed
allegiance, and in case of disobedience were liable to severe
punishment, and even death.

Desirous of imitating the domination of his royal master, he commenced a
tyrannical use of his power, which gained him many enemies. However, it
was of short duration. In 1822, when D. Augustin Yturbide was proclaimed
Emperor of Mexico, and when his government was recognized, in due form,
at St. Diego, there were many Indians present, who listened attentively,
to the declaration that Mexico no longer acknowledged the Spanish
authority. The king (or viceroy) had been deposed, and another placed in
his stead, with the new title of Emperor. A few months afterwards, a
grand feast was observed in the Indian village, to which all the
neighboring Indians were invited.

To commence the ceremonies, they burned their chief alive! and elected
another. The feast continued eight days, when the Indians dispersed and
returned to their several homes. Those who lived in the Presidio, were
censured for such inhumanity, which produced the following
remarks:-"Have you not done in Mexico the same with the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

King of Spain?" (meaning the Viceroy). "You say he was not good, and you
killed him! Well, our captain was not good, and we have burned him.
Should the new one be bad, we will burn him also!"

 

How little is the faith of these Indians in the teachings of the
Catholic truths! A missionary, of the mission of St. Luis Rey, who had
baptized several adults, the youngest of whom had reached his fiftieth
year, attempted to explain, after the ceremony was concluded, the sort
of life which they were to observe for the future; and he told them what
they were to do to avoid the influence of Satan. By invoking the sweet
names of Jesus and Mary, be said, and by the sign of the holy cross,
well performed, we destroy the power of the devil, and drive out all
unholy thoughts. A *satrap*, or governor, of one of the rancherias,
smilingly observed to the others, "See how this pádre cheats us! Who
believes that the devil will leave us, by the sign of the cross? If it
were to be done by dancing, as authorized by Chinigchinich, he would
depart; but that he will do so, by the means which he says, I do not
believe!" The others united with him in laughter, and appeared
unimpressed with the efficacy of such ceremony.

 

About the middle of December, 1823, a comet appeared in the north, which
was visible until the latter part of January, of the ensuing year; and
in September, 1825, another was seen. The latter appeared in the
south-east, with its direction to the north-west, and was visible,
though faintly, till the first of November.

The Indians, who had observed them, believing they were their deceased
chiefs, consulted together, as to the cause of their appearance, and
were all of one opinion, that they denoted some important change in
their destiny; but how, or in what manner, it would be, they were
ignorant. Some thought that they would return to their primitive mode of
life; that it was "*Sirout*," whom they had seen, he, who was the father
of their grand captain *Ouiot*; and when he came, he ever brought good
things, for their profit and happiness. Others said no! that it denoted
that they were to live free, and do whatever they pleased, without being
under subjection to any one; yet they would still remain occupants of
the mission. The elder ones said, *Sirout* foretold, that another people

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

would come, who would treat them as slaves, and abuse them--that they
would suffer much hunger and misery, and that the chief thus appeared,
to call them away from the impending calamity. Others said, that the
comet was "*Tacu*," the father of "*Ouiamot*" or "*Chinigchinich*,"
which was generally assented to. These ideas have, undoubtedly, arisen
from the fact, that when the declaration of independence was proclaimed
in Mexico, the Indians were made to believe, that they would no longer
be subject to the regulations of the missions; that each family, or
person, would live separate, as colonists. But the government,
considering them unfit for such a condition, has not made any
innovation, up to the present time of November, 1825.

 

An Indian "*vaquero*," of the mission of San Luis Obispo, who had been
despatched on business, to some place not far distant, did not make his
appearance until the day following, and then so pallid and trembling,
that he could hardly speak. Upon inquiring as to what ailed him, he
replied, "that being in a certain place, a phantom appeared before him,
which prevented his progress; and his horse, though vigorous, remained
immoveable at the sight. The phantom commanded him to tell his people
not to travel in that direction, for if they did, he should molest them!
Immediately, three of us, pádres, went out, with "*vaqueros*," and other
Indians, and remained all that day about the same spot, but nothing was
seen of the phantom.

 

In a certain "*rancho*," or farm, were several *Pima* Indians, and some
*Sagues*, who were employed in erecting a building; he who directed
them, was one of the *razon*, or native Spaniards. One day, whilst
superintending the work, he discovered, concealed, in one of the
apartments, a small wooden ball, which had around it, an unfinished
crown of thorns. He enquired of a "*Sagui*," what it was for. "Ah! Sir,"
he replied, "you have really escaped; with this ball you would have been
destroyed. You were to be killed for having chastised the Pima Indian,
and only two days more were required; that is, until the completion of
the crown of thorns around the ball; then, immediately, you would have
been attacked with pains in the head and heart, and would have died.
