[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc09)  [Next](bosc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

# Chapter VIII

### On Their Mode of Life and Occupation

Among the natural inclinations with which man is endowed, is that of
defending, and preserving his own individual person. For this reason, he
feels it his duty to consider how, and in what manner, he is to live,
and how to procure the necessary means of sustenance. Necessity, "the
mother of invention," has therefore revealed to him how to arrange the
rustic implements, used for securing his food. No doubt these Indians
passed a miserable life, ever idle, and more like the brutes, than
rational beings. They neither cultivated the ground, nor planted any
kind of grain; but lived upon the wild seeds of the field, the fruits of
the forest, and upon the abundance of game. It is really surprising,
that during a lapse of many ages, with their reason and experience, they
had not advanced one iota in improving the things that would have been
useful and convenient for them; for instance, in agriculture; in
planting and cultivating those seeds which were most appreciated-also
trees around their dwellings, bearing such fruit as they were obliged to
bring from a great distance. But no! nothing of the kind; and in no part
of the province was to be found aught but the common, spontaneous,
productions of the earth.

It cannot be denied, that these Indians, like all the human race, are
the descendants of Adam; endowed with reason, or in other words, with a
soul. When we read of the ancients--of their having transplanted trees
which were wild, thus increasing their abundance, and quality, and of

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

their planting seeds, which improved by cultivation, we cannot but
wonder that a knowledge so important was unknown here until the
missionary fathers came amongst them, and introduced the planting of
wheat, corn, beans, and other grains, that are now so abundant every
where. I consider these Indians, in their endowments, like the soul of
an infant, which is merely a will, accompanied with passions--an
understanding not exercised, or without use; and for this reason, they
did not comprehend the virtue of prudence, which is the result of time
and reason--of the former, by experience, and the latter, by
dissertation. Although ripe in years, they had no more experience than
when in childhood--no reasoning powers, and therefore followed blindly
in the footsteps of their predecessors.

Their occupation consisted in the construction of the bow and arrow, in
hunting for deer, rabbits;, squirrels, rats, &c., which not only
provided them with food, but *clothing*, if so it can be called. Their
usual style of dress, was a small skin thrown over the shoulders,
leaving the remaining portion of their person unprotected; but the
females formed a kind of cloak out of the skins of rabbits, which were
put together after this manner. They twisted them into a kind of rope,
that was sewed together, so as to conform to the size of the person, for
whom it was intended, and the front was adorned with a kind of fringe,
composed of grass, which reached down to the knees; around the collar it
was adorned with beads, and other ornaments, prized by the Indians.

They passed their time in plays, and roaming about from house to house,
dancing and sleeping; and this was their only occupation, and the mode
of life most common amongst them from day to day. The old men, and the
poorer class, devoted a portion of the day to constructing house
utensils, their bows and arrows, and the several instruments used in
making their baskets; also nets of various dimensions, which were used
for sundry purposes, such as for catching fish and wild fowl, and for
carrying heavy burdens on their backs, fastened by a strap passed across
the forehead. In like manner, the females used them for carrying their
infants.

The women were obliged to gather seeds in the fields, prepare them for
cooking, and to perform all the meanest offices, as well as the most
laborious. It was painful in the extreme, to behold them, with their

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

infants hanging upon their shoulders, groping about in search of herbs
or seed, and exposed as they frequently were to the inclemency of the
weather. Often it was the case that they returned home severely
fatigued, and hungry, to cook the fruits of their toil, but, perhaps,
there would be no wood, the fire extinguished, and their lazy husband
either at play or sleeping, so that again they would be obliged to go
out into the cold for fuel. When the brutal husband came home, or awoke
from his sluggishness, he expected his meal, and if not prepared at the
moment, invectives and ill treatment were the universal consequence.
Poor creatures! more unfortunate than slaves! They were in such
subjection, that for the most trifling offence, punishment was the
result, and oftentimes death; but, thank Heaven! since the introduction
of the Christian religion among this unhappy race, the females have
received more liberty and better treatment. The most wonderful of God's
blessings enjoyed among them, was the great facility with which they
underwent their accouchement, when it would seem as if they endured no
suffering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. On Their Principal Feasts and Dances](bosc11)
