[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc11)  [Next](bosc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# Chapter X

### Of Many of Their Extravagances

Superstitions of a ridiculous, and most extravagant nature, were found
associated with these Indians, and even now, in almost every town, or
hamlet, the child's first education is a belief in their authenticity;
and they grow up from infancy familiar with all their fabulous
traditions. The effect tends to enervate their physical faculties, and
weaken their mental, so that they naturally become a pusillanimous race
of people, liable to be deceived, imposed upon, and of course easily
influenced by the puplem, and old men, who are their sole instructors.

There are men, and also females, who are believed to possess the power
of enchantment, to such a degree, that no one can withstand their
powers; so that without resistance, all immediately acquiesce in their
demands. The incantation is performed thus: Beneath the left arm, in a
small leather bag, they carry a black ball, called by them "*aguet*,"
composed of a plaster of *mescal*, and wild honey, or, as they term it,
"quijotes," or "sejat." When they wish to make use of the same, to
exercise its virtues upon any one, the right hand is placed upon the
leather bag, and without any other ceremony, the sorcery is effected.
Should the person appear indifferent to the presence of the enchanter,
then a companion immediately announces the fact, that be bears the
sacred charm, and their demands are complied with, without reply or
opposition. The

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

said "aguet," is a composition unknown to all but the sorcerers, and of
course, only used by them. How it possesses so much virtue, I have never
been enabled to discover. Nevertheless, they give up whatever is asked
of them, under the impression that more calamities will attend them, if
they do not.

They have an idea, that if the shadow of the aura, in his flying through
the air, should fall upon them with their heads uncovered, they would
become afflicted with sores and diseases, and on this account, whenever
it so happens that a bird of this class approaches, they immediately
cover their persons.

They believed when the *pelican* visited the inland population, that it
was an omen of death to some one, and consequently, they persecuted the
bird until it left their neighborhood. Another ridiculous belief among
them was, that the deer hunters could never partake of venison which
they, themselves, procured, and only of such as was taken by others, for
the reason, that if they did, they would not get any more. And the
fishermen, also, possessed the same idea with regard to their fish. More
singular, however, than this, was the custom among the young men, when
starting for the woods in search of rabbits, squirrels, rats, or other
animals. They were obliged to take a companion for the reason, that he
who killed the game, could not eat thereof--if he did, in a few days he
complained of pains in his limbs, and gradually became emaciatcd. On
this account, two went together, in order to exchange with each other
the result of their excursion. This infliction did not extend to every
one who partook of the game of his own taking, but only to such as were
guilty of consuming it secretly. Neither was it incurable, for they had
among them certain sorcerers possessing the power to reinstate them in
their former health and contentment.

When the sun, or moon, was eclipsed, they appeared much frightened; and
the men, women, and children, were heard crying and shouting, whilst
throwing sand into the air, and beating with sticks upon dry hides, or
upon the ground. This was done, as they said, to scare away a large and
ferocious monster, who would devour the sun and moon, and if he were
permitted to accomplish the entire consumption of either, that is, if
there should be a *total eclipse*, all would immediately die, and the
world would come to an end.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

At the time of new moon, and on the first day of its appearance, it was
usual amongst them to call together all the young men for the purpose of
its celebration. A "correr la luna!" shouted one of the old men. Come,
my boys, the moon! the moon! Immediately, racing commenced, and without
order they ran about as if they were distracted, whilst the old men
danced in a circle, saying the following words--"As the moon dieth, and
cometh to life again, so we also having to die, will again live,"--thus
manifesting clearly the resurrection of the flesh. How this was
understood by them, I did not ascertain, for they could not explain it,
and they merely observed the ceremony, on account of its having been
practised by their ancestors.

Another belief, current with the younger part of the females of the
community, was, that the meteoric appearances often beheld in the
evening, were the *Tacuieh*, or children of the moon, and whenever they
beheld them, they fell upon the ground, and covered their heads, fearing
if seen by them, that their faces would become ugly, and diseased. They
had amongst them certain individuals who pretended to be descendants of
the "Coyote" eaters of human flesh--not as the cannibals and
Mexicans--but their manner of proceeding was after the following
disgusting custom. Whenever a Captain, or one of the Puplem, died, they
sent for the *Eno*, who was thus called before he officiated in his
duties, and afterwards "*Tacue*," signifying "an eater." Having arrived
at the place, where they had placed the dead body, he immediately cut
off a large piece from the neck, and the back, near the shoulder, and
consumed the flesh in its raw state, in presence of the multitude
assembled to witness the performance. This was always done in
commemoration of the feat performed by the "Coyote" upon the body of the
great Captain *Ouiot*, as has been already recounted in a previous
chapter. For this, *Eno* was well remunerated, and every one contributed
for the purpose. The young of both sexes, were very much afraid of this
Tacue, and looked upon him as a sorcerer.

These Indians were not entirely destitute of a knowledge of the
universal deluge, but how, or from whence, they received the same, I
could never understand. Some of their songs refer to it; and they have a
tradition that, at a time very remote, the sea began to swell and roll
in upon the plains, and fill the valleys, until it had covered the
mountains; and

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

thus nearly all the human race and animals were destroyed, excepting a
few, who had resorted to a very high mountain which the waters did not
reach. But the songs give a more distinct relation of the same, and they
state that the descendants of Captain *Ouiot* asked of Chinigchinich
vengeance upon their chief--that he appeared unto them, and said to
those endowed with the power, "Ye are the ones to achieve vengeance--ye
who cause it to rain! Do this, and so inundate the earth, that every
living being will be destroyed." The rains commenced, the sea was
troubled, and swelled in upon the earth, covering the plains, and rising
until it had overspread the highest land, excepting a high mountain,
where, the few had gone with the one who had caused it to rain, and thus
every other animal was destroyed upon the face of the earth. These songs
were supplications to Chinigchinich to drown their enemies. If their
opponents heard them, they sang others in opposition, which in substance
ran thus: "We are not afraid, because Chinigchinich does not wish to,
neither will he destroy the world by another inundation." Without doubt
this account has reference to the universal deluge, and the promise God
made, that there should not be another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Their Calendar](bosc13)
