[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bosc07)  [Next](bosc09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# Chapter VI

### The Instructions Given to Their Children

One of the difficulties most perplexing to the Indians, was, the rearing
and educating their children. They were unacquainted with the arts,
excepting those most necessary for their maintenance, and ignorant of
all useful knowledge to keep them from idleness; so that their only
education consisted in the construction of the bow and arrow, with their
peculiar uses, in procuring game and defending themselves from their
enemies.

Although, ignorant as they were of the knowledge of the true God, the
moral instruction given by parents to their children, was contained in
the precepts of Chinigchinich, which were strongly impressed upon their
minds, that they might become good, and avoid the fate of the evil. The
perverse child, invariably, was destroyed, and the parents of such
remained dishonored. At the age of six, or seven years, they gave them a
kind of god, as protector; an animal, in whom they were to place entire
confidence, who would defend them from all dangers, particularly those
in war against their enemies. They, however, were not to consider this
animal as the *real* God, for he was invisible, and inhabited the
mountains and bowels of the earth; and if he did appear to them at any
time, it was in the shape of an animal of the most terrific description.
This was not Chinigchinich, but another called *Touch*, signifying a
Devil. That they might know the class of animal, which the God,
Chinigchinich, had selected for their particular veneration, a kind of
drink was administered

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to them, made from a plant called *Pibat*, which was reduced to a
powder, and mixed with other intoxicating ingredients. Soon after taking
this preparation, they became insensible, and for three days were
deprived of any sustenance whatever. During this period they were
attended by some old men or women, who were continually exhorting them
to be on the alert, not to sleep for fear the *coyote*, the bear, the
crow, or the rattlesnake might come; to observe if it were furious or
gentle, and to inquire of the first that should come, what were its
desires. The poor Indian thus intoxicated, without food or drink,
suffering under delirium, beheld all kinds of visions; and when he made
known that he had seen any particular being who explained the
observances required of him, then they gave him to eat and drink, and
made a grand feast; at the same time advising him to be particular in
obeying the commands of the mysterious apparition.

They did not *all* partake of the drink, and those who did not, were
adorned with feathers, and were painted with a mixture of black and red.
They were thus taken to the Vanquech in fantastical procession, and
placed at the side of Chinigchinich. On the ground, and directly before
them, the Puplem sketched a most uncouth and ridiculous figure, of an
animal, and prohibited them from leaving the Vanquech during the time of
penance, (generally three days) and in case of hunger or thirst, they
were advised to suffer with patience. Should they partake of any thing,
the figure before them would inform to that effect, and Chinigchinich
would chastise them severely, by sending them sickness that would take
away their lives. These and many other ludicrous stories were told to
them, and the poor Indians placed the most implicit confidence in them.

The following circumstance was related to me, which transpired during
the time of their heathenism. A young man, who had been taken to the
Vanquech to perform the accustomed penance of fasting, the second day
feeling somewhat afflicted with hunger and thirst, secretly retired from
the temple, and entered a house that was near by, whose inhabitants were
absent; and having found food, he ate and drank sufficiently, and
returned without any one having seen him. After the accomplishment of
the time, being one day in company with many of his friends, he related
the circumstance, and gave out, as his opinion, that all that

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

was told them by the Puplem, regarding the figure upon the ground, *was
a mere story*,--for he had eaten, and drank, and even injured with his
foot a portion of the figure, and no bad result had happened to him;
therefore they ought not to believe the Puplem. But his companions,
instead of profiting by the information, immediately dispatched him with
their arrows, so furious were they, on hearing of the sacrilege offered
to their religious observances. He was the son of a captain, that is a
prince, for only such could do penance in the Vanquech; others drank of
the intoxicating mixture.

Having undergone the ceremonies described, they placed upon the poor
Indians a brand, which was done in this manner. A kind of herb was
pounded until it became sponge like; this, they placed, according to the
figure required, upon the spot intended to be burnt, which was generally
upon the right arm, and sometimes upon the thick part of the leg also.
They then set fire to it, and let it remain until all that was
combustible, was consumed. Consequently, a large blister immediately
formed, and although painful, they used no remedy to cure it, but left
it to heal itself; and thus, a large and perpetual scar remained. The
reason alleged for this ceremony, was, that it added greater strength to
the nerves, and gave a better pulse for the management of the bow.
Besides, Chinigchinich required it of them, that they might be more
formidable in war, and be enabled to conquer their enemies. Those who
were not marked in this way, which was called "*potense*," were ever
unfortunate, easily conquered, and men of feeble capacities.

They also were obliged to undergo still greater martyrdom to be called
men, and to be admitted among the already initiated; for, after the
ceremony of the "*potense*," they were whipped with nettles, and covered
with ants, that they might become robust, and the infliction was always
performed in summer, during the months of July and August, when the
nettle was in its most fiery state. They gathered small bunches, which
they fastened together, and the poor deluded Indian was chastised, by
inflicting blows with them upon his naked limbs, until unable to walk;
and then he was carried to the nest of the nearest, and most furious
species of ants, and laid down among them, while some of his friends,
with sticks, kept annoying the insects to make them still more violent.
What torments did they not undergo! what pain! what hellish

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

inflictions! yet, their faith gave them power to endure all without a
murmur, and they remained as if dead. Having undergone these dreadful
ordeals, they were considered as invulnerable, and believed that the
arrows of their enemies could no longer harm them.

The young were not allowed to approach the fire to warm themselves, that
they might learn to suffer, and become connaturalized with the changes
of temperature--a severe deprivation, indeed, to the Indian! whose
greatest luxury was to lie basking in the sun, or to enjoy the comforts
of a blazing fire. They were forbidden also to eat certain kinds of
seeds, and meats, until arrived at the age of manhood, and were even
parents of two or three children. Should they eat of such,
clandestinely, "*El Touch*" would know it, and chastise them in various
ways; and Chinigchinich, also, would be very angry. Their faith and
belief in these instructions were such, and the fear and terror produced
therefrom, so infused among them, that, rather than violate them, they
would suffer death.

Thus far, I have explained the education given to the boys. Now I will
proceed to that instilled into the minds of the females. Besides the
general instructions given to the males, to observe the commandments of
Chinigchinich, the girls were taught to remain at home, and not to roam
about in idleness; to be always employed in some domestic duty, so that,
when they were older, they might know how to work, and attend to their
household duties; such as procuring seeds, and cleaning them,--making
"*atole*" and "*pinole*," which are kinds of gruel, and their daily
food. When quite young, they have a small, shallow basket, called, by
the natives, "*tucmel*," with which they learn the way to clean the
seeds, and they are also instructed in grinding, and preparing the same,
for consumption. Those who are industrious in their youth, are flattered
with promises of many admirers when they grow up to be women--that they
will be generally beloved, and receive many presents. In this
neighborhood, and as I have been informed, as far south as Cape St.
Lucas, the girls were tat-tooed in their infancy, from their eyebrows,
down to their breasts; and some from the chin only-covering the arms
entirely, in both cases--but, the execution of this was not generally
complied with, until they reached their tenth year; and varied in the
application and style. The usual method of effecting the same, was by
pricking the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

parts with the thorn of the cactus plant, until they bled, and then they
were rubbed with a kind of charcoal produced from mescal, so that a
permanent blue color remained.

The particular reason for thus tat-tooing their females, was, that it
added to their beauty, and when well executed, would insure them many
admirers--but I think, besides this motive, it signified something more,
and was a necessary kind of distinction. As the devil invented the
branding of the males, so he may have ordered the painting of the
females, and *Chinigchinich* required its performance; so that both
might have their particular mark. Who was the inventor of the singular
ceremony, I could not ascertain, but presume it must have been the
famous *Ouimot*, who instituted the burning, or branding of the males.

A very novel, and rare custom, that these Indians had, was one that the
parents invariably advised them to adhere to, after arriving at the
state of womanhood, and it is this. In their excursions for the
collecting of seeds, or for other purposes, should they unfortunately
meet with one of the sorcerers, or eaters of human flesh, they were to
comply with any desire which he might express, without manifesting the
least reluctance on their part; not even if in company with their
mothers, or if married, and attended by their husbands, should they
command their protection. Both mothers and husbands were obliged to
submit to his requests, through fear of the many inflictions, which they
believed would be the result of their refusal; so, that whenever they
discovered any of this detested race, if possible, they concealed
themselves, so as not to be seen by them.

On arriving at the state of womanhood, a grand feast was made, and
conducted with much ceremony and witchcraft. They made a large hole in
the ground, in shape resembling a grave, about two feet deep: this they
filled with stones and burning coals, and when sufficiently heated, the
latter were taken out, and upon the former they laid branches of the
"*estafiarte*" (a kind of perennial plant), so as to form a bed, which
the natives called "*Pacsil*." Upon this, they placed the young girl,
and for two or three days she was permitted to eat but very little; thus
continuing until the accustomed term for purification had expired. In
the meantime the outside of the hole was adorned with feathers of
different birds, beads, and many other baubles. Several old women with
their faces

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

painted like devils, were employed in singing songs in a tone so
disagreeable, that one could hardly tell whether they were crying or
laughing; and the young women danced around her, at intervals, every
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. On Matrimony](bosc09.md)
