[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bosc01)  [Next](bosc03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# Introduction

The motives which have induced me to write the present history, have
been, principally, to fulfil my obligations as Apostolical Missionary;
to have before me the means of presenting to these poor Indians an
account of the errors entertained by them during their state of
heathenism, and to contrast the same with the light they now enjoy as
Christians. Also, to leave to my successors such instruction, as will
relieve them from the trouble and labor that I experienced, in procuring
a knowledge of the belief, usages, and customs, *i.e.*, the Religion,
which these natives possessed in their heathen state; persuaded as I am,
that being ignorant of this, it will be difficult to remove their
erroneous belief, and give them an understanding of the true Religion.
It is difficult, I confess, if unacquainted with their language, to
penetrate their secrets, as they do not *all* understand the
signification of their usages and customs; this knowledge being confined
to the chiefs of their tribes, and the old men who officiate as priests;
and when they reveal any thing, to their children, it is only to such as
they intend to rear for their successors, and these, are enjoined to
keep fast the secrets, and not communicate them to any one, under pain
of severe chastisement. A veil is cast over all their religious
observances, and the mystery with which they are performed, seems to
perpetuate respect for them, and preserve an ascendancy over the people.
This is the reason that the ceremonies of the dances, in their grand
feasts, (which are properly

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

exercises of religion,) cannot be understood. They have never had the
use of writings, letters, or characters of any description. All their
knowledge is from tradition, which they preserve in songs for their
dances, and these are introduced, by the chief, at their festivities, in
a language distinct from that, in common use. Others unite with them,
but without understanding the meaning of what they do, or articulate;
perhaps, the songs thus introduced, are in the primitive language.

Perchance, some one may enquire, how I have obtained so much
information, relative to the secrets or religion of these natives, when,
up to the present time, no other Father has written on the subject.

We are to suppose it a truth, that there are many things hidden, not
only, in the Divine Prophecies, but in human events, also, which cannot
be comprehended, or known but by the Divine Will; and as God, almost
always, makes use of the most humble instruments for his purpose, to me,
he assigned three aged Indians, the youngest of whom was over seventy
years of age. They knew all the secrets, for two of them were
*Capitans*, and the other a *Pul*, who were well instructed in the
mysteries. By gifts, endearments, and kindness, I elicited from them
their secrets, with their explanations; and, by witnessing the
ceremonies which they performed, I learned, by degrees, their mysteries.
Thus, by devoting a portion of the nights to profound meditation, and
comparing their actions with their disclosures, I was enabled, after a
long time, to acquire a knowledge of their religion. There are yet, many
things, which I do not understand, because they have not been disclosed
to me, with that clearness that I could wish, but, always so confusedly,
that I was unable to penetrate their meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Of What Race of People Are These Indians?](bosc03.md)
