[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-12) [Next](hoe1-14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

## CANTO VIII <span class="small">THE CONTEST AND PARTING OF THE BROTHERS</span>

O<span class="small">N</span> the following morning the three sons of
Kalev set out before sunrise towards the south; but they rested under
the trees and took some refreshment during the heat of the day. In the
evening they passed a house which was lighted up as if for company. The
father and mother stood at the door, and invited them to choose brides
from among their rich and beautiful daughters. The eldest brother
answered that they were not come to woo brides, and had no thought of
marriage; but the second brother said he should like the girls to come
out to swing with them; and they were forthwith summoned. Then the
youngest brother said he hoped the young ladies would not distress
themselves, but really he and his brothers had no idea of marrying at
present, and they must beg to be excused.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 Then they continued their journey southwards, and on the third day they
reached a small lake with steep banks.<span
id="page_56_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_56_note_1) Water-birds were sporting
in the lake, and on the opposite shore they saw the holy forest of Taara
shining in the sunset. “Here is the place where our lot must be
decided,” said the eldest brother; and each selected a stone for the
trial of strength. It was arranged that whoever should cast his stone
across the lake to the firm ground opposite should be adjudged his
father’s heir, and the other two should wander forth to seek their
fortunes in other lands.

 The eldest brother, in all friendliness, claimed his right to the first
trial, and cast his stone. It flew from his hand with the speed of a
bird or of the tempest, but suddenly changed its direction, and plunged
into the middle of the lake. The water foamed up over it, and entirely
concealed it from sight.

 The second brother then seized his stone, and sent it whistling through
the air like an arrow. It rose up till it was nearly lost to sight, and
then turned and fell on the shore close to the water, where it sank for
half its bulk into the <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> mud. Then came
the turn of the third, who, though the youngest, was much taller and
stronger than his brothers.

 The youngest brother made some sad reflections on his posthumous birth,
and on the course of his childhood, and then cast forth his rock like a
bird, or like a ship in a storm. It flew up far and high, but not up to
the clouds, like that cast by his brother, and afterwards made great
ducks and drakes across the whole lake, reaching at last the firm ground
beyond.

 “Don’t let us wait here,” said the eldest brother, “but let us go and
look for the stones, and decide our competition.” As the nearest way to
the opposite shore was through the lake, they waded straight across it,
and at the deepest place the water reached a little above their knees.
The stone cast by the eldest brother had disappeared entirely in the
water, and no trace of it could be found; but that thrown by the second
was found on the shore half sunken in the mud. Only the stone thrown by
the youngest brother, easily recognisable by its marks, was found on
firm ground, lying on the grass at some little distance beyond the lake.
Then the eldest brother declared <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> that
the gods had plainly assigned the kingdom to the youngest, and that the
others must now bathe him and adorn him as king.<span
id="page_58_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_58_note_1) After this the three
brothers took an affectionate leave of each other, and the two elder
ones wandered cheerfully away. The youngest sat on the rock sadly
reflecting on the lost joys of youth, and how he must now depend on his
own unaided efforts. At length he threw a silver coin into the water as
an offering to the gods, an old custom now forgotten.

 It was the duty of the new king both to plough the country and to
defend it, and he therefore set to work with his sword by his side.
Early and late he ploughed, stocking the country with corn, grass,
trees, and berries.

 One hot noonday, seeing his white horse<span
id="page_58_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_58_note_2) nearly exhausted, he
unyoked him from the plough, hobbled him, and left him to graze, while
he <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> himself lay down in the grass and
fell asleep. His head rested on the top of a hill, and his body and legs
spread far over the plain below. The sweat ran from his forehead and
sank into the earth, whence arose a healing and strengthening spring of
wonderful virtues. Those who taste the water of this spring are greatly
strengthened; weak children grow strong, the sick grow healthy; the
water heals sore eyes, and even blindness; the weary are refreshed, and
the maidens who taste it have rosy cheeks for their whole lifetime.

 While the Kalevide lay asleep, he dreamed that he saw his good horse
torn to pieces by wolves. And truly the horse had strayed away to some
distance, when a host of wild animals, wolves, bears, and foxes, emerged
from the forest. As the horse’s feet were hobbled, he could not escape,
and was soon overtaken. He defended himself as well as he could with
hoofs and head, and killed many of the beasts; but he was finally
overpowered by their ever-increasing numbers, and fell. Where he sank
the ground is hollow, and a number of little hills represent the wolves
killed in the struggle. The horse’s blood formed a red lake, his liver a
mountain, his entrails a <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> marsh, his
bones hills, his hair rushes, his mane bulrushes, and his tail
hazel-bushes.<span id="page_60_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_60_note_1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="page_56_note_1"></span>[1](#page_56_fr_1) This lake (Saad
järv) lies a little north of Dorpat.

<span id="footnotes_page_58">p. 58</span>

<span id="page_58_note_1"></span>[1](#page_58_fr_1) Nothing is said as
to how the government was carried on during the Kalevide’s minority.

<span id="page_58_note_2"></span>[2](#page_58_fr_2) White horses
constantly occur in Esthonian tales; and the devil’s mother or
grandmother usually appears as a white mare. One of the commentators
remarks that as the white horse was sacred in pre-Christian times, the
missionaries represented it as peculiarly diabolical. It will be
remembered with what severity the early missionaries suppressed the
horse feasts among the Teutonic tribes.

<span id="footnotes_page_60">p. 60</span>

<span id="page_60_note_1"></span>[1](#page_60_fr_1) This is a little
like the formation of the world from the body of the giant Ymir, as
described in the Edda. As W. Herbert paraphrases it,

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Of his bones the rocks high swelling,<br />
 Of his flesh the globe is made,<br />
From his veins the tide is welling,<br />
 And his locks are verdant shade.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

  
 “Helga” is a somewhat poor production, containing but few striking
passages except the description of the appearance of the Valkyrior
before the fight between Hialmar and Angantyr. But the shorter poems at
the end, “The Song of Vala” and “Brynhilda,” ought to be alone
sufficient to remove the name of this forgotten poet from oblivion.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
