[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-15) [Next](hoe1-17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

## CANTO XI <span class="small">THE LOSS OF THE SWORD</span>

N<span class="small">EXT</span> morning the Kalevide arose at dawn, and
hurried on towards Lake Peipus, clearing and levelling the country as he
went. When he arrived at the lake, there was no boat to be seen; so he
girded himself, and plunged into it at a point where it was too wide to
see the opposite shore, while the fish fled before him as he waded
through.

 On the shore opposite, a hideous sorcerer was hiding in the bushes. He
was as bristly as a wild boar, with wide mouth and small oblique
eyes.<span id="page_72_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_72_note_1) He was well
skilled in all magic; he could make the wind blow from any quarter,
could <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> remove ill from one man to cast it
on another, and could cause quarrels between the best friends. He had
evil demons at his beck and call; but for all that, he could cure all
hurts and diseases when he pleased. But to-day he was in a bad humour,
and blew a tremendous storm against the son of Kalev. Presently he saw a
human form struggling through the waters, which reached to his girdle.
Even at four or five miles’ distance the figure seemed as large as a
man, and he appeared to be heavily laden. Sometimes the water hid him
from view, but as he came nearer the form became ever huger and more
terrible.

 The Kalevide laughed at the raging storm, and said to the lake, “You
nasty little puddle, you’re wetting my girdle.” He had taken scarcely an
hour in his passage, when he reached the firm ground, carrying a load of
planks which a horse or a pair of oxen could hardly have dragged along.
He had brought them from Pleskau to build a refuge for his people; over
twenty dozen planks, three inches thick, an ell broad, and ten yards
long. He drew his sword to trim the timber, and the sorcerer determined
to reward a himself for his late exertions in raising the tempest <span
id="page_74">p. 74</span> by possessing himself of it; but this was no
the time for action, and he slunk deeper into the shades of the forest.

 The Kalevide was tired with his journey, and found a level place some
little distance from the shore, so he brought a lapful of shingle from
the beach and a quantity of sand, and made himself a comfortable bed in
a dry spot. Then he refreshed himself with bread and milk from his
wallet, loosed his girdle, laid his sword beside him, and soon fell
asleep, with his head to the west and his feet to the east, that the
first rays of the morning sun might shine in his eyes and awaken him.
Presently the ground shook, and the woods re-echoed, and the billows of
the lake rose in answer to his snoring, which sounded like the
Thunder-God driving three-in-hand through the clouds.

 The sorcerer now stole from his hiding-place, and advanced towards the
sleeping giant with catlike steps; but he tried in vain to steal the
good sword from its master’s side by his incantations. Neither commands
nor supplications would avail, and he was forced to use stronger spells.
So he scattered rowan-leaves, thyme, fern, and other magic herbs over
the sword, and at last it inclined <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>
towards the sorcerer, and he took it in his arms. The huge weapon
weighed him to the ground, and he was only able to struggle along
painfully under its weight, step by step, with the sweat pouring from
his face; but still he would not relinquish his booty. Presently he came
to the brook Käpä, and jumped over it; but the sword slipped from his
arm, and sank in the mud in the deepest place. He renewed his
incantations, but was now quite unable to repossess himself of the
sword, and on the approach of dawn he fled into the forest, to hide from
the vengeance of its owner.

 When the Kalevide awoke, he rubbed the sleep out of his eyes and felt
for his sword, but it had disappeared. He could see its traces where it
had been dragged away, and he followed on its track, calling to the
sword as to a brother, and beseeching it to answer him, and not to let
him search in vain. But there was no reply, and then he tried a song,
but still there was no reply, and he searched everywhere for the sword,
till at last he saw it shining at the bottom of the water.

 Then the Kalevide asked the sword who had stolen it and sunk it in the
water, and the sword <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> sang in reply how
the sorcerer had carried it off, and how it had slipped from his grasp
into the water, into the embraces of the fairest of the water-nymphs.
The Kalevide answered, “Does my sword prefer to lie in the arms of a
water-nymph rather than to feel the grasp of a hero in battle?” The
sword reminded the Kalevide of the terrible murder in Finland, which it
declared it could never forget, and the hero abandoned the weapon to its
sweet repose, saying that he relied on his own strength to overcome his
enemies in battle. But he laid his commands on the sword that if any
heroes of his race, Kalevides, Alevides, or Sulevides, should come to
the spot, then the sword should address them in words. If a great singer
came, the sword was to sing to him; if a hero as brave and as strong as
the Kalevide himself should come to the brook, then the sword was to
rise from its bed and join him; but if the man himself who had brought
the sword there should come that way, then the sword was to cut off both
his feet.

 By this he meant the sorcerer, but he expressed himself ambiguously.

 The son of Kalev then left the brook, took the boards on his back, and
set out for home. On his <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> journey he
passed through a pine forest which belonged to men, a leafy forest
sacred to women, and a hazel thicket, the last refuge of the maidens,
the orphans, and the sick. Here his foot touched something soft, which
he found to be a man of about the stature of our present race, who was
quaking with fear and besought his protection. The Kalevide took him up
kindly by the hair, and dropped him into his wallet, where he fell as
down a deep precipice, till he came to a stop among the bread and
herrings at the bottom. Then the hero asked him what had frightened him
so much.

 Up from the bottom of the bag came a voice like the croaking of a frog
from the bottom of a deep well, and this was the man’s story:—“Yesterday
evening I was wandering on the shores of Lake Peipus, and lost my way.
Presently I came to a footpath which led me to a poor hut, where I
thought to find a night’s lodging. I came into a great, empty room,
where an old woman was standing by the hearth preparing supper. She was
cooking half a pig in a great pot with peas, and kindly gave me a
cupful, but told me to eat my supper quick. As soon as I had finished,
she told me to hide among the straw which she had laid under the table,
and <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> to lie as still as a mouse, for if I
only moved a finger after her sons returned, they would be sure to kill
me. I thanked the good old woman, and crept into the straw, where three
men could easily have hidden themselves; and I hoped to sleep. But
presently I heard steps approaching which shook the house; and whether
or not it was my fear that makes me think so, I fancy, noble scion of
the Kalevides, that even your heavy tread never made such a noise.

 “The two brothers rushed into the room like wild bears, and one of them
sniffed about the room and said, ‘Mother, who has been here? I smell
man’s sweat.’ ‘Nobody has even been near the house today, my son,’
answered the old woman. ‘If you smell anything, you must have brought
the smell with you from out of doors.’

 “Then she gave them their supper, and they ate as much as would have
satisfied fifty of our race, and left something over. Then they laid
themselves down on the hard floor, one on each side the table, while the
old woman crept cautiously up the ladder to her couch above the stove.

 “Poor wretch that I am! if I had ever expected to find myself in such a
position, I would rather have drowned myself in the lake or thrown
myself <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> over a precipice. I could not
sleep a wink all night, and when the old woman opened the door in the
morning I crept behind her, and fled through two woods till I reached
the third, where you found me.”

 This was the poor man’s story, and the Kalevide laughed heartily at the
recital.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_72">p. 72</span>

<span id="page_72_note_1"></span>[1](#page_72_fr_1) This is a well-known
Mongol characteristic; and it is rather oddly attributed by Arabic
writers to the Jinn. “Two of them appeared in the form and aspect of the
Jarm, each with one eye slit endlong, and jutting horns and projecting
tusks.”—Story of Tohfat-el-Kulub (*Thousand and One Nights*, Breslau
edition).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
