[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-05) [Next](hoe1-07)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# THE KALEVIPOEG

### <span class="small">OR,</span> *THE ADVENTURES OF THE SON OF KALEV, THE HERO OF ESTHONIA.*

T<span class="small">HE</span> poem commences with an invocation to
Vanemuine.<span id="page_7_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_7_note_1) This is
followed by a long lyrical exordium.

## CANTO I <span class="small">THE MARRIAGES OF SALME AND LINDA</span>

 In ancient days, the race of Taara dwelt here and there in the land,
and took to themselves wives of the daughters of men.<span
id="page_7_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_7_note_2) In the far North, <span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> near the sacred oak forest of Taara, such a
house-hold existed, and from thence three sons went forth into the world
to seek their fortunes. One son travelled to Russia, where he became a
great merchant; another journeyed to Lapland, and became a warrior;
while the third, the famous Kalev,<span
id="page_8_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_8_note_1) the father of heroes, was
borne to Esthonia on the back of an eagle.<span
id="page_8_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_8_note_2) The eagle flew with him to
the south across the Gulf of Finland, and then eastward across
Lääne<span id="page_8_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_8_note_3) and Viru,<span
id="page_8_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_8_note_4) until, by the wise ordering
of Jumala,<span id="page_8_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_8_note_5) the eagle
finally descended <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> with him on the rocky
shores of Viru, where he founded a kingdom.

 In the province of Lääne a young widow lived quietly by herself. One
Sunday she followed the footprints of her cattle, and what did she find
on her way? On the path she found a hen; she found a grouse’s egg in the
footprints of the cattle, and she found a young crow near the village.
She carried them all home with her to comfort her loneliness, and she
made a nest for the hen and the egg in a basket lined with wool, but she
threw the young crow into a corner behind the boxes.

 The hen soon began to grow, and her head reached the lid of the basket
while she sat on the egg. She grew taller for three months, and for
several days of the fourth month.

 The widow went into the storehouse to look at her foster-children, and
what did she behold on raising the lid of the basket? The hen had grown
into the fair maiden Salme;<span
id="page_9_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_9_note_1) the egg had given <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> birth to a second maiden, Linda, while the
poor crow had become an orphan girl, a maid-of-all-work, to carry wood
to the stove and to bend under the weight of water-pails from the well.
Salme was besieged by suitors. Five and six brought her offerings of
corn-brandy, seven sent her offers of marriage, and eight sent
trustworthy messengers to bring them news of her. The fame of her beauty
spread far and wide, and at length not merely mortal lovers, but even
the Moon, the Sun,<span id="page_10_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_10_note_1)
and the eldest son of the Pole Star sought her hand in marriage.

 The Moon drove up in a grand chariot drawn by fifty horses, and
attended by a train of sixty grooms. He was a pale slender youth, and
found no favour in the eyes of Salme, who cried out from the storehouse:

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Him I will not have for husband,<br />
And the night-illumer love not.<br />
Far too varied are his duties,<br />
And his work is much too heavy.<br />
Sometimes he must shine in heaven<br />
Ere the day, or late in evening;<br />
Sometimes when the sun is rising;<br />
Sometimes he must toil at morning,<br />
Ere the day has fully broken;<br />
Sometimes watches in the daytime,<br />
Lingering in the sky till mid-day.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 When the Moon heard her answer, he grew yet paler, and returned home
sorrowful.

 And now the Sun himself appeared, a young man with fiery eyes; and he
drove up with similar state to the Moon. But Salme declared that she
liked him even less than the Moon, for he was much too fickle.
Sometimes, during the finest summer weather, he would send rain in the
midst of the hay-harvest; or if the time had come for sowing oats, he
would parch the land with drought; or if the time for sowing is past, he
dries up the barley in the ground, beats down the flax, and presses down
the peas in the furrows; he won’t let the buckwheat grow, or the lentils
in their pods; and when the rye is white for harvest, he either glows
fiercely and drives away the clouds, or sends a pouring rain.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

 The Sun was deeply offended; his eyes glowed with anger, and he
departed in a rage.

 At last the Youth of the Stars made his appearance, driving with a
similar cortège to those who had preceded him.

 As soon as Salme heard of his arrival, she cried out that his horse was
to be led into the stable and tended with the utmost care. The horse
must have the best provender, and must be given fine linen to rest on
and be covered with silken cloths; his head was to rest on satin, and
his hoofs on soft hay. After this she declared to his master:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Him I will accept as lover,<br />
Give the Star my hand in marriage,<br />
And will prove his faithful consort.<br />
Gently shine his eyes of starlight,<br />
And his temper alters nothing.<br />
Never can he thwart the sowing,<br />
Never will destroy the harvest.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Having thus accepted her suitor and provided for the comfort of his
horse, Salme ordered the bridegroom to be ushered into the hall, where
the broad table was washed clean and covered with a new tablecloth. The
Star was to be seated with his back to the wall and his feet comfortably
propped up on the bench, while he was to <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
be feasted on the best meat and fish, and offered wedding-cake and
honey, besides beer and sweet mead. The widow invited the Star to take
his place at the table, and pressed him to eat and drink, but he was
greatly excited, and his weapons, ornaments, and heavy spurs jingled and
clanked as he stamped on the floor, and declared that he would eat
nothing till Salme herself appeared before him. But Salme asked him to
wait awhile while she adorned herself, and asked her sister Linda to
fetch her woollen dress and her silken shift with gold-embroidered
sleeves, her stockings with the pretty garters, and the brightly
coloured and gold-worked kerchiefs of silk and linen.

 Meantime, the widow again invited the Star to eat and drink, or, if he
were tired, to sleep; but he declared, as before, that he would neither
eat nor drink till he had seen Salme, and that the stars never closed
their eyes in sleep.

 At last Salme herself appeared in the hall, but the Meadow-Queen<span
id="page_13_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_13_note_1) and the wood nymphs had so
adorned her that her foster-mother did not know <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> her again, and asked in astonishment, “Is it the moon,<span
id="page_14_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_14_note_1) or the sun, or one of the
young daughters of the sunset?”

 Guests gathered to the wedding from far and near, and even the oaks and
alders came, roots, branches, and all.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">After this they danced the cross-dance,<span id="page_14_fr_2"></span><a href="#page_14_note_2">2</a><br />
Waltzed the waltzes of Esthonia,<br />
And they danced the Arju<span id="page_14_fr_3"></span><a href="#page_14_note_3">3</a> dances,<br />
And the dances of the West Land;<br />
And they danced upon the gravel,<br />
And they trampled all the greensward.<br />
Starry youth and maiden Salme,<br />
Thus their nuptials held in rapture.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 In the midst of these joyous festivities, the Moon and then the Sun
returned in greater state than before to seek the hand of Linda, who was
resting on a couch in the bathroom; but she also refused <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> them both, almost in the same terms as her
sister had done; and they retired sorrowfully.

 A third suitor, the Lord of the Waters, now appeared; but Linda replied
that the roaring of the waves was terrible, and the depth of the sea was
awful; that the brooks only gave a scanty supply of water, and the
river-floods were devastating. He was followed by the Wind, who rode the
Horse of the Tempest, and, like all the other suitors, was attended by a
cavalcade of fifty horses and sixty grooms; and he too asked the hand of
Linda. But she replied that a delicate girl could never take pleasure in
the howling of the wind and the raging of the tempest. The Wind whistled
out of the house, but his trouble did not weigh on his heart very long.

 Another suitor for the hand of Linda now appeared in the person of the
Prince of Kungla.<span id="page_15_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_15_note_1) All
the guests, and Linda’s own sisters, approved of this suitor. But Linda
declared that she could not <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> think of
accepting him; for the king, his father, had wicked daughters, who would
treat a stranger unkindly.

 A sixth suitor now appeared in the person of the young and handsome
giant Kalev. All the wedding-guests grumbled, and even the widow was
opposed to the match; but he pleased Linda, and she accepted him at
once. The widow then invited him to enter and partake of the good cheer;
but he trembled with eagerness, so that his sword in its sheath, and his
chains and spurs, and even the money in his purse, jingled as he
answered that he would neither eat nor drink till Linda appeared before
him. Linda begged for a little delay to adorn herself, but Kalev still
refused to eat or drink, and then she called her slave-sister to help
her, while the widow continued her ineffectual invitations to Kalev to
feast and enjoy himself.

 At last Linda appeared in the hall, where she excited as much
admiration as her sister, and her wedding was celebrated with still
greater festivities than Salme’s, the guests dancing the local dances of
every province of Esthonia.

 But now the Youth of the Stars could delay no longer, and Salme took an
affecting farewell <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> of her foster-mother
and all her kith and kin, declaring that she would now be hidden behind
the clouds, or wandering through the heavens transformed into a star.
Then she mounted her sledge, and again bade her foster-mother a last and
eternal farewell. Linda and her slave-sister called after her to ask
whither she was going; but there came no answer save the sighing of the
wind, and tears of joy and regret in the rain and the dew; nor did they
ever receive tidings of Salme more.

 After Salme’s departure, the wedding-festival of Linda was kept up for
some time, and when Kalev finally drove off with her in her sledge, she
bade farewell to her foster-mother; but Kalev reminded her that she had
forgotten the moon before the house, who was her father; the sun before
the storehouse, who was her old uncle; and the birch-tree before the
window, who was her brother, besides her cousins in the wood. They gazed
after her sorrowfully; but she was happy with Kalev, and heeded them
not. Kalev and Linda drove on in their sledge day and night across the
snow-fields and through the pine-forests till they reached their home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-07)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="page_7_note_1"></span>[1](#page_7_fr_1) In the Finnish
*Kalevala*, Väinämöinen is represented as a culture-hero, and as the
father of his people; in Esthonia Vanemuine is usually a demi-god. He is
always the inventor and patron of music and the harp. He plays no part
in the *Kalevipoeg*, where his name is only mentioned once or twice.

<span id="page_7_note_2"></span>[2](#page_7_fr_2) If this is a
Scriptural allusion, it is almost the only one in the book. The
*Kalevipoeg* is essentially a pre-Christian poem, and nowhere exhibits
the curious mixture of pre-Christian and Christian <span
id="footnotes_page_2">p. 2</span> ideas that we meet with in many parts
of the *Kalevala*, and notably in Runo 50.

<span id="footnotes_page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="page_8_note_1"></span>[1](#page_8_fr_1) In the *Kalevala* ( =
the country of Kaleva), the hero himself does not appear in person,
though we constantly read of his sons and daughters. Some critics,
however, identify him with the dead giant, Antero Vipunen, in Runo 17 of
the *Kalevala*.

<span id="page_8_note_2"></span>[2](#page_8_fr_2) The eagle of the North
plays a conspicuous part in Finnish and Esthonian literature. It is this
bird for whose resting-place Väinämöinen spares the birch-tree, and
which afterwards rescues him from the waves and carries him to Pohjola.
In several cosmogonic ballads, too, it is the eggs of this bird and not
of the blue duck which contribute to the formation of the world: for the
Mundane Egg plays a part here as well as in other cosmogonies. The
passage in the *Kalevipoeg*, to which this note refers, corresponds
almost exactly to one in the *Kalevala* (xxx. 1-10), which ushers in the
adventures of Kullervo.

<span id="page_8_note_3"></span>[3](#page_8_fr_3) A province in Western
Esthonia, called Wiek by the Germans.

<span id="page_8_note_4"></span>[4](#page_8_fr_4) Esthonia proper;
specially applied to the north-eastern province.

<span id="page_8_note_5"></span>[5](#page_8_fr_5) God: this word is
applied to the Christian God in Esthonia, Finland, and Lapland, as well
as to the local divinities.

<span id="footnotes_page_9">p. 9</span>

<span id="page_9_note_1"></span>[1](#page_9_fr_1) There are many tales
and ballads about the miraculous birth and wooing of Salme and Linda.
(Compare Neus, *Ehstnische Volkslieder*, p. 9; Latham’s *Nationalities
of Europe*, i. p. 142.) In the story of the “Milky Way,” which commences
Part II. of this volume, Linda is represented as the daughter of Uho,
and the <span id="footnotes_page_10">p. 10</span> queen of the birds. We
also read of a blue bird, Siuru, the daughter of Taara, in the ballads.
The name Linda or Lindu is evidently derived from the word Lind, a bird.

<span id="footnotes_page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="page_10_note_1"></span>[1](#page_10_fr_1) The Sun and Moon are
both male deities in Finnish and Esthonian. In the *Kalevala* (Runo 11)
the sun, moon, and a star seek the hand of Kylliki, the fair maid of
Saari, for their sons, but she rejects them all as unceremoniously as
Salme. In the *Kanteletar* (iii. 60), a maiden called Suometar ( =
Finland’s daughter) plays a similar part. Suometar is born from a duck’s
egg, found by a young girl named Katrina.

<span id="footnotes_page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="page_13_note_1"></span>[1](#page_13_fr_1) *Muru eit*, the
meadow-queen (literally grass-mother), is regarded as one of the
tutelary divinities of the house. Esthonian houses generally stand in a
*grass field*, entered by a gate. Within the enclosure are the
storehouses, cattle-pens, and other outbuildings.

<span id="footnotes_page_14">p. 14</span>

<span id="page_14_note_1"></span>[1](#page_14_fr_1) This is somewhat
inconsistent with the rather undignified appearance of the Sun and Moon
in person a little while before.

<span id="page_14_note_2"></span>[2](#page_14_fr_2) The cross-dance is
still danced in out-of-the-way parts of the country; it is a kind of
quadrille. Four couples station themselves in such a manner as to form a
cross. The opposite pairs advance and retire several times, and then
they dance round, when the second pairs dance in the same manner, and
another dance round follows, till they have danced enough. The dance is
accompanied with a song, in which the dancers, and sometimes the
bystanders, join.

<span id="page_14_note_3"></span>[3](#page_14_fr_3) Arju or Harju
(German, Harrieu) one of the provinces of Esthonia.

<span id="footnotes_page_15">p. 15</span>

<span id="page_15_note_1"></span>[1](#page_15_fr_1) Kungla is described
as a country of untold wealth and the land of adventures—a kind of
fairyland. It appears, however, to have been a real country, separated
from Esthonia by sea, of which fabulous tales were told. Some writers
identify it with the Government of Perm; but this is improbable, as it
is generally described as an island. Others think that the island of
Gottland is meant.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
