[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-20) [Next](hoe1-22)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

## CANTO XVI <span class="small">THE VOYAGE OF THE KALEVIDE</span>

T<span class="small">HE</span> Kalevide now decided on a journey north,
to the uttermost end of the world, where it touches the sky. He imagined
that he could only reach this point by sea, and thought at first of
travelling on the wings of an eagle. Meantime, a raven directed him,
when he came to a broad expanse of blue water, to look for a place where
rushes grew on the bank, and to stamp on the ground with his right foot,
when the mouth of the earth and the strongly guarded doors would fly
open, and he would reach the end of the world.

 Then the Kalevide reflected how he had waded through every lake and
sea, and had found none too deep for him except Lake Ilma. He then
thought he would visit Finland, Norway, and the islands, where he
expected to find old friends to direct him on his journey. So he
directed Olev <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> to fell the great
oak-tree which their father and mother had planted, and which neither
sun, moon, stars, nor rain, could penetrate,<span
id="page_111_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_111_note_1) and to make the
strongest sailing vessels for exploring voyages from the trunk, warships
from the crown, merchantmen from the large branches, slave-ships from
the smaller ones, children’s boats from the splinters, and maiden’s
boats from the chips. He ordered the remainder to be used for building
towns, fortresses, and bouses for the people in various parts of the
country.

 Olev replied, “I know what to do, dear brother, if we can find a strong
man in the country able to fell the oak-tree.” The raven told them to
send out to seek for such a man, and they did so; whereupon the wise men
of Norway and Finland assembled to give them advice. But they told the
Kalevide that it was no use building a wooden ship to sail to the
world’s end, for the spirits of the Northern Lights would set it in
flames. He must build a strong vessel of iron and copper and tin.

 The Kalevide then constructed a vessel, not of <span id="page_112">p.
112</span> iron and copper, but of silver. The whole of the
ship—planking, deck, masts, and chains—was of silver, and he named the
vessel Lennuk.<span id="page_112_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_112_note_1) For
himself he provided golden armour, silver for the nobles, iron for the
crew, copper for the old men, and steel for the wise men.

 The Kalevide selected experienced sailors and many wise men to
accompany him, and they set sail joyfully towards Finland; but soon
turned, and directed their course to the far north, in the direction of
the Great Bear.

 To the north they sailed under the guidance of a wise helmsman who knew
all languages and the speech of birds and beasts. But the Finnish
sorcerers raised storms against the ship, and they were driven along for
seven days and nights, till a coast rose before them which the helmsman
declared was quite unknown to him. The son of Kalev then sprang into the
sea, swam ashore, and towed the ship after him.<span
id="page_112_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_112_note_2) The birds sang to them
that it was the poverty-stricken coast of Lapland.<span
id="page_112_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_112_note_3) They went <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> to explore the country, but wandered a long
way without meeting with any inhabitants. At last they found a solitary
cottage, where a maiden sat on the grass plot before the door spinning.
And she sang how a milkmaid once found a cock and a hen. The cock flew
away, but she caught the hen, and brought it home, where it grew up into
a proud princess who had many lovers, among whom were the sun and—“The
Kalevide,” shouted he; and the maiden screamed and fled into the house.
Then her father came to the door, and the Kalevide saluted him
courteously, and asked him the way to the world’s end. The wise man
answered that it was a vain quest. The sea had no end, and those who had
formerly attempted this quest had found their deaths on the Fire Island.
The raven had only directed them on the road to Pōrgu, but if they
wished to return home, he would be pleased to guide them.

 The Kalevide answered that he needed no pilot to show him the way home,
but would be glad if the Lapp could pilot him to the door at the World’s
End. The Lapp consented, but bargained for what was chained to the wall
at home, which the hero readily promised.

 So Varrak the Laplander took the helm and <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> steered the vessel due north for many days and nights. The
first danger they encountered was a great whirlpool,<span
id="page_114_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_114_note_1) which threatened to
engulf the ship. Then Varrak threw a small barrel overboard, wrapped in
red cloths and ornarnented with red strearners. This bait was swallowed
by a whale, which took to flight, and towed the ship to a place of
safety.

 Again they sailed on for a long distance, till they came in sight of
the Island of Fire,<span id="page_114_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_114_note_2)
where huge pillars of flame were towering up, and vast clouds of smoke
filled the air. The Kalevide wished to visit the island, but Varrak
warned him of the danger, and at length the Sulevide volunteered to land
alone. So Varrak ran the ship ashore at a spot where one mountain was
casting up flames, a second smoke, and a third boiling water, while the
burning lava ran down into the valley.

 The son of Sulev wandered on amid ashes and snowfields, amid a rain of
red-hot stones, till he <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> reached the
mouth of the volcano, when his coat caught fire and his hair and
eyebrows were singed, and he returned scorched to the ship. The Kalevide
asked if he had seen anything of the cupbearer, who had followed him;
but he had not. Then a white bird perched on the ship, and the wise
Finn, who knew the language of animals, asked for tidings of the boy.
But the bird answered that he had wandered away to a beautiful country
which lay behind the snow-mountains, where he was enjoying himself in
the company of the water-nymphs. He would return no more; let the ship
proceed on her course.<span
id="page_115_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_115_note_1)

 Next they reached a country where the birds all fed on gold and silver
and copper, and where the herbage grew as high as the pine-trees. The
Kalevide sent some of the crew ashore, under the guidance of the
magician, to view the country, while he and the Sulevide lay down on
deck to sleep in the sun, leaving the Alevide to keep watch.

 The ship’s company, headed by the magician, wandered into the country,
and, when night came, lay down to rest under a bush. Next morning the
<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> little daughter of a giant<span
id="page_116_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_116_note_1) found them asleep, and
wondering what they were, put them all into her apron, and carried them
home to her father, and scattered them before him, saying:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Look at these, O dearest father,<br />
I have brought them here to play with,<br />
For I found them in the cabbage,<br />
Where the six like fleas were lying,<br />
Stiffened in the chilly dewdrops,<br />
Sleeping ’neath a head of cabbage.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The giant<span id="page_116_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_116_note_2) wished
to test the wisdom of the strangers, so he inquired, “What walks along
the grass, steps on the edge of the fence, and walks along the sides of
the reeds?” “The bee,” replied the magician.<span
id="page_116_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_116_note_3) “What drinks from the
brooks and wells, and from the stones on the bank?” “The rainbow.” “What
comes hissing from the <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> meadow, and
rushing from the blue forest?” “The rain.” The giant was pleased with
the answers to his riddles, and told his daughter to carry the men back
to where she had found them, but the wise man asked her to take them to
the ship for fun. The maiden willingly obeyed; she leaned over the ship
like a vast cloud, shook the men out of her apron on deck, and then blew
the ship four miles out to sea, for which the Kalevide shouted back his
thanks to her.

 Now they sailed farther north, and the cold became intense, while the
spirits of the Northern Lights began their combats in the air with
silver spears and golden shields. The sailors were frightened, but the
Kalevide was pleased that they should now be able to direct their course
when they had left the sun and moon behind them.

 Next they reached an unknown shore, where the inhabitants were half men
and half dogs, and had long dog’s tails.<span
id="page_117_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_117_note_1) They were armed with
great clubs, and the Kalevide sprang ashore to fight. A <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> horse which he mounted soon fell dead under
him, but he tore up an oak by the roots and began to lay the country
waste. The wisest man of the country expostulated with him, and he
repented of his violence, and prayed to Ukko to send fish to the country
to replace the good ground which he had destroyed in his fury. Peace was
thus concluded; and the wise man told the Kalevide that the raven had
sent him on an idle quest to the gates of Pōrgu. The Kalevide then
decided to return home, and they directed the ship towards Lalli in the
bay of Lindanisa, where Olev was building a city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-22)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="page_111_note_1"></span>[1](#page_111_fr_1) Here we have the
great oak-tree mentioned in Cantos 5 and 6 reappearing in another
connection.

<span id="footnotes_page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="page_112_note_1"></span>[1](#page_112_fr_1) The Flyer.

<span id="page_112_note_2"></span>[2](#page_112_fr_2) In the present
canto the Kalevide is never spoken of as of gigantic size, unless we may
consider feats like this as implying it.

<span id="page_112_note_3"></span>[3](#page_112_fr_3) Baring Gould
considers this country to be the North Cape, but the geography of the
voyage is confused.

<span id="footnotes_page_114">p. 114</span>

<span id="page_114_note_1"></span>[1](#page_114_fr_1) The Maelström?

<span id="page_114_note_2"></span>[2](#page_114_fr_2) The commentators
identify this island with Iceland, but the voyagers were apparently on
the wrong side of Scandinavia to reach either the Maelström or Iceland.
Still we have both geysers and volcanoes in the text.

<span id="footnotes_page_115">p. 115</span>

<span id="page_115_note_1"></span>[1](#page_115_fr_1) Here the
Kalevide’s sun begins to decline, for the first of faithful companions
leaves his side, as Hylas left Heracles.

<span id="footnotes_page_116">p. 116</span>

<span id="page_116_note_1"></span>[1](#page_116_fr_1) This is Chamisso’s
Alsatian legend, “Das Riesenspielzeug,” “The Giant’s Toy,” usually
called in English translations “The Giant’s Daughter and the Peasant.”
The girl in the poem seems to have far exceeded even the Kalevide in
stature; and we may remember Gulliver’s remark respecting the
Brobdingnagians—“Who knows but that even this prodigious race of mortals
might be equally overmatched in some distant part of the world whereof
we have yet no discovery?”

<span id="page_116_note_2"></span>[2](#page_116_fr_2) Throughout this
passage the giant is usually called simply the magician, and the other
“the wise man.”

<span id="page_116_note_3"></span>[3](#page_116_fr_3) Asking riddles of
this kind was a common amusement in Northern Europe. Compare Prior’s
*Danish Ballads*, i. 185, 334.

<span id="footnotes_page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="page_117_note_1"></span>[1](#page_117_fr_1) Baring-Gould
ingeniously suggests that this country is Greenland, and that the
Dog-men are Esquimaux, clad in furs, and riding in dog-sledges. The end
of this canto is inconsequential, for the hero should have reached his
goal during this voyage, not by a land-journey afterwards.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
