[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-11) [Next](hoe1-13.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

## CANTO VII <span class="small">THE RETURN OF THE KALEVIDE</span>

T<span class="small">HE</span> Kalevide slept till the following
morning, and when at length he awoke he tried in vain to recollect the
events of the day before. He could not remember whether he had been in
Finland or on the island, or whether he had been engaged in battle. He
had no remembrance of having slain the smith’s son; but he got up
half-dazed, and walked on without stopping till he reached the seashore
on the third day afterwards. Here he found the sorcerer’s boat; so he
stepped into it, hoisted sail, and set off homewards.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Kalev’s offspring was not weary,<br />
For his back was like an oak-tree,<br />
And his shoulders gnarled and knotted,<br />
And his arms like trunks of oak-trees,<br />
And like elm-trees were his elbows,<br />
And his fingers spread like branches,<br />
And his finger-nails like boxwood,<br />
And his loins like hardened iron.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

 The Kalevide was now in high spirits, and began to sing a song, in
which he pictured himself as going on a voyage, and meeting three
shiploads of enchantresses, old and young, whose blandishments he
resisted. But as he approached the shores of Esthonia, the fresh
sea-breeze dispelled the mists that still clouded his memory, and the
blood-stained sword and the splashes of blood on his clothes bore
witness of the murder he had committed.

 About midnight he approached the small island where the maiden had
fallen into the sea, and the whole sad scene arose again before his
imagination. And now he could hear the maiden singing a sad song beneath
the waves, lamenting her sad fate, and yet more the evil lot of her
brother, who had slain the son of his father’s old friend.<span
id="page_50_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_50_note_1.md) The blood from the sword
reddened the cheeks of the maiden, and a long and terrible penance lay
before her brother.

 For a while the hero sat lost in thought, bitterly lamenting the past;
but presently he roused himself, and proceeded on his voyage, singing a
lamentation for his mother beginning:

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Where upgrows the weeping alder,<br />
And the aspen of confusion,<br />
And the pine-tree of distraction,<br />
And the deep remorse of birch-tree?<br />
Where I sorrow, springs the alder;<br />
Where I tremble, sprouts the aspen;<br />
Where I weep, the pine is verdant;<br />
Where I suffer, sighs the birch-tree.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Next morning the Kalevide reached the shore, made fast the boat, and
went homewards; but as he passed Mount Iru, where the form of his mother
stood, his steps were arrested by the sweet singing of her unseen spirit
in the wind. She sang how the young eagle had soared from the nest in
youthful innocence, and had returned stained with crime. He knew now
that his mother was dead, and realised more fully the two crimes which
weighed upon his soul—the one committed thoughtlessly and without evil
intent, and the other without his knowledge, when he was not master of
himself. He hastened on, and when he reached home his brothers, who had
long mourned him as dead, received him with open arms.

 In the evening the three brothers sat together and related their
adventures. The first sang how he had wandered in search of his mother
over vast <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> regions, and through a great
part of Courland, Poland, Russia, Germany, and Norway, and had met on
his wanderings maidens of tin, copper, silver, and gold. But only the
golden daughter of the Gold King could speak, and she directed him along
a path which would lead him to a beautiful maiden who could reply to his
question. He hurried on a long way, and at last met a rosy-cheeked
maiden of flesh and bone, who replied to his questions that she had seen
no traces of his mother, and the hawk must have flown away with her. But
she invited him to her village, where he would find plenty of rich and
beautiful maidens. He answered that he had not come to choose a wife,
but to seek his mother.

 Then the second brother sang how he also had wandered a long way, but
at last reached a cottage where he found an old man and woman, whom he
saluted and asked for tidings. They made no reply, and only the cat
mewed in answer.

 He went on farther, and met a wolf; but when he asked if he had seen
his mother, he only opened his mouth to grin at him. Next he met the
bear, who only growled, but finally the cuckoo<span
id="page_52_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_52_note_1.md) directed <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> him through a wood and across a green meadow
to some maidens who would give him information. When he reached the
spot, he found four beautiful maidens in elegant attire, who told him
that they had been wandering about the woods and meadows every day, but
had seen nothing of his mother, and they thought she must have flown
away. They recommended him to seek a wife; but he answered that a young
wife could not fill the place of his dear lost mother.

 Then the youngest brother related his adventures; but he said nothing
about the fatal brawl at the smith’s feast, nor of the sad songs of the
island-maiden and of the spirit of his mother.

 Then the eldest brother remarked that they knew not what had become of
their mother, but their parents were no more, and they must shift for
themselves, so he proposed a trial to decide which of the three should
rule as king in the land. The second brother agreed, and the third
proposed that the trial should take place next day, and be decided
according to the will of Taara.

 In the evening, before twilight had quite given way to night, the
youngest son took his handkerchief, which was wet with tears, and
climbed up <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> his father’s cairn. And his
father asked from below:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Who disturbs the sandy hillock,<br />
With his feet the grave disturbing,<br />
Stamping with his heels the gravel,<br />
And the gravestone thus disturbing?”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The hero besought his father to rise up and stroke his hair and speak
to him; but his father answered that he had long lain in his grave; his
bones were decayed, and the grass and moss grew over him, and he could
not rise. Let the wind and the sun caress his son. The son answered that
the wind only blew sometimes, and the sun only shone by day, but Taara
lives for ever. And the father told him not to weep or grieve, for the
spirit of his dead father should follow him throughout his life, and
that the good gods would protect him even through the desert wastes of
the waters of the ocean; and he also counselled him to do his best to
atone for every fault and error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-13.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_50">p. 50</span>

<span id="page_50_note_1"></span>[1](#page_50_fr_1.md) The smith is
sometimes called the uncle of Kalev; but the term may only mean that he
was an old friend.

<span id="footnotes_page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="page_52_note_1"></span>[1](#page_52_fr_1.md) The cuckoo is a
sacred bird, but more often alluded to in Finnish than in Esthonian
literature.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
