[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-16) [Next](hoe1-18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

## CANTO XII <span class="small">THE FIGHT WITH THE SORCERER’S SONS</span>

A<span class="small">S</span> the Kalevide proceeded on his way,
carrying his heavy load of planks, the sorcerer’s three sons rushed upon
him from an ambush close to a high waterfall which foams over steep
rocks. He had been walking quietly along, and the man in his wallet had
fallen comfortably asleep. The villains sprang upon the hero from
behind, armed with slender young birch-trees and dry pine-trunks. Two of
them carried long whips, the handle formed of strong beech-wood, and the
lash armed with a great millstone, with which they belaboured the hero
unmercifully. He had just armed himself with a huge club, in case he
should be assaulted in passing through the wood. It was a great
pine-trunk from which he had broken the crown. It was five-and-thirty
ells long, and two feet thick at the thick end, and with this he could
defend himself as with a sword.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

 The Kalevide tried at first to remonstrate with his assailants, but as
they continued to annoy him he rushed upon them with his club. The pine
club was soon splintered, the fragments flying in all directions, and
then the Kalevide defended himself with the planks which he was
carrying, and at every blow he smashed one on the backs of his enemies.
Presently his load was nearly exhausted, and the sorcerer’s sons, hoping
now for an easy victory, pressed him more hardly, when suddenly he heard
a little voice crying from the bushes, “Dear son of Kalev, strike them
with the edges!”<span id="page_81_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_81_note_1) The
hero at once took the hint, and, instead of striking with the flat side
of the planks, began to strike with the sharp edges, and his enemies
soon fled before him, howling like wolves. If the savages had not been
thoroughly hardened by long exposure to heat and cold by day and night,
he would have left them dead on the field.

 The Kalevide sat down to rest after the battle, and called to his dear
brother, who had aided him, to show himself. But his friend answered
<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> that he could not venture out into the
open, for he was only a poor naked little hedgehog. So the hero called
to him to come, and he would clothe him. The hedgehog crept out of his
warm nest, naked and shivering, and the hero cut a piece from the lining
of his own coat, and gave it to the hedgehog, who joyfully wrapped
himself in the warm covering. But the piece was not large enough to
cover him entirely, and his legs and belly remained naked as before.

 The Kalevide now wanted to sleep, but he was in the midst of a swamp.
He therefore fetched a load of sand from the distant sandhills, to make
himself a bed. He then felt into his bag for something to eat, when his
thumb came against the cold stiff body of his little friend, who had
been killed in his sleep by a chance blow during the fight, without
having had time to cry out or move a limb. He was much grieved at the
untimely death of his *protégé*, and dug him a grave with his own hands,
round which he planted berry-bearing bushes. Then he ate his supper and
fell asleep, to dream of the events of the past day.

 While he was asleep, the sorcerer himself crept <span id="page_83">p.
83</span> to his side, and by his spells and incantations, and the use
of magic herbs, threw him into a deep slumber, which lasted for days and
nights. Presently a messenger came in haste to summon the king, and the
cup-bearer directed him to Lake Peipus; but no one had seen or heard
anything of him.

 On a fine summer’s day, the people flocked from all parts of the
country to the sacred hill of Taara for a great festival, and as yet
there came no news of the king. Summer faded into autumn, and the
Kalevide still slept on, but he was dreaming of a new sword, much better
than the uncle of his father Kalev had forged for him, which was forged
in an underground smithy.

 This sword had been forged by the pupils of Ilmarine<span
id="page_83_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_83_note_1) in a workshop in the
interior of a great mountain at the middle point of the earth, the peak
of which was lost in the clouds. Seven strong smiths wrought it with
copper hammers, the handles of which were of silver, and one of their
company turned it on the fire or laid it on the anvil with tongs of the
purest silver, while Ilmarine himself watched every stroke of the
hammers.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 Presently a young man entered, pale and covered with blood, and he only
touched his cap without further salutation, and cried out to the workmen
not to waste the sword on the murderous son of Kalev, who could slay his
best friends in his rage. The Kalevide tried to cry out that it was
false, but the son of the old Tübja<span
id="page_84_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_84_note_1) oppressed him with a
nightmare, and he could not utter a word; he felt as if a mountain lay
upon his breast, and the sweat ran from his face.

 On the following morning the Kalevide awoke from his sleep. He knew
that the vision of the smithy was a dream, but he was not aware that he
had slept for seven weeks without intermission. He found that his planks
were nearly all destroyed, and determined to fetch a fresh load from
Pleskau.

 When he came to the lake, he heard a boy shouting for help. It was a
herd-boy, whose favourite lamb was being carried off by a wolf. He
killed the wolf with a stone,<span
id="page_84_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_84_note_2) and then stood by the lake
considering what to do next. Presently he decided to build a bridge
across the “puddle;” <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> and built it out
into the lake for perhaps a couple of miles, when a great storm arose
and swept away the unfinished structure. When he saw his work destroyed,
he said, “Why didn’t I wade straight through, as I did before, instead
of wasting my time like this?” So he caught a supply of crayfish, which
he roasted and ate, and then set out on his journey through the water.

 On the shores of Lake Peipus lived a poor orphan boy, who had lost all
dear to him by famine, pestilence, and war, and who was now compelled to
slave as herd-boy for a hard mistress,<span
id="page_85_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_85_note_1) and to mind the children
as well as to look after the sheep and goats. He sang sad songs, till at
length the wood-nymph took compassion on him, and sang to him one
evening from the summit of an oak-tree, telling him that good luck would
be his in the morning. Next morning he found a lark’s egg hidden among
leaves, which he hid in his bosom next his heart wrapped in wool and a
strip of linen. A mouse was hatched from it, which he fostered in the
same way till it became <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> a kitten, a
puppy, a lamb, and at length a sheep<span
id="page_86_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_86_note_1) with fine white wool, and
the sheep was so dear to the boy that he left off weeping and lamenting,
and always felt happy and contented, though his lot was still a hard
one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_81">p. 81</span>

<span id="page_81_note_1"></span>[1](#page_81_fr_1) This reminds us of
the help given to Hiawatha by the woodpecker during his fight with
Megissogwun; but the one incident can hardly be copied from the other.
*Hiawatha* was published some years before the *Kalevipoeg*.

<span id="footnotes_page_83">p. 83</span>

<span id="page_83_note_1"></span>[1](#page_83_fr_1) This is the only
passage in the *Kalevipoeg* in which one of the heroes of the *Kalevala*
is personally introduced.

<span id="footnotes_page_84">p. 84</span>

<span id="page_84_note_1"></span>[1](#page_84_fr_1) Emptiness; probably
the Contemptible One; a name often used for one of the principal demons.

<span id="page_84_note_2"></span>[2](#page_84_fr_2) The rock is still
shown, bearing the imprints of the hero’s fingers, each cleft large
enough to hold a man.

<span id="footnotes_page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="page_85_note_1"></span>[1](#page_85_fr_1) This was the fate of
Kullervo himself in the Kalevala. Orphans, for whom much sympathy is
expressed, constantly appear in Esthonian tales. Compare p. 236 of the
present volume.

<span id="footnotes_page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="page_86_note_1"></span>[1](#page_86_fr_1) We have a similar
series of transformations (mouse, cat, dog, ass, buffalo) in the story
of Noor Ed-Deen and Shes Ed-Deen in the *Thousand and One Nights*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
