[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-02) [Next](hoe1-04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

## INTRODUCTION

### ESTHONIA

E<span class="small">STHONIA</span>, or Estonia, as some prefer to write
it, is the most northerly of the three so-called German or Baltic
provinces of Russia—Esthonia, Livonia, and Courland. It is bounded on
the north by the Gulf of Finland, which lies between that country and
Esthonia; on the east by the Government of St. Petersburg; on the south
by Livonia, and on the west by the Baltic. Opposite its western coast
lie numerous large islands, the most important of which are Dagö and
Oesel; these islands nearly close the north-west corner of the Gulf of
Riga.

 The northern part of Livonia (including the island of Oesel, already
mentioned) is partly inhabited by Esthonians, and is dealt with in
popular literature as forming part of the country. The four provinces of
Esthonia proper, which are constantly referred to, <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> are as follows, the German names being added
in brackets. Two western, Arju or Harju (Harrien) on the north, and
Lääne (Wiek) on the south; one central, Järva (Jerwen), and one eastern,
Viru (Wierland). East of Livonia lies the great Lake Peipse or Peipus,
eighty miles long and thirty-two miles broad at the broadest part,
across which the son of Kalev is said to have waded to fetch timber from
Pihgast or Pleskau, which name is used to include the Russian province
of Pskov, bordering the lake on the south and south-east. At two-thirds
of its length the lake is divided nearly in two, and the southern
portion is sometimes called Lake Pskov. It may have been across the
narrow part between the two ends of the lake that the hero is supposed
to have waded, when, even during a great storm, the water reached only
to his girdle.

 The coast of Esthonia is rocky, but the interior of the country is very
marshy, though there are no navigable rivers or lakes of much importance
except Lake Peipus, which we have already mentioned. Small lakes,
however, are very numerous, the largest being Lake Virts.

 Esthonia was one of the countries conquered during the Middle Ages by
the crusading German <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> Knights of the
Sword, and has been described as a country with a Finnish population and
a German aristocracy under Russian rule. Occasionally we meet with
reminiscences of oppression by the German nobility in the songs and
tales; as, for instance, in the story of the Royal Herd-boy; while
everything beautiful or above the ordinary life of the peasants is
characterised as Saxon.

 The bulk of the population speak a language very closely allied to
Finnish, and they possess a large store of oral literature, much of
which has been collected, and in part published, during the present
century. It has, however, attracted very little attention out of
Esthonia, except in Finland, and to some extent in Germany, and very few
articles on the subject have appeared in England or France. It is
believed that this is the first work published in England giving any
detailed account of the popular literature of Esthonia, and it does not
pretend to be exhaustive, nor to extend much beyond the publication of
Kreutzwald, Neus, and Jannsen.

 The Finnish-Ugrian race, though not Aryan, is widely distributed
throughout Europe and Asiatic Russia, and the principal peoples
belonging to it <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> in the North are the
Finns, the Esthonians, and the Lapps, who speak very similar languages,
and whose tales and legends possess much similarity, while in the south
the Magyars are more distantly related to them. The Lapp hero-tales,
however, have more of a historical basis, while the popular tales are
much shorter and less artistic. It is, however, curious that Swan-maiden
stories are peculiarly common among the Lapps. Several other lesser
known peoples belong to the same race, whom we need not further notice.

 Esthonian abounds in dialects, but is so close to Finnish that it bears
almost the same relation to it as Lowland Scotch to English, or perhaps
as Danish to Swedish. But there is a strong admixture of German words in
Esthonian, and their tales, when exhibiting traces of foreign influence,
have apparently derived it from Germany. In Finnish tales, on the
contrary, Russian influence is often very apparent.

 The orthography is a little unsettled, words like Ukko or Kalev being
often written with a single or double consonant, as Uko or Kallev; while
words like Käpä are often written with double vowels, as Kääpä.

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

 The pronunciation of most of the letters resembles that of English, or,
in the case of the vowels, German, and calls for no special remark.

 *j* as in nearly all languages except English and French, corresponds
to our *y*.

 *v* is printed either *v* or *w* in Finnish and Esthonian, but
corresponds to our *v*, and is thus used by the best Finnish
authorities. Of course the Germans properly write it *w*, their *w*
corresponding to our *v*.

 For the modified vowels we have no exact equivalent in English; *ä* and
*ü* are pronounced nearly as in German; but the *ō* may roughly be said
to resemble our *ee* in sound. *y* has somewhat of a *u* sound, as in
the Scandinavian languages; and, as in these too, the modified vowels
are placed at the end of the alphabet, but in the following order: *ü*,
*ä*, *ō*. Musical as is Finnish itself, Esthonian is still softer, as
may be seen in the dropping of final consonants, as Vanemuine for
Väinämöinen; and in such words as *kannel* (harp) for *kantele*. As in
most parts of Northern Europe, the Gothic character is still much used
in Finland and Esthonia, especially in literary works.

 As a specimen of the language we may quote the original of the lines on
p. 14:—

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small"> Ristitantsi tantsitie,<br />
 Viru tantsi veeritie,<br />
 Arju tantsi hakkatie,<br />
 Lääne tantsi lōhutie,<br />
 Sōre liiva sōtkutie,<br />
 Murupinda piinatie.<br />
Tähte peig ja Salme neidu,<br />
Pidasivad pulma ilu!</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 We may add the text of the lines on p. 49:—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small"> Kalevide poeg ei väsi;<br />
 Piht on meehel pihlakane,<br />
 Ōlanukud ōunapuusta,<br />
 Käevarred vahterased,<br />
 Küünarnukud künnapuusta,<br />
 Sōrmelülid sōsterased,<br />
 Sōrmeküüned kuuslapuused,<br />
 Raudarammu kōiges kehas.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### THE KALEVIPOEG

 In the year 1838 some Esthonian scholars founded a society called “*Die
gelehrte Ehstnische Gesellschaft*,” and set themselves to collect the
popular literature of their country. Doubtless encouraged by the recent
publication of the *Kalevala* in Finland, Dr. Fahlmann undertook
specially to collect any fragments of verse or prose relative to the
mythical <span id="page_xix">p. xix</span> hero of Esthonia, the son of
Kalev, intending to weave them into a connected whole. He did not live
to complete the work; but after his death Dr. Kreutzwald carried out his
design, and the book was published, accompanied by a German translation
by Reinthal and Bertram, from 1857 to 1861.

 The materials were defective, and were augmented and pieced together,
not always very successfully or artistically,<span
id="page_xix_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xix_note_1) by Dr. Kreutzwald, and
the story is interrupted by long lyrical passages, especially at the
beginning of some of the cantos, which are tedious and out of place in a
narrative poem. Consequently, a complete translation would hardly be
sufficiently attractive; but there is so much that is curious and
beautiful in the poem, that I think that a tolerably full prose abstract
may perhaps be found both useful and interesting, as opening up an
almost new subject to English readers.

 Besides Reinthal’s translation, there are two condensed abstracts of
the poem in German, one by C. C. Israel, in prose, published in 1873,
and the other by Julius Grosse, in hexameters, published in 1875. <span
id="page_xx">p. xx</span> But while the *Kalevala* has been translated
into six or seven languages, and into several of them two or three
times, extremely little has been published on the *Kalevipoeg* outside
of Esthonia and Finland.

 The metre is the eight-syllable trochaic, which is the commonest metre
used by the Esthonians and Finns. In the *Kalevipoeg* the verse usually
flows continuously, while in the *Kalevala* it is arranged in distichs,
almost every second line being a repetition of the first in other words;
nor is the *Kalevipoeg* quite so full of alliteration as the *Kalevala*.

 Longfellow adapted this metre in his *Hiawatha* from Schiefner’s German
translation of the *Kalevala*, and as it was then a novelty in English,
it was set down at the time as Longfellow’s own invention, and was much
ridiculed. A similar metre, however, was used before the appearance of
*Hiawatha* in some parts of Kenealy’s *Goethe*, which was published in
1850, and subsequently condensed and completed under the title of “A New
Pantomime.” I quote a passage from this wonderful but eccentric poem
(*Goethe*, p. 301) to show the manner in which Kenealy has used it in
the lighter parts of his work; but in some of the darker passages it
shows itself as a versatile metre of great power in English:—

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small"> “We have come, enchanting ladyes,<br />
 To sojourn awhile, and revel<br />
 In these bowers, far outshining<br />
 The six heavens of Mohammed,<br />
 Or the sunbright spheres of Vishnu,<br />
 Or the Gardens of Adonis,<br />
 Or the viewless bowers of Irim,<br />
 Or the fine Mosaic mythus,<br />
 Or the fair Elysian flower-land,<br />
 Or the clashing halls of Odin,<br />
 Or the cyclop-orbs of Brahma,<br />
 Or the marble realms of Siva,<br />
 Or the grandly proud Walhalla.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 I do not find this metre used in either of the two cognate poems,
*Faust* and *Festus*.

 To return to the *Kalevipoeg*, the poem consists of twenty cantos and
about 19,000 verses. Some of the legends are found also in the
*Kalevala*, and the giant-hero whose life and adventures form its
subject is evidently the same as the Kullervo of the *Kalevala*, as will
be seen in our notes on various passages in the poem.

 Of the other heroes of the *Kalevala*, besides an occasional reference
to Vanemuine and Ilmarine (Väinämöinen and Ilmarinen), we find no trace;
but three heroes, apparently cousins of the Kalevipoeg, appear suddenly
in the poem. These are usually <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>
called by their patronymics, Alevide, Sulevide, and Olevide, but
sometimes simply Alev, Sulev, and Olev.

### FOLK-TALES IN PROSE

 The most important collection of Esthonian prose tales was edited by
Kreutzwald, and was published by the Finnish Literary Society at
Helsingfors in 1866, under the title of *Eestirahwa Ennemuistesed
jutud*, and has since been reprinted at Dorpat. In 1869 the same Society
published a useful little Esthonian-Finnish glossary to the volume. A
good German translation of many of these tales, by F. Löwe, appeared at
Halle in 1869, under the title of *Ehstnische Märchen*, with notes by
various contributors; and M. Dido, who has lately translated two or
three of the tales into French, and given more or less detailed notices
of the others, mentions that they have also been translated into
Russian. Other collections of Esthonian tales have since been published;
and Harry Jannsen has published a selection in German under the title of
*Märchen und Sagen des estnischen Volkes* (Dorpat, 1881; Riga, 1888).
Some of his tales are taken from Kreutzwald, <span id="page_xxiii">p.
xxiii</span> but I have not seen the Esthonian originals of the others.
Many of the longer and more interesting tales in those collections I
have given in full; others are more or less abridged, or simply noticed,
and some few unimportant tales towards the end of Kreutzwald’s
collection have been passed over altogether.

 One of Kreutzwald’s longer tales, which I thought too unlike the others
to be noticed in the body of the work, is, “How Seven Tailors went to
war in Turkey.” Their names were, “First-man, One-strong, Two-strong,
Three-strong, Four-strong, Five-strong, and Last-man;” and the story
gives a comic account of their poltrooneries.

 Other tales relate to a plot against a chaste wife; a girl who clears
herself from scandal by lifting and hurling a huge stone; &c.

### BALLADS AND OTHER SHORT POEMS

 The plan of the present work did not allow of many short poetical
pieces being included; nevertheless, two of the best of the numerous
songs and ballads interspersed through the *Kalevipoeg* have been given,
and two other specimens from <span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> Neus’
*Ehstnische Volkslieder* (Revel, 1850-1852) and Kreutzwald and Neus’
*Mythische und Magische Lieder der Ehsten* (St. Petersburg, 1854). More
poetical specimens were thought unnecessary, because many of the
principal ballads in the former work will be found translated in
Latham’s “Nationalities of Europe,” 1863.

### PASTOR HURT’S COLLECTIONS

 In recent years enormous collections of Esthonian folk-lore have been
formed by Pastor Jacob Hurt and his coadjutors.

 “Three volumes of these collections were edited by Hurt in 1875, 1876,
and 1886, under the title of *Vana Kannel*, the ‘Old Harp;’ and other
collections were published by several of his colleagues. In 1888 Hurt
made a renewed appeal to the Esthonians to collect their old songs, and
fresh contributions came pouring in from all quarters.

 “Special attention was called to Pastor Hurt’s work at the Congress of
Folk-lorists in Paris by Henry Camoy.

 “According to the latest intelligence which I have received from Dr.
Krohn, Pastor Hurt has received <span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>
contributions from 633 different folk-tale collectors in the last three
and a half years. Most of these contributors are simple peasants; some
are school-masters, but only a few are students or highly educated
persons.

 “He now possesses, as the result of three and a half years’ work of
this nature, epics, lyrics, wedding-songs, &c., upwards of 20,000 items;
tales, about 3000; proverbs, about 18,000; riddles, about 20,000.
Besides these he has a large collection of magical formulæ,
superstitions, &c.

 “He has only been able to accomplish these extraordinary results by his
having been able to awaken popular interest in the subject.”<span
id="page_xxv_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xxv_note_1)

 I am glad to hear from my friend Dr. Kaarle Krohn, to whom I have been
indebted for much useful information and assistance in my own studies,
that part of the results of these great collections are likely to be
published very shortly. Of course a great number of tales and songs are
merely variants. Many relate to legends belonging rather to the
*Kalevala* than to the *Kalevipoeg*.

 In Dr. Krohn’s important paper, *Die geographische* <span
id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span> *Verbreitung Estnischer Lieder*, published
in 1892, he divides Esthonia and Northern Livonia into several
districts, and marks the number of variants obtained in each. It may be
interesting to summarise the latter, to show the extent to which the
collection of variants has been carried on in Esthonia.

 1. Legend of the creation of the earth and of the origin of the
heavenly bodies, 62 variants.

 2. Salme and her suitors, 160 variants; and 33 relative to the
celestial suitors.

 3. The Great Ox, 24 variants.

 4. The Great Oak, 130 variants, and 61 relative to its fragments.

 5. The Weeping Oak, 61 variants.

 6. The origin of the harp and of boating, three variations, with 19,
39, and 17 variants respectively.

 7. The bride of gold and silver, 52 variants.

 8. Songs of the Seluks or Orthodox Esths, 91 variants.

### MYTHOLOGY

 We can, I think, trace Finnish and Esthonian religion through four
well-marked stages.

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

 1. Fetishism, as seen in the story of the Treasure-Bringer, and in the
account given of the origin of various animals, &c.

 2. Nature-worship.

 3. Transitional stage, well marked in the *Kalevala*, where the heroes
sometimes pray to the gods in conventional Christian phraseology, and at
other times try to compel their assistance by invocations and spells.
This stage is also seen in the strange travesty of the Nativity in the
last Runo of the *Kalevala*; and indeed, one of the older writers says
that the favourite deities of the Finns in his time were Väinämöinen and
the Virgin Mary. But this stage is much less visible in the
*Kalevipoeg*, which is, on the whole, a more archaic and more heathenish
poem than the *Kalevala*.

 4. Mediæval Christianity.

 The gods belong to the stage of Nature-worship. The supreme god is
Taara, to whom the oak is sacred. The most celebrated of his sacred
oak-forests was in the neighbourhood of Dorpat. Thursday is his day;
whence it is more often mentioned in popular tales than any other day in
the week. He is also called Uko or Ukko (the Old God), by which name he
is usually known in the <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>
*Kalevala*; and also Vana Isa, or Old Father. The Christian God is
called Jumal or Jumala, and is probably to be identified with Taara.
Ukko or Tarra is the ancestor and protector of the heroes; he attended
with Rōugutaja at the birth of the Kalevipoeg, watched over and
protected him during his life, sometimes appeared to counsel him in
visions, received him in his heavenly halls after death, and assigned to
him his future employment.

 Ukko’s daughters are Lindu and Jutta, the queens of the birds; and
Siuru, who is described as a blue bird herself. Possibly these may be
all the same; and the first at least may be identical with Kalev’s
bride, Linda, who was born from an egg, and whose name is evidently
derived from *lind* or *lindu*, a bird.

 Äike, Kōu, Paristaja, Pikne, Piker, or Pikker, is the god of thunder,
and some of his names connect him with the Lithuanian Perkunas. He
thunders across the iron bridges of the skies in his chariot, and hurls
his thunderbolts at the demons, like Thor. He also possesses a musical
instrument, ofwhich the demons stand in great terror. He has a
ne’er-do-weel son, who has dealings with the Devil, and a mischievous
little daughter, called the Air-Maiden.

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

 Ahti, the god of the waters, is mentioned occasionally, but much less
frequently than Ahto in the *Kalevala*. He must not be confounded with
Ahti, one of the names of the hero Lemminkainen in the latter poem.

 Rōugutaja is the god of the winds and waves, and attends specially on
births. In one story, however, he appears rather in the character of a
morose wood-demon with very undesirable family connections than as a
god. This is very probably due to missionary efforts to malign his
character and discredit his worship. However, there is a class of
magicians who are called Wind-sorcerers, and witches often invoke the
aid of the Mother of the Wind.

 An old man, with one eye and a long grey beard, often appears to
travellers in the forests. He is probably the Finnish Tapio, but is not
named. The sun, moon, and stars are represented as male deities.

 Goddesses preside over the woods, fields, waters, &c. Thus we have the
Meadow-Queen (literally, Grass-mother), who presides over the
home-field, and is therefore one of the protecting deities of the
household. She is also the queen of the woods and fields. The
Wind-mother and Water-mother are <span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>
similar deities, and the wood-nymphs and water-nymphs are their
daughters.

 Vanemuine, the Väinämöinen of the Finns, is the god of song and music,
rather than the patriarch and culture-hero of the *Kalevala*. All voices
and sounds in nature are only echoes of his music. He has a
foster-daughter, Jutta, of whom we have given an account elsewhere.

 Ilmarine (Finnish, Ilmarinen) is a great smith, whose workshop is under
a mountain at the centre of the earth.

 The Devil has many names, being called Kurat, the Evil One; Tühi or
Tühja, the Empty One, or rather, perhaps, the Contemptible One; but most
often Vana Pois, the Old Boy; God being frequently called Vana Isa, the
Old Father. He dwells in the underground kingdom, and has three
daughters, or foster-daughters; a hat of invisibility, composed of
nail-parings; a bridge-building wand, and a sword. He has also much gold
and silver plate, and ducks and geese with gold and silver plumage.
These treasures are often carried off by enterprising heroes. The
maidens whom the Kalevipoeg found in the palace of Sarvik do not appear
to have been at all unkindly treated, though they had to work <span
id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span> hard, and much regretted that they had no
human company.

 Another Devil, more prominent in the *Kalevipoeg*, is Vana Sarvik, or
Old Hornie, who is represented as Tühi’s brother-in-law.

 The Devil’s underground kingdom is called Pōrgu, or Hell. His mother
usually appears in the form of a bitch, and his grandmother under that
of a white mare. The minor Esthonian devils are usually stupid rather
than malevolent. They are sometimes ogres or soul-merchants, but are at
times quite ready to do a kindness, or to return one to those who aid
them. Their great enemies are the Thunder-God and the wolf. The
principal outwitter of the devil is generally called Crafty Hans; and
several volumes of their adventures have been published in Esthonian.
The Devil is often represented as fond of beer.

 Besides the above-named gods and demons, we have spirits of the
whirlwind and the Northern Lights; gnomes; and a host of inferior
demons, as well as various grades of sorcerers, especially
Wind-sorcerers, Word-sorcerers, or soothsayers, and Death-sorcerers, or
necromancers. The Tont, or House-Spirit, goes by various names; among
others Kratt or Puuk. Kratt is perhaps a word <span id="page_xxxii">p.
xxxii</span> of Scandinavian or German origin; Puuk must be the same as
our Puck, or the Irish Pouka. He was probably originally a beneficent
house-spirit, and in later times assumed the demoniacal character in
which he appears in the story of the Treasure-Bringer. In the story of
“Martin and his Dead Master,” we have a spectre much resembling a
vampyre in character.

 The gigantic race of the heroes is represented as descended from Taara.
As in the case of so many other hero-races—as, for example, the knights
of Arthur, Finn, Charlemagne, Vladimir, Palmerin, &c.—they are at length
practically destroyed in a series of terrible battles, while the
Kalevipoeg, like Arthur, Olger, Barbarossa, and Tell; remains in
enchanted bondage till the day shall come for him to restore the ancient
glories of his country.<span
id="page_xxxii_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxii_note_1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span id="page_xix_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xix_fr_1) This is specially
noticeable in the manner in which the story of the Great Oak Tree is
scattered in disjointed fragments through three cantos; and in the
unsuccessful result of the Kalevide’s voyage, when he reaches his goal
after his return by a land journey.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span id="page_xxv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxv_fr_1) Kirby in “Papers
and Transactions of International Folk-lore Congress of 1891,” p. 429.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span id="page_xxxii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxii_fr_1) Further
information on most of the subjects discussed in the Introduction will
be found in the Notes and Index.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
