[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-29) [Next](hoe1-31)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

## SLYBOOTS. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

I<span class="small">N</span> the days of the son of Kalev there reigned
a very rich king of Kungla, who gave a great feast to his subjects every
seven years at midsummer, which lasted for two or three weeks
together.<span id="page_187_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_187_note_1) The time
for the feast came round again, and its commencement had been looked
forward to for some months, though with some uncertainty; for twice
already, seven years ago and fourteen years ago, the anticipated
festival had come to nothing. Both times the king had made full
preparations for the feast, but no man had tasted it. This seemed
strange and incredible, but there were many people everywhere who could
bear witness to the facts. It was said that on both these occasions an
unknown stranger had come to the head-cook and asked to be permitted to
taste a little of the food and drink, but the moment he had dipped his
spoon in the soup-kettle, and put the froth in the beer-can to his <span
id="page_188">p. 188</span> mouth, the whole contents of the
storehouses, pantries, and cellars vanished in a moment, so that not a
scrap or drop of anything remained.<span
id="page_188_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_188_note_1) The cooks and
kitchen-boys had all seen and sworn to the truth of the matter, but the
people were so enraged at the collapse of the feast, that the king was
obliged to appease them seven years before, by ordering the head-cook to
be hanged for having given the stranger permission to taste the food. In
order to prevent any repetition of the trouble, the king proclaimed that
he would richly reward any one who would undertake the preparation of
the feast; and at length, when no one would undertake the
responsibility, the king promised his youngest daughter in marriage to
any one who should succeed, but added that failure would be punished
with death.

 A long way from the capital, and near the borders of the kingdom, lived
a rich farmer who had three sons, the youngest of whom showed great
intelligence from his youth, because the Meadow-Queen<span
id="page_188_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_188_note_2) had nursed him, and had
often secretly given him the breast. The father called <span
id="page_189">p. 189</span> him Slyboots, and used to say to the
brothers, “You two elder ones must earn your living by your bodily
strength and by the work of your hands, but as for you, little Slyboots,
you will be able to rise higher in the world than your brothers, by your
own cleverness.”

 Before the father died, he divided all his corn-land and meadows
between his two elder sons, but to the youngest he gave enough money to
enable him to go forth into the wide world to seek his fortune. But the
father’s corpse was scarcely cold when the two elder brothers stripped
the youngest of every farthing, and thrust him out of the door, saying
mockingly, “Your cleverness alone, Slyboots, is to exalt you over our
heads, and therefore you might find the money troublesome to you.”

 The youngest brother scorned to notice the ill-treatment of his
brothers, and went cheerfully on his way. “Good fortune may come from
God,” was the comforting reflection which he took with him from his
father’s house, and he whistled away his sad thoughts. Just as he was
beginning to feel hungry, he encountered two travelling journeymen. His
pleasant countenance and cheerful talk pleased them, and when they
rested, they shared <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> their provisions
with him, so that Slyboots did not fare so badly on the first day. He
parted from his companions before evening quite contented, for his
present comfort left him without anxiety for the morrow. He could sleep
anywhere with the green grass for a couch and the blue sky above, and a
stone under his head served as well as a soft pillow. Next morning he
set out on his way again, and arrived at a lonely farm, where a young
woman was sitting at the door, weeping bitterly. Slyboots asked what was
her trouble, and she answered, “I have a bad husband, who beats me every
day if I cannot humour his mad freaks. He has ordered me to-day to cook
him a fish which is not a fish, and which has eyes, but not in its head.
Where in the world shall I find such a creature?” “Don’t cry, young
woman,” answered Slyboots “Your husband wants a crab, which is a
water-animal to be sure, but is not a fish, and which has eyes, but not
in its head.” The woman thanked him for his good advice, and gave him
something to eat, and a bag of provisions which would last him for
several days. As soon as he received this unexpected assistance, he
determined to set out for the royal capital, where cleverness <span
id="page_191">p. 191</span> was likely to be in most request, and where
he hoped to make his fortune.

 Wherever he went, he heard every one talking of the king’s midsummer
banquet, and when he heard of the reward which was offered to the man
who should prepare the feast, he began to reflect whether he might not
be able to accomplish the adventure. “If I succeed,” said he to himself,
“I shall find myself at a stroke on the highway to fortune; and in the
worst case of all, I shall only lose my life, and we must all die sooner
or later. If I begin in the right way, why shouldn’t I succeed? Perhaps
I may be more fortunate than others. And even if the king should refuse
me his daughter, he must at least give me the promised reward in money,
which will make me a rich man.”

 Buoyed up with such thoughts, he pursued his journey, singing and
whistling like a lark, sometimes resting under the shadow of a bush
during the heat of the day, and sleeping at night under a tree or in the
open fields. One morning he finished the last remains of his provisions,
and in the evening he arrived safe and sound at the city.

 Next day he craved audience of the king. The king saw that he had to
deal with an intelligent and <span id="page_192">p. 192</span>
enterprising man, and it was easy for them to come to terms. “What is
your name?” asked the king. The man of brains replied, “My baptismal
name is Nicodemus, but I was always called Slyboots at home, to show
that I did not fall on my head.” “I will leave you your name,” returned
the king, “but your head must answer for all mischief if the affair
should go wrong.”

 Slyboots asked the king to give him seven hundred workmen, and set
about his preparations without delay. He ordered twenty large sheds to
be constructed, and arranged in a square like a series of large
cowhouses, so that a great open space was left in the middle, to which
led one single large gate. He ordered great cooking-pots and caldrons to
be built in the rooms which were to be heated, and the ovens were
furnished with iron spits, where meat and sausages could be roasted.
Other sheds were furnished with great boilers and vats for brewing beer,
so that the boilers were above and the vats below. Other houses without
fireplaces were fitted up as storehouses for cold provisions, such as
black bread, barm bracks, white bread, &c. All needful stores, such as
flour, groats, meat, salt, lard, butter, &c., were brought into the
<span id="page_193">p. 193</span> open space, and fifty soldiers were
stationed before the door, so that nothing should be touched by the
finger of any thief. The king came every day to view the preparations,
and praised the skill and forethought of Slyboots. Besides all this,
several dozen bakehouses were built in the open air, and a special guard
of soldiers was stationed before each. They slaughtered for the feast a
thousand oxen, two hundred calves, five hundred swine, ten thousand
sheep, and many more small animals, which were driven together in flocks
from all quarters. Stores of provisions were constantly brought by river
in boats and barges, and by land in waggons, and this went on without
intermission for several weeks. Seven thousand hogsheads were brewed of
beer alone. Although the seven hundred assistants toiled late and early,
and many additional labourers were engaged, yet most of the toil and
trouble fell upon Slyboots, who was obliged to look sharply after the
others at every point. He had warned the cooks, the bakers, and the
brewers, in the most stringent manner, not to allow any strange mouth to
taste the food or drink, and any one who broke this command was
threatened with the gallows. If such a greedy stranger should make his
appearance <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> anywhere, he was to be
brought immediately to the superintendent of the preparations.

 On the morning of the first day of the feast, word was brought to
Slyboots that an unknown old man had come into one of the kitchens, and
asked the cook to allow him to taste a little from the soup-kettle with
a spoon, which the cook could not permit him to do on his own
responsibility. Slyboots ordered the stranger to be brought before him,
and presently he beheld a little old man with grey hair, who humbly
begged to be allowed to taste the food and drink prepared for the
banquet. Slyboots told him to come into one of the kitchens, when he
would gratify his wish if it were possible. As they went, he scanned the
old man sharply, to see whether he could not detect something strange
about him. Presently he observed a shining gold ring on the ring-finger
of the old man’s left hand. When they reached the kitchen, Slyboots
asked, “What security can you give me that no harm shall come of it if I
let you taste the food?” “My lord,” answered the stranger, “I have
nothing to offer you as a pledge.” Slyboots pointed to the fine gold
ring and demanded that as a pledge. The old fellow resisted with all his
might, <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> protesting that the ring was a
token of remembrance from his dead wife, and he had vowed never to take
it from his hand, lest some misfortune should happen. “Then it is quite
impossible for me to grant your request,” said Slyboots, “for I cannot
permit any one to taste either the food or drink without a pledge.” The
old man was so anxious about it that at last he gave his ring as a
pledge.

 Just as he was about to dip his spoon in the pot, Slyboots struck him
so heavy a blow on the head with the flat of an axe, that it might have
felled the strongest ox; but the old fellow did not fall, but only
staggered a little. Then Slyboots seized him by the beard with both
hands, and ordered strong ropes to be brought, with which he bound the
old man hand and foot, and hung him up by the legs to a beam. Then
Slyboots said to him mockingly, “You may wait there till the feast is
over, and then we will resume our conversation. Meantime, I’ll keep your
ring, on which your power depends, as a token.” The old man was obliged
to submit, whether he liked it or not, for he was bound so firmly that
he could not move hand or foot. Then the great feast began, to which the
people <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> flocked in thousands from all
quarters. Although the feasting lasted for three whole weeks, there was
no want of either food or drink, for there was plenty and to spare.

 The people were much pleased, and had nothing but praise for the king
and the manager of the feast. When the king was about to pay Slyboots
the promised reward, he answered, “I have still a little business to
transact with the stranger before I receive my reward.” Then he took
seven strong men with him, armed with heavy cudgels, and took them to
the place where the old man had been hanging for the last three weeks.
“Now, then,” said Slyboots, “grasp your cudgels firmly, and belabour the
old man so that he shall never forget his hospitable reception for the
rest of his life.” The seven men began to whack the old man all at once,
and would soon have made an end of his life, if the rope had not given
way under their blows. The little man fell down, and vanished
underground in an instant, leaving a wide opening behind him. Then said
Slyboots, “I have his pledge, with which I must follow him. Bring the
king a thousand greetings from me, and tell him to divide my reward
among the poor, if I should not return.”

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

 He then crept downwards through the hole in which the old man had
disappeared. At first he found the pathway very narrow, but it widened
considerably at the depth of a few fathoms, so that he was able to
advance easily. Steps were hewn in the rock, so that he did not slip,
notwithstanding the darkness. Slyboots went on for some distance, till
he came to a door. He looked through a crack, and saw three young
girls<span id="page_197_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_197_note_1) sitting with
the old man, whose head was resting on the lap of one of them. The girl
was saying, “If I only rub the bruise a few times more with the
bell,<span id="page_197_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_197_note_2) the pain and
swelling will disappear.” Slyboots thought, “That is certainly the place
where I struck the old man with the back of the axe three weeks ago.” He
decided to wait behind the door till the master of the house had lain
down to sleep and the fire was extinguished. Presently the old man said,
“Help me into my room, that I may go to bed, for my body is quite out of
joint, and I can’t move hand or foot.” Then <span id="page_198">p.
198</span> they brought him to his room. When it grew dark, and the
girls had left the room, Slyboots crept gently in, and hid himself
behind the beer-barrel.<span
id="page_198_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_198_note_1)

 Presently the girls came back, and spoke gently, so as not to rouse the
old man. “The bruise on the head is of no consequence,” said one, “and
the sprained body will also soon be cured, but the loss of the ring of
strength is irreparable, and this troubles the old man more than his
bodily sufferings.” Soon afterwards they heard the old man snoring, and
Slyboots came out of his hiding-place and made friends with the maidens.
At first they were rather frightened, but the clever youth soon
contrived to dispel their alarm, and they allowed him to stay there for
the night. The maidens told him that the old man possessed two great
treasures, a magic sword and a rod of rowan-wood, and he resolved to
possess himself of both. The rod would form a bridge over the sea for
its possessor, and he who bore the sword could destroy the most numerous
army.<span id="page_198_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_198_note_2) On the
following evening <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> Slyboots contrived
to seize upon the wand and the sword, and escaped before daybreak with
the help of the youngest girl. But the passage had disappeared from
before the door, and in its place he found a large enclosure, beyond
which was a broad sea.

 As soon as Slyboots was gone the girls began to quarrel, and their loud
talking woke up the old man. He learned from what they said that a
stranger had been there, and he rose up in a passion, and found the wand
and sword gone. “My best treasures are stolen!” he roared, and,
forgetting his bruises, he rushed out. Slyboots was still sitting on the
beach, thinking whether he should try the power of the wand, or seek for
a dry path. Suddenly he heard a rushing sound behind him like a gust of
wind. When he looked round, he saw the old man charging upon him like a
madman. He sprang up, and had just time to strike the waves with the
rod, and to cry out, “Bridge before, water behind!” He had scarcely
spoken, when he found himself standing on a bridge <span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> over the sea, already at some distance from
the shore.<span id="page_200_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_200_note_1)

 The old man came to the beach panting and puffing, but stopped short
when he saw the thief on the bridge over the sea. He called out,
snuffling, “Nicodemus, my son, where are you going?” “Home, papa,” was
the reply. “Nicodemus, my son, you struck me on the head with an axe,
and hung me up to a beam by the legs.” “Yes, papa.” “Nicodemus, my son,
did you call seven men to beat me, and steal my gold ring from me?”
“Yes, papa.” “Nicodemus, my son, have you bamboozled my daughters?”
“Yes, papa.” “Nicodemus, my son, have you stolen my sword and wand?”
“Yes, papa.” “Nicodemus, my son, will you come back?” “Yes, papa,”
answered Slyboots again. Meantime he had advanced so far on the bridge,
that he could no longer hear the old man speak. When he had crossed the
sea, he inquired the nearest way to the royal city, and hastened thither
to claim his reward.

 But lo! he found everything very different from what he had expected.
Both his brothers had <span id="page_201">p. 201</span> entered the
service of the king, one as a coach man and the other as a chamberlain.
Both were living in grand style and were rich people. When Slyboots
applied to the king for his reward, the latter answered, “I waited for
you for a whole year, and I neither saw nor heard anything of you. I
supposed you were dead, and was about to divide your reward among the
poor, as you desired. But one day your elder brothers arrived to inherit
your fortune. I left the matter to the court, who assigned the money to
them, because it was supposed that you were dead. Since then your
brothers have entered my service, and both still remain in it.” When
Slyboots heard what the king said, he thought he must be dreaming, for
he imagined that he had been only two nights in the old man’s
subterranean dwelling, and had then taken a few days to return home; but
now it appeared that each night had been as long as a year. He would not
go to law with his brothers, but abandoned the money to them, thanked
God that he had escaped with his life, and looked out for some fresh
employment. The king’s cook engaged him as kitchen-boy, and he now had
to turn the joints on the spit every day. His brothers <span
id="page_202">p. 202</span> despised him for his mean employment, and
did not like to have anything to do with him, although he still loved
them. One evening he told them much of what he had seen in the
under-world, where the geese and ducks had gold and silver plumage. The
brothers related this to the king, and begged him to send their youngest
brother to fetch these curious birds. The king sent for the kitchen-boy,
and ordered him to start next morning in search of the birds with the
costly feathers.

 Slyboots set out next day with a heavy heart, but he took with him the
ring, the wand, and the sword, which he had carefully preserved. Some
days afterwards he reached the sea, and saw an old man<span
id="page_202_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_202_note_1) with a long grey beard
sitting on a stone at the place where he had reached land after his
flight. When Slyboots came nearer, the old man asked, “Why are you so
sad, my friend?” Slyboots told him how badly he had fared, and the old
man bid him be of good cheer, and not vex himself, adding, “No harm can
happen to you, as long as you wear the ring of strength.” He then gave
Slyboots a mussel-shell,<span
id="page_202_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_202_note_2) and advised him to <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> build the bridge with the magic wand to the
middle of the sea, and then to step on the shell with his left foot,
when he would immediately find himself in the under-world, while every
one there was asleep. He also advised him to make himself a bag of spun
yarn in which to put the water-birds with gold and silver plumage, and
then he could return unmolested. Everything fell out as the old man
predicted, but Slyboots had hardly reached the sea-shore with his booty
when he heard his former acquaintance behind him; and when he was on the
bridge he heard him calling out, “Nicodemus, my son,” and repeating the
same questions as before. At last he asked if he had stolen the birds?
Slyboots answered “Yes” to every question, and hastened on.

 Slyboots arrived at the royal city in the evening, as his friend with
the grey beard had foretold, and the yarn bag held the birds so well
that none had escaped. The king made him a present, and told him to go
back next day, for he had heard from the two elder brothers that the
lord of the under-world had many gold and silver utensils, which the
king desired for his own use. Slyboots did not venture to refuse, <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> but he went very unwillingly, because he did
not know how to manage the affair. However, when he reached the
sea-shore, he met his friend with the grey beard, who asked the reason
of his sadness. The old man gave Slyboots another mussel-shell, and a
handful of small stones, with the following advice. “If you go there in
the afternoon, you will find the father in bed taking his siesta, the
daughters spinning in the sitting-room, and the grandmother in the
kitchen scouring the gold and silver vessels bright. Climb nimbly on the
chimney, throw down the stones tied up in a bag on the old woman’s neck,
come down yourself as quick as possible, put the costly vessels in the
yarn bag, and then run off as fast as your legs will carry you.”

 Slyboots thanked his friend, and followed his advice exactly. But when
he dropped the bag of pebbles, it expanded into a six hundred weight
sack of paving stones, which dashed the old woman to the ground. In a
moment Slyboots swept all the gold and silver vessels into his bag and
took to flight. When the Old Boy heard the noise, he thought the chimney
had fallen down, and did not venture to get up directly. But when he
<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> had called the grandmother for a long
time without receiving any answer, he was obliged to go himself. When he
discovered the misfortune that had happened, he hastened in pursuit of
the thief, who could not be gone far. Slyboots was already on the sea,
when his pursuer reached the shore panting and puffing. As before, the
Old Boy cried out, “Nicodemus, my son,” and repeated the former
questions. At last he asked, “Nicodemus, my son, have you stolen my gold
and silver utensils?” “Certainly, my father,” answered Slyboots.
“Nicodemus, my son, do you promise to come again?” “No, my father,”
answered Slyboots, hurrying along the bridge. Although the old man
cursed and scolded after the thief, he could not catch him, and he had
now been despoiled of all his magic treasures.

 Slyboots found his friend with the grey beard waiting for him on the
other side of the sea, and he threw down the bag of heavy gold and
silverware, which the ring of strength had enabled him to bring away,
and sat down to rest his weary limbs.

 The old man now told him much that shocked him. “Your brothers hate
you, and will do all <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> they can to
destroy you, if you do not oppose their wicked attempts. They will urge
the king on to set you tasks in which you are very likely to perish.
When you bring your rich load to the king this evening, you will find
him friendly disposed towards you; and then ask, as your only reward,
that his daughter should be hidden behind the door in the evening, to
hear what your brothers talk about together.”

 When Slyboots came before the king with his rich booty, which was
enough to make at least ten horse-loads, he found him extremely kind and
friendly, and he took the opportunity to make the request which his old
friend had advised. The king was glad that the treasure-bringer asked
for no greater reward, and ordered his daughter to hide herself behind
the door in the evening, to overhear what the coachman and the
chamberlain were talking about.

 The brothers had grown haughty with prosperity, and boasted of their
good luck, and what was worse, they both boasted to each other of the
favours of the princess in her own hearing! She ran to her father,
flushed with shame and anger, and told him weepmg what shameful lies she
had <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> heard with her own ears, and
begged him to punish the wretches. The king immediately ordered them
both to be thrown into prison, and when they had confessed their guilt
before the court next day, they were executed, while Slyboots was
promoted to the rank of king’s councillor.

 Some time afterwards the country was invaded by a foreign king, and
Slyboots was sent against the enemy in the field. Then he drew the sword
which he had brought from the under-world for the first time, and began
to slaughter the hostile army, and soon none were left alive on the
bloody field. The king was so pleased at the victory that he made
Slyboots his son-in-law.

 

 <span class="small">Jannsen gives an inferior variant of this story
under the title of the House-Spirit. Here a little man who creeps from
under the stove is permitted by the cook to taste the soup three times
running, and every time the pot is emptied. His master tells him to quit
his service next morning, and orders the steward to make soup; and the
steward knocks down the dwarf with the spoon. Next morning, as the cook
is leaving, the dwarf invites him to his house under the stove, and
gives him a little box, on which he has only to tap, and ask for
whatever he wants. The steward meets the cook, hears the story, puts on
soup, and invites the dwarf to partake. In return he receives a box,
which he takes to his master, but out of the box jumps a dwarf with
<span id="page_208">p. 208</span> an iron club, who belabours them both
till they are nearly dead, and then disappears with the box. The kitchen
dwarf was never seen again.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-31)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_187">p. 187</span>

<span id="page_187_note_1"></span>[1](#page_187_fr_1) These great public
periodical feasts are Eastern rather than Western. Compare the story of
Ali Shar and Zumurrud (*Thousand and One Nights*).

<span id="footnotes_page_188">p. 188</span>

<span id="page_188_note_1"></span>[1](#page_188_fr_1) A similar feat is
performed by Sarvik in the *Kalevipoeg*, Canto 17.

<span id="page_188_note_2"></span>[2](#page_188_fr_2) See page 13.

<span id="footnotes_page_197">p. 197</span>

<span id="page_197_note_1"></span>[1](#page_197_fr_1) As in the
*Kalevipoeg*, Canto 13; and the story of the Gold-Spinners, &c.

<span id="page_197_note_2"></span>[2](#page_197_fr_2) Compare p. 121
(anteà). The bell is not mentioned elsewhere in this story.

<span id="footnotes_page_198">p. 198</span>

<span id="page_198_note_1"></span>[1](#page_198_fr_1) A beer-barrel with
a tap, for general use, often stands in the houses of the Esthonian
peasantry.

<span id="page_198_note_2"></span>[2](#page_198_fr_2) “And as to the
sword, if it be drawn against an army, and its bearer shake it, he will
rout the army; and if he say to it at the <span
id="footnotes_page_199">p. 199</span> time of his shaking it, ‘Slay this
army,’ there will proceed from that sword a lightning which will slay
the whole army.”—*Story of Joodar* (*Thousand and One Nights*).

<span id="footnotes_page_200">p. 200</span>

<span id="page_200_note_1"></span>[1](#page_200_fr_1) Compare the scene
between the Kalevide and Tühi, in Canto 15 of the poem.

<span id="footnotes_page_202">p. 202</span>

<span id="page_202_note_1"></span>[1](#page_202_fr_1) This old man may
have been the consort of the Meadow Queen. *Cf*. pp. 188, 259.

<span id="page_202_note_2"></span>[2](#page_202_fr_2) We shall find
mussel-shells used as boats in other tales.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
