[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-06) [Next](hoe1-08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

## CANTO II <span class="small">THE DEATH OF KALEV</span>

K<span class="small">ALEV</span> and Linda lived very happily together,
and were blessed with a numerous offspring;<span
id="page_18_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_18_note_1) but the Country was small,
and as soon as the children were grown up they wandered forth into the
world to seek their fortunes, more especially as Kalev had determined
that one son only should be the heir to his possessions. At length Kalev
began to grow old, and felt that his end was approaching. Two of his
younger sons, who were still little boys, remained at home; but the
youngest of all, the famous Sohni, more often known by his patronymic,
the Son of Kalev, was still unborn. Kalev foretold the glory and
greatness of this last son to Linda, indicating him as his heir,<span
id="page_18_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_18_note_2) and shortly afterwards
fell dangerously sick.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

 Then Linda took her brooch, and spun it round on a thread, while she
sent forth the Alder-Beetle<span
id="page_19_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_19_note_1) to bid the Wind-Magician
and Soothsayer hasten to the bedside of her husband. Seven days the
brooch spun round, and seven days the beetle flew to the north, across
three kingdoms and more, till he encountered the Moon, and besought his
aid. But the Moon only gazed on him sorrowfully without speaking, and
went on his way.

 Again Linda spun the brooch for seven days, and sent forth the beetle,
who flew farther this time, through many thick forests, and as far as
the Gold Mountain, till he encountered the Evening Star; but he also
refused him an answer.

 Next time the beetle took a different route, over wide heaths and thick
fir-woods, till he reached the Gold Mountain, and met the rising Sun. He
also <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> returned no answer; but on a fourth
journey the beetle encountered the Wind-Magician, the old Soothsayer
from Finland,<span id="page_20_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_20_note_1) and the
great Necromancer himself. He besought their aid, but they replied with
one voice that what the drought had parched up, the moonlight blanched,
and the stars withered, could never bloom again. And before the beetle
returned from his fruitless journey the mighty Kalev had expired.

 Linda sat weeping by his bedside without food or sleep for seven days
and nights, and then began to prepare his corpse for burial. First she
bathed it with her tears, then with salt water from the sea, rain water
from the clouds, and lastly water from the spring. Then she smoothed his
hair with her fingers, and brushed it with a silver brush, and combed it
with the golden comb which the water-nymphs had used to comb their hair.
She drew on him a silken shirt, a satin shroud, and a robe over it,
confined by a silver girdle. She herself <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>
dug his grave thirty ells below the sod, and grass and flowers soon
sprang from it.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">From the grave the grasses sprouted,<br />
And the herbage from the hillock;<br />
From the dead man dewy grasses,<br />
From his cheeks grew ruddy flowers,<br />
From his eyes there sprang the harebells,<br />
Golden flowerets from his eyelids.<span id="page_21_fr_1"></span><a href="#page_21_note_1">1</a><br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Linda mourned for Kalev for one month after another till three months
had passed, and the fourth was far advanced. She heaped a cairn of
stones over his tomb, which formed the hill on which the Cathedral of
Revel now stands. One day she was carrying a great stone to the cairn,
but found herself too weak, and let it fall. She sat down on it, and
lamented her sad fate, and her tears formed the lake called “Ulemiste
järv,” the Upper Lake, beside which the huge stone block may still be
seen.<span id="page_21_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_21_note_2)

 After this, Linda felt her time approaching, and she retired to the
bathroom,<span id="page_21_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_21_note_3) and called
upon the <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> gods to aid her. Ukko and
Rōugutaja<span id="page_22_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_22_note_1) both
attended at her call, and one brought a bundle of straw, and the other
pillows, and they made her up a soft bed; nor was it long before Kalev’s
posthumous son saw the light.

 Linda was sitting by the cradle one day, trying to sing the child to
sleep, when suddenly he began to scream, and continued to scream day and
night for a whole month, when he burst his swaddling-clothes, smashed
the cradle to pieces, and began to creep about the floor.<span
id="page_22_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_22_note_2)

 Linda suckled the child till he was three years old, and he grew up a
fine strong boy. He first learned to tend the cattle, and then to guide
the plough, and grew up like a young oak-tree. When he played *kurni*
(tipcat), his blocks flew far and wide all over the eountry, and many
even as far as the sea. Sometimes he used to go down to the sea, and
make ducks and drakes of huge rocks, which he sent spinning out to sea
for a <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> verst or more, while he stood on
his head to watch them.

 At other times he used to amuse himself quietly in the enclosure,
carving skates or weaving baskets. Thus he passed his days till he came
to man’s estate.

 After the death of Kalev, Linda was much pestered by suitors who were
anxious to marry the rich widow; but she refused them all, and at length
they ceased to trouble her. Last of all came a mighty wind-sorcerer from
Finland, calling himself Kalev’s cousin; and when she refused him also,
he vowed revenge. But she laughed at his threats, telling him she had
three young eagles with sharp claws growing up in the house, who would
protect their mother.

 Linda was no longer tormented by suitors, but the magician whom she had
discarded recommended all his friends not to seek a wife in Kalev’s
house, for notwithstanding Linda’s wealth her beauty was faded, her
teeth were iron, and her words were red-hot pincers. They would do
better to sail to Finland, where they would find rows of maidens, rich
in money, pearls, jewels, and golden bracelets, waiting for them on the
rocky coast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_18">p. 18</span>

<span id="page_18_note_1"></span>[1](#page_18_fr_1) According to various
traditions, Kalev and Linda are said to have had seven or twelve sons.

<span id="page_18_note_2"></span>[2](#page_18_fr_2) This is what Jacobs
calls “junior right;” the patriarchal <span id="footnotes_page_19">p.
19</span> custom of the elder children going forth into the world to
seek their fortunes, and the youngest remaining at home to look after
his parents and inherit their possessions. Hence the rivalry between
Esau and Jacob.

<span id="footnotes_page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="page_19_note_1"></span>[1](#page_19_fr_1) Has this anything to
do with boys spinning cockchafers on a thread? The beetle alluded to in
the text is said to be the ladybird, but the ladybird has no particular
connection with the alder. When a brooch is thus spun on a thread, a
question is asked, and if the motion stops, the answer is unfavourable,
but favourable if it continues. The flight of the beetle is fortunate
towards the south, but unfortunate towards the north.

<span id="footnotes_page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="page_20_note_1"></span>[1](#page_20_fr_1) It is curious that
the Esthonians always regarded the Finns, and the Finns the Lapps, as
great sorcerers; each nation attributing special skill in magic to those
living north of themselves. But there is a Finnish ballad (*Kanteletar*,
iii. 2) in which we read of the sun and moon being stolen by German and
Esthonian sorcerers.

<span id="footnotes_page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="page_21_note_1"></span>[1](#page_21_fr_1) This reminds us of
Ariel’s well-known song—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Full fathom five thy father lies,<br />
Of his bones are coral made,” &amp;c.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_21_note_2"></span>[2](#page_21_fr_2) The origin of stone
blocks is usually ascribed to non-human beings in many countries, but
most frequently to the devil, especially in Northern Europe. Compare
also the church-stories, &c., in a later part of this work.

<span id="page_21_note_3"></span>[3](#page_21_fr_3) The usual place
employed on such occasions in Finland and Esthonia.

<span id="footnotes_page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="page_22_note_1"></span>[1](#page_22_fr_1) Ukko or Taara
commonly appears as the principal god of the Finns and Esthonians;
Rōugutaja usually as an accoucheur, but occasionally also as a malicious
demon. Rōugutaja is also called the God of the Wind. Other authorities
consider him a water-god. (Kreutzwald und Neus, *Mythische und Magische
Lieder*, p. 108.)

<span id="page_22_note_2"></span>[2](#page_22_fr_2) Kullervo in the
*Kalevala* (Runo 30) bursts his swaddling-clothes and smashes his cradle
in the same way.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
