[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-10) [Next](hoe1-12.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

## CANTO VI <span class="small">THE KALEVIDE AND THE SWORD-SMITHS</span>

T<span class="small">HE</span> Kalevide mourned two days for his mother,
but on the third day he began to get over his grief, and determined,
before returning home, to visit a famous smith of Finland, and to
provide himself with a good sword. So he set off in another direction,
and lost himself in the woods, and had to pass the night on the wet
grass under a fir-tree, which he did not at all relish. Next morning he
started off again early, and a thrush sang to him, and directed him to
turn to the west. He sprang forward with renewed energy and soon found
himself in the open country, where he encountered an old woman,<span
id="page_42_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_42_note_1.md) who gave him minute
instructions for finding his way to the smithy, which was three days’
journey off. When at length he reached the smithy, he found <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> the old smith and his three sons hard at work
forging swords.

 The hero saluted the smith, who replied to him courteously, and at once
acceded to his request to try the swords before purchasing one. At a
sign from the smith, one of the sons went out and fetched an armful of
swords. The Kalevide picked out the longest, and bent it into a hoop,
when it straightened itself at once. He then whirled it round his head,
and struck at the massive rock which stood in the smithy with all his
might. The sparks flew from the stone and the blade shivered to pieces,
while the old smith looked on and swore.

 “Who mixes up children’s toys with weapons for men?” said the Kalevide
scornfully, and caught up a second and third sword, which he shivered in
the same way before the smith could interfere. “Stop, stop,” cried the
smith at last, “don’t break any more swords to show off your strength;”
and he called to his sons to bring some swords of the best quality they
had.

 The youths brought in an armful of the very best, and the Kalevide
chose a huge sword, which he brandished like a reed in his right hand,
and <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> then brought down on the anvil. The
sword cut deep into the iron, and the blade did not fly, but the sharp
edge was somewhat blunted.

 Then the smith was well pleased, and said that he had one sword in
store worthy of the strength of the hero, if he was rich enough to buy
it; for, between friends, the price was nine strong carthorses, four
pairs of good packhorses, twenty good milch kine, ten pairs of good yoke
oxen, fifty well-fed calves, a hundred tons of the best wheat, two
boatsful of barley, and a large shipload of rye, a thousand old dollars,
a hundred pairs of bracelets, two hundred gold coins, a lapful of silver
brooches, the third of a kingdom, and the dowries of three maidens.

 Then from a little iron cupboard they fetched a sword which had not its
equal in the world, and on which the smith and his sons had laboured for
seven long years without intermission. It was wrought of seven different
kinds of Swedish iron with the aid of seven powerful charms, and was
tempered in seven different waters, from those of the sea and Lake
Peipus to rain-water. It had been bespoken by Kalev himself, but he had
not lived till the work was completed.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

 The son of Kalev received the huge blade from the hands of the smith
with reverence, and whirled it round like a fiery wheel, and it whistled
through the air like the tempest that breaks oaks and unroofs houses.
Then he turned and brought down the keen edge like a flash of lightning
on the great anvil, and clove it to the ground without the sword
receiving the slightest injury.

 Then the hero joyfully expressed his thanks to the smith for forging
such a splendid sword, and promised to bring him the full price demanded
upon his return to Esthonia. But the smith said he would rather go and
fetch the value of the sword himself.

 And now a great drinking-bout was prepared in honour of the sword and
its owner, which lasted for seven days. Beer and mead flowed in
abundance, and the guests drank till they lost all restraint, shouting
and laughing, and throwing their caps about, and rolling on the grass.

 The Kalevide had lost his senses like the rest, and told the whole
story of his adventure on the island and the drowning of the maiden.
Upon this, the eldest son of the smith, his father’s pride and joy,
sprang forward, denouncing him for his <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
aspersions on the maiden’s honour. The Kalevide defied him, maintaining
the truth of the story, and from words they soon came to blows; and,
before any one could comprehend what was going on or interfere, the
Kalevide drew the sword from its sheath and struck off the head of his
adversary before the face of his father, mother, and brothers, the hero
thus loading himself with a second great crime.

 The youth’s father shrieked with horror and his mother fell fainting to
the ground; the smith then cried out to the Kalevide that he had
murdered the support of his old age, and had stained the innocence and
honour of his new sword for ever. Then he called to his sons to fetch
the hammers from the smithy and break the bones of the murderer. But the
drunken giant advanced against them with his sword, defying them to the
combat; and the smith, recognising the hopelessness of any attempt
against him, cried to his sons to let him pass and leave vengeance to
the gods, cursing him like a mad dog, and calling on the sword itself to
avenge the crime. But the Kalevide seemed to hear nothing, and staggered
away from the house through the wood along the road till he <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> came to a high waterfall. He followed the
course of the stream some distance till he found a resting-place, where
he laid down, and snored till the whole neighbourhood shook, and people
asked in fear whether enemies had invaded the land and a battle was in
progress.

 The oak which the islander had planted sprang up, first as a small
tree, but it grew so rapidly that it reached the clouds, and almost
touched the sun. The sun and moon were hidden, the windows darkened, and
all the country around made dismal by the shadow of its branches. The
islander sought far and near for some one to fell the tree, for whole
cities and fleets might have been built of its wood. Proclamation was
made everywhere for some one to fell the tree, but no one dared to
attempt it, and he returned home, grumbling to his wife at the failure
of his long and fruitless journey. Then the old woman led the way to the
room where the eagle and the dwarf were still remaining, and told her
husband how she had found the dwarf, who was no larger than Kalev’s
thumb, under the wing of the eagle. The islander asked the dwarf if he
would fell the oak-tree, and he consented at once, on condition that
<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> he should be released from his
captivity; he was also given a dish of pure gold.

 The dwarf went out and took a good look at the oak-tree, and then he
himself began to grow, first by ells, and then by fathoms. Having thus
become a giant, he began to hew at the tree, and he hewed at it for
three days, till it fell, covering half the island and half the sea with
its branches. The trunk was used to make a great bridge, with two arms,
reaching from the island to Finland on the one side, and to Esthonia on
the other. Large ships were built of the summit, merchant-vessels from
the trunk, towns from the roots, rowing-boats from the branches, and
children’s boats from the chips. What remained was used to make shelters
for weak old men, sick widows, and orphan children, and the last
branches left were used to build a little room in which the minstrel
could sing his songs. Strangers who came now and then across the bridge
stopped before the minstrel’s hut to ask the name of the city with the
magnificent palace; and the minstrel replied that there was nothing
there but his poor hut, and all the splendour they beheld was the light
of his songs reflected from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-12.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_1"></span>[1](#page_42_fr_1.md) In the *Kalevala*
(Runo 34) an old woman directs Kullervo to the house of his parents.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
