[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-09) [Next](hoe1-11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

## CANTO V <span class="small">THE KALEVIDE AND THE FINNISH SORCERER</span>

D<span class="small">AY</span> was breaking as the dauntless swimmer
approached the coast of Finland, where his enemy, the sorcerer, had
arrived somewhat before him, and had made his boat fast under a
projecting rock. The Kalevide gazed round without seeing any traces of
him, and lay down to sleep; but though the morning was calm and
peaceful, his dreams were but of battle and murder.

 Meantime the islander and his wife, not being able to find their
daughter, returned home weeping, and planted the oak and the fir in the
field where their daughter used to swing in the evening, in remembrance
of her. Then they went to look in the helmet where they had put the egg;
but it was cold and damp, so the mother put the egg in the warm sun by
day, and nursed it in her bosom at night.

 Then they went to look at the trees, and the oak had already shot up a
hundred fathoms, and the <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> fir-tree ten.
Next they visited the fish, which prayed for its liberty, and they
restored it to the sea.

 The oak and fir now reached the clouds; and a young eagle was hatched
from the egg, which the mother tended; but one day it escaped and flew
away. The oak now scattered the clouds and threatened to pierce the sky.
Then they sought a sorcerer to fell the tree, and the woman took a
golden rake on her shoulder with a copper handle and silver prongs. She
raked up three swathes of grass, and in the third she found the eagle
which she had lately reared from the egg. She took him home, and under
his wing was a little man, scarcely two spans high, holding an axe in
his hands.<span id="page_39_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_39_note_1)

 The Kalevide had only intended to take a short nap, but he was so weary
that he slept all through the day and night, and did not awake till
sunrise next morning.<span id="page_39_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_39_note_2)
When he awoke, he set off at once <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> in
search of his mother and the sorcerer into the interior of the country.
At last he climbed a high mountain, and saw from thence an inhabited
valley with a brook running through it, and the sorcerer’s farm at the
edge of the wood.

 The son of Kalev rushed down the mountain and through the plain till he
reached the gate of the enclosure and looked in. The sorcerer was lying
on the grass in the shade of his house. The Kalevide turned towards the
wood, tore up an oak-tree by the roots, and trimmed it into a club. He
swung it in his right hand, and strode through the enclosure, the whole
country trembling and the hills and valleys shaking with fear as he
advanced.

 The sorcerer started from his sleep, and saw Linda’s avenger at the
gate, but he was too unnerved and terrified to attempt to hide himself.
He hurriedly took a handful of feathers from his bosom, and blew them
from him with a few magic words, and lo! they became an armed host of
warriors,—thousands of them, both on foot and on horseback.<span
id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_40_note_1) They rushed upon the son
of Kalev <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> like a swarm of gnats or bees;
but he laid about him with his club as if he was threshing, and beat
them down, horse and man together, on all sides, like drops of hail or
rain. The fight was hardly begun when it was over, and the hero waded
chest-deep in blood. The sorcerer, whose magic troops had never failed
him before, was now at his wit’s end, and prayed for mercy, giving a
long account of how he had endeavoured to carry off Linda, and had been
struck down by the enraged Thunder-God. But the Kalevide paid no
attention to his speech, and, after a few angry words, he smashed his
head with his club. Then he rushed through the house from room to room
in search of his mother, breaking open every door and lock which opposed
him, while the noise resounded far over the country. But he found not
his mother, and regretted that he had killed the sorcerer, who might
have helped him. At last, wearied out with his own violence, he threw
himself on a couch, and wept himself to sleep. He had a vision of his
mother in her youth and beauty, swinging with her companions, and awoke,
convinced that she was really dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="page_39_note_1"></span>[1](#page_39_fr_1) We find this great
oak-tree over and over again in Finnish and Esthonian tales. Compare
*Kalevala*, Runo 2, and Cantos 4, 5, 6, and 16 of the *Kalevipoeg*.
Neus, *Ehstnische Volkslieder*, p. 47; Kreutzwald and Neus, *Mythische
und Magische Lieder*, p.8, &c. Could this oak have any connection,
direct or indirect, with the ash Yggthrasil? or could the story have
originated in some report or tradition of the banyan?

<span id="page_39_note_2"></span>[2](#page_39_fr_2) The tremendous
exploits of the Kalevide and his weariness afterwards give him much of
the character of a Berserk.

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1) In the 26th Runo of
the *Kalevala* Lemminkainen creates a flock of birds from a handful of
feathers, to appease the fiery eagle who obstructed his way to Pohjola.
We may also remember Jason and the dragon’s teeth.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
