[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-30) [Next](hoe1-32.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The next story is peculiarly interesting and original. I place it here,
because we find three maidens busy spinning for a witch, as the Kalevide
found them in the palace of Sarvik.

 

## THE GOLD-SPINNERS. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

I <span class="small">AM</span> going to tell you a beautiful story
about what happened in the world in ancient days, when the meadows still
resounded with the wise sayings of birds and beasts.

 Once upon a time a lame old woman lived in a thick forest with her
three beautiful daughters in a cottage hidden among the bushes. The
three daughters were like three fair flowers, especially the youngest,
who was as fair and delicate as a bean-flower, while the mother was like
a withered stem. But there was none to look upon them in their
loneliness save the sun <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> by day, and by
night the moon and the starry eyes of heaven.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Hot, like eyes of youthful lovers,<br />
Shone the sun upon their head-gear,<br />
Shining on their coloured ribands,<br />
Turning red their garment’s edges.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The old mother did not allow the girls to grow up in idleness, but kept
them hard at work from morning to night spinning golden flax into
thread. She gave the poor creatures no half-holidays on Thursdays or
Saturdays, to provide themselves with anything they needed, and if they
had not sometimes taken their needles in their hands by stealth at
twilight or by moonlight, they would have possessed nothing. As soon as
the distaff was empty, they were immediately furnished with a fresh
supply, and the thread was required to be fine and regular. When the
thread was finished, the old woman hid it away under lock and key in a
secret chamber, where her daughters were never allowed to set foot. The
spinners knew not how the golden flax came into the house, nor for what
fabric the thread was used, for the mother never <span id="page_210">p.
210</span> replied to any questions on these subjects. The old woman
went off on a journey two or three times every summer, and sometimes
stayed away more than a week, but her daughters never knew where she
went or what she brought back with her, for she always returned by
night. When she was about to start, she always distributed as many days’
work to her daughters as she expected to be away.

 The time came round again for the old woman to set out on her journey,
and she gave out work to the girls for six days, repeating her usual
admonition. “Children, do not let your eyes wander, and hold your
fingers carefully, that the thread on the reel is not broken, or the
glitter of the golden thread will vanish, and with it all your prospects
of good fortune.” The girls laughed at this impressive warning, and
before their mother had hobbled ten steps from the house on her
crutches, all three began to make light of it. “There is no need of this
useless warning, which is always repeated,” said the youngest sister.
“The golden threads do not break with picking, much less with spinning.”
The other sisters added, “It is equally unlikely that <span
id="page_211">p. 211</span> the golden lustre should disappear.” The
girls often ventured on such jests, but at last, after much merriment,
tears rose to their eyes.

 On the third day after their mother’s departure an unexpected event
took place, which at first filled the daughters with alarm, and then
with joy and happiness, but which was destined to cause them great
trouble for a long time afterwards. A prince of the race of Kalev found
himself separated from his companions while hunting in the forest,<span
id="page_211_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_211_note_1.md) and wandered so far out
of his way that he could no longer hear the barking of the dogs, nor the
blowing of the horns to direct him aright. All his shouts met with no
response but their own echo, or were lost in the thick bush. At length
the prince, tired and disheartened, dismounted from his horse and lay
down to rest under a bush, while he allowed his horse to stray about and
graze at liberty. When the prince awoke from his sleep, the sun was
already low in the heavens. As he was again wandering <span
id="page_212">p. 212</span> backwards and forwards in search of the
right road, he came at length to a small footpath which led him to the
cottage of the lame old woman. The daughters were startled when they
suddenly saw the stranger appear, whose like they had never before
beheld. But they had finished their day’s work, and soon made friends
with the visitor in the cool evening, feeling no inclination to retire
to rest. And even after the elder sisters had lain down to sleep, the
youngest still sat on the doorstep with their guest, and no sleep
visited their eyes that night.

 We will leave the pair to exchange confidences and sweet words in the
light of the moon and stars, and will return to the huntsmen who had
lost their master in the wood. They searched unweariedly through the
whole forest, until the darkness of night put an end to their quest.
After this, two men were sent to carry the sad news to the city, while
the others camped for the night under a great pine-tree, ready to renew
their search next day. The king immediately issued orders that a
regiment of horse and a regiment of foot should march out next morning
to seek for his lost son. The wood was so long and broad <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> that the search lasted till the third day,
when horse-tracks were at length discovered which they followed till
they reached the footpath which led to the cottage. The prince had not
found the time pass heavily in company with the maiden, and he was but
little disposed to go home. Before he departed, he gave her a secret
promise that he would return in a short time, and take her with him,
either with good-will or by force, and would make her his bride. But
although the elder sisters had heard nothing of the matter, it
nevertheless came to light in a way which nobody anticipated.

 The youngest daughter was not a little astonished, when she sat down to
work after the departure of the prince, to find that the thread on the
spool was broken. She pieced the ends together, and set the wheel in
rapid motion that she might make up for the time which she had lost with
her lover, by diligent labour, but her heart fluttered at a strange and
inexplicable event, for the gold thread had lost its former lustre. No
terror and no sighs or tears could repair the mischief. According to an
old proverb, misfortune springs into the house through the door, enters
by the window, and <span id="page_214">p. 214</span> creeps in through
any crevice which is not blocked up; and thus was it now.<span
id="page_214_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_214_note_1.md)

 The old woman returned home by night; and as soon as she came into the
room in the morning, she perceived at once that something was wrong. Her
heart was filled with rage, and she called her daughters one by one, and
severely cross-questioned them. They could not help themselves with lies
and excuses, for lies have short legs, and the cunning old woman soon
discovered what the village cock had crowed in her youngest daughter’s
ear behind her back. Then the old woman began to curse so terribly that
it seemed as if she wanted to darken heaven and earth with her
imprecations. At last she threatened to break the neck of the young man
and give his flesh to the wild beasts to devour if he ever ventured near
the house again. The youngest daughter turned as red as a boiled crab,
and found no rest by day nor sleep by night; for the thought oppressed
her ever, that if the youth should return, he might meet his death.
Early in the morning she stole quietly out of the house while her mother
and sisters <span id="page_215">p. 215</span> were still asleep, to
breathe the freshness of the dewy air. As luck would have it, she had
learned the language of birds from her mother when she was still a
child, and her knowledge now stood her in good stead. A raven was
sitting in the branches of a pine-tree near, preening his feathers, and
the maiden called to him, “Dear bird of wisdom, wisest of the race of
birds, come to my aid.” “What help dost thou need?” answered the raven.
The girl answered, “Fly from the wood afar into the country, until you
reach a stately city with a royal palace. Endeavour to find the king’s
son, and warn him of the misfortune which has come upon us.” Then she
told the raven the whole story, from the breaking of the thread to the
terrible threat of her mother, and begged that the youth would never
return to the house. The raven promised to deliver her message, if he
could find anybody who understood his language, and flew away
immediately.

 The mother would not allow the youngest daughter to work at the
spinning-wheel again, but kept her busy winding the spun thread. This
work would have been easier to the maiden than the other, but her
mother’s incessant cursing and <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
scolding gave her no rest from morning to night. Any attempt to palliate
her offence only made matters worse. If a woman’s heart overflows with
anger and loosens her tongue, no power on earth can stay it.

 Towards evening the voice of the raven was heard croaking on the summit
of the pine-tree, and the tortured girl hurried out to inquire what news
he brought. The raven had had the good fortune to meet with the son of a
magician in the garden of the king, who perfectly understood the
language of birds. To him the bird delivered the message of the maiden,
and besought him to convey it to the prince. “Tell the raven,” said the
prince to the magician’s son, “that he must return, and say to the
maiden, ‘Sleep not on the ninth night, for a deliverer will then appear
to rescue the chick from the claws of the hawk.’ ” They gave the raven a
piece of meat as a reward for his message and to strengthen his wings,
and then sent him back again. The maiden thanked the bird for his news,
but concealed his message carefully in her own bosom, so that the others
heard nothing of it. But as the ninth day approached her heart grew ever
heavier, for she dreaded <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> lest some
unexpected mischance might yet ruin all.

 When the ninth night came, and the mother and daughters had retired to
rest, the youngest sister stole from the house on tip-toe, and sat down
on the grass under a tree to wait for her lover. Her heart was full of
mingled hope and fear. The cock had already crowed twice, but there was
not a step nor a voice to be heard in the wood. But between the second
and third cockcrow she heard the distant sound of horses’ hoofs. Guided
by the sound, she made her way in their direction, lest the noise of
their approach should rouse the sleeping household. She soon caught
sight of the troop of soldiers, at whose head rode the prince himself,
guiding them by the secret marks he had made on the trees when he
departed. As soon as he perceived the maiden, he sprang from his horse,
lifted her into the saddle, seated himself before her, so that she could
cling to him, and then hastened homewards. The moon shone so brightly
between the trees that the soldiers could not miss the track. Presently
the birds roused up, and began to chirp and twitter in the dawning
light. And if the maiden had had time to listen to their <span
id="page_218">p. 218</span> warnings, they would have profited her more
than the honeyed words of her lover, which were all that reached her
ear. But she saw and heard nothing but the voice of her lover, who bade
her dismiss all idle fears, and to trust in the protection of the
soldiers. The sun was already high in the heavens when they left the
forest and emerged into the open country. Fortunately the old mother did
not discover her daughter’s flight very early in the morning. It was
only when she found that the twists of thread had not been wound that
she asked what had become of the youngest sister, but no one could
inform her. There were many indications to show that she had fled, and
the mother immediately devised a crafty plan to punish the fugitive. She
went out and gathered a handful of nine<span
id="page_218_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_218_note_1.md) different sorts of magic
herbs, scattered charmed salt over them, and tied up the whole in a
bundle. Then she muttered curses and imprecations over the witch-packet,
and cast it to the winds, saying—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Lend the ball thy wings, O whirlwind!<br />
Mother of the wind, thy pinions;<br />
Drive the witch’s bundle onward,<br />
<span id="page_219">p. 219</span> Let it fly with wind-like swiftness,<br />
Let it scatter death around it,<br />
Let it cast disease beyond it.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Somewhat before noon the prince and his army arrived on the bank of a
broad river, over which a narrow bridge had been thrown, which only
permitted the soldiers to pass one by one. The prince was just riding on
the middle of the bridge, when the witch’s bundle came flying along,
borne by the wind, and attacked his horse like a gadfly. The horse
snorted with terror, reared up on his hind-legs, and before any help
could be given, the maiden slid from the saddle and fell headlong into
the river. The prince would have leaped in after her, but the soldiers
seized hold of him and prevented him, for the river was of unfathomable
depth, and no human aid could avail to remedy the misfortune which had
happened.

 The prince was almost distracted with grief and horror, and the
soldiers forced him to accompany them home against his will. He lay in a
quiet room for weeks mourning over the calamity, and at first refused
all food and drink. The king summoned magicians from all quarters, but
none of them could discover the nature of the disease <span
id="page_220">p. 220</span> or suggest any remedy. But one day the son
of the wind-sorcerer, who was one of the labourers in the king’s garden,
advised, “Send to Finland for the oldest of all magicians, for he is
wiser than the magicians of our country.”

 When the king heard this, he sent a messenger to the old Finnish
sorcerer, who arrived after a week on the wings of the wind. He spoke
thus to the king: “Mighty king, the disease which afflicts the prince is
caused by the wind. An evil witch-packet has robbed the prince of the
half of his heart, and therefore he suffers unceasingly. Send him often
into the wind that the wind may bear away his sorrows into the forest.”

 He was not wrong, for the health of the prince soon began to improve,
his appetite grew better, and he was able to sleep at night. At last he
confided the sorrow of his heart to his parents, and his father wished
him to seek out another young bride to lead home; but the prince would
not listen to the proposal.

 The young man had already passed a year in mourning, when one day he
happened to come to the bridge where he had lost his betrothed, and
bitter tears rose to his eyes at the recollection. <span
id="page_221">p. 221</span> Suddenly he heard a sweet voice singing,
although no living creature was in sight. And the voice sang:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“By the mother’s curse o’ertaken,<br />
Sank in flood the hapless maiden,<br />
In the watery grave the fair one,<br />
And in Ahti’s<span id="page_221_fr_1"></span><a href="#page_221_note_1">1</a> waves thy darling.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The prince dismounted from his horse, and looked round everywhere to
see whether some one might not be hidden under the bridge, but he could
see no singer anywhere. The only object visible was a water-lily,
swaying on the water amid its broad leaves. But a swaying flower could
not sing, and there must be something mysterious about it. He tied his
horse to a stump on the bank, and sat down on the bridge to listen,
hoping that his eyes or ears would give him some solution of the riddle.
All was still for a while, but presently the invisible singer sang
again:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“By the mother’s curse o’ertaken,<br />
Sank in flood the hapless maiden,<br />
In the watery grave the fair one,<br />
And in Ahti’s waves thy darling.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Sometimes the wind brings a fortunate idea to <span id="page_222">p.
222</span> men, and such was the case now. The prince thought, “If I
rode alone to the cottage in the wood, who knows but that the
gold-spinners might be able to give me some explanation of this
wonderful occurrence. He mounted his horse and rode towards the forest.
He hoped to find his way easily by the former indications, but the wood
had grown, and he rode for more than one day before he could discover
the footpath. When he drew near the cottage, he stopped and waited,
hoping that one of the maidens would come out. Early in the morning the
eldest sister came out to wash her face at the spring. The young man
went to her, and told her of the misfortune that had happened on the
bridge the year before, and of the song which he had heard there a day
or two ago. It happened that the old mother was absent from home, and
the maiden invited the prince into the house. As soon as the two girls
heard his story, they knew that the misfortune must have been caused by
their mother’s witch’s coil, and that their sister was not dead, but
only enchanted. The eldest sister inquired, “Did you see nothing on the
surface of the water from whence the song might have proceeded?”
“Nothing,” replied the <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> prince. “As far
as my eyes could reach, nothing could be perceived on the surface of the
water but a yellow water-lily surrounded by its broad leaves; but leaves
and flowers cannot sing.” The maidens immediately suspected that the
water-lily could be nothing but their sister, who had fallen into the
water, and had been changed into a flower by enchantment. They knew that
their old mother had let fly the witch’s coil after the maiden, with her
curse, and that if it had not killed her, it might have transformed her
into any shape. But they would not tell the prince of their suspicions
until they could devise some means for their sister’s release, lest they
might inspire him with fruitless hopes. As they did not expect their
mother to return home for some days, there was plenty of time to
consider the best course to adopt.

 In the evening the eldest sister gathered a sufficient quantity of
various magic herbs, which she rubbed with flour into a dough; and baked
a pie which she gave to the young man to eat before he retired to rest
at night. During the night the prince had a wonderful dream. He thought
that he was in the wood among the birds, and that he could understand
the <span id="page_224">p. 224</span> language of them all. In the
morning he related his dream to the maidens, and the eldest sister
observed, “You have come to us at a fortunate hour, and you have had
your dream at a fortunate hour, for it will be fulfilled on your way
home. The pork pie which I baked for your welfare yesterday, and gave
you to eat, was mixed with magic herbs which will enable you to
understand everything which the knowing birds say to one another. These
little feathered people are gifted with much wisdom which is unknown to
mankind. Turn a sharp ear to whatever their beaks may utter. And when
your own time of trouble is over, do not forget us poor children, who
sit here at the spinning-wheel as if in an eternal prison.”

 The prince thanked the maidens for their kindness, and promised to do
his best to release them, either by ransom or by force. He then took
leave of them and turned his way homewards. The maidens were pleased to
find that the threads were not broken, and still retained their golden
lustre, so that their mother would have no cause to reproach them when
she returned.

 The prince found his ride through the wood <span id="page_225">p.
225</span> still more pleasant. He seemed to be surrounded with a
numerous company, for the singing and chirping of the birds sounded like
articulate words to his ears. He was greatly surprised to find how much
wisdom is lost to men who do not understand the language of birds. At
first the wanderer was not able to understand clearly what the feathered
people were saying, for they were talking of the affairs of various
persons who were unknown to him; but suddenly he saw a magpie and a
thrush sitting in a tall pine-tree, who were talking about himself.

 “How great is the stupidity of men!” said the thrush. “They cannot
rightly comprehend the most trifling matter. For a whole year the
foster-child of a lame old woman has been sitting near the bridge in the
form of a water-lily, lamenting her sad fate in song, but no one has
been able to release her. A few days ago her lover was riding over the
bridge, and heard her melancholy song, but he was no wiser than anybody
else.” The magpie answered, “And yet the maiden was punished by her
mother on his account. Unless he is gifted with greater wisdom that
falls to the lot of men, she must remain a flower for ever.” “It would
be a trifling matter <span id="page_226">p. 226</span> to release the
maiden,” said the thrush, “if the matter were fully explained to the old
magician of Finland. He could easily deliver her from her watery prison
and flowery bondage.”

 This conversation made the young man thoughtful, and as he rode on, he
began to consider what messenger he could send to Finland. Presently he
heard one swallow say to another over his head, “Let us go to Finland,
where we can build our nests better than here.”

 “Stay, friends,” cried the prince in the language of the birds. “Please
to convey a thousand compliments from me to the old sorcerer of Finland,
and ask him to give me directions how to restore a maiden who has been
transformed into a water-lily to her original form.” The swallows
promised to fulfil his request, and flew away.

 When he came to the bank of the river, he allowed his horse to graze,
and remained standing on the bridge, to listen whether he could not hear
the song again. But all was still, and he could hear nothing but the
rushing of the waters and the sighing of the wind. At last he mounted
his horse unwillingly and rode home, but did not <span id="page_227">p.
227</span> say a word to any one of his excursion and his adventure.

 He was sitting in the garden a week afterwards, and thinking that the
swallows must have forgotten his message, when a great eagle circled
above him high in the air. The bird gradually descended, and at length
alighted on the branch of a lime-tree near the prince, and thus
addressed him: “I bring you greetings from the old sorcerer in Finland,
who hopes that you will not think ill of him that he did not reply to
your message sooner, for he could not find a messenger who was coming
this way. It is a very simple matter to disenchant the maiden. You have
only to go to the bank of the river, throw off your clothes, and smear
yourself all over with mud till not a speck remains white. Then take the
tip of your nose between your fingers, and say, ‘Let the man become a
crayfish.’ Immediately you will become a crayfish, when you can descend
into the river without any fear of being drowned. Squeeze yourself
boldly under the roots of the water-lily, and clear them from mud and
reeds, so that no portion remains fixed. Then grasp one of the roots
with your pincers, and the water will raise you with the flower to the
surface. Allow <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> yourself to drift with
the stream till you see a rowan-tree<span
id="page_228_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_228_note_1.md) with leafy branches on
the left bank. Near the rowan-tree is a rock about as high as a small
bath-house. When you reach the rock you must say, ‘Let the water-lily
become a maiden and the crayfish a man!’ and it will be accomplished
immediately.” When the eagle had delivered his message, he spread his
wings, and flew away. The young man looked after him for a time, not
knowing what to think of the whole affair.

 A week passed by, and found him still undecided, for he had neither
courage nor confidence sufficient to undertake such an enterprise. At
length a crow said to him, “Why do you neglect to follow the old man’s
advice? The old sorcerer has never given false information, and the
language of birds never deceives. Hasten to the river, and let the
maiden dry your tears of longing.” This gave the young man courage, for
he reflected, “Nothing worse can befall me but death, and death is
easier than constant weeping.” He mounted his horse and took the
well-known path to the banks of the <span id="page_229">p. 229</span>
river. When he came to the bridge, he could distinguish the song:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“By my mother’s curse o’ertaken,<br />
Here I lie in slumber sunken;<br />
Here the youthful maid must languish<br />
On the bosom of the waters,<br />
And the bed is cold and oozy<br />
Where the tender maid is resting.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The prince dismounted, and hobbled his horse to prevent him from
straying too far from the bridge. Then he took off his clothes, and
smeared himself over and over with mud, so that no spot remained white.
After this, he caught hold of the end of his nose, and jumped into the
water, exclaiming, “Let the man become a crayfish.” There was a splash
in the water, and then everything became as still as before.

 The prince, now transformed into a crayfish, immediately began to
disentangle the roots of the water-lily from the bed of the river, but
it took him a long time. The roots were firmly fixed in the sand and
mud, so that the crayfish had to work for seven whole days before he
could complete his task. Then he seized one of the rootlets with his
pincers, and the water <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> buoyed him up
to the surface with the flower. They drifted along slowly with the
current, but although there were plenty of trees and bushes on the
banks, it was some time before the prince caught sight of the rowan-tree
and the rock. At last, however, he spied the tree with its leaves and
clusters of red berries on the left bank, and a little farther on stood
the rock, which was as high as a small bath-house. Upon this he cried
out, “Let the water-lily become a maiden and the crayfish a man.” Then
the youth and the maiden swam with their heads above the water. The
water bore them to the bank, but they were both mother-naked, as God had
created them.

 Then said the shame-faced maiden, “Dear youth, I have no clothes to put
on, and cannot come out of the water.” But the prince answered, “Go
ashore near the rowan-tree, and I will shut my eyes while you climb up
and hide yourself under the tree. Then I will hurry to the bridge where
I left my horse and my clothes when I plunged into the river.” So the
maiden hid herself under the tree, while the prince hurried to the spot
where he had left his horse and his <span id="page_231">p. 231</span>
clothes, but he could find neither one nor the other. He did not know
that he had passed so many days in the form of a crayfish, and supposed
that he had only spent a few hours in the water. Presently he saw a
magnificent chariot with six horses coming slowly along the bank to meet
him. In the chariot he found everything needful both for himself and for
the maiden whom he had released from her watery prison, as well as an
attendant and a lady’s maid. The prince kept the attendant with him, but
sent the chariot and the maid with the clothes to the spot where his
naked darling was waiting under the rowan-tree. Rather more than an hour
elapsed before the coach returned, bringing the maiden attired as a
royal bride to the spot where the prince was waiting. He also was richly
dressed in wedding robes, and seated himself by her side in the chariot.
They drove straight to the city, and stopped before the door of the
church. In the church sat the king and queen in black garments, mourning
for the loss of their beloved son, who was supposed to have been drowned
in the river, for his horse and his clothes had been found on the bank.
Great was their joy <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> when their lost
son appeared before them, accompanied by a beautiful girl, both in
wedding attire. The king himself led them to the altar, and they were
married. Then a wedding-feast was prepared, which lasted for six whole
weeks.

 But there is no peace nor rest in the course of time, for days of
happiness appear to pass more quickly than hours of trouble. Soon after
the wedding, autumn set in, followed by frost and snow, and the young
couple did not feel much inclination to leave the house. But when spring
returned, the prince and his young consort went to walk in the garden.
There they heard a magpie crying out from the summit of a tree, “O what
an ungrateful creature to neglect the friends who have helped him so
much, in his days of happiness! Must the two poor girls sit spinning
gold thread all their lives? The lame old woman is not the mother of the
maidens, but a wicked witch who stole them away from a far country when
they were children. The old woman has committed many crimes, and
deserves no mercy. Let her be punished with boiled hemlock, or she will
perhaps direct another witch’s coil against the child who has been
rescued.”

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

 This reminded the prince of all that had happened, and he told his
consort how he had gone to the cottage in the wood to ask the advice of
her sisters, and how the maidens had taught him the language of birds,
and he had promised to release them from their servitude. His wife
begged him with tears in her eyes to go to the aid of her sisters. When
they awoke next morning, she said, “I had an important dream last night.
I dreamed that the old mother had left the house, and that the girls
were alone. No doubt this would be a good opportunity to go to their
aid.”

 The prince immediately equipped a troop of soldiers, and led them to
the cottage in the wood, where they arrived on the following day. The
maidens were alone, as the dream had foreshadowed, and ran out with
joyful cries to meet their deliverers. A soldier was ordered to gather
hemlock-roots, and to boil them for the punishment of the old woman, so
that she should need no more food if she came home, and ate a
sufficiency of them. They passed the night in the cottage, and on the
following morning set out early on the road with the maidens, so that
they reached the town in the evening. Great was the joy of the <span
id="page_234">p. 234</span> sisters, who had not seen each other for two
years.

 The old woman returned home the same night, and greedily devoured the
food which she found on the table. Then she crept into bed to rest, but
she never awoke again, for the hemlock put an end to her wicked life. A
week later the prince sent a trusty captain to see how things were going
on, when he found the old woman dead. Fifty loads of golden thread were
found in the secret chamber, and were divided among the sisters. As soon
as the treasure was carried away, the captain sent the red cock on the
roof.<span id="page_234_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_234_note_1.md) But while the
cock was already stretching his red comb out of the smoke-hole, a great
cat with fiery eyes clambered down the wall from the roof. The soldiers
chased the cat, and soon caught her, when a bird sang from the summit of
a tree, “Fix the cat in a trap by her tail, and all will come to light.”
The men obeyed.

 “Don’t torture me, good people,” said the cat. “I am a human being like
yourselves, and have been changed into the shape of a cat by witchcraft,
though it was a just return for my wickedness. <span id="page_235">p.
235</span> I was the housekeeper in the palace of a great king a long
way from here, and the old woman was the queen’s first chambermaid. We
were led by avarice to plot together secretly to steal the king’s three
daughters and a great treasure, and then to make our escape. After we
had contrived to make away with all the golden vessels, which the old
woman changed into golden flax, we took the children, when the eldest
was three years old, and the youngest six months. The old woman was
afraid that I might repent and change my intentions, so she transformed
me into a cat. Her death loosed my tongue, but I did not recover my
former shape.” When the captain heard this, he answered, “you deserve no
better fate than the old woman,” and ordered her to be thrown into the
fire.

 It was not long before the two elder princesses married kings’ sons,
like their youngest sister, and the golden thread which they had spun in
the cottage in the wood provided them with rich dowries. But they never
discovered their parents, nor the place of their birth. It was reported
that the old woman had buried many more loads of golden thread in the
ground, but no one could find the spot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-32.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_211">p. 211</span>

<span id="page_211_note_1"></span>[1](#page_211_fr_1.md) “These forests are
very useful in delivering princes from their courtiers, like a sieve
that keeps back the bran. Then the princes get away to follow their
fortunes.”—*George MacDonald*, “*The Light Princess*.”

<span id="footnotes_page_214">p. 214</span>

<span id="page_214_note_1"></span>[1](#page_214_fr_1.md) Compare the scene
with the four Grey Women in the second part of *Faust*.

<span id="footnotes_page_218">p. 218</span>

<span id="page_218_note_1"></span>[1](#page_218_fr_1.md) Nine is a mystical
number as well as seven.

<span id="footnotes_page_221">p. 221</span>

<span id="page_221_note_1"></span>[1](#page_221_fr_1.md) Ahti, the God of
the Waters.

<span id="footnotes_page_228">p. 228</span>

<span id="page_228_note_1"></span>[1](#page_228_fr_1.md) A sacred tree in
Eastern Europe, as it is in the British Isles.

<span id="footnotes_page_234">p. 234</span>

<span id="page_234_note_1"></span>[1](#page_234_fr_1.md) See page 108.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
