[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-54) [Next](hoe2-56.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE WOODEN MAN AND THE BIRCH-BARK MAID. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

T<span class="small">HIS</span> is another story which relates how a
stingy farmer starved all his servants, till no one would live with him.
He applied to a sorcerer, who directed him to take a black hare in a bag
to a cross-road for three Thursdays running, just before midnight, and
whistle for the Devil. The farmer took a black cat instead, and on the
third Thursday agreed with the Devil to receive a man-servant and a
maid, who should work for him for twice seven years, and who would
require no food, nothing but a little water. To ratify the bargain, the
farmer gave the Devil <span id="page_181">p. 181</span> three drops of
blood from his index-finger. At the end of the time the servants
disappeared, and the farmer could only find a rotten stump and a heap of
birch-bark, as their names signified (Puulane and Tohtlane). Then the
Devil seized the farmer by the throat and strangled him, and his wife
could find no trace of him but three drops of blood, while all the
corn-bins were empty, and the money-chest contained only withered
birch-leaves.

 

 A farmer who had unthinkingly devoted his lazy horse to the Devil, was
much annoyed by three, who appeared successively, and demanded it. At
last he was obliged to invite them to his Christmas-dinner, and to
promise to feed them on blood, flesh, and corn. But a Finnish sorcerer
taught him a charm by which he transformed them respectively into a bug,
a wolf, and a rat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-56.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
