[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-09) [Next](hoe2-11.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE MAGICIAN’S HEIRS. (KREUTZWALD.)

T<span class="small">HE</span> story of the traveller who appropriates
the magical properties over which the sons of a dead <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> magician are quarrelling is widely
distributed, and frequently occurs as a mere incident in a story; as,
for example, in that of Hasan of El Basrah in the *Thousand and One
Nights*. In the Esthonian stary of the “Dwarf’s<span
id="page_25_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_25_note_1.md) Quarrel,” the articles
form the leading *motif*; but mixed up with details curiously resembling
some Celtic fairy tales.

 A man passing through a wood came upon a small clearing, where he found
three dwarfs beating, pushing, kicking, and biting each other, and
tearing each other’s hair so that it was shocking to see them. They
proved to be fighting over an old hat, composed of the parings of
finger-nails,<span id="page_25_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_25_note_2.md) the
wearer of which could see everything taking place in the world, whether
near or far; a pair of bast shoes, which would carry the wearer anywhere
at a step; and a stick which would demolish everything before it. Each
of the dwarfs wanted to take all these articles, to go to a great
wedding which was just taking place in Courland. The referee put on the
hat, saw the wedding, and told the dwarfs to stand with their backs to
him, when he demolished them <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> with the
stick, only three drops of water being left where they had been
standing. Then he went to the wedding in Courland, where he found a
great number of people assembled, both high and low, for the entertainer
was a very rich householder.

 As the wearer of the magic hat could see everything hidden as well as
obvious, he saw when he lifted his eyes to the crossbeams<span
id="page_26_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_26_note_1.md) that there were a vast
crowd of little guests both there and on the door-posts, who seemed to
be far more numerous than the invited guests. But no one else could see
the little people. Presently some of them began to whisper, “Look there;
our old uncle’s come to the feast too.” “No,” answered others, “it seems
that this stranger has our uncle’s hat, shoes, and stick, but uncle
himself isn’t here.” Meantime, covered dishes were brought in for the
feast. Then the stranger saw what nobody else could perceive, that the
good food was abstracted from the dishes with wonderful quickness, and
worse put in its place. It went just the same with the jugs and bottles.
Then the stranger asked for the master of the house, greeted him
politely, and said, “Don’t be offended that I have come to the feast as
an uninvited stranger.” <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> “You are
welcome,” returned the host. “We have plenty to eat and drink, so that
we are not inconvenienced by a few uninvited guests.” The stranger
rejoined, “I can well believe that one or two uninvited guests would
make no difference, but if the uninvited guests are far more numerous
than those who are invited, the richest host may run short.” “I don’t
understand you,” said the host. The stranger gave him the hat, saying,
“Put my hat on, and raise your eyes to the crossbeams, and then you’ll
see them.” The host did so, and when he saw the tricks that the little
guests were playing with the feast, he turned as pale as death, and
cried out with a trembling voice, “Ah! my friend, my heart never dreamed
of such guests; and now I’ve taken off your hat, they’ve all vanished.
How can I ever get rid of them?” The owner of the hat returned, “I will
soon rid you of these little guests, if you will ask the invited guests
to step out for a short time, closing the doors and windows carefully,
and taking care that no chink or crack in the wall remains unstopped.”
Although the founder of the feast did not quite understand what he
meant, he consented to the stranger’s offer, and asked him to get rid of
the little nuisances.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

 In a short time the room was cleared of all the invited guests, the
doors, windows, and other openings were carefully closed, and the
stranger was left alone with the little guests. Then he began to swing
his cudgel towards the crossbeams and corners of the room so vigorously
that it was a pleasure to behold. In a few moments the whole mob of
little guests was annihilated, and as many drops of water were left on
the floor as if it had been raining heavily. Only one auger-hole had
been accidentally left unstopped, through which one of the dwarfs
slipped out, although the cudgel might still have reached the fugitive.
He fled across the enclosure, bellowing, “Oh, oh, what a calamity! Many
a time have I been terrified at the arrows of old father Pikne,<span
id="page_28_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_28_note_1.md) but they are nothing to
this cudgel!”

 When the host had convinced himself, by the aid of the magic hat, that
the room was cleared of the dwarfs, he invited the guests to re-enter.
During the feast the omniscient man read the secret thoughts of the
wedding-guests, and learned much which the others did not suspect. The
bridegroom thought more of the wealth of his father-in-law than <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span> of his young wife; and she, who was not
altogether faultless, hoped that her husband and her matron’s cap would
protect her from scandal. It’s a great pity that such a hat is no longer
to be met with in our times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-11.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="page_25_note_1"></span>[1](#page_25_fr_1.md) The Esthonian term
is peculiar. “Ox-knee people”—*i.e.*, people as tall as an ox’s knee.

<span id="page_25_note_2"></span>[2](#page_25_fr_2.md) Compare the
*Kalevipoeg*, Cantos 13 and 14.

<span id="footnotes_page_26">p. 26</span>

<span id="page_26_note_1"></span>[1](#page_26_fr_1.md) Compare Croker’s
Irish story of “Master and Man.”

<span id="footnotes_page_28">p. 28</span>

<span id="page_28_note_1"></span>[1](#page_28_fr_1.md) The Thunder-God.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
