[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-50) [Next](hoe2-52)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

# SECTION VIII

### *STORIES OF THE DEVIL AND OF BLACK MAGIC.*

S<span class="small">TORIES</span> relating to the Devil are very
frequent in Esthonian literature, and notwithstanding the universal
notion that you sell yourself to him by giving him three drops of your
blood, or by signing a compact with your blood, yet many stories of this
class are evidently pre-Christian. He is generally represented as a
buffoon, and easily outwitted. Further particulars respecting him will
be found in the Introduction. The stories incidentally referred to in
this section of our work are mostly related by Jannsen.

 As regards sorcery, the Esthonians appear to have regarded the Finns,
and the Finns the Lapps, as proficient in magic, each people attributing
most skill to those living north of themselves. However, it should be
mentioned that there is a ballad in the Finnish *Kanteletar* in which
the sun and moon are <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> represented as
stolen by German and Esthonian sorcerers. In the *Kalevala* they are
stolen by Louhi, the witch-queen of Lapland.

 The first story of this series, “The Son of the Thunder-God,”
represents this demigod as actually selling his soul to the Devil, and
tricking the Devil out of it. The Thunder-God is here called Paristaja,
and also Vana Kōu; but in other tales he is usually called Pikne, and is
no doubt identical with the Perkunas of the Lithuanians. In this story
the Devil is called Kurat, the Evil One; and also Vanapois (the Old
Boy), as in other tales.

 The primitive manner in which the undutiful son tickles the nose of his
august father is amusing. Vana (old) seems to be a term of respect
applied to gods and devils alike.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-52)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
