[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-69) [Next](hoe2-71.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE CHURCH AT PÜHALEPP.

B<span class="small">EFORE</span> Christian times there was a great
alder forest in the island of Dagö, where the people used to make
sacrifices and hold festivals. Afterwards the forest was hewn down, all
but one tree, under which the people wished to build a church. But the
missionaries would not consent, till a man advised them to yoke two oxen
to the cart in which the building materials should be loaded, and then
let them wander at will. Where they halted, the church should be built.

 So the oxen were driven to the alder forest, where there was plenty of
grass, and after being <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> allowed to
graze awhile they were brought back and yoked to the cart. They returned
to the heath and began to feed, and the church was erected on that spot
and named the Church of Pühalepp.

 The Devil thought to destroy it by hurling two great rocks at it at
night from a hill, after having carefully noted its position in the
daytime. He missed his aim in the darkness, but mounted his mare and
rode to see what damage was done. Just as he reached the church the cock
crew, and he was forced to turn round and ride back to hell. But the
marks of the mare’s hoofs are still to be seen where he heard the cock
crow.

 Another story relates how the Devil pulled down a church which was in
course of erection, and tore up the very foundations. But a wise man
told the people to take two white calves, dropped on that night, harness
them to a cart, and build the church where they stopped, which was
accordingly done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-71.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
