[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-02) [Next](hoe2-04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BLUEBEARD. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD</span>)

T<span class="small">HE</span> Esthonian version of “Bluebeard” (the
Wife-Murderer) is very similar to the usual story. A <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> rich lord, reported to have vast treasure-vaults
under his castle, lost his wives very fast, and married, as his twelfth
wife, the youngest of the three daughters of a reduced gentleman in the
neighbourhood. An orphan boy had been brought up in the household, and
had served first as a gooseherd, and then as page; but he was always
known as “Goose-Tony.” He was nearly of the same age as the young lady,
who had been his playmate, and he declared that the rich suitor was a
murderer; his heart told him so, and his presentiments had never yet
deceived him. The boy was scolded and threatened, but his warnings made
so much impression that he was allowed to accompany the bride to her new
home.

 Three weeks afterwards, the husband set out on a journey, leaving his
keys with his wife, among which was the gold key of the forbidden
chamber. He warned her that if she even looked in, he would be forced to
behead her with his own hand. She begged him in vain to take charge of
it himself; but he refused, and left it with her.

 Next morning one of the lady’s sisters came to stay with her; but a day
or two afterwards the page gave her another warning, after which he
<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> suddenly disappeared, and no trace of him
could be found. The two sisters looked over the house, and at last
encouraged each other to enter the secret chamber. In the middle stood
an oaken block with a broad axe upon it, and the floor was splashed with
blood. In the background against the wall stood a table, with the bloody
heads of the squire’s former wives ranged upon it. The lady dropped the
key in her horror, and on picking it up found it covered with
blood-stains, which nothing could remove, while the door stood a
handbreadth open, as if an invisible wedge had fallen between the door
and the door-post.

 The squire was not expected to return for a week, but he came back next
morning, and rushed upstairs in a frenzied rage, dragged his wife to the
block by her hair, and was just lifting the axe, when he was struck down
by Goose-Tony with a heavy cudgel, and bound. He was brought to justice,
and sentenced to death, and his property was adjudged to his widow, who
shortly after married the page who had saved her life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-04)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
