[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-74) [Next](hoe2-76.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

# SECTION XIII

### *PLAGUE-LEGENDS*

T<span class="small">HE</span> plague continued to rage in Eastern
Europe long after it had disappeared from the West, and down to a very
recent period. Consequently we find plague-legends, which have almost
died out in the British Islands, except in Scotland, rife among all the
Eastern nations. The Plague-demon is usually represented as female, but
in the Esthonian legends it is masculine.

 The Plague once seated himself in a boat which was returning to the
Island of Rogö,<span id="page_271_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_271_note_1.md)
which had hitherto escaped his ravages, in the shape of a tall black man
with a great scythe in his hand. He arrived among the dead crew, and at
once sprang on shore and began to destroy the inhabitants. Some saw the
Plague himself, and others not. If any one saw him, his heart froze with
terror <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> before he could speak a
word.<span id="page_272_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_272_note_1.md) One night
during a violent storm, an old woman saw him enter her cottage as she
was sitting alone spinning; but she gathered courage to cry out,
“Welcome, in God’s name.” He stopped short, muttering, “That’s enough,”
returned to the boat in which he had come, and went out to sea. The
storm ceased as he departed, and since then he has never reappeared.

 In the Island of Nuckö he appeared as an old grey man, with a taper in
one hand and a staff in the other, a book under his arm, and a
three-cornered hat on his head. As he went from house to house, he
looked up the names of his victims in his book, let his taper shine on
their faces to make sure that he had made no mistake, and touched the
doomed with his staff. A peasant once saw him enter his cottage, and
touch all with his staff, except himself and the infant in the cradle.
All the others died before cockcrow.<span
id="page_272_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_272_note_2.md)

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

 Another time the Plague was driving down a steep path which led to a
village, when be upset his vehicle and broke the axle. A passing peasant
helped him to bind it up, and directed him to the smithy; but be
declared that be was the Plague, and for the good deed that had been
done him all the village should be spared. So be turned his horse, drove
back up the hill, and vanished like a cloud. When the news was brought
to the village, bonfire of rejoicing were lighted, and kept up for many
days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-76.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_271">p. 271</span>

<span id="page_271_note_1"></span>[1](#page_271_fr_1.md) There is a similar
tale told of the arrival of the Cholera in one of the Greek islands.

<span id="footnotes_page_272">p. 272</span>

<span id="page_272_note_1"></span>[1](#page_272_fr_1.md) Speaking of the
Vad Velen, the Yellow Plague, in Britain, we are told in the
*Mabinogion* that all who saw him were doomed to die.

<span id="page_272_note_2"></span>[2](#page_272_fr_2.md) This story
somewhat resembles that of the old hag seen by Lord Seaforth when lying
ill of scarlet fever with several of his schoolfellows. The narrative
has been reprinted several times, and is included in Stead’s *More Ghost
Stories*, p. 37.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
