[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-68) [Next](hoe2-70.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE CHURCH AT REVEL.

R<span class="small">EVEL</span> was formerly an unimportant place, and
the inhabitants wished to make it famous by building a church. They
contracted with the great architect Olaf<span
id="page_262_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_262_note_1.md) to erect it; and when it
was completed, and he was about to fix the cross on the summit, his wife
cried out joyfully, “Olaf will come home to-day with a thousand barrels
of gold.”<span id="page_262_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_262_note_2.md) But
scarcely had <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> Olaf fixed the cross in
its place, when he slipped and fell to the ground, and a toad and a
snake sprang out of his mouth. The Devil wished to destroy the church,
but could not get near it; so he made a sling at Pernau, and hurled a
great rock at it. But the sling broke, and the rock fell half-way
between Pernau and Revel, where it now remains. (Similar tales are
related of the Devil in many countries, but are perhaps commonest in
Scandinavia.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-70.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_262">p. 262</span>

<span id="page_262_note_1"></span>[1](#page_262_fr_1.md) Doubtless Olev of
the *Kalevipoeg*; possibly St. Olaf may also be intended.

<span id="page_262_note_2"></span>[2](#page_262_fr_2.md) This incident
reminds us of the story of St. Olaf and the giant Wind and Weather (see
Keightley’s *Fairy Mythology*, Bohn’s edition, 1860, p. 117), though
here it is the giant church-builder who falls. According to one of the
legends of Cologne Cathedral, the architect was hurled from the top of
the unfinished building by the Devil. The calling of a person by name
was often regarded by the Scandinavians as a death-omen.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
