[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-61) [Next](hoe2-63)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE TREASURE AT KERTELL. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

D<span class="small">URING</span> a great war, the people of Kertell, in
the island of Dagö, caused a great iron chest to be made, <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> wherein they stored all their gold and
silver, and sunk it in the river near the old bridge. But they all
perished without recovering it. Many years afterwards, a man who was
passing by in the evening saw a small flame flickering in the air. He
laid his pipe on a stone and followed the flame; but it disappeared, and
on going to pick up his pipe, he found it gone, and money lying on the
stone. But afterwards, whenever he passed the stone, he found money. His
companions advised him to consult a magician with respect to raising the
treasure, of which the tradition had persisted; and the magician
directed him to go to the place where he had seen the flame on three
successive Thursdays, and sacrifice a cock, but not to speak of it to
any one.<span id="page_223_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_223_note_1) On the
third Thursday, he took some companions with him; and when the cock was
sacrificed, the treasure-chest appeared above water, and they dragged it
to shore with great labour. But one of the party looked towards the
bridge, and saw a little boy mounted on a pig riding over it. He
exclaimed to his companions, when the figures disappeared, the stakes
and ropes gave way, and the treasure fell <span id="page_224">p.
224</span> back into the river, and was irrecoverably lost to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-63)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_223">p. 223</span>

<span id="page_223_note_1"></span>[1](#page_223_fr_1) This seems to be
an error in the story; for the context shows that the prohibition was
not to speak a word during the ceremony.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
