[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-29) [Next](hoe2-31.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 In the *Kalevala*, Vainamonien has neither wife nor child, but the
Esthonians ascribe to him a foster-daughter, of whom the following story
is related.

 

## JUTTA. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)<span id="page_85_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_85_note_1.md)

O<span class="small">NCE</span> upon a time the God of Song wandered
musing by the banks of Lake Endla, and his harp <span id="page_86">p.
86</span> clanged in unison with the thoughts which moved his heart.
There he saw a little child lying near him in the grass, which stretched
out its hands to him. He looked round everywhere for the child’s mother,
but she was nowhere to be seen. So he lifted up the beautiful little
girl, and went to Taara, and begged him to give him the child as his
own. Ukko consented, and as he gazed graciously at his daughter, her
eyes shone like stars, and her hair glittered like bright gold.

 Under the divine protection the child grew up from the tender infant to
the maiden Jutta. The God of Song taught her the sweet art of speech,
and Ilmarine wrought the girl a veil, wondrously woven of silver
threads. He who gazed through her veil saw everything of which the
maiden spoke as if it were passing before his eyes. She is said to have
dwelt by the Lake of Endla, where she was often seen, planning the
flights of the birds of passage, and showing them the way; and also when
she <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> wandered by the shores of the lake,
and wept for the death of Endla,<span
id="page_87_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_87_note_1.md) her beloved. But she took
the wonderful veil, and gazed upon the happy past, and then was she
happy, for she thought she possessed what her eyes saw. She has also
lent her veil to mortal men, and then it is that the songs and legends
of the past become living to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-31.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="page_85_note_1"></span>[1](#page_85_fr_1.md) This story is also
related, more briefly, by Blumberg, who states that Lake Endla lies in
an impassable swamp in the district of Vaimastfer, and is visible from
the hill near Kardis. The fish and birds are under the protection of
Jutta, and there is no place in the country where birds congregate to
such an extent, and birds of passage remain so long. Jutta is perhaps
the same as Lindu (vol. ii. <span id="footnotes_page_86">p. 86</span> p.
147). Near Heidelberg is a spring called the “Wolfsbrunnen,” where a
beautiful enchantress named Jutta, the priestess of Hertha, is said to
have had an assignation with her lover; but he found she had been killed
by a wolf, the messenger of the offended goddess. Whether there is any
connection between the German and Esthonian Jutta I do not know.

<span id="footnotes_page_87">p. 87</span>

<span id="page_87_note_1"></span>[1](#page_87_fr_1.md) Or Endel, the son of
Ilmarine. Blumberg writes “Wanemuinen” and “Ilmarinen” in his account of
the legend, which nearly approach the Finnish forms of the names.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
