[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-58) [Next](hoe2-60.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

# SECTION IX

### *HIDDEN TREASURES*

I<span class="small">N</span> Esthonia, as elsewhere, we meet with many
stories of hidden treasure, frequently in connection with devils, and
hence we place this section next to the Devil-stories. The stories of
“The Courageous Barn-keeper” and of the “Gallows Dwarfs” are curious and
interesting; those which follow are given here only in abstract. In all
countries which have been devastated by war, traditions on hidden
treasure are common. I remember once reading a story in a newspaper (but
I do not know if the report was true) of a quantity of coins of Edward
the Confessor and Harold being dug up in a field respecting which there
was a tradition in the neighbourhood that a great treasure was concealed
in it. In Esthonian as well as in Oriental tales, hidden treausures are
usually under the care of non-human guardians, even when it is not said
that they were specially placed under their protection. This notion
<span id="page_195">p. 195</span> probably persists in many countries to
the present day. It is said that when Kidd, the famous pirate, buried a
hoard of treasure, he used to slaughter a negro at the place, that the
ghost might guard it. Stories of his hidden treasure (more or less
probable) are still rife in America.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-60.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
