[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-04) [Next](hoe2-06.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE DRAGON-SLAYER.

W<span class="small">E</span> find this story in a familiar form in that
of “The Lucky Rouble” (Kreutzwald). The father of three sons, before his
death, gives Peter,<span id="page_6_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_6_note_2.md) the
youngest, a magic silver rouble, which always returns to the pocket of
its possessor. Peter afterwards meets a one-eyed old man, who sells him
three black dogs, named Run-for-Food, Tear-Down, and Break-Iron.
Afterwards, when passing through a forest, he meets a grand coach, in
which a princess, who has been chosen by lot to be delivered over to a
monster, is being conveyed to her doom. Peter abides the issue, and
encounters the <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> monster, which is described
as like a bear, but much bigger than a horse, covered with scales
instead of hair, with two crooked horns on the head, two long wings,
long boars’ tusks, and long legs and claws.<span
id="page_7_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_7_note_1.md) With the assistance of the
dog Tear-Down, Peter kills the monster, cuts off his horns and tusks,
and leaves the princess with the coachman, promising to return in three
years. The coachman compels the princess by threats to say that he
killed the dragon; but the princess contrives to delay her marriage with
the coachman, and on the wedding-day Peter returns, is imprisoned by
order of the king, but released by Break-Iron. Then he sends
Run-for-Food to the princess, who recognises him, and reveals the secret
to her father. The coachman is condemned to death, and Peter produces
the horns and claws of the dragon, and marries the princess, when the
dogs, whose mission is accomplished, assume the forms of swans, and fly
away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-06.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="page_6_note_2"></span>[2](#page_6_fr_2.md) Peeter.

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="page_7_note_1"></span>[1](#page_7_fr_1.md) Not a bad description
of a conventional dragon. If these stories could be traced back to their
original source, we should certainly find them to be founded on
traditions of some of the great extinct Saurians. They are too explicit,
and too discordant, to be founded only on rumours of the existence of
crocodiles.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
