[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-15) [Next](hoe2-17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## RED RIDING-HOOD.

O<span class="small">NE</span> of the most fantastic stories of this
series is “The Devil’s Visit” (Jannsen: Veckenstedt), which,
notwithstanding its subject, has an absurd <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> resemblance in some of its details to “Little Red
Riding-Hood.”

 Two men and their wives lived together in a cottage; one couple had
three children, the others were childless. One day, both husbands were
absent, and the Devil and his son knocked at the door in their
semblance, and sat down to supper. But the eldest child said secretly,
“Mother, mother, father’s got long claws!” The second said, “Mother,
mother, he’s got a tail too!” And the youngest added, “Mother, mother,
he’s got iron teeth in his mouth.” The woman comforted the children, and
while the childless woman went with one of the devils, the mother put
the children to bed on the stove, laid juniper twigs in front, and made
the sign of the cross over them.

 She then gave the Devil the end of her girdle to hold, by which to draw
her to him, but she fastened the other end to a log of wood, and climbed
on the roof for safety, taking with her a three-pronged fork. As soon as
the devils began to devour the supposed women,<span
id="page_39_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_39_note_1) the elder discovered that
he had <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> been deceived; and his son
advised him to devour the children; but he could not get at them. Then
his son advised him to look for the mother; and he tried to climb on the
roof, but the woman struck him back with the fork, and he called to his
son for help. The son immediately rushed out of the cottage to get his
share of the prey, when a red cock crew, and the Devil cried out, “He’s
my half-brother,” and tried again to get on the roof. Then crowed a
white cock, and the Devil cried out, “He’s my godfather,” and scrambled
on the corner of the gable. Then crowed a black cock, when the Devil
cried out, “He’s my murderer!” and both devils vanished, as if they had
sunk into the ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="page_39_note_1"></span>[1](#page_39_fr_1) It must be said, to
the credit of the Esthonian devils, that they only appear occasionally
in the light of ogres. In many tales they are harmless, and sometimes
amiable.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
