[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-55) [Next](hoe2-57.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Another story, in which the Devil gets the worst of it, is

 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

## THE COMPASSIONATE SHOEMAKER. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

O<span class="small">NCE</span> upon a time, when God himself was still
on earth, it happened that he went to a farm-house disguised as a
beggar,<span id="page_182_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_182_note_1.md) while a
christening was going forward, and asked for a lodging. But the people
did not receive him, and declared that he might easily be trodden under
the feet of the guests in the confusion. The poor man offered to creep
under the stove, and lie still there; but they would not heed his
prayer, and showed him the door, telling him he might go to the mud
hovel, or wherever he liked.

 In the hovel lived a shoemaker, who was always very compassionate
towards the poor and needy, and would rather suffer hunger himself than
allow <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> a poor man to leave his
threshold unrelieved. God went to him, and begged for a night’s lodging.
The shoemaker gave him a friendly reception and something to eat, and
offered him his own bed, while he himself lay on straw.

 Next morning, when God took his departure, he thanked his host, and
said, “I am he who has power to fulfil whatsoever the heart can desire.
You have given me a friendly and most hospitable reception and I am
grateful to you from my heart, and will reward you. Speak a wish, and it
shall be fulfilled.”

 The shoemaker answered, “Then I will wish that whenever a poor man
comes to ask my aid, I may be able to give him what he most requires,
and that I myself may never want for daily bread as long as I live.”

 “Let it be so!” answered God, who took leave of him and departed.

 Meantime the people in the farmhouse were feasting and drinking, not
remembering the proverbs, “A large piece strains the mouth,” and “The
mouth is the measure of the stomach.” They set the house on fire by
their recklessness, and only escaped with bare life. All their goods and
chattels were reduced <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> to ashes, and
they were left without a roof to shelter them. The guests hastened home,
but the farmer and his people were forced to take refuge in the
shoemaker’s hut. He received them in the most friendly way, and gave
them clothes and shoes, and food and drink, and saw to it that they
wanted for nothing till they could again provide themselves with
shelter.

 Besides this, needy people came every day to the shoemaker, and each
received an abundant allowance.

 As he thus doled out everything, and refused no one relief, low people
jeered at him, saying, “What is your object in giving everything away?
You cannot make the world warm.” He answered, “We should love our
neighbours as ourselves.”

 At length the shoemaker felt that his last hour had come. So he dressed
himself neatly, took with him a staff of juniper, and set off on the way
to hell. The warden trembled when he saw him, and cried out, “Throw down
the staff! No one may bring such a weapon to hell.” The shoemaker took
no heed of this speech, but pressed on his way. At length the Prince of
Hell himself met him, and cried out, “Throw down your staff and let us
wrestle. If you overcome me, I will be your <span id="page_185">p.
185</span> slave; but if I should overcome you, then you must serve me.”

 This did not please the shoemaker, who answered, “I will not wrestle
with you, for you have such very clumsy hands, but come against me with
a spear.”

 As the Devil continued talking, and again advised him to throw away the
staff, the shoemaker struck him a heavy blow with it behind the ear.
Upon this, all hell shook, and the Devil and his companions vanished
suddenly, as lead sinks in water.

 Then the shoemaker proceeded farther, and cautiously explored the
interior of the underworld. In one hall lay a great book, in which the
souls of all children who died unbaptized were recorded. Near the book
lay many keys, which opened the rooms in which the children’s souls were
imprisoned. So he took the keys, released the innocent captive souls,
and went with them to heaven, where he was received with honour, and a
thanksgiving feast was instituted in remembrance of his good deed.

 

 Among other stories of devils is one of a forester who gave the Devil
three drops of blood for a magic powder which would heal all wounds. But
when <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> he died, his corpse rushed out at
the door, and was never seen again. Another time, a dull schoolboy, who
was always beaten by his master, met the Devil, who drew blood from
three punctures, and wrote a compact with it; but the boy was rescued by
a clever student, who afterwards died from the bursting of the
“blood-vessel of wisdom,” as was ascertained by autopsy.

 The Devil is sometimes represented as driving about in a coach drawn by
twelve black stallions, and annoying the neighbourhood.

 Another time, a charitable orphan-girl stayed late one Saturday evening
in the bath-house,<span id="page_186_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_186_note_1.md)
after washing the poor and helpless, when the Devil and his mother and
three sons drove up in a coach drawn by four black stallions, with
harness adorned with gold and silver, and asked her hand for one of his
sons. But the maiden fled back into the bath-house, after making the
sign of the cross on the threshold, and replied that she was not ready,
as she had no shoes nor dress. The Devil desired her to ask for whatever
she wanted; but a mouse called to her to ask for each article
separately. <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> One of the sons fetched
each article as it was asked for; and the maiden was at last fully
attired, when the cock crew, and everything vanished. Next day the
girl’s mistress and her daughter were envious of her fine clothes and
ornaments; and next Saturday evening the daughter went to the
bath-house. But she despised the warning of the mouse, and asked for
everything at once, when she was taken into the coach and carried away.

 Tales of minor dealings with the Devil are common. A farmer taking flax
to market, invoked the Devil to enable him to sell it well. The Devil
did so, and rode home with him from market, made him drunk, and tempted
him to commit a burglary at the house of a rich man in the
neighbourhood. He put his hat on the farmer’s head, which made him
invisible, and broke open the iron bars of the door with his teeth. On
the way home, the farmer cried out, while crossing the ford where he had
first met the Devil, “Good God! how much money I’ve got!” The Devil
vanished, and all the treasure fell into the stream, and was lost. On
another occasion, a labourer devoted his horse to the Devil, at a time
when an old Devil and his son overheard him. The son wanted to lay claim
to it, but his father warned <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> him that
it was no use, for such people did not mean what they said, and did not
keep their word. Nevertheless, the imp went to unharness it, and the
peasant in terror invoked the Trinity, when the imp ran away, and his
father laughed at him.

 The stories which follow, like several of the preceding, are mostly
told by Jannsen, and deal with various forms of black magic. The first
is an instance of something very like Vampyrism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-57.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_182">p. 182</span>

<span id="page_182_note_1"></span>[1](#page_182_fr_1.md) This disguise is
often assumed by God in the stories of Eastern Europe, when he wishes to
be incognito; nor is it always clear whether God or Christ is intended.
I remember once reading a Lithuanian Story in which God and St. Peter
are represented as descending to earth disguised as beggars, for fear
they might be recognised, to inquire into the wickedness of mankind
before the Flood.

<span id="footnotes_page_186">p. 186</span>

<span id="page_186_note_1"></span>[1](#page_186_fr_1.md) The bath is a
special place of resort for devils in Mohammedan folk-lore.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
