[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-30) [Next](hoe2-32.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 We will now proceed to stories relative to the nature-spirits,
commencing with those of the water, who are both numerous and powerful
among the Finns and Esthonians. Other stories concerning them will be
found in different parts of the book.

 

## THE TWELVE DAUGHTERS. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

O<span class="small">NCE</span> upon a time there lived a poor labourer
who had twelve daughters, among whom were two pairs of twins. They were
all charming girls, healthy, ruddy, and well made. The parents were very
poor, and the neighbours could not understand how <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> they managed to feed and clothe so many children. Every day
the children were washed and their hair combed, and they always wore
clean clothes, like Saxon children. Some thought that the labourer had a
treasure-bringer, who brought him whatever he wanted;<span
id="page_88_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_88_note_1.md) others said that he was a
sorcerer, and others thought he was a wizard who knew how to discover
hidden treasures in the whirlwind. But the real explanation was very
different. The labourer’s wife had a secret benefactress who fed and
washed and combed the children.

 When the mother was a girl, she lived in service at a farmhouse, where
she dreamed for three nights running that a noble lady came towards her,
and desired her to go to the village spring on St. John’s eve. Perhaps
she would have forgotten all about the dream; but on St. John’s Eve she
heard a small voice like the buzzing of a gnat always singing in her
ear, “Go to the spring, go to the spring, whence trickle the watery
streams of your good fortune!” Although she could not listen to this
secret summons without a shudder, yet she fortified her heart at length,
and leaving the other maidens, <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> who were
amusing themselves with the swing and round the fire, she went to the
spring. The nearer she came, the more her heart failed her, and she
would have turned back if the gnat-like voice had allowed her any rest;
but it drove her unwillingly onwards. When she reached the spot, she saw
a lady in white robes sitting on a stone by the spring. When the lady
perceived the girl’s alarm, she advanced a few steps to meet her, and
offered her her hand, saying, “Fear nothing, dear child; I will do you
no harm. Give good heed to what I tell you, and remember it. In the
autumn you will be sought in marriage. Your bridegroom will be as poor
as yourself; but do not concern yourself about this, and accept his
offered brandy.<span id="page_89_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_89_note_1.md) As
you are both good people, I will bring you happiness, and help you to
get on; but do not neglect thrift and labour, without which no happiness
is lasting. Take this bag, and put it in your pocket; there is nothing
in it but a few milk-can pebbles.<span
id="page_89_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_89_note_2.md) When you have given birth
to your first child, throw a pebble into the well, and I will come <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> to see you. When the child is baptized, I will
be the sponsor. Let no one know of our nocturnal meeting. For the
present I say farewell.” At these words the wonderful stranger vanished
from the girl’s eyes as suddenly as if she had sunk into the ground.
Very likely the girl might have thought that this adventure was a dream
too, if the bag in her hand had not testified to its reality: it
contained twelve stones.

 The prediction was fulfilled, and the girl was married in the autumn to
a poor labourer. Next year the young wife gave birth to her first child,
and remembering what had happened to her on St. John’s Eve, she rose
secretly from her bed, and threw a pebble into the well. It splashed
into the water, and immediately the friendly white-robed lady stood
before her, and said, “I thank you for not forgetting me. Take the child
to be baptized on Sunday fortnight, and I will come to church too, and
stand sponsor.”

 When the child was brought into church on the appointed day, an unknown
lady entered, who took it on her lap and had it baptized. When this was
done, she tied a silver rouble in the child’s swaddling clothes, and
gave it back to the mother. The same thing happened at the birth of each
successive child, until there were twelve. On the birth of the last
<span id="page_91">p. 91</span> child, the lady said to the mother,
“Henceforward you will see me no more, though I shall invisibly watch
over you and your children daily. The water of the well will benefit the
children more than the best food. When the time comes for your daughters
to marry, you must give each the rouble which I brought as their
godmother’s gift. Until then, do not let them dress finely, but let them
wear clean dresses and clean linen both on week-days and Sundays.”

 The children grew and throve so well that it was a delight to see them.
There was plenty of bread in the house, though sometimes little else,
but both parents and children seemed to be chiefly strengthened by the
water of the well. In due time the eldest daughter was married to the
son of a prosperous innkeeper. Although she brought him nothing beyond
her most needful clothing, yet a bridal chest was made, and her clothes
and her godmother’s rouble put into it. But when the men lifted the
chest into the cart, they found it so heavy that they thought it must be
full of stones, for the poor labourer could not have given his daughter
anything of value. But great was the young bride’s amazement when she
opened the chest in her husband’s house and found it filled with pieces
of linen, <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> and at the bottom a leathern
purse containing a hundred silver roubles. The same thing happened after
every fresh marriage, and the daughters were soon all betrothed when it
became known that each received such a bridal portion.

 One of the sons-in-law was a very avaricious man, and was not satisfied
with his wife’s bridal portion. He thought that the parents themselves
must be possessed of great riches, if they could bestow so much on each
daughter. So he went one day to his father-in-law, and began to pester
him about his supposed treasure. The labourer told him the exact truth.
“I have nothing but my body and soul, and could not give my daughters
anything but the chests. I have nothing to do with what each found in
her chest. It is the gift of the godmother, who gave each of the
children a rouble at her christening, and this has multiplied itself in
the chests.” The avaricious son-in-law would not believe him, and
threatened to denounce the old man as a wizard and wind-sorcerer, who
had amassed a large treasure in this manner. But as the labourer had a
clear conscience, he did not fear his son-in-law’s threats. The latter,
however, actually made his complaint to the authorities, and the court
sent for the other sons-in-law of <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> the
labourer, and inquired whether each of their brides had received the
same portion. The men declared that each had received a chest of linen
and a hundred silver roubles. This caused great surprise, for the whole
neighbourhood knew that the labourer was a poor man, and had no other
treasure but his twelve pretty daughters. The people knew that the
daughters had always worn clean white linen from their earliest years,
but nobody had seen them wear any other ornaments, neither brooches nor
coloured neckerchiefs. The judge now determined to investigate this
wonderful affair more closely, and to find out whether the old man was
really a sorcerer.

 One day the judge left the town, attended by his police. They wished to
surround the labourer’s house with guards, so that no one could get out
and carry away the treasure. The avaricious son-in-law accompanied them
as guide. When they reached the wood in which the labourer’s house
stood, guards were posted on all sides, with strict orders not to allow
any one to pass till the matter had been fully investigated. The rest
left their horses behind, and followed the footpath to the cottage. The
son-in-law warned them to advance slowly and silently, for fear the
sorcerer might see them coming <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> and
escape on the wings of the wind. They had already nearly reached the
cottage, when they were suddenly dazzled by the wonderful splendour
which shone through the trees. As they advanced, a large and splendid
palace became visible. It was entirely built of glass, and illuminated
by hundreds of tapers, although the sun shone, and the day was perfectly
light. Two sentries stood at the door, wholly cased in brazen armour,
and holding long drawn swords in their hands. The officials did not know
what to make of it, and everything looked more like a dream than
reality. Then the door opened, and a young man gaily attired in silken
garments, came forth and said, “Our queen has commanded that the
chief-justice shall appear before her.” Although the judge felt some
alarm, he decided to follow the young man into the house.

 Who can describe the splendour which he beheld! In a magnificent hall
as large as a church sat a lady enthroned, robed in silk, satin, and
gold. Some feet lower sat twelve beautiful princesses on smaller golden
seats. They were dressed as magnificently as the queen, except that they
wore no golden crowns. On both sides stood numerous attendants, all in
bright silken attire and with golden necklaces. When the chief judge
came forward bowing, the <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> queen demanded,
“Why have you come out to-day with a host of police, as if you were
about to arrest criminals?” The judge was about to answer, but terror
stopped his utterance and he could not speak a word. “I know the base
lying charges,” continued the queen, “for nothing is concealed from my
eyes. Let the false accuser enter, but chain him hand and foot, and I
will pronounce just sentence. Let the other judges and attendants enter
too, that the matter may be done publicly, and that they may bear
witness that no one suffers injustice here.” One of the servants
hastened out to fulfil the order, and after some time the accuser was
led in, chained hand and foot, and guarded by six soldiers in armour.
The remaining judges and attendants followed. Then the queen addressed
the assembly.

 “Before I pronounce the well-deserved sentence on the offender, I must
briefly explain the real state of the case, I am the most powerful Lady
of the Waters, and all the springs of water which rise from the earth
are subject to my authority.<span
id="page_95_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_95_note_1.md) The eldest son of the King
of the Winds was my lover, but as <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> his
father would not allow him to take a wife, we were obliged to keep our
marriage secret as long as his father lived.<span
id="page_96_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_96_note_1.md) As I could not venture to
bring up my children at home, I exchanged them with the children of the
labourer’s wife, as often as she was confined. The labourer’s children
were reared as foster-children by my aunt, and whenever one of the
labourer’s daughters was about to marry, another change was effected.

 “Each time, on the night before the wedding, I had my daughter carried
away, and that of the labourer substituted. The old King of the Winds
had been lying ill for a long time, and knew nothing of our proceedings.
On the christening-day I gave each child a silver rouble to form the
marriage portion in her bridal chest. All the sons-in-law were satisfied
with their young wives and with what they brought them, except this
avaricious scoundrel whom you see before you in chains, who dared to
bring false accusations against his father-in-law, in hopes of enriching
himself thereby. The old King of the <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>
Winds died a fortnight ago, and my consort succeeded to the throne. It
is no longer necessary for us to conceal our marriage and our children.
Here sit my twelve daughters, and their foster-parents, the labourer and
his wife, shall dwell with me as my pensioners till their death. But
you, worthless scamp, whom I have put in chains, shall also receive your
just reward. You shall sit chained in a mountain of gold, so that your
greedy eyes shall ever behold the gold without your being able to touch
a particle. For seven hundred years you shall endure this torment before
death shall have power to bring you rest. This is my decree.”

 When the queen had finished speaking, a noise was heard like a violent
clap of thunder; the earth quaked, and the magistrates and their
servants fell down stunned. When they recovered their senses, they found
themselves in the wood to which their guide had led them, but on the
spot where the palace of glass had stood in all its splendour, clear
cold water now gushed forth from a small spring. Nothing more was ever
heard of the labourer, his wife, or his avaricious son-in-law. The widow
of the latter married another husband in the autumn, and lived happily
with him for the rest of her life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-32.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_88">p. 88</span>

<span id="page_88_note_1"></span>[1](#page_88_fr_1.md) Compare the story of
the “Treasure-Bringer,” in a later section of the volume.

<span id="footnotes_page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="page_89_note_1"></span>[1](#page_89_fr_1.md) Brandy is offered by
a lover in Esthonia, and accepted by the girl if she favours him.

<span id="page_89_note_2"></span>[2](#page_89_fr_2.md) Small stones are
used for cleaning milk-cans.

<span id="footnotes_page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="page_95_note_1"></span>[1](#page_95_fr_1.md) Jannsen remarks that
her authority seems to have been limited to these, and also that she
cannot have been the supreme Water-Goddess, whose husband is Ahti, the
God of the Sea.

<span id="footnotes_page_96">p. 96</span>

<span id="page_96_note_1"></span>[1](#page_96_fr_1.md) These long-lived,
but mortal Elemental Powers seem to correspond to some classes of the
Arabian Jinn, as for instance, the Diving Jinn in such tales as
“Jullanur of the Sea” (*Thousand and One Nights*). They may also be
compared with the Elemental Spirits of the Rosicrucians, who are
long-lived, but likewise mortal.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
