[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-06) [Next](hoe2-08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE ENVIOUS SISTERS.

T<span class="small">HE</span> Esthonian version of this story (the last
in Galland’s original translation of the *Thousand* <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> *and One Nights*, and also found in Germany
and elsewhere), is peculiarly fantastic as “The Prince who rescued his
Brothers” (Kreutzwald). A young king was very ill, and the soothsayers
and magicians could not cure him. One of the magicians, however, at
length finding that the king’s hands and arms were gold-coloured to the
elbows, his legs silver-coloured to the knees, and his belly of the
colour of blue glass, told him that he would only be cured by marrying a
young bride similarly coloured. Such a bride was discovered in the
daughter of one of the king’s generals, and she was made queen. The
queen was confined of six boys at once; but her eider sister was jealous
of her, and availed herself of the services of an old witch, who carried
the children away by night, and handed them over to the Old Boy,
replacing them with puppies. The queen was confined a second and a third
time, each time of three princes, who suffered the same fate, but the
nurse contrived to hide one of the last three princes. Nevertheless, the
king was now so enraged that he ordered the mother and child to be
thrown into the sea on an iron bed for a boat. But it floated away with
them; and when the prince was seven weeks old, he had <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> grown to be a young man, and he began to talk
to his mother. Soon afterwards they reached an island, when the prince
kicked the bed to pieces, and they went ashore. The prince met an old
man, who gave him a hatchet which would build houses, and a wand which
would change ants into men; whereupon the prince built and populated a
city. The prince then changed himself into a flea, and went to his
father’s palace. The king had married the wicked sister-in-law, and she
was trying to persuade him not to visit the island where the queen and
prince had settled, but to visit another country, where he would see
more wonderful things. He went; but his son had already removed the
wonders to his own island, and he returned disappointed. As the king was
still bent on visiting the island, the new queen advised him instead to
visit a country where he would see eleven men, coloured like himself.
When the prince told his mother what he had heard, she knew that they
were her sons. Then the queen prepared three cakes, one poisoned, and
the others mixed with milk from her breast. The prince set out, gave the
poisoned cake to the old devil who guarded his brothers, and divided the
other cakes with them. They then <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> escaped
to the prince’s island in the form of doves, and presently the king and
queen arrived, and the king was informed of the whole plot.

 Then the king ordered the wicked queen and the sorceress to be put to
death, and settled down in his son’s island with his wife and children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-08)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
