[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-23) [Next](hoe2-25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

## THE MERMAID.<span id="page_49_fr_1"></span>[{1}](#page_49_note_1) (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

I<span class="small">N</span> the happy days of old, better men lived on
earth than now, and the Heavenly Father revealed many wonders to them
which are now quite concealed, or but rarely manifested to a child of
fortune. It is true that the birds sing and the beasts converse as of
old, but unhappily we no longer comprehend their speech, and what they
say brings us neither profit nor wisdom.

 In old days a fair mermaid dwelt on the shores of the province of
Lääne. She often appeared to the people, and my grandfather’s father,
who was reared in the neighbourhood, sometimes saw her sitting on a
rock, but the little fellow did not venture to approach her. The maiden
appeared in various forms, sometimes as a foal or a calf, and sometimes
under the form of some other animal. In the evening she often came among
the children, and let them play with her, until some little boy mounted
her back, <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> when she would vanish as
suddenly as if she had sunk into the ground.

 At that time old people said that in former days the maiden was to be
seen on the borders of the sea almost every fine evening in the summer,
sitting on a rock, and combing her long fair hair with a golden comb,
and she sang such beautiful songs that it melted the hearts of her
listeners. But she could not endure the gaze of men, and vanished from
their sight or fled into the sea, where she rocked on the waves like a
swan. We will now relate the cause of her flying from men, and no longer
meeting them with her former confidence.

 In old times, long before the invasion of the Swedes, a rich farmer
lived on the coast of Lääne with his wife and four sons. They obtained
their food more from the sea than from the land, for fishing was a very
productive industry in their days. The youngest son was very different
from his brothers, even from a child. He avoided the companionship of
men, and wandered about on the sea-shore and in the forest. He talked
much to himself and to the birds, or to the winds and waves, but when he
was in the company of others he hardly opened his mouth, but stood like
one dreaming. <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> When the storms raged over
the sea in autumn, and the waves swelled up as high as a house and broke
foaming on the beach, the boy could not contain himself in the house,
but ran like one possessed, and often half-naked, to the shore. Neither
wind nor weather harmed his robust body. He sprang into his boat, seized
the oars, and drove like a wild goose over the crest of the raging
billows far out to sea, without incurring any harm by his rashness. In
the morning, when the storm had spent its fury, he was found sound
asleep on the beach. If he was sent anywhere on an errand, to herd
cattle in summer, or to do any other easy employment, he gave his
parents only trouble. He lay down under the shadow of a bush without
minding the animals, and they strayed away or trampled down the meadows
and cornfields, and his brothers had often to work for hours before they
could find the lost animals. The father often let the boy feel the rod
severely enough, but it had no more effect than water poured on the back
of a goose. When the boy grew up into a youth, he did not mend his ways.
No work prospered in his negligent hands; he hacked and broke the tools,
wearied out the draught cattle, and yet never did anything right.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

 His father sent him to neighbouring farmers to work, hoping that a
stranger’s whip might improve the sloven, but whoever had the fellow for
one week on trial sent him back again on the next. His parents rated him
for a sluggard, and his brothers dubbed him “Sleepy Tony.” This soon
became his nickname with everybody, though he had been christened
Jüri.<span id="page_52_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_52_note_1) Sleepy Tony
brought no one any good, but was only a nuisance to his parents and
relatives, so that they would gladly have given a sum of money if
anybody would have rid them of the lazy fellow. As nobody would put up
with him any longer, his father engaged him as servant to a foreign
captain, because he could not run away at sea, and because he had always
been so fond of the water from a child. However, after a few weeks,
nobody knows how, he escaped from the ship, and again set his lazy feet
on his native soil. But he was ashamed to enter his father’s house,
where he could not expect to meet with a friendly reception, so he
wandered about from one place to another, and sought to get his living
as he could, without working. He was a strong handsome fellow, and could
talk very agreeably if he liked, although he <span id="page_53">p.
53</span> had never been accustomed to talk much in his father’s house.
He was now obliged to use his handsome appearance and fine tongue to
ingratiate himself with the women and girls.

 One fine summer evening after sunset it happened that he was wandering
alone on the beach when the clear song of the mermaid reached his ears.
Sleepy Tony thought to himself, “She is a woman, at any rate, and won’t
do me any harm.” He did not hesitate to approach nearer, to take a view
of the beautiful bird. He climbed the highest hill, and saw the mermaid
some distance off, sitting on a rock, combing her hair with a golden
comb, and singing a ravishing song. The youth would have wished for more
ears to listen to her song, which pierced his heart like a flame, but
when he drew nearer he saw that he would have needed just as many eyes
to take in the beauty of the maiden. The mermaid must have seen him
coming, but she did not fly from him, as she was always wont to do when
men approached. Sleepy Tony advanced to within ten paces of her, and
then stopped, undecided whether to go nearer. And oh, wonderful! the
mermaid rose from the stone and came to meet him with a friendly air.
She gave him her hand in <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> greeting, and
said, “I have expected you for many days, for a fateful dream warned me
of your arrival. You have neither house nor home among those of your own
race. Why should you be dependent upon strangers when your parents
refuse to receive you into their house? I have known you from a child,
and better than men have known you, for I have often watched over and
protected you when your rashness would otherwise have destroyed you. I
have often guarded the rocking boat with my hands, when it would
otherwise have sunk in the depths. Come with me, and you shall enjoy
every happiness which your heart can desire, and you shall want for
nothing. I will watch over and protect you as the apple of my eye, so
that neither wind nor rain nor frost shall touch you.”

 Sleepy Tony stood for a time uncertain what to answer, though every
word of the maiden was like a flaming arrow in his heart. At last he
stammered out an inquiry as to whether her home was very far away. “We
can reach it with the speed of the wind, if you have confidence in me,”
answered the mermaid. Then Sleepy Tony remembered many sayings which he
had heard about the mermaid, and his heart failed him, and he asked for
three days to <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> make up his mind. “I will
agree to your wish,” said the mermaid, “but lest you should again be
doubtful, I will put my gold ring on your finger before we part, that
you may not forget to return. When we are better acquainted, this pledge
may serve as an engagement ring.” She then drew off the ring, placed it
on the youth’s little finger, and vanished as if she had melted into
air. Sleepy Tony stood staring with wide-open eyes, and would have
supposed it was all a dream, if the sparkling ring on his finger had not
been proof to the contrary. But the ring seemed like a strange spirit,
which left him no peace or rest anywhere. He wandered aimlessly about
the shore all night, and always returned to the rock on which the maiden
had been sitting; but the stone was cold and vacant. In the morning he
lay down for a short time, but uneasy dreams disturbed his sleep. When
he awoke, he felt neither hunger nor thirst, and all his thoughts were
directed towards the evening, when he hoped to see the mermaid again.
The day waned at last, and evening approached, the wind sank, the birds
in the alder-bushes left off singing and tucked their tired heads under
their wings, but that evening he saw the mermaid nowhere.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 He wept bitter tears of sorrow and trouble, and reflected bitterly on
his folly in having hesitated to seize the good fortune offered to him
the evening before, when a cleverer fellow would have grasped at it with
both hands. But regret and complaint were useless now. The night and the
day which followed were equally painful to him, and his trouble weighed
upon him so much that he never felt hunger. Towards sunset he sat down
with an aching heart on the rock where the mermaid had sat two evenings
ago. He began to weep bitterly, and exclaimed, sobbing, “If she does not
come back to me, I will live no longer, but either die of hunger on this
rock, or cast myself headlong into the waves, and end my miserable life
in the depths of the sea.”

 I know not how long he sat thus on the rock in his distress, but at
last he felt a soft warm hand laid upon his forehead. When he looked up,
he saw the maiden before him, and she said tenderly, “I have seen your
bitter suffering and heard your longing sighs, and could not withdraw
myself longer, though the time does not expire till to-morrow night.”

 “Forgive me, forgive me, dear maiden,” stammered Sleepy Tony. “Forgive
me; I was a mad <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> fool not to accept the
proffered happiness. The devil only knows what folly came into my head
two nights ago. Carry me whither you please. I will oppose you no
longer, and would joyfully give up my very life for your sake.”

 The mermaid answered smiling, “I do not desire your death, but I will
take you living as my dear companion.” She took the youth by the hand,
led him a few paces nearer to the sea, and bound a silk handkerchief
over his eyes. Immediately Sleepy Tony felt himself embraced by two
strong arms, which raised him up as if in flight, and then plunged
headlong into the sea. The moment the cold water touched his body, he
lost all consciousness, and knew nothing more of what was happening
around him; nor was he afterwards able to tell how long this
insensibility lasted.

 When he awoke, he was to experience something stranger still.

 He found himself lying on soft cushions in a silken bed, which stood in
a beautiful chamber, with walls of glass covered on the inside with
curtains of red satin, lest the glaring light should wake the sleeper.
Some time passed before he could make out whether he was still alive, or
whether he was in <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> some unknown region of
the dead. He rocked his limbs to and fro, took the end of his nose
between his fingers, and behold, he was quite unchanged. He was dressed
in a white shirt, and handsome clothes lay in a chair in front of his
bed. After lying in bed for some time, and feeling himself all over to
make sure that he was really alive, he got up and dressed himself.

 Presently he coughed, when two maids entered, who greeted him as “his
lordship,” and wished to know what he would like for breakfast. One laid
the table, and the other went to prepare the food. In a short time the
table was loaded with dishes of pork, sausage, black puddings, and
honey, with jugs of beer and mead, just the same as at a grand
wedding-feast. Sleepy Tony, who had eaten nothing for several days
before, now set to work in earnest, and ate his fill, after which he
laid down on the bed to digest it. When he got up again, the
waiting-maids came back, and invited his lordship to take a walk in the
garden while her ladyship was dressing. He heard himself called “your
lordship” so often, that he already began to feel himself such in
reality, and forgot his former station.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

 In the garden he met with beauty and elegance at every step; gold and
silver apples glittered among the green leaves, and even the fir and
pine cones were of gold, while birds of golden plumage hopped among the
twigs and branches. Two maids came from behind a bush, who were
commissioned to show his lordship round the garden, and to point out all
its beauties. They went farther, and reached the edge of a pond where
silver-feathered geese and swans were swimming. A rosy flush as of dawn
filled all the sky, but the sun was not visible. The bushes were covered
with flowers which exhaled a delicious odour, and bees as large as
hornets flew among the flowers. All the flowers and shrubs which our
friend beheld here were far more beautiful than he had ever seen before.
Presently two elegantly dressed girls appeared, who invited his lordship
to meet her ladyship, who was expecting him. But first they threw a blue
silken shawl over his shoulders. Who would have recognised the former
Sleepy Tony in such a guise?

 In a beautiful hall, as large as a church, and built of glass like the
bedroom, sat twelve fair maidens on silver chairs.<span
id="page_59_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_59_note_1) Against the wall behind
them was a <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> dais on which two golden
thrones were placed. On one throne sat the august queen, and the other
was unoccupied. When Sleepy Tony crossed the threshold, all the maidens
rose from their seats and saluted him respectfully, and did not sit down
again until desired to do so. The lady herself remained seated, bent her
head to the youth in salutation, and signed with her finger, upon which
Sleepy Tony’s attendants took him between them, and conducted him to
their mistress. The youth advanced with faltering steps, and did not
venture to lift his eyes, for he was dazzled with all the unaccustomed
splendour and magnificence. He was shown to his place on the golden
throne next to the lady, and she said, “This young man is my beloved
bridegroom, to whom I have plighted myself and whom I have accepted as
my consort. You must show him every respect, and obey him as you obey
me. Whenever I leave the house, you must amuse him and look after him
and guard him as the apple of my eye. You will be severely punished if
you neglect to carry out my orders exactly.”

 Sleepy Tony looked round him like one dazed, for he did not know what
to make of the adventures of the night, which were more wonderful than
<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> wonder itself. He continually turned the
question over in his mind as to whether he was awake or dreaming. The
lady noticed his confusion, and rose from her throne, took him by the
hand, and led him from one room to another, all of which were
untenanted. At last they arrived at the twelfth chamber, which was
rather smaller, but handsomer than the others. Here the lady took her
crown from her bead, cast aside the gold-embroidered mantle, and when
Sleepy Tony ventured to raise his eyes, he recognised that it was the
mermaid at his side, and no strange lady. Oh, how quickly his courage
rose and his hopes revived! He cried out joyfully, “O dear mermaid!”—but
the maiden laid her hand on his mouth, and spoke very earnestly, “If you
have any regard for your own happiness or for mine, never call me by
that name, which has only been given to me in mockery. I am one of the
daughters of the Water-Mother. There are many sisters of us, but we all
live apart, each in her own place, in the sea, or in lakes and rivers,
and we only see each other occasionally by some fortunate chance.” She
then explained to him that she had hitherto remained unmarried, but now
that she was an established ruler, she must assume the dignity <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> of a royal matron. Sleepy Tony was so
bewildered with this unimagined good fortune that he did not know how to
express his happiness. His tongue seemed paralysed, and he could not
manage to say more than Yes or No. But while he was enjoying a capital
dinner and delicious beverages, his tongue was loosened, and he was not
only able to talk as well as before, but to indulge in many pleasant
jests.

 This agreeable life was continued on the next and on the third day, and
Sleepy Tony thought he had been exalted to heaven in his living body.
But before retiring to rest the mermaid said to him, “To-morrow will be
Thursday, and every week I am bound by a vow to fast, and to remain
apart from every one. You cannot see me at all on Thursdays until the
cock has crowed thrice in the evening. My attendants will sing to you to
pass the time away, and will see that you want for nothing.”

 Next morning Sleepy Tony could not find his consort anywhere. He
remembered what she had told him the evening before, that he must pass
this and all future Thursdays without her. The waiting-maids exerted
themselves to amuse him in every <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>
possible manner; they sang, played, and performed elegant dances, and
then set before him such food and drink that no prince by birthright
could have enjoyed better, and the day passed quicker than he had
expected. After supper he laid himself to rest, and when the cock had
crowed three times, the fair one returned to him. The same thing
happened on every following Thursday. He often implored his beloved to
allow him to fast with her on Thursdays, but all to no purpose. He
troubled his consort again on a Wednesday with this request, and allowed
her no rest; but the mermaid said, with tears in her eyes, “Take my
life, if you please; I would lay it down cheerfully; but I cannot and
dare not yield to your wish to take you with me on my fast-days.”

 A year or more might have passed in this manner, when doubts arose in
the mind of Sleepy Tony, which became always more tormenting, and
allowed him no peace. His food became distasteful to him and his sleep
refreshed him not. He feared lest the mermaid might have some other
lover in secret besides himself, in whose arms she passed every
Thursday, while he was obliged to pass his time with the waiting-maids.
He had long ago discovered the room in which the mermaid hid herself
<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> on Thursdays, but how did that help him?
The door was always locked, and the windows were so closely hung with
double curtains on the inside that there was not an opening left as
large as a needle’s eye through which a sunbeam, much less a human eye,
could penetrate. But the more impossible it seemed to penetrate this
secret, the more eager grew his longing to get to the very bottom of it.
Although he never breathed a word of the weight upon his mind to the
mermaid, she could see from his altered manner that all was not as it
should be. Again and again she implored him with tears in her eyes not
to torment both himself and her with evil thoughts. “I am free from
every fault against you,” she declared, “and I have no secret love nor
any other sin against you on my conscience. But your false suspicion
makes us both miserable, and will destroy the peace of our hearts. I
would gladly give up every moment of my life to you if you wished it,
but I cannot allow you to come near me on my fast-days. It cannot be,
for it would put an end to our love and happiness for ever. We are able
to live quietly and happily together for six days in the week, and how
should the separation of one day be so heavy that you cannot bear it?”

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

 She talked in this sensible way for six days, but when the following
Thursday came, and the mermaid did not show herself, Sleepy Tony lost
his wits, and behaved as if he was half-mad. He knew no peace, and at
last one Thursday he refused to have any one with him. He ordered the
waiting-maids to bring him his food and drink, and then to leave him
directly, so that he remained alone like a spectre.

 This great alteration in his conduct astonished everybody, and when the
mermaid heard of the matter, she almost wept her eyes out of her head,
though she only gave way to her grief when no one was present. Sleepy
Tony hoped that when he was alone he might have a better opportunity of
inspecting the secret fasting chamber, and perhaps he might find some
crack through which he could spy upon what was going on. The more he
tormented himself, the more depressed became the mermaid, and although
she still maintained a cheerful countenance, her friendliness no longer
came from the heart as before.

 Some weeks passed by, and matters remained at a standstill, neither
worse nor better, when one Thursday Sleepy Tony found a small space near
the window where the curtains had slightly shifted, so <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> that he could look into the chamber. The
secret chamber had no floor, but looked like a great square tank, filled
with water many feet deep. Herein swam his much-loved mermaid. From her
head to her middle she was a beautiful woman, but from the navel
downwards she was wholly a fish, covered with scales and provided with
fins. Sometimes she threshed the water with her broad fish’s tail and it
dashed high up.

 The spy shrunk back confounded and made his way home very sorrowfully.
What would he not have given to have blotted the sight from his memory!
He thought of one thing and another, but could not decide on what to do.

 In the evening the cock crowed three times as usual, but the mermaid
did not come back to him. He lay awake all night, but the fair one never
came. She did not return till morning, when she was clad in black
mourning garments and her face was covered with a thin silk
handkerchief. Then she said, weeping, “O thou unhappy one! to have
brought our happy life to an end by thy folly! Thou seest me to-day for
the last time, and must return to thy former condition, and this thou
hast brought upon thyself. Farewell, for the last time.”

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

 There was a sudden crash and a tremendous noise, as if the floor was
giving way beneath his feet, and Sleepy Tony was hurled down stunned,
and could not perceive what was happening to himself or about him.

 No one knows how long afterwards it may have been when he recovered
from his swoon, and found himself on the sea-shore close to the rock on
which the fair mermaid had sat when she entered into the bond of
friendship with him. Instead of the magnificent robes whieh be had worn
every day in the dwelling of the mermaid, he found himself dressed in
his old clothes, which were now much older and more ragged than he could
possibly have supposed. Our friend’s happy days were over, and no
remorse, however bitter, could bring them back.

 He walked on till he reached the first houses of his village. They were
standing in the same places, but yet looked different. But what appeared
to him much more wonderful when he looked round, was that the people
were all strangers, and he did not meet a single face which he knew.

 The people all looked strangely at him, too, as though he was a
monster. Sleepy Tony went on to the farm of his parents, but here too he
<span id="page_68">p. 68</span> encountered only strangers, who knew him
not, and whom he did not know. He asked in amazement for his father and
brothers, but no one could tell him anything about them. At length an
infirm old man came up, leaning on a stick, and said, “Peasant, the
farmer whom you ask after has been sleeping in the ground for more than
thirty years, and his sons must be dead too. How comes it, my good old
man, that you ask after people who have been so long forgotten?” The
words “old man” took Sleepy Tony so much aback that he was unable to ask
another question. He felt his limbs trembling, turned his back on the
strange people, and went out at the gate. The expression “old man” left
him no peace; it fell upon him with a crushing weight, and his feet
refused him their office.

 He hurried to the nearest spring and gazed in the water. The pale
sunken cheeks, the hollow eyes, the long grey beard and grey hair,
confirmed what he had heard. This worn-out, withered form no longer bore
the slightest resemblance to the youth whom the mermaid had chosen as
her consort. Now he fully realised his misery for the first time, and
knew that the few years that <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> he appeared
to have been absent had comprised the greater part of his life, for he
had entered the mermaid’s house as a vigorous youth, and had returned as
a spectre-like old man. There he had felt nothing of the course of time
or of the wasting of his body, and he could not comprehend how the
burden of old age had fallen upon him so suddenly, like the passing of a
bird’s wing. What could he do now, when he was a grey stranger among
strangers?

 He wandered about on the beach for a few days, from one farm to
another, and good people gave him a piece of bread out of charity. He
chanced to meet with a friendly young fellow, to whom he related all the
adventures of his life, but the same night he disappeared. A few days
afterwards the waves cast up his body on the shore. It is not known
whether he threw himself into the sea, or was drowned by accident.

 After this the behaviour of the mermaid towards mankind entirely
changed. She sometimes appears to children only, most often in another
form, but she does not permit grown-up people to approach her, but shuns
them like fire.

 

 Other stories relative to the Water-Mother, mermaids, <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> and other beings of the water will be found in
a later section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_49">p. 49</span>

<span id="page_49_note_1"></span>[1](#page_49_fr_1) Schiefner considers
the name of this story (*Näki Neitsi*) to indicate a Swedish origin; but
this seems to be very doubtful evidence, and the incidental allusion to
the Swedes in the course of the narrative seems opposed to such an idea.

<span id="footnotes_page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="page_52_note_1"></span>[1](#page_52_fr_1) George.

<span id="footnotes_page_59">p. 59</span>

<span id="page_59_note_1"></span>[1](#page_59_fr_1) Compare the story of
the “Twelve Daughters.”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
