[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-65) [Next](hoe2-67.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

# SECTION X

### *ORIENTAL TALES.*

U<span class="small">NDER</span> this heading I propose to notice two
stories only. The first of these is called the “Maidens who Bathed in
the Moonlight” (Kreutzwald), and is peculiarly tame and inconsequential,
but yet exhibits one or two features of special interest which forbid
its being passed over altogether.

 A young man who had already learned the language of birds and other
mysteries, and was still desirous to peer into all sorts of secret
knowledge, applied to a famous necromancer<span
id="page_233_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_233_note_1.md) to initiate him into the
secrets hidden under the veil of night. The Finnish sorcerer endeavoured
to dissuade him from his purpose; but as he persisted, he told him that
on the evening of St. Mark’s Day, which was not far off, the king of the
serpents would hold his <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> court at a
place which he indicated, as was the custom every seven years. There
would be a dish of heavenly goat’s-milk before the king, and if the
young man could dip a bit of bread in it, and put it in his mouth before
taking to flight, he would gain the secret knowledge which he desired.

 At the appointed time, the young man went at dusk to a wide moor, where
he could see nothing but a number of hillocks. At midnight a bright
light shone from one of the hillocks; it was the king’s signal, and all
the other snakes, which had been lying like motionless hillocks,
uncoiled themselves, and began to move in that direction.<span
id="page_234_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_234_note_1.md) At last they gathered
themselves into a great heap as large as a haycock. The youth at first
feared to approach, but at last crept up on tiptoe, when he saw
thousands of snakes clustered round a huge serpent with a gold crown on
his head. The youth’s blood froze in his veins and his hair stood on
end, but he sprang over the heap of hissing serpents, who opened their
jaws as he passed, but <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> could not
disengage themselves quickly enough to strike him. He secured his prize
and fled, pursued by the hissing serpents, till he fell senseless; but
at the first rays of the sun he woke up, having left the moor four or
five miles behind him, and all danger was now over. He slept through the
day, to recover himself from the fatigue and fright, and went into the
woods in the following night, where he saw golden bathing benches
arranged, with silver bath whisks<span
id="page_235_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_235_note_1.md) and silver basins.
Presently the loveliest naked maidens assembled from all quarters, and
began to wash themselves in the bright moonlight, while the youth stood
behind a bush looking on. They were the wood-nymphs, and the daughters
of the Meadow-Queen.<span
id="page_235_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_235_note_2.md) Towards morning they
disappeared suddenly from his sight, and though he visited the woods
again night after night, he never again saw either the bathing utensils
or the maidens, and pined away in hopeless longing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-67.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_233">p. 233</span>

<span id="page_233_note_1"></span>[1](#page_233_fr_1.md) There has been
some discussion as to the right meaning to be put upon the words, *Mana
tarp* (Death-magician), but it appears to me that necromancer is simply
a literal rendering.

<span id="footnotes_page_234">p. 234</span>

<span id="page_234_note_1"></span>[1](#page_234_fr_1.md) This
serpent-gathering so much reserobles those described in the first book
of the *Maha-Bharata*, and in the story of Hasib (or Jamasp) in the
*Thousand and One Nights*, that I have referred the present story to the
class of tales of Oriental origin.

<span id="footnotes_page_235">p. 235</span>

<span id="page_235_note_1"></span>[1](#page_235_fr_1.md) In Finland and
Esthonia they use dried birch-twigs with the leaves attached to whisk
themselves with when bathing.

<span id="page_235_note_2"></span>[2](#page_235_fr_2.md) See vol. i. p. 13.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
