[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-84) [Next](hoe2-86.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

## THE BLUE BIRD (II.).

 This totally different ballad is from Neus, *Ehstnische Volkslieder*,
p. 42. Neus quotes Ganander as saying that one of the names of the
Finnish Wood-goddess (the spouse of Tapio) is Blue Bird. The present
poem is *possibly* a fragment of a creation-myth.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Lo, the bird with azure plumage,<br />
Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br />
Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br />
Over forests four in number,<br />
Over four woods in succession;<br />
One a wood of golden pine-trees,<br />
One a wood of beauteous apples,<br />
One a wood of silver birch-trees,<br />
One a swampy wood of lime-trees.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><span class="small">Lo, the bird with azure plumage,<br />
Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br />
Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br />
Over lakelets three in number;<br />
Three the lakes all close together,<br />
And the first with wine was brimming,<br />
And with ale the second foaming,<br />
And the third with mead was frothing.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span id="page_297">p. 297</span><br />
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><span class="small">Lo, the bird with azure plumage.<br />
Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br />
Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br />
Over three fields in succession,<br />
Over three fields close together;<br />
In the first the oats were growing,<br />
In the second rye was waving,<br />
In the third the wheat was springing.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">And the wood of golden pine-trees<br />
Was a wood of youthful striplings,<br />
And the wood of beauteous apples<br />
Was a wood of youthful maidens.<br />
And the wood of silver birch-trees<br />
Was a wood of youthful matrons,<br />
And the swampy wood of lime-trees<br />
Was a wood of men all aged.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><span class="small">And the lake with wine o’erbrimming<br />
Was the lake of youthful striplings,<br />
And the lake with ale up-foaming<br />
Was the lake of youthful matrons,<br />
And the lake where mead was frothing<br />
Was the lake of youthful maidens.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">And the field where oats were growing<br />
Was the field of youthful striplings,<br />
And the field where rye was waving<br />
Was the field of youthful matrons,<br />
And the field where wheat was springing<br />
Was the share of youthful maidens.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-86.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
