[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-37) [Next](hoe2-39.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

## THE FOUNDLING. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)<span id="page_112_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_112_note_1.md)

O<span class="small">NE</span> evening a little boy was sleeping
restlessly in a village on the island of Dago. His father saw a small
hole which had been bored in the wall, and thinking that the draught
disturbed the child, he stopped it up. He then saw a beautiful little
girl playing with the boy, and preventing him from sleeping quietly. As
she could not get away again, she remained in the house; and when the
children grew up, they married, and had two children. One Sunday they
went to church, and the wife laughed; but when her husband asked why,
she replied that she would tell him if he told her how she came into his
house. Thinking no harm, he promised to tell her, as he had heard the
story from his father. Then she told him that she saw a great horse-skin
spread on the wall of the church, on which the devil wrote the names of
all the people who slept or talked in church instead of attending to the
word of God. When it was full, he tried to stretch it with his <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> teeth, but in doing so, he knocked his head
against the wall and made a wry face, and she laughed. When they got
home, he took the wooden plug from the hole, and showed it to his wife,
but she instantly disappeared through it and never returned. The man
wept himself blind, but the children grew up and prospered all their
lives. People said their mother visited them secretly and brought
treasures to the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-39.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="page_112_note_1"></span>[1](#page_112_fr_1.md) Latham
(*Nationalities of Europe*, i. p. 34) relates a very similar Lithuanian
story of a Lauma or Nightmare.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
