[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dld00)  [Next](dld02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103633/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Doctrine of the Lord*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1763\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1904\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Doctrine of the Lord

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

UNIVERSAL HOLY SCRIPTURE TREATS OF THE LORD: THE LORD IS THE WORD. We
read in John: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and God was the Word. The same was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made.
In Him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light
shineth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not (John
1:1-5). The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His
glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth (John 1:14). The light is come into the world and men loved
the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil (John
3:19). While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be
sons of light. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth in Me should not abide in the darkness (John 12:36, 46). From
these passages it is evident that the Lord is God from eternity, and
that this God is the selfsame Lord who was born in the world; for it is
said that the Word was with God, and God was the Word, and also that
without Him was not anything made that was made; and it is added that
the Word was made flesh, and they beheld Him. It is but little
understood in the church why the Lord is called the Word. It is because
"the Word" signifies Divine truth or Divine wisdom, and the Lord is
Divine truth itself or Divine wisdom itself. And this is why He is
called the Light, of which also it is said that it came into the world.
As the Divine wisdom and the Divine love make a one, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1-1](#fn_0) and in the Lord had been a one from
eternity, it is said, "In Him was life, and the life was the light of
men." "Life" is Divine love; and "light" is Divine wisdom. It is this
one that is meant by, "In the beginning the Word was with God, and God
was the Word." "With God," is in God; for wisdom is in love, and love in
wisdom. So in another place in John: And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me
with Thine own Self, with the glory which I had with Thee before the
world was (John 17:5). "With Thine own Self," is in Thyself, and
therefore it is said, "and God was the Word;" and elsewhere, that the
Lord is in the Father, and the Father in Him; and that He and the Father
are one. As therefore the Word is the Divine wisdom of the Divine love,
it follows that it is Jehovah Himself, thus the Lord by whom all things
were made that are made; for all things have been created from Divine
love by means of Divine wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

That the Word here specifically meant is the same Word that was
manifested by means of Moses, the prophets, and the evangelists, is very
evident from the fact that the Word is the Divine truth itself from
which angels have all their wisdom, and men all their spiritual
intelligence. For this same Word that is among men in this world is also
among the angels in the heavens, but in this world among men it is
natural, whereas in the heavens it is spiritual. And as the Word is the
Divine truth, it is also the Divine proceeding; <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2-1](#fn_1) and this is not only from the Lord, but is
also the Lord Himself; and being the Lord Himself, it follows that each
and all things of the Word have been written concerning Him alone. From
Isaiah to Malachi there is nothing that is not either concerning the
Lord, or, in the opposite sense, against Him. Hitherto no one has ever
seen this to be so, and yet everyone can see it, provided he is aware of
it, and thinks of it while he is reading, especially if he knows that
the Word contains not only a natural but also a spiritual sense, and
that in this sense the names of persons and places signify something of
the Lord, and, derivatively, something of heaven and the church from
Him, or else some thing opposite to them. As all things of the Word both
in general and in particular treat of the Lord and as the Word, being
the Divine truth, is the Lord, it is evident why it is said, "And the
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory;" and
also why it is said, "While ye have the light, believe in the light,
that ye may be sons of light: I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believeth in Me should not abide in the darkness." The "light"
is the Divine truth, thus the Word. This is why, even at this day, every
one who, while reading the Word, approaches the Lord alone, and prays to
Him, is enlightened in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

Briefly stated, the subjects concerning the Lord that are treated of in
all the Prophets of the Old Testament, from Isaiah to Malachi, both in
general and in particular, are these: i. The Lord came into the world in
the fullness of times, which was when He was no longer known by the
Jews, and when, consequently, there was nothing of the church left; and
unless He had then come into the world and revealed Himself, mankind
would have perished in eternal death. As He Himself says in John:
"Except ye believe that I am, ye shall die in your sins" (8:24). ii. The
Lord came into the world to execute a Last Judgment, and thereby to
subdue the existing dominance of the hells; which was effected by means
of combats (that is, temptations) admitted into his maternal human, and
the attendant continual victories; for unless the hells had been
subjugated no man could have been saved. iii. The Lord came into the
world in order to glorify His Human, that is, unite it to the Divine
which was in Him from conception. iv. The Lord came into the world in
order to set up a new church which should acknowledge Him as the
Redeemer and Savior, and be redeemed and saved through love to Him and
faith in Him. v. He at the same time reduced heaven into order, so that
it made a one with the church. vi. The passion of the cross was the last
combat or temptation, by means of which He completely conquered the
hells and fully glorified His Human. In the following small work on The
Holy Scripture it will be seen that the Word treats of no other subjects
than these.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

In confirmation of this, I shall in this first chapter merely adduce
passages from the Word which contain the expressions "that day," "in
that day," and "in that time;" in which, by "day," and "time," is meant
the Lord's advent. In Isaiah: It shall come to pass in the futurity of
days that the mountain of the house of Jehovah shall be established in
the top of the mountains. Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
The day of Jehovah of Armiea shall be upon everyone that is proud and
lofty. In that day a man shall cast away his idols of silver and of gold
(Isa. 2:2, 11-12, 20). In that day the Lord Jehovih will take away their
ornament (Isa. 3:18). In that day shall the branch of Jehovah be
beautiful and glorious (Isa. 4:2). In that day it shall roar against
him, and he shall look unto the land, and behold darkness and distress,
and the light shall be darkened in the ruins (Isa. 5:30). It shall come
to pass in that day that Jehovah shall hiss for the fly that is in the
uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt. In that day the Lord shall shave
in the crossings of the river. In that day He shall vivify. In that day
every place shall be for briers and thorns (7:18, 20, 21, 23). What will
ye do in the day of visitation, which shall come? In that day Israel
shall stay upon Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth (10:3, 20). It
shall come to pass in that day, that the Root of Jesse, which standeth
for an ensign of the peoples, shall the nations seek, and His rest shall
be glory. Chiefly in that day shall the Lord seek again the remnant of
His people (11:10, 11). In that day thou shalt say, I will confess unto
Thee, O Jehovah. In that day shall ye say, Confess ye to Jehovah, call
upon His name (12:1, 4). The day of Jehovah is at hand, as a laying
waste from Shaddai shall it come. Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh,
cruel, and of indignation, and of wrath, and of anger. I will move the
heaven, and the earth shall be shaken out of her place, in the day of
the wrath of His anger. His time is near, and it cometh, and the days
shall not be prolonged (13:6, 9, 13, 22). It shall come to pass in that
day, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin. In that day shall a man
look unto his Maker, and his eyes to the Holy One of Israel. In that day
shall the cities of refuge be as the forsaken places of the forest
(17:4, 7, 9). In that day there shall be five cities in the land of
Egypt that speak with the lip of Canaan. In that day there shall be an
altar to Jehovah in the midst of Egypt. In that day there shall be a
path from Egypt to Assyria, and Israel shall be in the midst of the land
(19:18, 19, 23, 24). The inhabitant of the island shall say in that day,
Behold our expectation (20:6). A day of tumult, and of treading down,
and of perplexity, from the Lord Jehovih of Armies (22:5). In that day
shall Jehovah visit upon the army of the height, and upon the kings of
the earth. Alter a multitude of days shall they be visited; then shall
the moon blush, and the sun be ashamed (24:21, 22, 23). It shall be
said <span id="fr_2"></span>[4-1](#fn_2) in that day, Lo, this is our
God, for whom we have waited, that He may deliver us (25:9). In that day
shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, We have a strong city
(26:1). In that day Jehovah shall visit with His sword. In that day ye
shall answer to it, A vineyard of unmixed wine (27:1, 2, 12, 13). In
that day shall Jehovah of Armies be for a crown of ornament, and for a
diadem (28:5). In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book,
and the eyes of the blind shall see out of darkness (29:18). There shall
be streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers
shall fall; and the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
in the day that Jehovah shall bind up the hurt of His people (30:25,
26). In that day they shall cast away every man his idols of silver and
of gold (31:7). The day of Jehovah's vengeance, the year of His
recompenses (34:8). These two things shall come to thee in one day, the
loss of children and widowhood (47:9). My people shall know My name, and
in that day that I am He that doth speak; behold it is I (52:6). Jehovah
hath anointed Me to proclaim the acceptable year of Jehovah, and the day
of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn (61:1, 2). The day of
vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed come (63:4). In
Jeremiah: In those days ye shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of
Jehovah. In that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah.
In those days the house of Judah shall walk to the house of Israel (Jer.
3:16-18). In that day the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart
of the princes, and the priests shall be amazed, and the prophets (Jer.
4:9). Behold the days come in which the land shall become a waste (Jer.
7:32, 34). They shall fall among them that fall, in the day of their
visitation (Jer. 8:12). Behold the days come that I will visit all that
is circumcised with what is uncircumcised (Jer. 9:25). In the time of
their visitation they shall perish (Jer. 10:15). There shall be no
remains to them, I will bring evil upon them in the year of their
visitation (Jer. 11:23). Behold, the days come in which it shall no more
be said (Jer. 16:14). I will look upon them in the nape, and not the
faces, in the day of their destruction (Jer. 18:17). Behold, the days
come in which I will give this place for a waste (Jer. 19:6). Behold,
the days come that I will raise unto David a righteous offshoot, who
shall reign as king. In those days Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely. Therefore, behold, the days come that they shall no
more say . . . I will bring evil upon them in the year of their
visitation. In the end of days ye shall understand intelligence (Jer.
23:5-7, 12, 20). Behold, the days come in which I will turn again. Alas!
for that day is great, and none shall be like it. It shall come to pass
in that day that I will break the yoke, and burst the bonds (Jer. 30:3,
7-8). There shall be a day that the watchman upon Mount Ephraim shall
cry, Arise ye, let us ascend Zion, unto Jehovah our God. Behold, the
days come that I will make a new covenant. Behold, the days come that
the city shall be built to Jehovah (Jer. 31:6, 31, 38). The days come
that I will establish the good word. In those days and at that time,
will I make a righteous offshoot unto David. In those days shall Judah
be saved (Jer. 33:14-16). I will bring words against this city for evil
in that day. But I will deliver thee in that day (Jer. 39:16-17). That
day is to the Lord Jehovih of Armies a day of vengeance, that He will
take vengeance of His enemies. The day of destruction has come upon
them, the time of their visitation (Jer. 46:10, 21). Because of the day
that cometh to lay waste (Jer. 47:4). I will bring upon him the year of
visitation. Yet I will bring again his captivity in the end of days
(Jer. 48:44, 47). I will bring destruction upon them in the time of
their visitation. Her young men shall fall in the streets, and all the
men of war shall be cut off in that day. In the end of days I will bring
again their captivity (Jer. 49:8, 26, 39). In those days, and in that
time, the sons of Israel and the sons of Judah shall come together, and
shall seek Jehovah their God. In those days, and in that time, the
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none. Woe
unto them, for their day is come, the time of their visitation (Jer.
50:4, 20, 27, 31). They are vanity, a work of errors, in the time of
their visitation they shall perish (Jer. 51:18). In Ezekiel: An end is
come, the end is come, the morning cometh upon thee; the time is come,
the day of tumult is near. Behold the day, behold it cometh, the morning
hath gone forth, the rod hath blossomed, violence hath budded. The day
is come, the time is come upon all the multitude thereof. Their silver
and gold shall not deliver them in the day of the anger of Jehovah
(Ezek. 7:6, 7, 10, 12, 19). They said of the prophet, The vision that he
seeth shall come to pass after many days; he prophesieth for times that
are far off (Ezek. 12:27). They shall not stand in the war in the day of
the anger of Jehovah (Ezek. 13:5). Thou, O deadly wounded wicked one,
the prince of Israel, whose day is done, in the time of the iniquity of
the end (Ezek. 21:25). A city that sheddeth blood in the midst of her,
that her time may come; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, so
that thou art come to thy years (Ezek. 22:3-4). Shall it not be in the
day when I take from them their strength? In that day he that escapeth
shall come unto thee to the instructing of thine ears. In that day shall
thy mouth be opened together with him that is escaped (Ezek. 24:25-27).
In that day will I cause a horn to grow unto the house of Israel (Ezek.
29:21). Howl ye, Woe worth the day! for the day of Jehovah is near, the
day of Jehovah is near, a day of cloud, it shall be the time of the
nations. In that day shall messengers go forth from Me (Ezek. 30:2-3,
9). In the day in which thou shalt go down into hell (Ezek. 31:15). I
will search for My flock in the day that he shall be in the midst of his
flock; and I will deliver them out of all places whither they have been
scattered, in the day of cloud and of thick darkness (Ezek. 34:11-12).
In the day that I cleanse you from all your iniquities (Ezek. 36:33).
Prophesy and say, In that day when My people Israel shall sit securely,
shalt thou not know it? In the futurity of days I will lead thee to My
land. In that day, even the day when Gog shall come upon the land. In My
zeal, in the fire of Mine indignation, if not in this day, there shall
be a great earthquake upon the land of Israel (Ezek. 38:14, 16, 18-19).
Behold, it cometh, this day of which I have spoken. It shall come to
pass in that day that I will give unto Gog a place for burial in the
land of Israel, so that the house of Israel shall know that I am Jehovah
their God, from that day and forward (Ezek. 39:8, 11, 22). In Daniel:
God in the heavens hath revealed secrets, what shall be in the futurity
of days (Dan. 2:28). The time came that the saints possessed the kingdom
(Dan. 7:22). Attend, for at the time of the end shall be the vision. And
he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of
the anger, for at the time appointed shall the end be. The vision of the
evening and the morning is truth; shut thou up the vision, for it shall
be for many days (Dan. 8:17, 19, 26). I am come to make thee understand
what shall befall thy people in the end of days; for the vision is yet
for days (Dan. 10:14). The intelligent shall be proved to purge and
cleanse them, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for the
time appointed (Dan. 11:35). At that time shall Michael rise up, the
great prince who standeth for the sons of thy people; and there shall be
a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation. At that
time thy people shall be delivered, everyone that shall be found written
in the book (Dan. 12:1). Thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the
book, even to the time of the end. But from the time that the continual
\[burnt-offering\] shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh
waste be set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
Thou shall arise into thy lot at the end of the days (Dan. 12:4, 11,
13). In Hosea: I will make an end of the kingdom of the house of Israel.
In that day I will break the bow of Israel. Great shall be the day of
Jezreel (Hos. 1:4-5, 11). In that day thou shalt call Me, my Husband. In
that day I will make a covenant for them. In that day I will hear (Hos.
2:16, 18, 21). The sons of Israel shall return, and seek Jehovah their
God, and David their king, in the end of days (Hos. 3:5). Come, and let
us return unto Jehovah; after two days He will revive us; in the third
day He will raise us up, and we shall live before him (Hos. 6:1-2). The
days of visitation are come; the days of retribution are come (Hos.
9:7). In Joel: Alas for the day, for the day of Jehovah is at hand, and
as a laying waste from Shaddai shall it come (Joel 1:15). The day of
Jehovah cometh, nigh is the day of darkness and of thick darkness, a day
of cloud and of obscurity. The day of Jehovah is great and very
terrible; and who can endure it? (Joel 2:1, 2, 11). Upon the servants,
and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out My spirit. The sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great
and terrible day of Jehovah is come (Joel 2:29, 31). Behold, in those
days, and in that time, which I will bring back, I will gather all
nations. The day of Jehovah is near. It shall come to pass in that day
that the mountains shall drop new wine (Joel 3:1-2, 14, 18). In Obadiah:
Shall I not in that day destroy the wise men out of Edom? Neither
shouldest thou have rejoiced over them in the day of their destruction,
in the day of their distress. For the day of Jehovah is near upon all
the nations (Obad. 8, 12, 15). In Amos: He that is courageous in his
heart shall flee away naked in that day (Amos 2:16). In the day that I
shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him (Amos 3:14). Woe unto
you that desire the day of Jehovah! What to you is the day of Jehovah?
it is one of darkness, and not of light. Shall not the day of Jehovah be
darkness, and not light? even thick darkness, and no brightness in it?
(Amos 5:18, 20.) The songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day.
In that day I will cause the sun to go down at noon; and I will darken
the earth in the day of light. In that day shall the beautiful virgins
and the young men faint for thirst (Amos 8:3, 9, 13). In that day I will
raise up the tent of David that is fallen. Behold, the days come that
the mountains shall drop new wine (Amos 9:11, 13). In Micah: In that day
shall one lament, We be utterly laid waste (Micah 2:4). In the end of
days the mountain of the house of Jehovah shall be established at the
head of the mountains. In that day will I gather her that halteth (Micah
4:1, 6). In that day I will cut off thy horses and thy chariots (Micah
5:10). The day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation, cometh. The day is
at hand for building thy walls. In that day he shall come even to thee
(Micah 7:4, 11-12). In Habakkuk: The vision is yet for an appointed
time, and at the end it shall speak; though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not delay (Hab. 2:3). O Jehovah do
Thy work in the midst of the years; in the midst of the years make known
God cometh (Hab. 3:2, 3). In Zephaniah: The day of Jehovah is at hand.
In the day of Jehovah's sacrifice I will visit upon the princes, and
upon the king's sons. In that day there shall be the voice of a cry. At
that time I will search Jerusalem with lamps. The great day of Jehovah
is near. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a
day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and thick darkness, a
day of cloud and overclouding, a day of the trumpet and of sounding. In
the day of Jehovah's wrath the whole land shall be devoured, and He
shall make a speedy end of all them that dwell in the land (Zeph. 1:7-8,
10, 12, 14-16, 18). Before the day of Jehovah's anger has come upon us.
It may be ye shall be hid in the day of Jehovah's anger (Zeph. 2:2-3).
Wait ye upon Me until the day that I rise up to the prey, for it is My
judgment. In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy works. In
that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not. At that time I
will deal with thine oppressors. At that time will I bring you in, and
at that time will I gather you; for I will make you a name, and a praise
(Zeph. 3:8, 11, 16, 19-20). In Zechariah: Many nations shall cleave to
Jehovah in that day (Zech. 2:11). I will remove the iniquity of that
land in one day. In that day shall ye cry every man to his companion
under the vine and under the fig tree (Zech. 3:9-10). In those days ten
men shall take hold of the skirt of a man that is a Jew (Zech. 8:23).
Jehovah their God shall serve them in that day, as the flock of His
people (Zech. 9:16). My covenant was broken in that day (Zech. 11:11).
In that day will I make Jerusalem a stone of burden for all peoples. In
that day I will smite every horse with astonishment. In that day will I
make the leaders of Judah like a furnace of fire among the wood. In that
day shall Jehovah defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem. In that day I
will seek to destroy all nations. In that day shall there be a great
mourning in Jerusalem (Zech. 12:3-4, 6, 8, 9, 11). In that day there
shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem. It shall come to pass in that day I will cut off the names
of the idols in the land. In that day the prophets shall be ashamed
(Zech. 13:1-4). Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh. His feet shall stand
in that day upon the Mount of Olives. In that day there shall not be
light and brightness; but it shall be one day which shall be known unto
Jehovah; not day, nor night, at evening time there shall be light. In
that day living waters shall go out from Jerusalem. In that day there
shall be one Jehovah, and His name one. In that day there shall be a
great tumult from Jehovah. In that day shall there be upon the bells of
the horses, Holiness unto Jehovah. In that day there shall be no more a
Canaanite in the house of Jehovah (Zech. 14:1, 4, 6-9, 13, 20-21). In
Malachi: Who may abide the day of His coming, and who shall stand when
He appeareth? They shall be Mine in the day wherein I do make a peculiar
treasure. Behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven. Behold, I
send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and terrible
day of Jehovah (Mal. 3:2, 17; 4:1, 5). In David: In His days shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, and He shall have dominion
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth (Ps.
72:7-8, besides other places).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

In these passages by "day" and "time" is meant the advent of the Lord.
By a "day" or "time" of darkness, of thick darkness, of gloom, of no
light, of laying waste, of the end of iniquity, of destruction, is meant
the advent of the Lord when He was no longer known, and when
consequently there was no longer anything of the church left. By "a day"
cruel, terrible, of wrath, of anger, of tumult, of visitation, of
sacrifice, of recompense, of distress, of war, of a cry, is meant the
advent of the Lord to Judgment. By "the day" in which Jehovah alone
shall be exalted, in which He shall be one and His name one, in which
the offshoot of Jehovah shall be for beauty and glory, in which the
righteous shall flourish, in which He shall vivify, in which He shall
seek His flock, in which He shall make a new covenant, in which the
mountains shall drop new wine, in which living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem, in which they shall look unto the God of Israel, and many
similar expressions, is meant the advent of the Lord to set up again a
new church which will acknowledge Him as the Redeemer and Savior.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

To these passages may be added some which speak of the Lord's advent
more openly: The Lord Himself shall give you a sign: Behold a virgin
shall conceive and hear a Son, and shall call His name GOD-WITH-US (Isa.
7:14; Matt. 1:22, 23). Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given,
and the government shall he upon His shoulder; and His name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, God, Hero, Father of eternity, Prince of
peace. Of the increase of His government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish it in
judgment and justice, from henceforth and even to eternity (Isa. 9:6-7).
There shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Shoot shall
bear fruit out of his roots: and the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon
Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might. Righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins, and truth the
girdle of His reins. Therefore it shall come to pass in that day, that
the Root of Jesse, which standeth for an ensign of the peoples, shall
the nations seek, and His rest shall be glory (Isa. 11:1-2, 5, 10). Send
ye the lamb of the ruler of the land, from the rock to the wilderness,
to the mountain of the daughter of Zion. By mercy has the throne been
established, and one shall sit upon it in truth, in the tabernacle of
David, judging and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness (Isa.
16:1, 5). It shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for Him that He may save us: THIS IS JEHOVAH we have waited for
Him, we will rejoice and be glad in His salvation (Isa. 25:9). The voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of JEHOVAH, make
plain in the solitude a pathway for our God. For the glory of JEHOVAH
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. Behold, the LORD
JEHOVIH will come in strength, and His arm shall rule for Him; behold,
His reward is with Him. He shall feed His flock like a shepherd (Isa.
40:3, 5, 10-11). Mine elect, in whom My soul delighteth. I JEHOVAH have
called Thee in righteousness, and I will give Thee for a covenant to the
people, for a light to the nations, to open the blind eyes, to bring out
the bound from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prison house. I am JEHOVAH, this is My name, and My glory will I not
give to another (Isa. 42:1, 6-8). Who hath believed our word, and to
whom is the arm of Jehovah revealed? He hath no form; we have seen Him,
but He hath no appearance. He hath borne our diseases, and carried our
griefs (Isa. 53:1, 2, 4, to end). Who is this that cometh from Edom,
with sprinkled garments from Bozrah, marching in the greatness
\[mulitudine\] of His strength? I that speak in righteousness, great to
save: for the day of vengeance is in Mine heart, and the year of My
redeemed is come. So He became their Savior (Isa. 63:1, 4, 8). Behold,
the days come that I will raise up to David a righteous offshoot, who
shall reign a king, and shall prosper, and shall execute judgment and
justice in the earth: and this is His name whereby they shall call Him,
JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS (Jer. 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16). Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion shout, O daughter of Jerusalem behold, thy King cometh
unto thee, He is just and saved. <span id="fr_3"></span>[6-1](#fn_3) He
shall speak peace to the nations and His dominion shall be from sea to
sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth (Zech. 9:9, 10).
Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Zion; lo, I come, that I may dwell in
the midst of thee and many nations shall cleave to Jehovah in that day,
and shall be My people (Zech. 2:10, 11). Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, little
as thou art to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall one
come forth unto Me that is to be Ruler in Israel, and whose goings forth
are from of old, from the days of eternity. He shall stand and feed in
the strength of JEHOVAH (Micah 5:2, 4). Behold, I send Mine Angel, who
shall prepare the way before Me, and the LORD whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to His temple, even the Angel of the covenant, whom ye
have desired; behold, He cometh but who shall abide the day of His
coming? Behold, I send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the
great and terrible day of Jehovah (Mal. 3:1, 2; 4:5). I saw, and behold,
one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven; and there was
given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations,
and languages may worship Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed; and all dominions shall worship Him, and obey Him (Dan. 7:13,
14, 27). Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy
city, to consummate the transgression, and to seal up the vision and the
prophecy, and to anoint the holy of holies. Know, therefore, and
perceive, that from the going forth of the word to restore and build
Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks (Dan. 9:24,
25). I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers:
He shall cry unto Me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation. I also will make him My firstborn, higher than the kings of
the earth. His seed also will I make to endure to eternity, and his
throne as the days of the heavens (Ps. 89:25-27, 29). Jehovah said unto
my Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
footstool. Jehovah shall send the scepter of Thy strength out of Zion;
rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies. Thou art a priest to eternity
after the manner of Melchizedek (Ps. 110:1-2, 4; Matt. 22:44; Luke
20:42). I have anointed My king upon Zion, the mountain of My holiness;
I will declare for a statute, Jehovah hath said unto Me, Thou art My
Son, this day have I begotten Thee; I will give the nations for Thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.
Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish from the way; blessed are
all they that put their trust in Him (Ps. 2:6-8, 12). Thou hast made him
a little less than the angels, but hast crowned him with glory and
honor; Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands;
Thou hast put all things under his feet (Ps. 8:5-6). Jehovah, remember
David, who sware unto Jehovah, and vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob, If
I shall enter within the tent of my house, if I shall go up upon my
couch, if I shall give sleep to mine eyes, until I find out a place for
Jehovah, a habitation for the Mighty One of Jacob. Lo, we heard of Him
at Ephratah, we found Him in the fields of the forest. We will enter
into His tabernacles, we will bow at His footstool. Let Thy priests be
clothed with righteousness, and let Thy saints shout for joy (Ps.
132:1-7, 9). The passages here adduced, however, are but few.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

That universal Holy Scripture has been written solely about the Lord,
will be more fully evident from what follows, especially from the things
to be advanced in the small work on The Holy Scripture. This is the one
only source of the holiness of the Word, and is what is meant by the
words The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy (Rev. 19:10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

ITS BEING SAID THAT THE LORD FULFILLED ALL THINGS OF THE LAW, MEANS THAT
HE FULFILLED ALL THINGS OF THE WORD. At the present day many persons
believe that when it is said of the Lord that He fulfilled the law, the
meaning is that He fulfilled all the commandments of the Decalogue, and
thus became righteousness, and also justified the men of this world
through this matter of faith. This however is not the meaning. The
meaning is that the Lord fulfilled all things written concerning Himself
in the Law and the Prophets, that is, in universal Holy Scripture,
because this treats solely of Him, as has been said in the foregoing
article. The reason why many have believed differently, is that they
have not searched the Scriptures and seen what is there meant by "the
Law." The Law there means, in a restricted sense, the ten commandments
of the Decalogue; in a wider sense, all things written by Moses in the
five books; and in the widest sense, all things of the Word. It is well
known that By the Law in a restricted sense are meant the ten
commandments of the Decalogue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

That by the Law in a wider sense are meant all things written by Moses
in his five books, is evident from the following passages. In Luke:
Abraham said to the rich man in hell, They have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them; if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead (16:29, 31). In
John: Philip said to Nathanael, We have found Him of whom Moses in the
Law and the Prophets did write (1:45). In Matthew: Think not that I am
come to loosen the Law and the Prophets; I am not come to loosen, but to
fulfill (5:17). All the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John
(11:13). In Luke: The Law and the Prophets were until John since then
the kingdom of God is evangelized (16:16). In Matthew: All things
whatsoever that ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets (7:12). Jesus said, Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself; on these two commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets (22:37, 39, 40). In these passages,
"Moses and the Prophets," and "the Law and the Prophets," mean all
things that have been written in the books of Moses and in the books of
the prophets. That "the Law" specifically means all things that have
been written by Moses, is further evident from the following passages.
In Luke: When the days of her purification, according to the Law of
Moses, were fulfilled, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem, to present Him
to the Lord; as it is written in the Law of the Lord: Every male that
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord; and to offer a
sacrifice, according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord: A
pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons. And the parents brought
Jesus into the temple, to do for Him after the custom of the Law. And
when they had performed all things according to the Law of the Lord
(2:22-24, 27, 39). In John: Moses in the Law commanded us that such
should be stoned (8:5). The Law was given by Moses (1:17). From these
passages it appears that where such things are spoken of as are written
in the books of Moses, they are sometimes called "the Law," and
sometimes "Moses." (So also in Matt. 8:4; Mark 10:2-4; 12:19; Luke
20:28, 37; John 3:14; 7:19, 51; 8:17; 19:7.) Many things that were
commanded also, are called by Moses "the Law," as: Concerning the
burnt-offerings (Lev. 6:9; 7:37). Concerning the sacrifices (Lev. 6:25;
7:1-11). Concerning the meat-offering (Lev. 6:14). Concerning leprosy
(Lev. 14:2). Concerning jealousy (Num. 5:29, 30). Concerning the
Naziriteship (Num. 6:13, 21). And Moses himself calls his books "the
Law:" Moses wrote this Law, and delivered it to the priests, the sons of
Levi, who bare the ark of the covenant of Jehovah; and he said to them,
Take the Book of this Law, and put it at the side of the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah (Deut. 31:9, 11, 26). It was placed at the side,
because within the ark were the tables of stone, which in a restricted
sense are the Law. Afterwards the books of Moses are called "The Book of
the Law:" And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I
have found the Book of the Law in the house of Jehovah. And when the
king had heard the words of the Book of the Law, he rent his garments (2
Kings 22:8, 11; 23:24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

That by "the Law," in the widest sense, are meant all things of the
Word, is evident from these passages: Jesus said, Is it not written in
your Law, I said, Ye are gods? (John 10:34). (This is written in Ps.
82:6.) The multitude answered Him, We have heard out of the Law, that
the Christ abideth forever (John 12:34). (This is written in Ps. 89:29;
110:4; and in Dan. 7:11, 14.) That the word might be fulfilled that is
written in their Law, They hated Me without a cause (John 15:25) (This
is written in Ps. 35:19.) The Pharisees said, Have any of the rulers
believed on Him? But this multitude that knoweth not the Law are cursed
(John 7:48, 49). It is easier for heaven and earth to pass than for one
tittle of the Law to fall (Luke 16:17). (Here "the Law" means all Holy
Scripture.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

That the statement that the Lord fulfilled all things of the Law means
that He fulfilled all things of the Word, is evident from passages where
it is said that the Scripture was fulfilled by Him, and that all things
were consummated: as from the following: Jesus went into the synagogue,
and stood up to read, and there was delivered to Him the book of the
prophet Isaiah, and He unrolled the book, and found the place where it
is written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed
Me, He hath sent Me to preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the
broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of
sight to the blind, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And He
rolled up the book and said, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your ears (Luke 4:16-21). Search the Scriptures, for they testify of Me
(John 5:39). That the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread
with Me hath lifted up his heel against Me (John 13:18). None of them is
lost, but the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled
(John 17:12). That the word might be fulfilled which He spake, Of them
whom Thou gavest Me have I lost none (John 18:9). Jesus said to Peter,
Put up again thy sword into its place. How then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? But all this was done that the
Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled (Matt. 26:52, 54, 56). The
Son of Man goeth as it is written of Him, that the Scriptures be
fulfilled (Mark 14:21, 49). Thus the Scripture was fulfilled which
saith, He was accounted among the transgressors (Mark 15:28; Luke
22:37). That the Scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They divided
My garments among them, and upon my under-vesture did they cast a lot
(John 19:24). After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
consummated, that the Scripture might be fulfilled (John 19:28). When
Jesus had received the vinegar, He said, It is consummated, that is,
fulfilled (John 19:30). These things were done, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, A bone of Him shall not be broken. And again another
Scripture saith, They shall look on Him whom they pierced (John 19:36,
37). Besides other places, where passages are adduced from the Prophets,
without its being at the same time said that the Law, or the Scripture,
was fulfilled. That all the Word has been written about the Lord, and
that He came into the world to fulfill it, He also taught His disciples
before His departure, in these words: Jesus said to His disciples, O
fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
Ought not the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into His
glory? And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, He expounded unto
them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself (Luke
24:25-27). Jesus said to His disciples, These are the words which I
spake unto you while I was yet with you, that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets,
and in the Psalms, concerning Me (Luke 24:44). That in the world the
Lord fulfilled all things of the Word, even to the veriest
singulars <span id="fr_4"></span>[11-1](#fn_4) of it, is evident from
these His own words: Verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or one tittle shall not pass from the law, till all things be
accomplished (Matt. 5:18). From these passages it may now be clearly
seen that by its being said that the Lord fulfilled all things of the
law is not meant that He fulfilled all the commandments of the
Decalogue, but that He fulfilled all things of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

THE LORD CAME INTO THE WORLD TO SUBJUGATE THE HELLS AND TO GLORIFY HIS
HUMAN AND THE PASSION OF THE CROSS WAS THE FINAL COMBAT, WHEREBY HE
FULLY CONQUERED THE HELLS, AND FULLY GLORIFIED HIS HUMAN. It is known in
the church that the Lord conquered death, by which is meant hell, and
that He afterwards ascended in glory into heaven; but as yet it has not
been known that it was by means of combats which are temptations that
the Lord conquered death or hell, and at the same time by means of them
glorified His Human; and that the passion of the cross was the final
combat or temptation by means of which He effected this conquest and
this glorification. Of these temptations many things are said in the
Prophets and in David; but not so many in the Evangelists. In these, the
temptations which He endured from childhood are summarily described by
His temptations in the wilderness, followed by those from the devil and
the last of them by the things He suffered at Gethsemane and on the
cross. (Concerning His temptations in the wilderness, and by the devil,
see Matt. 4:1-11; Mark 1:12, 13; and Luke 4:1-13.) By these temptations,
however, are meant all His temptations even to the last of them. He
revealed no more to His disciples concerning them; for it is said in
Isaiah: He was oppressed, yet He opened not His mouth: as a lamb that is
brought to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so
He opened not His mouth (Isa. 53:7). (Concerning His temptations at
Gethsemane, see Matt. 26:36-44; Mark 14:32-42; and Luke 22:39-46. And
concerning the temptations on the cross, see Matt. 27:33-50; Mark
15:22-37; Luke 23:33-49; and John 19:17-34.) Temptations are nothing
else than combats against the hells. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[12-1](#fn_5)

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

That the Lord fully conquered the hells by the passion of the cross, He
Himself teaches in John: Now is the judgment of this world; now shall
the prince of this world be cast out (John 12:31). The Lord said this
when the passion of the cross was at hand. The prince of this world is
judged (John 16:11). Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world (John
16:33). In Luke: Jesus said, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven (Luke 10:18). The "world," the "prince of the world," "Satan,"
and "the devil," mean hell. That by the passion of the cross the Lord
also fully glorified His Human, He teaches in John: When Judas was gone
out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified
in Him; if God be glorified in Him, God will also glorify Him in
Himself, and will straightway glorify Him (John 13:31-32). Father, the
hour is come, glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee (John
17:1). Now is My soul troubled; and He said, Father, glorify Thy name.
Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it,
and I will glorify it again (John 12:27-28). In Luke: Ought not the
Christ to suffer this, and to enter into His glory? (Luke 24:26). These
things are said of the Passion. Glorification is the unition of the
Divine and the Human; and therefore it is said, "and God will glorify
Him in Himself."

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

That the Lord came into the world to reduce into order all things in
heaven, and derivatively on earth; that this was effected by means of
combats against the hells, which were then infesting every man that came
into the world and that went out of the world; and that He thereby
became righteousness, and saved men, who otherwise could not have been
saved, is foretold in many passages in the Prophets, of which only a few
shall be adduced. \[2\] In Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom,
with sprinkled garments from Bozrah; this that is glorious in His
apparel, marching in the greatness of His strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art Thou red in Thine apparel,
and Thy garments like Him that treadeth in the winepress? I have trodden
the winepress alone, and of the people there was not a man with Me
wherefore I have trodden them in Mine anger, and trampled them in My
wrath; therefore their victory is sprinkled upon My garments; for the
day of vengeance is in Mine heart, and the year of My redeemed is come.
Mine own arm brought salvation unto Me; and I brought down their victory
to the earth. He said, Lo, they are My people, sons; therefore He was
their Savior in His love, and in His pity, He redeemed them (Isa.
63:1-9). These things are said of the Lord's combats against the hells.
The "apparel" in which He was "glorious," and which was "red," means the
Word, to which violence had been done by the Jewish people. The actual
combat against the hells, and the victory over them, are described by
its being said that He "trod them in His anger, and trampled them in His
wrath." That He fought alone, and from His own power, is described by,
"of the people there was not a man with Me, Mine own arm brought
salvation unto Me, I brought down their victory to the earth." That He
thereby effected salvation and redemption, is described by, "therefore
He was their Savior; in His love and in His pity He redeemed them." That
this was the reason for His advent, is described by, "the day of
vengeance is in Mine heart, and the year of My redeemed is come." \[3\]
In Isaiah again: He saw that there was not anyone, and He was amazed
that there was none to interpose; therefore His own arm brought
salvation unto Him; and His righteousness, it upheld Him; therefore He
put on righteousness as a coat of mail, and a helmet of salvation upon
His head; and He put on garments of vengeance, and clad Himself with
zeal as a cloak; then came the Redeemer to Zion (Isa. 59:16, 17, 20).
These words also treat of the Lord's combats against the hells while He
was in the world. That He fought against them from His own power, is
meant by, "He saw that there was not anyone, therefore His own arm
brought salvation unto Him." That thereby He became righteousness, is
meant by, "His righteousness, it upheld Him, whence He put on
righteousness as a coat of mail." That He thus effected redemption, is
meant by, "then came the Redeemer to Zion." \[4\] In Jeremiah: They are
dismayed, their strong ones were beaten down, they are fled a pace, and
look not back: that day is to the Lord Jehovih Zebaoth a day of
vengeance, that He may take vengeance of His enemies, and the sword
shall devour, and be sated (Jer. 46:5, 10). The Lord's combat with the
hells, and His victory over them, are described by its being said that
they are dismayed, and that their strong ones being beaten down are fled
apace, and looked not back. Their "strong ones," and "enemies," are the
hells, for all there feel hatred against the Lord. His advent into the
world for this purpose is meant by, "that day is to the Lord Jehovih
Zebaoth a day of vengeance, that He may take vengeance of His enemies."
\[5\] In Jeremiah: Her young men shall fall in the streets, and all the
men of war shall be cut off in that day (Jer. 49:26). In Joel: Jehovah
hath uttered His voice before His army; the day of Jehovah is great and
very terrible; who therefore can endure it? (Joel 2:11). In Zephaniah:
In the day of the sacrifice of Jehovah I will visit upon the princes,
upon the king's sons, upon all who are clothed with strange apparel.
That day is a day of distress, a day of the trumpet and of sounding
(Zeph. 1:8, 15-16). In Zechariah: Jehovah shall go forth, and fight
against the nations, as when He fought in the day of battle. And His
feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
the faces of Jerusalem. Then shall ye flee into the valley of My
mountains. In that day there shall not be light and brightness. And
Jehovah shall be king over all the earth; in that day there shall be one
Jehovah, and His name one (Zech. 14:3-6, 9). These passages also treat
of the Lord's combats. "That day" means His advent. The Mount of Olives
that was before the faces of Jerusalem, was where the Lord was wont to
tarry. (See Mark 13:3; 14:26; Luke 21:37; 22:39; John 8:1; and
elsewhere.) \[6\] In David: The cords of death compassed me about, the
cords of hell encompassed me, the snares of death forestalled me;
therefore He sent out His arrows, and many lightnings, and discomfited
them. I will pursue Mine enemies, and catch them, neither will I turn
until I have consumed them. I will smite them that they shall not be
able to rise. Thou hast girded me with strength unto the war, and Thou
shalt put mine enemies to flight I will beat them small as dust before
the faces of the wind, as the mire of the streets I will enfeeble them
(Ps. 18:5, 14, 37-40, 42). The "cords" and "snares of death" that
encompassed and forestalled, signify temptations, which, being from
hell, are called also "the cords of hell." These and all other things in
this whole Psalm treat of the Lord's combats and victories; and
therefore it is added, "Thou wilt make me the head of the nations a
people that have not known shall serve me" (verse 43). \[7\] In David,
again: Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Mighty one; Thine arrows are
sharp, the people shall fall under Thee, from the heart of the king's
enemies. Thy throne is forever and to eternity: Thou hast loved
righteousness, wherefore God hath anointed Thee (Ps. 45:3, 5-7). These
words also treat of combat with the hells, and of their subjugation; for
this whole Psalm treats of the Lord, that is to say, of His combats, His
glorification, and the salvation of the faithful by Him. In David: A
fire shall go before Him, it shall burn up His enemies round about the
earth shall see and shall fear the mountains shall melt like wax before
the Lord of the whole earth. The heavens shall declare His
righteousness, and all the people shall see His glory (Ps. 97:3-6). This
Psalm likewise treats of the Lord, and of the like things. \[8\] In
David: Jehovah said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand until I make
Thine enemies Thy footstool; rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies.
The Lord at Thy right hand hath smitten kings in the day of His anger;
He hath filled with dead bodies, He hath smitten the head over much land
(Ps. 110:1, 2, 5, 6). That these words are said of the Lord, is evident
from His own words in Matt. 22:44; Mark 12:36; and Luke 20:42. To "sit
at the right hand," signifies omnipotence; the "enemies" signify the
hells "kings," those there who are in falsities of evil. To "make them
His footstool," "smite them in the day of anger," and "fill with dead
bodies," signifies to destroy their power; and to "smite the head over
much land," signifies to destroy all. \[9\] As the Lord alone conquered
the hells, without the aid of any angel, He is called HERO, and a MAN OF
WARS (Isa. 42:13); THE KING OF GLORY, JEHOVAH STRONG AND MIGHTY; A HERO
OF WAR (Ps. xxiv. 8, 10); THE MIGHTY ONE OF JACOB (Ps. 132:2); and in
many places, JEHOVAH ZEBAOTH, that is, Jehovah of the Armies of War. His
advent is also called THE DAY OF JEHOVAH terrible, cruel, of
indignation, of wrath, of anger, of vengeance, of destruction, of war,
of the sounding of the trumpet, of tumult, as may be seen from the
passages quoted above, in n. 4. \[10\] As the Last Judgment executed by
the Lord when He was in the world was effected by means of combats with
the hells, and by their subjugation, this coming Judgment is treated of
in many passages. As in David: Jehovah cometh to judge the earth; He
shall judge the world in righteousness, and the people in truth (Ps.
96:13). And so in many other passages. These are from the prophetical
parts of the Word. \[11\] In its historical parts like things are
represented by the wars of the sons of Israel with various nations; for
everything that is written in the Word, whether in prophecy or history,
is written about the Lord; and this is why the Word is Divine. Many
arcana of the Lord's glorification are contained in the rituals of the
Israelitish Church, as for example in its burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, in its sabbaths and feasts, and in the priesthood of Aaron
and the Levites; as they are also in all those other things in Moses
which are called laws, judgments, and statutes; and this is what is
meant by the Lord's words to His disciples: That He must needs fulfill
all things which are written in the law of Moses concerning Him (Luke
24:44) and by His saying to the Jews that Moses "wrote of Him" (John
5:46). \[12\] From all this it is evident that the Lord came into the
world to subjugate the hells, and to glorify His Human; and that the
passion of the cross was the final combat, by which He fully conquered
the hells, and fully glorified His Human. But more will be seen on this
subject in the following small work on The Holy Scripture, where are
collected together all the passages from the prophetical Word that treat
of the Lord's combats with the hells and His victories over them; or,
what is the same, that treat of the Last Judgment executed by Him when
He was in the world; and also those which treat of His passion, and of
the glorification of His Human, which are so numerous that if quoted
they would fill pages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

BY THE PASSION OF THE CROSS THE LORD DID NOT TAKE AWAY SINS, BUT BORE
THEM. Some persons within the church believe that by the passion of the
cross the Lord took away sins, and made satisfaction to the Father, and
so effected Redemption; and some, that He transferred to Himself, bore,
and cast into the depths of the sea (that is, into hell), the sins of
those who have faith in Him. They confirm themselves in these notions by
the words of John concerning Jesus: Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh
away the sins of the world (John 1:29); and by the Lord's words in
Isaiah: He hath borne our diseases, and carried our sorrows: He was
wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His wound has health been
given us. Jehovah hath made to fall on Him the iniquities of us all. He
was oppressed \[literaly, He hath endured exaction\], and He was
afflicted, yet opened not His mouth He is led as a lamb to the
slaughter. He was cut off out of the land of the living for the
transgression of My people, to whom the stroke was due, that He might
deliver the wicked into their sepulcher, and the rich into their deaths;
He shall see of the labor of His soul, and shall be satisfied. By His
knowledge shall He justify many in that He hath borne their iniquities.
He hath poured out His soul unto death, and He was numbered with the
transgressors, and He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors (Isa. 53:4-12). Both these passages speak of the
Lord's temptations and passion; and by His taking away sins and
diseases, and by the iniquities of all being made to fall on Him, is
meant the like as by His bearing sorrows and iniquities. \[2\] Therefore
it shall first be stated what is meant by bearing iniquities, and
afterwards what by taking them away. To bear iniquities means to endure
grievous temptations; and also to suffer the Jews to treat Him as they
had treated the Word, which they did because He was the Word. For the
church as it then existed among the Jews was utterly devastated, and it
was devastated by their having perverted all things of the Word, so that
there was not any truth remaining; and therefore they did not
acknowledge the Lord. This was meant and signified by all things of the
Lord's passion. The prophets were treated in a similar way, because they
represented the Lord in respect to the Word, and derivatively in respect
to the church, and the Lord was the Prophet. \[3\] That the Lord was the
Prophet is evident from the following passages: Jesus said, A prophet is
not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house (Matt.
13:57; Mark 6:4; Luke 4:24). Jesus said, It cannot be that a prophet
perish out of Jerusalem (Luke 13:33). They said of Jesus, This is that
prophet of Nazareth (Matt. 21:11; John 7:40). Fear took hold on all; and
they praised God, saying that a great prophet is risen up among us (Luke
7:16). That a prophet should be raised up out of the midst of their
brethren, whose words they shall obey (Deut. 18:15-19). That the
prophets underwent similar treatment, is evident from the things which
follow. \[4\] In order that he might represent the state of the church,
the prophet Isaiah was commanded To loose the sackcloth from off his
loins, and to put off the shoe from his foot, and to walk naked and
barefoot three years, for a sign and a wonder (Isa. 20:2-3). In order
that he might represent the state of the church, the prophet Jeremiah
was commanded: To buy for himself a girdle, and put it upon his loins,
and not put it in water, and to hide it in a hole of the rock near the
river Euphrates; and after many days he found it rotten (Jer. 13:1-7).
The same prophet represented the state of the church by His not taking a
wife in that place, nor entering into the house of mourning, neither
going away to lament, nor entering into the house of feasting (Jer.
16:2, 5, 8). \[5\] In order that he might represent the state of the
church, the prophet Ezekiel was commanded To cause a barber's razor to
pass upon his head, and upon his beard, and afterwards to divide it, and
to burn the third part of it in the midst of the city, to smite a third
part with a sword, and to scatter a third part in the wind; and that he
should bind a few hairs in his skirts, and at last cast them into the
midst of the fire, and burn them (Ezek. 5:1-4). In order that he might
represent the state of the church, the same prophet was commanded To
make vessels of wandering, and to wander to another place in the eyes of
the sons of Israel, and to bring forth the vessels by day, and go forth
in the evening through a hole dug in the wall, and cover his face so
that he should not see the earth, and that so he should be for a wonder
to the house of Israel, and should say, I am your sign; like as I have
done, so shall it be done unto you (Ezek. 12:3-7, 11). \[6\] In order
that he might represent the state of the church, the prophet Hosea was
commanded To take to himself a harlot for a wife, and he took her, and
she bare him three sons, one of whom he called "Jezreel;" the second,
"That hath not obtained mercy;" and the third, "Not my people" (Hos.
1:2-9). And again he was commanded To go and love a woman beloved of her
companion, and an adulteress, whom he also bought for fifteen pieces of
silver (Hos. 3:1-2). \[7\] In order that he might represent the state of
the church, the prophet Ezekiel was commanded To take a tile, and
engrave upon it Jerusalem, and to lay siege to it, and build a rampart
and a mount against it, and to put an iron pan between himself and the
city, and to lie on his left side three hundred and ninety days, and
afterwards, on his right side, forty days. Also to take wheat, barley,
lentils, millet, and spelt, and make bread thereof, which he should then
eat by measure. And also that he should make for himself a barley cake
with the dung of man; and because he prayed that it might not be so, he
was commanded to make it with cow's dung (Ezek. 4:1-15). The prophets
represented other things besides; as, for instance, Zedekiah, by The
horns of iron that he made for himself (1 Kings 22:11). And another
prophet, by being Smitten and wounded, and by putting ashes upon his
eyes (1 Kings 20:35-38). \[8\] In general, the prophets represented the
Word in its ultimate sense, which is the sense of the letter, by a
garment of hair (Zech. 13:4); and therefore Elijah Was clad in such a
coat, and was girt about his loins with a leathern girdle (2 Kings 1:8);
and in like manner John the Baptist, Who had his raiment of camel's
hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and ate locust and wild
honey (Matt. 3:4). From these things it is evident that the prophets
represented the state of the church, and also the Word; for he who
represents the one represents the other, because the church is from the
Word, and is according to the reception of it in life and faith.
Therefore prophets, wherever mentioned in both Testaments, signify the
doctrine of the church from the Word; and by the Lord, as the Grand
Prophet, is signified the church itself, and the Word itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

The state of the church from the Word thus represented in the Prophets,
is what is meant by bearing the iniquities and sins of the people. That
such is the case is evident from the things said of Isaiah the prophet:
That he went naked and barefoot three years, for a sign and a wonder
(Isa. 20:3). Of the prophet Ezekiel: That he brought forth vessels of
wandering, and covered his face so that he should not see the earth, and
that so he was for a portent to the house of Israel, and also said, I am
your portent (Ezek. 12:6, 11). \[2\] That this was for them to bear
iniquities, is plainly evident in Ezekiel, where that prophet is
commanded to lie three hundred and ninety days, and forty days, upon his
left side and upon his right, against Jerusalem, and to eat a barley
cake made with cow's dung: As we read: Lie thou upon thy left side, and
lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it, according to the number
of the days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity.
For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the
number of the days, three hundred and ninety days, that thou bear the
iniquity of the house of Israel. And when thou hast accomplished them,
thou shalt lie upon thy right side, so that thou bear the iniquity of
the house of Judah forty days (Ezek. 4:4-6). \[3\] That by his having
thus borne the iniquities of the house of Israel and of the house of
Judah, the prophet did not take them away, and thus expiate them, but
only represented and showed them, is evident from what there follows:
Thus saith Jehovah, The sons of Israel shall eat their unclean bread
among the nations whither I will drive them. Behold, I will break the
staff of bread in Jerusalem, that they may lack bread and water, and be
desolate a man and his brother, and consume away for their iniquity
(Ezek. 4:13, 16-17). \[4\] So when the same prophet showed himself, and
said, Behold, I am your portent, it is added, as I have done, so shall
it be done unto them (Ezek. 12:6, 11). The meaning is therefore the same
where it is said of the Lord: He hath borne our diseases, and carried
our sorrows Jehovah hath made to light on Him the iniquities of us all
by His knowledge hath He justified many, in that He hath borne their
iniquities (Isa. 53:4, 6, 11); where, in this whole chapter, the Lord's
passion is treated of. \[5\] That the Lord Himself, as the Grand
Prophet, represented the state of the church in respect to the Word, is
evident from all things of His passion; as that He was betrayed by
Judas; that He was taken and condemned by the chief priests and elders;
that they buffeted Him; that they smote Him on the head with a reed;
that they put on Him a crown of thorns; that they divided His garments,
and cast lots for His under vesture; that they crucified Him; that they
gave Him vinegar to drink; that they pierced His side; that He was
buried; and that He rose again the third day. \[6\] That He was betrayed
by Judas, signified that He was betrayed by the Jewish nation, among
whom at that time was the Word, for Judas represented that nation. That
He was taken and condemned by the chief priests and elders, signified
that He was so treated by the whole Jewish Church. That they scourged
Him, spat in His face, buffeted Him, and smote Him on the head with a
reed, signified that they had done the like to the Word in respect to
its Divine truths, all of which treat of the Lord. That they put on Him
a crown of thorns, signified that they had falsified and adulterated
those truths. That they divided His garments, and cast lots for His
under-vesture, signified that they had dispersed all the truths of the
Word, but not its spiritual sense, which His under-vesture signified.
That they crucified Him, signified that they had destroyed and profaned
the whole Word. That they offered Him vinegar to drink, signified that
everything had become falsified and false; and therefore He did not
drink it, and then said, It is finished. That they pierced His side,
signified that they had completely extinguished all the truth of the
Word, and all its good. That He was buried, signified the rejection of
the residue of the maternal human. That He rose again the third day,
signified His glorification. \[7\] Similar things are signified by these
things as foretold in the Prophets and in David. And it was for the same
reason that, after He had been scourged and brought out wearing the
crown of thorns and the purple robe put on Him by the soldiers, He said,
Behold the Man! (John 19:1, 5). This He said because by "man
\[hominem\]" is signified the church; for by "Son of man" is signified
the truth of the church, thus the Word. It is evident then from these
things, that to bear iniquities means to represent and effigy in one's
self sins against the Divine truths of the Word. That the Lord endured
and suffered such things as the Son of man, and not as the Son of God,
will be seen in what follows; for "the Son of man" signifies the Lord in
respect to the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

Something shall now be said of what is meant by taking away sins. To
take away sins means the same as to redeem man, and to save him; for the
Lord came into the world to render salvation possible to man. Without
His advent no mortal could have been reformed and regenerated, and so
saved. But this became possible after the Lord had deprived the devil
(that is, hell) of all his power; and had glorified His Human, that is,
had united it to the Divine of His Father. If these things had not been
done, no man would have been capable of permanently receiving any Divine
truth, still less any Divine good; for the devil, whose power was
previously the stronger, would have plucked it out of his heart. \[2\]
From what has been said it is evident that the Lord did not take away
sins by the passion of the cross; but that He takes them away, that is,
removes them, in those who believe in Him by living according to His
commandments; as He also teaches in Matthew: Think not that I am come to
loosen the law and the prophets. Whosoever shall loosen the least of
these commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in
the kingdom of the heavens; but whosoever shall do and teach them shall
be called great in the kingdom of the heavens (Matt. 5:17, 19). \[3\]
Who cannot see from reason alone, provided he is in some enlightenment,
that sins cannot be taken away from a man except by actual repentance,
which consists in his seeing his sins, imploring the Lord's help, and
desisting from them? To see, believe, and teach otherwise, is not from
the Word, nor from sound reason, but from cupidity and a depraved will,
which are proper to man, and from this comes the debasement of his
intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

THE IMPUTATION OF THE LORD'S MERIT IS NOTHING BUT THE REMISSION OF SINS
AFTER REPENTANCE. It is believed in the church that the Lord was sent by
the Father to make an atonement for the human race, and that this was
effected by His fulfilling the law, and by the passion of the cross; and
that in this way He took away condemnation, and made satisfaction; and
that without this expiation, satisfaction, and propitiation, the human
race would have perished in eternal death, and this on account of
justice which by some is called vengeful justice. It is true that
without the Lord's advent all in the world would have perished; but how
it is to be understood that the Lord fulfilled all things of the law,
and why He suffered the cross, may be seen above, in chapters II. and
III., which show that it was not on account of any vengeful justice,
because this is not a Divine attribute. Divine attributes are justice,
love, mercy, and good; and God is justice itself, love itself, mercy
itself, and good itself; and where these are, there is not anything of
vengeance, and therefore no vengeful justice. \[2\] As the fulfilling of
the law, and the passion of the cross, have hitherto been understood by
many to mean that by these two things the Lord made satisfaction for
mankind, and took away the condemnation that had been foreseen or
appointed, there has followed from the connection, and also from the
principle that man is saved by mere faith that it is so, the dogma of
the imputation of the Lord's merit by our receiving, as for
satisfaction, these two things that belong to His merit. But this dogma
is refuted by what has been said about the fulfilling of the law by the
Lord, and about His passion of the cross. At the same time we can see
that the imputation of merit is a phrase destitute of meaning, unless
there is meant by it the remission of sins after repentance. For nothing
of the Lord can be imputed to man; but salvation can be awarded him by
the Lord after he has performed repentance, that is, after he has seen
and acknowledged his sins, and has then desisted from them, and this
from the Lord. Then is salvation awarded him: not that he is saved by
his own merit or righteousness, but by the Lord, who alone has fought
and conquered the hells, and who alone still fights for man, and
conquers the hells for him. \[3\] These things are the Lord's merit and
righteousness, and they never can be imputed to man; for if they were,
the Lord's merit and righteousness would be imputed to man as if they
were his; and this is never done, nor can be done. If imputation were
possible, an impenitent and wicked man could impute the Lord's merit to
himself, and so think himself justified, and yet this would be to defile
what is holy with things profane, and to profane the Lord's name; for it
would be to keep the thought fixed on the Lord, and the will in hell,
and yet the will is the whole man. There is a faith of God, and a faith
of man; those have the faith of God who perform repentance; and those
the faith of man who do not perform repentance, and yet think of
imputation; and the faith of God is a living faith, and the faith of man
is a dead faith. \[4\] That the Lord Himself, and His disciples,
preached repentance and the remission of sins, is evident from the
following passages: Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
kingdom of the heavens is at hand (Matt. 4:17). John said, Bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance; and now is the axe laid to the root of the
trees; every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire (Luke 3:8-9). Jesus said, Except ye repent, ye shall
all perish (Luke 13:3, 5). Jesus, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of
God, said, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand;
repent ye, and believe the Gospel (Mark 1:14-15). Jesus sent out the
disciples, who went forth and preached that men should repent (Mark
6:12). Jesus said to the apostles that they must preach in His name
repentance and the remission of sins among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem (Luke 24:47). John preached the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins (Luke 3:3; Mark 1:4). By "baptism" is meant spiritual
washing, which is a washing from sins, and is called regeneration. \[5\]
Repentance and the remission of sins are thus described by the Lord in
John: He came unto His own, but His own received Him not; but to as many
as received Him to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe in His name who were born, not of bloods, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God (John 1:11-13). By
"His own," are meant those who were then of the church, where was the
Word; by "the sons of God," and "those who believe in His name," are
meant those who believe in the Lord, and who believe the Word; by
"bloods," are meant falsifications of the Word, and confirmations of
falsity thereby; "the will of the flesh," is man's Own pertaining to the
will, which in itself is evil; "the will of man," is man's Own
pertaining to the understanding, which in itself is falsity; those "born
of God," are those who have been regenerated by the Lord. From these
things it is evident that those are saved who are in the good of love
and in the truths of faith from the Lord, and not those who are in what
is their own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

THE LORD IN RESPECT TO THE DIVINE HUMAN IS CALLED THE SON OF GOD; AND IN
RESPECT TO THE WORD, THE SON OF MAN. In the church, the Son of God is
supposed to be the second Person of the Godhead, distinct from the
Person of the Father, whence comes the belief about the Son of God born
from eternity. As this belief has been universally received, and as it
relates to God, no one has had any opportunity or permission to think
about it from any understanding; not even as to what it is to be born
from eternity; for anyone who thinks about it from the understanding
must needs say to himself, This transcends my understanding; but still I
say it because others say it, and I believe it because others believe
it. Be it known, then, that there is no Son from eternity; but that the
Lord is from eternity. When it is known what the Lord is, and what the
Son, it will be possible, and not before, to think with understanding of
the Triune God. \[2\] That the Lord's Human, conceived of Jehovah the
Father, and born of the virgin Mary, is the Son of God, is plainly
evident from the following passages. In Luke: The angel Gabriel was sent
from God unto a city of Galilee named Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to
a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's
name was Mary. And the angel entered in to her, and said, Hail, thou
that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among
women. And when she saw, she was troubled at his word, and cast in her
mind what manner of salutation this might be. And the angel said unto
her, Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found grace with God. And behold,
thou shalt conceive and bear a Son, and shalt call His name Jesus. He
shall be great, and shall be called THE SON OF THE MOST HIGH. But Mary
said unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the
angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee, Wherefore also
that HOLY THING which shall be born of thee shall be called THE SON OF
GOD (Luke 1:26-35). It is here said, "thou shalt conceive and bear a
Son; He shall be great, and shall be called THE SON OF THE MOST HIGH;"
and further, "that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called THE SON OF GOD;" from which it is evident that the Human
conceived of God, and born of the virgin Mary, is what is called "the
Son of God." \[3\] In Isaiah: The Lord Himself shall give you a sign;
Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call His name
GOD-WITH-US (Isa. 7:14). That the Son born of the virgin, and conceived
of God, is He who is called "God-with-us," thus is He who is the Son of
God, is evident. That this is the case is confirmed also by Matt.
1:22-23. \[4\] In Isaiah: Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given; and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name shall
be called Wonderful, Counselor, God, Hero, FATHER OF ETERNITY, Prince of
peace (Isa. 9:6). The burden is the same here; for it is said, "Unto us
a Child is born, unto us a Son is given," who is not a Son from
eternity, but a Son born in the world, as is also evident from the words
of the prophet in the next verse, which are similar to those of the
angel Gabriel to Mary in Luke 1:32, 33. \[5\] In David: I will make an
announcement concerning a statute, Jehovah hath said, Thou art My Son;
this day have I begotten Thee. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye
perish in the way (Ps. 2:7, 12). Neither here is there meant a Son from
eternity, but a Son born in the world; for it is a prophecy concerning
the Lord who was to come; and therefore it is called "a statute
concerning which Jehovah has made an announcement" to David. "This day,"
is not from eternity, but is in time. \[6\] In David: I will set His
hand in the sea. He shall call Me, Thou art My Father. I will make Him
My Firstborn (Ps. 89:25-27). This whole Psalm treats of the Lord who was
to come, and therefore He is meant by Him who "shall call Jehovah His
Father," and who shall be the "Firstborn," thus who is the Son of God.
\[7\] And so in other places, where He is called A rod out of the stem
of Jesse (Isa. 11:1); An Offshoot of David (Jer. 23:5); The seed of the
woman (Gen. 3:15); The Only-begotten (John 1:18); A Priest to eternity,
and the Lord (Ps. 110:4, 5). \[8\] In the Jewish Church there was
understood by the Son of God the Messiah whom they had expected, and of
whom they knew that He was to be born at Bethlehem. That by the Son of
God they understood the Messiah, is evident from the following passages.
In John: Peter said, We believe and know that Thou art THE CHRIST, THE
SON OF THE LIVING GOD (6:69). In the same Evangelist: Thou art THE
CHRIST THE SON OF GOD, who should come into the world (11:27). In
Matthew: The chief priest asked Jesus whether He was THE CHRIST THE SON
OF GOD. Jesus said, I am (26:63, 64; Mark 14:62). In John: These things
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is THE CHRIST THE SON OF
GOD (xx. 31; also Mark 1:1). "Christ" is a Greek word, and means "the
Anointed," as also does "Messiah" in the Hebrew language; and therefore
John says: We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, THE
CHRIST (John 1:41). And in another place: The woman said, I know that
MESSIAH cometh, who is called CHRIST (4:25). \[9\] It has been shown in
the first chapter that the Law and the Prophets, that is, the whole Word
of the Old Testament, is concerning the Lord, and therefore by the Son
of God who was to come, nothing else can be meant than the Human which
the Lord assumed in the world. From this it follows that the Human was
what was meant, when Jesus, at His baptism, was called by Jehovah, in a
voice from heaven, His Son: This is MY BELOVED SON, in whom I am well
pleased (Matt. 3:17; Mark 1:11; Luke 3:22). For it was His Human that
was baptized. And when He was transfigured: This is MY BELOVED SON, in
whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him (Matt. 17:5; Mark 9:7; Luke 9:35).
And in other places also, as Matt. 8:29; 14:33; Mark 3:11; 15:39; John
1:34, 49; 3:18; 5:25; 10:36; 11:4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

As by "the Son of God" is meant the Lord as to the Human which He
assumed in the world, which is the Divine Human, it is evident what is
meant by the Lord's so frequently saying that He was sent by the Father
into the world, and that He came forth from the Father. By His being
sent by the Father into the world, is meant that He was conceived from
Jehovah the Father. That nothing else is meant by being sent, and sent
by the Father, is evident from all the passages where it is said that He
did the will of the Father and works, which were that He conquered the
hells, glorified His Human, taught the Word, and set up <span
id="fr_6"></span>[20-1](#fn_6) a new church, which could not have been
done except by means of a Human conceived from Jehovah and born of a
virgin, that is, unless God had been made Man. Examine the passages
where "sent" occurs, and you will see. As, for instance, Matt. 10:40;
15:24; Mark 9:37; Luke 4:43; 9:48; 10:16; John 3:17, 34; 4:34; 5:23-24,
36-38; 6:29, 39-40, 44, 57; 7:16, 18, 28, 29; 8:16, 18, 29, 42; 9:4;
11:42; 12:44-45, 49; 13:20; 14:24; 15:21; 16:5; 17:3, 8, 21, 23, 25;
20:21; and also the passages where the Lord calls Jehovah "Father."

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

At the present day many think of the Lord no otherwise than as of a
common man like themselves, because they think solely of His Human, and
not at the same time of His Divine, when yet His Divine and His Human
cannot be separated. For the Lord is God and Man, and God and Man in the
Lord are not two, but one Person, yes, altogether one, just as soul and
body are one man, according to the doctrine received in the whole
Christian world which was formulated by Councils, and is called the
doctrine of the Athanasian Creed. Therefore, lest anyone should in
future separate in his thought the Divine and the Human in the Lord, I
pray him to read the passages from Luke quoted above, and also the
following in Matthew: The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. When
His mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together,
she was found with child of the Holy Spirit. And Joseph her betrothed,
being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was
minded to put her away privily. But while he thought on these things,
behold, an angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying,
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
betrothed, for that which is begotten \[natus\] in her is of the Holy
Spirit. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call His name
Jesus for He shall save His people from their sins. And Joseph, being
awaked from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took
unto him his betrothed, but knew her not till she had brought forth her
firstborn son; and he called His name Jesus (Matt. 1:18-25). From these
words, and from those written in Luke concerning the Lord's nativity,
and from others adduced above, it is evident that the "Son of God" is
Jesus conceived of Jehovah the Father, and born of the Virgin Mary, of
whom all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

He who knows what in the Lord is called "the Son of God," and what in
Him is called "the Son of man," is able to see many of the secret things
of the Word; for at one time the Lord calls Himself "the Son," at
another "the Son of God," and at another "the Son of man," everywhere
according to the subject that is being treated of. When His Divinity,
His oneness with the Father, His Divine power, faith in Him, life from
Him, are being treated of, He calls Himself "the Son," and "the Son of
God." As, for instance, in John 5:17-26, and elsewhere. But where His
passion, Judgment, His advent, and, in general, redemption, salvation,
reformation, and regeneration, are treated of, He calls Himself "the Son
of man;" the reason of which is that He is then meant in respect to the
Word. In the Word of the Old Testament, the Lord is designated by
various names, being there named Jehovah, Jah, Lord, God, the Lord
Jehovih, Jehovah Zebaoth, the God of Israel, the Holy One of Israel, the
Mighty One of Jacob, Shaddai, the Rock, and also Creator, Former,
Savior, Redeemer, everywhere according to the subject that is being
treated of. And the same in the Word of the New Testament, where He is
named Jesus, Christ, the Lord, God, the Son of God, the Son of man, the
Prophet, the Lamb, with other names, also everywhere according to the
subject there treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

Having stated on what grounds the Lord is called "the Son of God," we
will now state those on which He is called "the Son of man." The Lord is
called "the Son of man" where the subject treated of is His passion,
Judgment, His advent, and, in general, redemption, salvation,
reformation, and regeneration. The reason is that "the Son of man" is
the Lord in respect to the Word; and as the Word He suffered, judges,
came into the world, redeems, saves, reforms, and regenerates That such
is the case is evident from what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

That the Lord is called "the Son of man" when His passion is treated of,
is evident from these passages: Jesus said to His disciples, Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief
priests and scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death, and shall
deliver Him to the nations, and they shall scourge Him, and spit on Him,
and shall kill Him; but on the third day He shall rise again (Mark
10:33, 34). (And so in other places where He foretells His passion, as
in Matt. 20:18, 19; Mark 8:31; Luke 9:22.) Jesus said to His disciples,
Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners (Matt. 26:45). The angel said to the women that came to
the sepulcher, Remember how He spake unto you, that the Son of man must
be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the
third day rise again (Luke 24:6, 7). The reason the Lord then called
Himself "the Son of man," is that He suffered Himself to be treated in
the same way as they had treated the Word, as has been shown above very
fully.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

That the Lord is called "the Son of man" when the Judgment is treated
of, is evident from these passages: When the Son of man shall come in
His glory, then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory, and He shall
set the sheep on His right hand, and the goats on the left (Matt. 25:31,
33). When the Son of man shall sit on the throne of His glory, He shall
judge the twelve tribes of Israel (Matt. 19:28). The Son of man shall
come in the glory of His Father, and shall render to everyone according
to his deeds (Matt. 16:27). Watch ye at every season, that ye may be
accounted worthy to stand before the Son of man (Luke 21:36). In such an
hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh (Matt. 24:44; Luke 12:40).
The Father judgeth no one, but hath given all judgment to the Son,
because He is the Son of man (John 5:22, 27). The reason why the Lord
calls Himself "the Son of man" when the Judgment is treated of, is that
all judgment is effected according to the Divine truth which is in the
Word. That this judges everyone, is said by the Lord Himself in John: If
any one hear My words, and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not
to judge the world. The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day (12:47, 48). The Son of man has not come to judge
the world, but that through Him it might be saved; he that believeth in
Him is not judged; but he that believeth not is judged already, because
he hath not believed in the name of the Only-begotten Son of God (3:17,
18). (That the Lord judges no one to hell, and casts no one into hell,
but that an evil spirit casts himself in, may be seen in the work on
Heaven and Hell, n. 545-550, 574.) By "the name" of Jehovah, of the
Lord, of the Son of God, is meant the Divine truth, and therefore also
the Word, which is from Him, and about Him, and therefore is Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

That the Lord is called "the Son of man" when His advent is treated of,
is evident from these passages: The disciples said to Jesus, What shall
be the sign of Thy coming, and of the consummation of the age? And then
the Lord foretold the successive states of the church down to its end;
and of its end He said, Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man,
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and glory (Matt. 24:3, 30; Mark 13:26; Luke 21:27). "The
consummation of the age," means the last time of the church; His "coming
in the clouds of heaven with glory," means the opening of the Word, and
the making manifest that the Word has been written about Him alone. In
Daniel: I saw and behold one like the Son of man came with clouds of the
heavens (8:13). In the Revelation: Behold, He cometh with clouds, and
every eye shall see Him (1:7). This also is said of the Son of man, as
is evident from verse 13. I saw and behold a white cloud, and upon the
cloud one sat like unto the Son of man (14:14). \[2\] That by "the Son
of God" the Lord meant one thing in Himself, and by "the Son of man"
another, is evident from His reply to the chief priest: The high priest
said unto Jesus, I adjure Thee by the living God that Thou tell us
whether Thou be the Christ, the Son of God. Jesus said unto him, Thou
hast said; nevertheless, I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son
of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven (Matt. 26:63, 64). Here He first confessed that He was the Son of
God, and afterwards said that they should see the Son of man sitting at
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven, by which is
meant that after the passion of the cross He would possess the Divine
power of opening the Word and setting up the church anew, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[26-1](#fn_7) which could not be effected before,
because He had not then conquered hell and glorified His Human. What is
signified by sitting upon the clouds of heaven, and coming in glory, has
been set forth in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 1.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

That the Lord is called "the Son of man" when Redemption, Salvation,
Reformation, and Regeneration are treated of, is evident from these
passages: The Son of man came to give His life a redemption for many
(Matt. 20:28; Mark 10:5). The Son of man is come to save, and not to
destroy (Matt. 18:11; Luke 9:56). The Son of man is come to seek and
save that which was lost (Luke 19:10). The Son of man is come that the
world through Him may be saved (John 3:17). He that soweth the good seed
is the Son of man (Matt. 13:37). Redemption and salvation are here
treated of, and as the Lord effects these by means of the Word, He here
calls Himself "the Son of man." The Lord says, That the Son of man has
power \[potestas\] <span id="fr_8"></span>[27-1](#fn_8) to forgive sins
(Mark 2:10; Luke 5:24) (that is, to save). And also, That He is the Lord
of the Sabbath, because He is the Son of man (Matt. 12:8; Mark 2:28;
Luke 6:5) (i.e. because He is the Word, which He is Himself then
teaching). He says, further, in John: Labor not for the meat which
perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which
the Son of man shall give unto you (John 6:27). By "meat" is meant all
truth and good of doctrine from the Word, thus from the Lord; and this
is also meant there by the manna, and by the bread which came down from
heaven; and also by the following in the same chapter: Except ye shall
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in
you (John 6:53). "Flesh," or "bread," is the good of love from the Word;
"blood," or "wine," is the good of faith from the Word, both from the
Lord. \[2\] The like is signified by "the son of man" in other passages
where He is mentioned, as in the following: The foxes have holes, and
the birds nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay His head
(Matt. 8:20; Luke 9:58). By this is meant that the Word would have no
place among the Jews, as also the Lord said in John 8:37; and also that
they had it not abiding in them, because they had not acknowledged Him
(John 5:38). In Revelation also "the Son of man" means the Lord in
respect to the Word: In the midst of the seven lamp stands I saw one
like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and
girt about the paps with a golden girdle (Rev. 1:13, etc.). Here, in
various ways, the Lord is represented as the Word, and He is therefore
called "the Son of man." In David: Let Thy hand he upon the man of Thy
right hand, upon the Son of man whom Thou hast made strong for Thyself:
so will not we go back from Thee; quicken us (Ps. 80:17-18). "The man of
Thy right hand," also means the Lord in respect to the Word; and so does
"the Son of man." He is called "the man of the right hand," because the
Lord has power from the Divine truth, which also the Word is, and He had
Divine power when He had fulfilled the whole Word: and therefore He had
said That they should see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of
the Father, with power (Mark 14:62).

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

That "the Son of man" signifies the Lord in respect to the Word, was the
reason why the prophets also were called sons of man. The reason why the
prophets were called sons of man, was that they represented the Lord in
respect to the Word, and consequently signified the doctrine of the
church from the Word. In heaven nothing else is understood by "prophets"
as mentioned in the Word; for the spiritual signification of "prophet,"
as well as of "son of man," is the doctrine of the church from the Word;
and, when predicated of the Lord, "prophet" means the Word itself. That
the prophet Daniel is called "son of man" may be seen in Dan. 8:17. That
the prophet Ezekiel is called "son of man" may be seen in Ezek. 2:1, 3,
6, 8; 3:1, 3, 4, 10, 17, 25; 4:1, 16; 5:1; 6:2; 7:2; 8:5, 6, 8, 12, 15;
9:2, 4, 15; 12:2, 3, 9, 18, 22, 27; 13:2, 17; 14:3, 13; 15:2; 16:2;
17:2; 20:3, 4, 27, 46; 21:2, 6, 9, 12, 14, 19, 28; 22:18, 24; 23:2, 36;
24:2, 16, 25; 25:2; 26:2; 27:2; 28:2, 12, 21; 29:2, 18; 30:2, 21; 31:2;
32:2, 18; 33:2, 7, 10, 12, 24, 30; 34:2; 35:2; 36:1, 17; 37:3, 9, 11;
16; 38:2, 14; 39:1, 17; 40:4; 43:7, 10, 18; 44:5. From what has been
said it is now evident that the Lord in respect to the Divine Human is
called "the Son of God," and in respect to the Word, "the Son of man."

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

III\. THE LORD MADE DIVINE HIS HUMAN FROM THE DIVINE THAT WAS IN
HIMSELF, AND THUS BECAME ONE WITH THE FATHER. The Doctrine of the Church
that is received in the whole Christian world is that Our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man, who, although He is God and Man,
yet He is not two, but one Christ; one, by the taking of the manhood
into God; one altogether, by unity of person; for as the reasonable soul
and flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ. These words are
taken from the doctrine of the Athanasian Creed, which has been received
in the whole Christian world; and they are what is essential in it
concerning the unition of the Divine and the Human in the Lord. What is
said further in that Creed about the Lord will be explained in its own
chapter. From these words it is quite evident that it is in accordance
with the faith of the Christian Church that the Divine and the Human in
the Lord are not two, but one, as the soul and body are one man, and
that the Divine in Him assumed the Human. \[2\] From this it follows
that the Divine cannot be separated from the Human, nor the Human from
the Divine, for this would be like separating the soul from the body.
That this is so must be admitted by every one who reads what is cited
above (n. 9, 21) from two of the evangelists (namely, Luke 1:26-35, and
Matt. 1:18-25) concerning the Lord's birth; from which it is manifest
that Jesus was conceived of Jehovah God, and born of the virgin Mary; so
that the Divine was in Him, and was His soul. As therefore His soul was
the very Divine of the Father, it follows that His body, or Human, must
also have become Divine for where the one is Divine, the other must be
so too. In this way and in no other are the Father and the Son one, and
the Father in the Son and the Son in the Father, and all things of the
Son the Father's, and all things of the Father the Son's, as the Lord
Himself teaches in His Word. \[3\] But how this unition was effected,
shall be shown in the following order: i. The Lord from eternity is
Jehovah. ii. The Lord from eternity, or Jehovah, assumed the Human to
save men. iii. He made Divine the Human from the Divine in Himself. iv.
He made Divine the Human by means of temptations admitted into Himself.
v. The full unition of the Divine and the Human in Him was effected by
means of the passion of the cross, which was the last temptation. vi. By
successive steps He put off the human taken from the mother, and put on
a Human from the Divine within Him, which is the Divine Human, and is
the Son of God. vii. That thus God became Man, as in first principles,
so also in ultimates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

i\. That the Lord from eternity is Jehovah, is known from the Word; for
the Lord said to the Jews, Verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
am (John 8:58). And He says in another place, Glorify Thou Me, O Father,
with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was (John 17:5).
By this is meant the Lord from eternity, and not a Son from eternity;
for "the Son" is His Human that was conceived of Jehovah the Father, and
born of the virgin Mary, in time, as has been shown above. \[2\] That
the Lord from eternity is Jehovah Himself, is evident from many passages
in the Word, of which at present there shall be adduced only these few:
It shall be said in that day, THIS IS OUR GOD; we have waited for Him
that He may deliver us; THIS IS JEHOVAH, we have waited for Him; we will
rejoice and be glad in His salvation (Isa. 25:9). From these words it is
evident that Jehovah God Himself was awaited. The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of JEHOVAH, make plain in the
solitude a path for OUR GOD. The glory of JEHOVAH shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together. Beheld, THE LORD JEHOVAH shall come in
strength (Isa. 40:3, 5, 10; Matt. 3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke 3:4). Here, too,
the Lord is called Jehovah, who should come. \[3\] I Jehovah will give
thee for a covenant to the people, for a light of the nations. I
Jehovah, this is My name and My glory will I not give to another (Isa.
42:6-8). "A covenant to the people," and "a light of the nations," is
the Lord as to the Human; and as this is from Jehovah, and has become
one with Jehovah, it is said, I Jehovah, this is My name, and My glory
will I give to another, that is, not to another than Himself. To give
glory, means to glorify, or to unite to Himself. \[4\] THE LORD whom ye
seek, shall suddenly come to His temple (Mal. 3:1). By the "temple" is
meant the temple of His body (John 2:19, 21). THE DAY-SPRING FROM ON
HIGH hath visited us (Luke 1:78). "The day-spring from on high" also is
Jehovah, or the Lord from eternity. From what has been said it is
evident that by the Lord from eternity is meant His Divine a Quo, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[30-1](#fn_9) which in the Word is "Jehovah." But from
the passages to be quoted below, it will be evident that by Lord, and
also by Jehovah, after His Human was glorified, is meant the Divine and
the Human together, as a one; and that by the Son, alone, is meant the
Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

ii\. That the Lord from eternity, or Jehovah, assumed the Human to save
men, has been confirmed from the Word in preceding chapters; and that
man could not have been saved in any other way, will be shown elsewhere.
That He assumed a Human, is evident from the passages in the Word where
it is said that He went forth from the Father, descended from heaven,
and was sent into the world. As from these: I went out from the Father,
and am come into the world (John 16:28). I went out and am come from
God; neither came I of Myself, but He sent Me (John 8:42). The Father
loveth you, because ye have believed that I came out from God (John
16:27). No one hath ascended into heaven, but He that came down from
heaven (John 3:13). The bread of God is He that cometh down from heaven,
and giveth life unto the world (John 6:33, 35, 41, 50, 51). He that
cometh from above is above all; He that cometh from heaven is above all
(John 3:31). I know the Father because I am from Him, and He hath sent
Me (John 7:29). (That to be "sent by the Father into the world" means to
assume a Human, may be seen above, at n. 20.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

iii\. That the Lord made His Human Divine from the Divine in Himself, is
evident from many passages of the Word, of which those shall be here
adduced which confirm: 1. That this was done by successive steps: Jesus
grew and waxed strong in spirit and in wisdom, and the grace of God was
upon Him (Luke 2:40). Jesus increased in wisdom, in age, and in grace
with God and men (verse 52). \[2\] 2. That the Divine operated through
the Human, as the soul does through the body: The Son can do nothing
from Himself, but what He seeth the Father doing (John 5:19). I do
nothing of Myself, but as My Father hath taught Me, I speak these things
and He that hath sent Me is with Me He hath not left Me alone (John
8:28, 29; 5:30). I have not spoken of Myself, but the Father who sent
Me, He hath given Me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should
speak (John 12:49). The words that I speak unto you I speak not of
Myself, but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth the works (John
14:10). I am not alone, because the Father is with Me (John 16:32).
\[3\] 3. That the Divine and Human operated unanimously: What things
soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise (John 5:19).
As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will (John 5:21). As the Father hath life in Himself
so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself (John 5:26). Now
they have known that all things which Thou hast given Me, are of Thee
(John 17:7). \[4\] 4. That the Divine was united to the Human, and the
Human to the Divine: If ye had known Me ye would have known My Father
also; and ye have seen Him. He said to Philip, who desired to see the
Father, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known
Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father. Believest thou
not that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me? Believe Me, that I am
in the Father, and the Father in Me (John 14:7-11). If I do not the
works of My Father, believe Me not; but if I do, believe the works; that
ye may know and believe that the Father is in Me, and I in the Father
(John 10:37, 38). That they all may be one, as Thou, Father, art in Me,
and I in Thee (John 17:21). At that day ye shall know that I am in My
Father (John 14:20). No one is able to pluck the sheep out of My
Father's hand; I and the Father are one (John 10:29, 30). The Father
loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand (John 3:35). All
things that the Father hath are Mine (John 16:15). All Mine are Thine,
and Thine are Mine (John 17:10). Thou hast given the Son power
\[potestas\] over all flesh (John 17:2). All power \[potestas\] is given
unto Me in heaven and on earth (Matt. 28:18). \[5\] 5. That the Divine
Human is to be approached, is evident from these passages: That all may
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father (John 5:23). If ye had
known Me, ye would have known My Father also (John 8:19). He that seeth
Me, seeth Him that sent Me (John 12:45). If ye had known Me, ye would
have known My Father also; and from henceforth ye know Him, and have
seen Him (John 14:7). He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me
(John 13:20). The reason of this is that no one can see the Divine
Itself which is called "the Father;" but the Divine Human can be seen;
for the Lord says, No one hath seen God at any time the Only-begotten
Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath set Him forth (John
1:18). Not that any one hath seen the Father, save He that is with the
Father; He hath seen the Father (John 6:46). Ye have not heard the
Father's voice at any time, nor seen His shape (John 5:37). \[6\] 6. As
the Lord made His Human Divine from the Divine in Himself, and as the
Human is to be approached, and as the Son of God, we must put our faith
in the Lord, who is both Father and Son. This is evident from these
passages: Jesus said, As many as received Him, to them gave He power
\[potestas\] to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in His
name (John 1:12). That whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but
have eternal life (John 3:15). God so loved the world that He gave His
Only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should have eternal
life (John 3:16). He that believeth in the Son is not judged; but he
that believeth not hath been judged already, because he hath not
believed in the name of the Only-begotten Son of God (John 3:18). He
that believeth in the Son hath eternal life; but he that believeth not
the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him (John
3:36). The bread of God is He that cometh down from heaven, and giveth
life unto the world. He that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he
that believeth in Me shall never thirst (John 6:33, 35). This is the
will of Him that sent Me, that everyone who seeth the Son, and believeth
in Him, may have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day
(John 6:40). They said to Jesus, What shall we do that we may work the
works of God? Jesus answered, This is the work of God, that ye believe
in Him whom He hath sent (John 6:28, 29). Verily I say unto you, He that
believeth in Me hath eternal life (John 6:47). Jesus cried, saying, If
anyone thirst let him come unto Me and drink; he that believeth in Me,
as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water (John 7:37, 38). Unless ye believe that I am, ye shall die in your
sins (John 8:24). Jesus said, I am the resurrection and the life; he
that believeth in Me, though he were dead, shall live and whosoever
liveth and believeth in Me shall never die (John 11:25, 26). Jesus said,
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in Me should
not abide in darkness (John 12:46; 8:12). While ye have the light,
believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light (John 12:36).
Verily I say unto you, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live (John 5:25). Abide in Me, and I in
you. I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in Me, and I in
him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without Me ye can do
nothing (John 15:4, 5). That they should abide in the Lord, and the Lord
in them (John 14:20; 17:23). I am the way, the truth, and the life; no
one cometh unto the Father but by Me (John 14:6). \[7\] In these and all
other passages where "the Father" is mentioned, there is meant the
Divine which was in the Lord from conception, and which, according to
the Doctrine of Faith of the Christian world, was circumstanced as is
the soul in the body with man. The Human itself from this Divine is the
Son of God. Now as this Human was made Divine, therefore, in order to
prevent man from approaching the Father only, and thereby in thought,
faith, and thence in worship, separating the Father from the Lord in
whom the Father is, after the Lord had taught that He and the Father are
one; that the Father is in Him, and He in the Father; that all should
abide in Him; and that no one cometh to the Father but by Him, He taught
also that we must believe in Him, and that man is saved by a faith
directed to Him. \[8\] Many in Christendom can form no idea of the fact
that the Human in the Lord was made Divine, the chief reason of which is
that they think of a man from his material body, and not from his
spiritual body. And yet the truth is that all the angels (who are
spiritual) are also men in a complete form; and, what is more, the whole
Divine which proceeds from Jehovah God, from its first principles in
heaven, down to its ultimate in this world, has a tendency to the human
form. <span id="fr_10"></span>[32-1](#fn_10)

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

iv\. That the Lord made His Human Divine by means of temptations
admitted into Himself, and by means of continual victories in them, has
been treated of above, n. 12-14; to which shall be added only this:
Temptations are nothing but combats against evils and falsities; and as
evils and falsities are from hell, temptations are combats against hell.
Moreover with the men who are undergoing spiritual temptations, there
are present evil spirits from hell, who induce them. The man is unaware
that evil spirits induce the temptations; yet that they do so has been
granted me to know from much experience. \[2\] This is the reason why
man is drawn out of hell and elevated into heaven when from the Lord he
conquers in temptations; and this again is why man becomes spiritual,
and therefore an angel, by means of temptations, or combats against
evils. The Lord, however, fought from His own power against all the
hells, and completely mastered and subjugated them; and as He at the
same time glorified His Human, He holds them so to eternity. \[3\] For
before the Lord's advent the hells had grown up to such a height that
they were beginning to infest the very angels of heaven, and also every
man that came into the world and went out of it. The cause of so high a
growth of the hells was the complete devastation of the church, and the
consequent prevalence of idolatries which caused the men of this world
to be in mere falsities and evils; and the hells are from men. Hence it
was that no man could have been saved unless the Lord had come into the
world. \[4\] Of these combats of the Lord the Psalms and Prophets treat
much, but the Evangelists little. It is these combats which are meant by
the temptations that the Lord endured, the last of which was the passion
of the cross. And it is on account of them that the Lord is called
Savior and Redeemer. This is so far known in the church as to lead them
to say that the Lord conquered death or the devil (that is, hell), and
that He rose again victorious; and also that without the Lord there is
no salvation. That the Lord also glorified His Human, and thereby became
the Savior, Redeemer, Reformer, and Regenerator to eternity, will be
seen in what follows. \[5\] That by means of these combats or
temptations the Lord has become our Savior, is evident from the passages
quoted above in n. 12-14; and also from this one in Isaiah: The day of
vengeance is in Mine heart, and the year of My redeemed is come; I have
trampled them in Mine anger, I have brought down their victory to the
earth; so He became their Savior (Isa. 63:4, 6, 8). This chapter treats
of the Lord's combats. Also from this passage in David: Lift up your
heads, ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye doors of the world, that the
King of glory may come in. Who is this King of glory? Jehovah mighty and
a Hero, Jehovah a Hero of war (Ps. 24:7, 8). These words also treat of
the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

v\. That the full unition of the Divine and the Human in the Lord was
effected by means of the passion of the cross, which was the last
temptation, has been established above in its proper chapter, where it
has been shown that the Lord came into the world in order to subjugate
the hells and glorify His Human, and that the passion of the cross was
the last combat, by means of which He fully conquered the hells, and
fully glorified His Human. Now as by the passion of the cross the Lord
fully glorified His Human (that is, united it to His Divine, and thus
made His Human also Divine), it follows that He is Jehovah and God as to
both the Divine and the Human. And therefore in many passages in the
Word He is called Jehovah, God, and the Holy One of Israel the Redeemer,
Savior, and Former. \[2\] As in the following: Mary said, My soul doth
magnify THE LORD, and my spirit hath exalted in GOD MY SAVIOR (Luke
1:46, 47). The angel said to the shepherds, Behold, I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; that there is born
this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord (Luke
2:10, 11). They said, This is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world
(John 4:42). I Jehovah God will help thee, and thy Redeemer is the Holy
One of Israel (Isa. 41:14). Thus saith Jehovah thy Creator, O Jacob and
thy Former, O Israel for I have redeemed thee. I am Jehovah thy God, the
Holy One of Israel, thy Savior (Isa. 43:1, 3). Thus saith Jehovah your
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: I am Jehovah your Holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King (Isa. 43:14, 15). Thus saith Jehovah, the
Holy One of Israel, and his Former (Isa. 45:11). Thus saith Jehovah thy
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 48:17). That all flesh may know
that I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob
(Isa. 49:26). Then shall the Redeemer come to Zion (Isa. 59:20). That
thou mayest know that I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the
Mighty One of Jacob (Isa. 60:16). Jehovah thy Former from the womb (Isa.
49:5). Jehovah my Rock, and my Redeemer (Ps. 19:14). They remembered
that God was their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer (Ps. 128:35).
Thus saith Jehovah thy Redeemer, and thy Former from the womb (Isa.
44:24). As for our Redeemer, Jehovah of Armies is His name, the Holy One
of Israel (Isa. 47:4). With mercy of eternity will I have mercy on thee,
saith Jehovah thy Redeemer (Isa. 54:8). Their Redeemer is strong,
Jehovah of Armies is His name (Jer. 50:34). Let Israel hope in Jehovah,
for with Jehovah there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous redemption;
and He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities (Ps. 130:7, 8).
Jehovah is my Rock and my fortress; the horn of my salvation, my Savior
(2 Sam. 22:2, 3). Thus saith Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel, His Holy
One, Kings shall see and stand, because of Jehovah who is faithful, the
Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee (Isa. 44:7). Surely God is in
thee, and there is none else, there is no God. Verily Thou art a God
that hidest Thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior (Isa. 45:14, 15). Thus
saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer Jehovah of Armies,
Besides Me there is no God (Isa. 44:6). I am Jehovah, and besides Me
there is no Savior (Isa. 43:11). Am not I Jehovah? and there is no God
else besides Me; and a Savior, there is none besides Me (Isa. 45:21). I
am Jehovah thy God, and thou shalt know no God but Me, and besides Me
there is no Savior (Hos. 13:4). Am not I Jehovah, and there is no other
God besides Me; a just God and a Savior, there is none besides Me: look
unto Me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth for I am God, and
there is none else (Isa. 45:21, 22). Jehovah of Armies is His name, and
thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall He
be called (Isa. 54:5). \[3\] From these passages it may be seen that the
Lord's Divine called "the Father" (and here "Jehovah" and "God"), and
the Divine Human called "the Son" (and here "the Redeemer" and "Savior,"
and also "the Former," which means the Reformer and Regenerator), are
not two, but one. For not only is mention made of Jehovah, God, and the
Holy One of Israel the Redeemer and Savior, but the expression "Jehovah
the Redeemer and Savior" is used, and even "I am Jehovah the Savior, and
there is none besides Me." From this it is very evident that the Divine
and the Human in the Lord are one Person; and that the Human also is
Divine. For the Redeemer and Savior of the world is no other than the
Lord in respect to the Divine Human, and this is what is called the Son.
Moreover redemption and salvation are an attribute proper to His Human,
which is called merit and righteousness; for it was His Human that
endured temptations and the passion of the cross; and therefore it was
by means of His Human that He effected redemption and salvation. \[4\]
As, therefore, after the unition of the Human with the Divine in Him,
which was like that of the soul and body in man, they were no longer two
but one Person (according to the Doctrine of the Christian world), it
follows that the Lord is Jehovah and God as to both the Divine and the
Human. And this therefore is why it is said on the one hand that Jehovah
and the Holy One of Israel are the Redeemer and Savior, and on the other
that the Redeemer and Savior are Jehovah, as may be seen from the
passages that have been quoted. Thus it is said, Christ the Savior (Luke
2:11; John 4:42). God and the God of Israel the Savior and Redeemer
(Luke 1:47; Isa. 45:15; 54:5; Ps. 78:35). Jehovah the Holy One of Israel
the Savior and Redeemer (Isa. 41:14; 43:3, 11, 14, 15; 48:17; 49:7;
54:5). Jehovah the Savior, Redeemer, and Former (Isa. 44:6; 47:4; 49:26;
54:8; 63:16; 50:34; Ps. 19:14; 130:7, 8; 2 Sam. 22:2, 3). Jehovah God
the Redeemer and Savior, and besides Me there is none else (Isa. 43:11;
44:6; 45:14-15, 21-22; Hos. 13:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

vi\. By successive steps the Lord put off the human taken from the
mother, and put on a Human from the Divine within Him, which is the
Divine Human, and is the Son of God. That in the Lord were the Divine
and the human, the Divine from Jehovah the Father, and the human from
the virgin Mary, is known. Hence He was God and Man, having a Divine
essence and a human nature; a Divine essence from the Father, and a
human nature from the mother; and therefore was equal to the Father as
to the Divine, and less than the Father as to the human. It is also
known that this human nature from the mother was not transmuted into the
Divine essence, nor commingled with it, for this is taught in the
Doctrine of Faith which is called the Athanasian Creed. For a human
nature cannot be transmuted into the Divine essence, nor can it be
commingled therewith. \[2\] In accordance with the same creed is also
our doctrine, that the Divine assumed the Human, that is, united itself
to it, as a soul to its body, so that they were not two, but one Person.
From this it follows that the Lord put off the human from the mother,
which in itself was like that of another man, and thus material, and put
on a Human from the Father, which in itself was like His Divine, and
thus substantial, so that the Human too became Divine. This is why in
the Word of the Prophets the Lord even as to the Human is called
Jehovah, and God; and in the Word of the Evangelists, Lord, God, Messiah
or Christ, and the Son of God in whom we must believe, and by whom we
are to be saved. \[3\] As from His birth the Lord had a human from the
mother, and as He by successive steps put it off, it follows that while
He was in the world He had two states, the one called the state of
humiliation or emptying out \[exinanitio\], and the other the state of
glorification or unition with the Divine called the Father. He was in
the state of humiliation at the time and in the degree that He was in
the human from the mother; and in that of glorification at the time and
in the degree that He was in the Human from the Father. In the state of
humiliation He prayed to the Father as to one who was other than
Himself; but in the state of glorification He spoke with the Father as
with Himself. In this latter state He said that the Father was in Him
and He in the Father, and that the Father and He were one. But in the
state of humiliation He underwent temptations, and suffered the cross,
and prayed to the Father not to forsake Him. For the Divine could not be
tempted, much less could it suffer the cross. From what has been said it
is now evident that by means of temptations and continual victories in
them, and by the passion of the cross which was the last of the
temptations, the Lord completely conquered the hells, and fully
glorified His Human, as has been shown above. \[4\] That the Lord put
off the human taken from the mother, and put on a Human from the Divine
in Himself called the Father, is evident also from the fact that
whenever He addressed His mother directly, He did not call her Mother,
but Woman. Only three times in the Evangelists do we read that He thus
addressed or spoke of her, twice calling her Woman, and once not
recognizing her as His mother. Of the two occasions when He called her
Woman we read in John: The mother of Jesus said unto Him, They have no
wine. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what \[belongs\] to Me, and to thee?
Mine hour is not yet come (2:3, 4). When from the cross, Jesus sees His
mother, and the disciple standing by whom He loved, He saith to His
mother, Woman, behold thy son; and then He saith to the disciple, Behold
thy mother (19:26, 27). And of the one occasion when He did not
recognize her, in Luke: It was told Jesus by certain who said, Thy
mother and Thy brethren stand without, desiring to see Thee. Jesus
answering said unto them, My mother and My brethren are these, who hear
the Word of God, and do it (8:20, 21; Matt. 12: 46-49; Mark 3:31-35). In
other places Mary is called His "mother," but not from His own mouth.
\[5\] The same inference is confirmed by the fact that the Lord did not
admit that He was the son of David For we read in the Evangelists: Jesus
asked the Pharisees, saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is He?
They say unto Him, The Son of David. He saith unto them, How then doth
David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
Thou on My right hand till I make Thine enemies Thy footstool? If then
David calls Him Lord, how is He his son? And no one was able to answer
Him a word (Matt. 12:41-46; Mark 12:35-37; Luke 20:41-44; Ps. 110:1).
From what has been said it is evident that in respect to the glorified
Human the Lord was the son neither of Mary nor of David. \[6\] Of what
quality was His glorified Human, He showed to Peter, James, and John
when transfigured before them: That His face shone as the sun, and His
raiment was like the light and then a voice out of the cloud said, This
is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him (Matt. 17:1-8;
Mark 9:2-8; Luke 9:28-36). The Lord was also seen by John as the sun
shining in his strength (Rev. 1:16). \[7\] That the Lord's Human was
glorified, is evident from what is said about His glorification in the
Evangelists: The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified.
Jesus said, Father, glorify Thy name: then came there a voice from
heaven, saying, I both have glorified it and will glorify it again (John
12:23, 28). As the Lord was glorified by successive steps, it is said "I
both have glorified it, and will glorify it again." Again in the same
Evangelist: After Judas had gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in Him: God shall also glorify Him in
Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him (John 13:31, 32). Jesus said,
Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son may also glorify
Thee (John 17:1, 5). And in Luke: Behooved it not the Christ to suffer
this, and to enter into His glory? (Luke 24:26). These things are said
concerning His Human. \[8\] The reason the Lord said "God is glorified
in Him," and "God shall glorify Him in Himself," and also "Glorify Thy
Son that Thy Son may also glorify Thee," is that the unition was
reciprocal, being that of the Divine with the Human and of the Human
with the Divine. On this account He said also, "I am in the Father, and
the Father in Me" (John 14:10, 11); and "All Mine are Thine, and Thine
are Mine" (John 17:10); so that the unition was plenary. It is the same
with all unition-unless it is reciprocal, it is not full. Such therefore
must also be the uniting of the Lord with man, and of man with the Lord.
As He teaches: In that day ye shall know that ye are in Me, and I in you
(John 14:20). Abide in Me, and I in you; he that abideth in Me, and I in
him, the same bringeth forth much fruit (John 15:4, 5). \[9\] As the
Lord's Human was glorified, that is, made Divine, He rose again after
death on the third day with His whole body, which does not take place
with any man; for a man rises again solely as to the spirit, and not as
to the body. In order that men may know, and no one doubt, that the Lord
rose again with His whole body, He not only said so through the angels
in the sepulcher, but also showed Himself to His disciples in His human
body, saying to them when they believed that they saw a spirit: See My
hands and My feet, that it is I Myself; handle Me and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me have; and when He had thus spoken,
He showed them His hands and His feet (Luke 24:39, 40 John 20:20). And
He said to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side; and be not faithless
but believing; then said Thomas, My Lord and my God (John 20:27, 28).
\[10\] In order to evince still further that He was not a spirit but a
Man, the Lord said to His disciples, Have ye here any meat? And they
gave Him a piece of a broiled fish, and of a honeycomb; and He took it
and did eat before them (Luke 24:41-43). As His body was no longer
material, but Divine substantial, He came in to His disciples when the
doors were shut (John 20:19, 26); and after He had been seen He became
invisible (Luke 24:31). Being such, the Lord was then taken up, and sat
at the right hand of God; as we read: It came to pass that while Jesus
blessed His disciples, He was parted from them, and carried up into
heaven (Luke 24:51). After He had spoken unto them, He was carried up
into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God (Mark 16:19). To "sit at
the right hand of God," signifies Divine omnipotence. \[11\] As the Lord
ascended into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God (by which is
signified Divine omnipotence) with the Divine and the Human united into
a one, it follows that His human substance or essence is just as is His
Divine substance or essence. To think otherwise would be like thinking
that His Divine was taken up into heaven and sat at the right hand of
God, but not His Human together with it, which is contrary to Scripture,
and also to the Christian Doctrine, which is that in Christ God and Man
are like soul and body, and to separate these is contrary to sound
reason. This unition of the Father with the Son, or of the Divine with
the Human, is meant also in the following: I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world; again I leave the world, and go to the
Father (John 16:28). I go away, and come to Him that sent Me (John 7:33;
16:5, 16; 17:11, 13; 20:17). If then ye shall see the Son of man
ascending where He was before (John 6:62). No one hath ascended into
heaven but He that came down from heaven (John 3:13). Every man who is
saved ascends into heaven, but not of himself. He ascends by the Lord's
aid. The Lord alone ascended of Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

vii\. Thus God became Man, as in first principles so also in ultimates.
That God is a Man, and that every angel and every spirit is a man from
God, has been partially shown in the work on Heaven and Hell, and will
be further shown in the works entitled Angelic Wisdom. From the
beginning, however, God was a Man in first principles and not in
ultimates; but after He had assumed the Human in the world, He became a
Man in ultimates also. This follows from what has been already
established-that the Lord united His Human to His Divine, and thus made
His Human Divine. It is from this that the Lord is called the beginning
and the end, the first and the last, the Alpha and the Omega: I am the
Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the Lord, who is,
and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty (Rev. 1:8, 11). When John
saw the Son of man in the midst of the seven lamp stands, he fell at His
feet as dead; but He laid His right hand upon him, saying, I am the
first and the last (Rev. 1:13, 17; 2:8; 21:6). Behold, I come quickly,
to give everyone according to his work: I am the Alpha and the Omega,
the beginning and the end, the first and the last (Rev. 22:12-13). Thus
saith Jehovah the King of Israel, and his Redeemer Jehovah of Armies, I
am the first and the last (Isa. 44:6; 48:12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

THE LORD IS GOD HIMSELF, FROM WHOM AND CONCERNING WHOM IS THE WORD. In
chapter I. we undertook to show that universal Holy Scripture treats of
the Lord, and that the Lord is the Word. This shall now be further shown
from passages of the Word in which the Lord is called "Jehovah," the
"God of Israel and of Jacob," the "Holy One of Israel," the "Lord," and
"God;" and also "King," "Jehovah's Anointed," and "David." I may first
mention that I have been permitted to run through all the Prophets and
the Psalms of David, and to examine each verse and see what it treats
of, and I have seen that the only subjects treated of are: the church
set up anew and to be set up anew by the Lord; the advent, combats,
glorification, redemption, and salvation, of the Lord; heaven from Him;
and, with these, their opposites. As all these are works of the Lord, it
became evident that universal Holy Scripture is concerning Him, and
therefore that the Lord is the Word. \[2\] But this can be seen only by
those who are in enlightenment from the Lord, and who also know the
spiritual sense of the Word. All the angels of heaven are in this sense,
and therefore when the Word is being read by a man, they so comprehend
it. For spirits and angels are constantly with man, and as they are
spiritual they understand spiritually all that a man understands
naturally. That all Holy Scripture is concerning the Lord, may be
obscurely seen, and as through a glass, darkly, from the passages of the
Word already cited in chapter I. (n. 1-6), as also from those concerning
the Lord now to be quoted, to show how frequently He is called the Lord
\[that is, Jehovah\] and God; and from which it is apparent that it is
He who spoke through the prophets, by whom it is everywhere said,
"Jehovah spake," "Thus saith Jehovah," "The saying of Jehovah." \[3\]
That the Lord existed before His advent into the world, is evident from
the following passages: John the Baptist said concerning the Lord, He it
is who coming after me was before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. This is He of whom I said, After me cometh a man who
was before me, for He was before me (John 1:27, 30). They fell down
before the throne (on which was the Lord) saying, We eve Thee thanks,
Lord God Almighty, who art, and who wast, and who art to come (Rev.
11:16, 17). Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, out of thee shall He go forth unto Me that shall be
Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from the days
of eternity (Micah 5:2). The same is evident from the Lord's words in
the Evangelists that He "was before Abraham," that He had glory with the
Father "before the foundation of the world," that He "had gone forth
from the Father," and that "the Word was from the beginning with God,"
that "God was the Word," and that this "was made flesh." That the Lord
is called "Jehovah," the "God of Israel and of Jacob," the "Holy One of
Israel," "God," and "Lord," and also "King," "Jehovah's Anointed," and
"David," is evident from what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

That the Lord is called "Jehovah," is evident from these passages: Thus
saith Jehovah thy Creator, O Jacob, and thy Former, O Israel, Fear not,
for I have redeemed thee. I am Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel,
thy Savior (Isa. 43:1, 3). I am Jehovah your Holy One, the Creator of
Israel, your King (verse 15). The Holy One of Israel, and his Former, O
God of Israel, the Savior (Isa. 45:11, 15). That all flesh may know that
I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob (Isa.
49:26). That thou mayest know that I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy
Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob (Isa. 60:16). Jehovah thy Former from
the womb (Isa. 49:5). Jehovah my Rock, and my Redeemer (Ps. 19:14). Thus
saith Jehovah thy Maker and Former from the womb. Thus saith Jehovah the
King of Israel, and his Redeemer, Jehovah of Armies (Isa. 44:2, 6). As
for our Redeemer, Jehovah of Armies is His name, the Holy One of Israel
(Isa. 47:4). With the mercy of eternity will I have mercy on thee, saith
Jehovah thy Redeemer (Isa. 54:8). Their Redeemer is strong, Jehovah of
Armies is His name (Jer. 1:34). Jehovah God, my Rock, my fortress, the
horn of my salvation, my Savior (2 Sam. 22:2, 3). Thus saith Jehovah
your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 43:14; 48:17). Thus saith
Jehovah the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, Kings shall see (Isa.
49:7). I am Jehovah, and besides Me there is no Savior (Isa. 43:11). Am
not I Jehovah, and there is none besides Me, and there is no Savior
besides Me. Look unto Me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth (Isa.
45:21, 22). I am Jehovah thy God, and there is no Savior besides Me
(Hos. 13:4). Thou hast redeemed me, O Jehovah God of truth (Ps. 26:5).
Let Israel hope in Jehovah, for with Jehovah there is mercy, and with
Him is plenteous redemption, and He shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities (Ps. 130:7, 8). Jehovah of Armies is His name, and thy
Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall He be
called (Isa. 54:5). In these passages Jehovah is called the "Redeemer
and Savior;" and as the Lord alone is the Redeemer and Savior, it is He
who is meant by "Jehovah." That the Lord is Jehovah, that is, that
Jehovah is the Lord, is evident also from the following passages: There
shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a shoot out of his
roots shall bear fruit, and the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon Him
(Isa. 11:1, 2). It shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God we
have waited for Him, and He will save us; this is Jehovah, we have
waited for Him; we will rejoice and be glad in His salvation (Isa.
25:9). The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, prepare ye the
way of Jehovah, make plain in the solitude a pathway for our God. For
the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it.
Behold the Lord Jehovih shall come in strength, and His arm shall rule
for Him (Isa. 40:3, 5, 10). I Jehovah will give thee for a covenant to
the people, for a light of the nations. I am Jehovah, that is My name,
and My glory will I not give to another (Isa. 42:6, 8). Behold the days
come that I will raise unto David a righteous offshoot, who shall reign
a King, and shall prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the
earth; and this is His name whereby He shall be called, Jehovah our
righteousness (Jer. 23:5-6; 33:15-16). Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, out of
thee shall He go forth unto Me that shall be a Ruler in Israel; He shall
stand and feed \[His flock\] in the strength of Jehovah (Micah 5:2, 4).
Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government
shall be upon His shoulder, and His name shall be called God, Hero, the
Father of eternity, upon the throne of David to establish and to found
it in judgment and in justice, from henceforth and even to eternity
(Isa. 9:6-7). Jehovah shall go forth and fight against the nations; and
His feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives before the faces of
Jerusalem (Zech. 14:3-4). Lift up your heads, O ye gates and be ye
lifted up, ye doors of the world, that the King of glory may come in.
Who is this King of glory? Jehovah strong and a Hero, Jehovah a Hero of
war (Ps. 24:7-10). In that day shall Jehovah of Armies be for a crown of
ornament, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of His people
(Isa. 28:5). I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of
the great day of Jehovah (Mal. 4:5). Not to mention other passages where
mention is made of the great and near day of Jehovah as Ezek. 30:3; Joel
2:11; Amos 5:18, 20; Zeph. 1:14-15, 18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

ii\. That the Lord is called "the God of Israel," and "the God of
Jacob," is evident from the following passages: Moses took the blood and
sprinkled it upon the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant
which Jehovah hath made with you. And they saw the God of Israel, under
whose feet was as it were a work of sapphire stone, and as it were the
substance of heaven (Exod. 24:8, 10). The multitude wondered when they
saw the dumb speaking, the lame walking, and the blind seeing; and they
glorified the God of Israel (Matt. 15:31). Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for He hath visited and wrought deliverance for His people
Israel, when He raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of
David (Luke 1:68, 69). I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and
hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I Jehovah,
who have called thee by thy name, am the God of Israel (Isa. 45:3). O
house of Jacob, who swear in the name of Jehovah, and of the God of
Israel; for they are called of the city of holiness, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel, Jehovah of Armies is His name (Isa. 48:1, 2).
Jacob shall see his children in the midst of him, they shall sanctify My
name, and they shall sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, they shall fear the
God of Israel (Isa. 29:23). In the end of the days many people shall go
and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the
house of the God of Jacob, who shall teach us of His ways, that we may
walk in His paths (Isa. 2:2, 3; Micah 4:1, 2). That all flesh may know
that I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob
(Isa. 49:26). I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One
of Jacob (Isa. 60:16). Thou art in pain, O earth, before the Lord,
before the God of Jacob (Ps. 114:7). David sware to Jehovah, he vowed to
the Mighty One of Jacob, Surely I will not come into the tent of my
house, until I find out a place for Jehovah, a habitation for the Mighty
One of Jacob; we have heard of Him at Ephratah (Bethlehem) (Ps. 132:2,
3, 5, 6). Blessed be the God of Israel the whole earth shall be filled
with His glory (Ps. 72:18, 19). Not to quote those passages in which the
Lord is called the God of Israel the Redeemer and Savior; as Luke 1:47;
Isa. 45:15; 54:5; Ps. 78:35. Besides many other passages, in which He is
called the God of Israel only; as Isa. 17:6; 21:10, 17; 24:15; 29:23;
Jer. 7:3; 9:15; 11:3; 13:12; 16:9; 19:3, 15; 23:2; 24:5; 25:15, 27;
29:4, 8, 21, 25; 30:2; 31:23; 32:14, 15, 36; 33:4; 34:2, 13; 35:13, 17,
18, 19; 27:7; 38:17; 39:16; xlii. 9, 15, 18; 43:10; 44:2, 7, 11, 25;
48:1; 50:18; 51:33; Ezek. 8:4; 9:3; 10:19, 20; 11:22; 43:2; 44:2; Zeph.
2:9; Ps. 41:13; 59:5; 68:8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

iii\. That the Lord is called "the Holy One of Israel," is evident from
these passages: The angel said to Mary, That Holy thing which shall be
born of thee shall be called the Son of God (Luke 1:35). I saw in the
visions, and behold, a Watcher and a Holy One came down from heaven
(Dan. 4:13, 23). God came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran
(Hab. 3:3). I am Jehovah your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King
(Isa 43;15). The Holy One of Israel, and his Former (Isa. 45:11). Thus
saith Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel, His Holy One (Isa. 49:7). I am
Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel thy Savior (Isa. 43:3). As for
our Redeemer, Jehovah of Armies is His name, the Holy One of Israel
(Isa. 47:4). Thus saith Jehovah your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel
(Isa. 43:14; 48:17). Jehovah of Armies is His name, and thy Redeemer the
Holy One of Israel (Isa. 54:5). They tempted God, and the Holy One of
Israel (Ps. 78:41). They have forsaken Jehovah, and have provoked the
Holy One of Israel (Isa. 1:4). They have said, Cause the Holy One of
Israel to cease from our faces; wherefore thus saith the Holy One of
Israel (Isa. 30:11, 12). Who say, Let Him hasten His work that we may
see, and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come
(Isa. 5:19). In that day they shall stay upon Jehovah, the Holy One of
Israel, in truth (Isa. 10:20). Cry out and shout, O daughter of Zion,
for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee (Isa. 12:6).
The saying of the God of Israel, In that day shall a man look to his
Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel (Isa.
17:6, 7). The meek shall increase their joy in Jehovah, and the needy
among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 29:19; 41:16).
Nations shall run unto thee because of Jehovah thy God, and because of
the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 54:5). The isles shall confide in Me, to
bring thy sons from far, unto the name of Jehovah of Armies, and to the
Holy One of Israel (Isa. 60:9). The land is full of guilt against the
Holy One of Israel (Jer. 51:5). Babylon hath been proud against Jehovah,
against the Holy One of Israel (Jer. 1:29). (Besides many other
passages.) By "the Holy One of Israel" is meant the Lord as to the
Divine Human; for the angel Gabriel said to Mary, "That Holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God" (Luke 1:35). That
Jehovah and the Holy One of Israel, although distinctively mentioned,
are one and the same, is evident from the passages here quoted, in which
it is said that Jehovah is that Holy One of Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

iv\. That the Lord is called "Lord" and "God," is evident from so many
passages that if quoted they would fill pages. Let these few suffice:
When by the Lord's command Thomas had seen His hands and touched His
side, he said, My Lord and my God (John 20:27, 28). They remembered that
God was their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer (Ps. 78:35). Jehovah
of Armies is His name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God
of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa. 54:5). The same is evident
from the fact that they adored Him, and fell upon their faces before Him
(Matt. 9:18; 14:33; 15:25; 28:9; Mark 1:40; 5:22; 7:25; 10:17; Luke
17:15, 16; John 9:38). So in David: We heard of Him at Ephratah; we will
enter into His dwelling places, and will bow ourselves at His footstool
(Ps. 132:6, 7). And it is the same in heaven: I was in the spirit, and
behold a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne like a
jasper and sardine stone, and there was a rainbow round about the
throne, in sight like unto an emerald. And the four and twenty elders
fell down before Him that sat on the throne, and adored Him that liveth
for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne (Rev. 4:2, 3,
10). I saw in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne a look
sealed within and on the back side, sealed with seven seals, and no one
was able to open the book. Then one of the elders said, Behold the Lion
of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, hath prevailed to open the
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof and I beheld in the midst of
the throne a Lamb standing, and He came and took the book, and they fell
down before the Lamb, and worshiped Him that liveth for ever and ever
(5:1, 3, 5-8, 14).

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

v\. The reason why the Lord is called "King" and "the Anointed," is that
He was the Messiah, or Christ; and "Messiah" or "Christ" means the king
and the anointed. This is why, in the Word, the Lord is meant by "king,"
and also by "David," who was king over Judah and Israel. That the Lord
is called king" and "Jehovah's anointed," is evident from many passages
in the Word: The Lamb shall overcome them; for He is Lord of lords and
King of kings (Rev. 17:14). He that sat upon the white horse had on His
vesture a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords (19:16). It is
from the Lord's being called a "king," that heaven and the church are
called His "kingdom," and that His advent into the world is called "the
Gospel of the kingdom." That heaven and the church are called His
kingdom, may be seen in Matt. 12:28; 16:28; Mark 1:14, 15; 9:1; 15:43;
Luke 1:33; 4:43; 8:1, 10; 9:2, 11, 60; 10:11; 16:16; 19:11; 21:31;
22:18; 23:51. And in Daniel: God shall set up a kingdom which shall
never be destroyed; it shall break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand forever (2:44). I saw in the night visions,
and behold one like the Son of man came with the clouds of the heavens.
And there was given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
peoples, nations, and languages should worship Him; His dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed
(7:13, 14, 27). That His advent is called "the Gospel of the kingdom,"
may be seen in Matt. 4:23; 9:5; 24:14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

vi\. That the Lord is called "David," is evident from these passages: In
that day they shall serve Jehovah their God, and David their king, whom
I will raise up to them (Jer. 30:8, 9). Afterwards the sons of Israel
shall return, and shall seek Jehovah their God, and David their king,
and shall come with fear to Jehovah, and to His goodness in the end of
days (Hos. 3:5). I will raise up one shepherd over them, who shall feed
them My servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd: and I Jehovah will be their God, and My servant David a prince
in the midst of them (Ezek. 34:23, 24). That they may be My people, and
that I may be their God and David My servant shall be king over them,
that they may all have one shepherd; then shall they dwell upon the
land, they and their sons and their sons' sons, even to eternity and
David shall be their prince to eternity and I will make a covenant of
peace, and it shall be a covenant of eternity with them (Ezek.
37:23-26). I will make a covenant of eternity with you, the sure mercies
of David: behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a prince
and a lawgiver to the nations (Isa. 55:3, 4). In that day I will raise
up the tent of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof;
I will restore his ruins, and will build it as in the days of eternity
(Amos 9:11). The house of David shall be as God, as the angel of Jehovah
before them (Zech. 12:8). In that day there shall be a fountain open to
the house of David (Zech. 13:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

He who knows that the Lord is meant by David, may know why David so
frequently wrote of the Lord in his Psalms while writing about himself;
as in these words: I have made a covenant with My chosen, I have sworn
unto David My servant; thy seed will I establish to eternity, and will
build up thy throne to generation and generation; and the heavens shall
confess thy wonder, thy truth also in the congregation of the saints.
Thou speakest in vision to Thine holy one and saidst, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people, I
have found David My servant, with My holy oil have I anointed him, with
whom My hand shall be established, Mine arm also shall strengthen him,
My truth and My mercy shall be with him, and in My name shall his horn
be exalted, I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers. He shall cry unto Me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock
of my salvation. I will also make him My firstborn, higher than the
kings of the earth; My covenant shall stand fast with him his seed will
I make to endure to eternity, and his throne as the days of the heavens.
Once have I sworn by My holiness that I will not lie unto David; his
seed shall endure to eternity, and his throne as the sun before Me it
shall be established to eternity as the moon, and a faithful witness in
the clouds (Ps. 89:3-5, 19-21, 24-29, 35-37). And so in other Psalms, as
Ps. 45:1-17; 122:4, 5; 132:8-18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

GOD IS ONE, AND THE LORD IS THAT GOD. From the numerous passages quoted
from the Word in the preceding chapter, it is evident that the Lord is
called Jehovah, the God of Israel and of Jacob, the Holy One of Israel,
Lord, and God, and also King, the Anointed, and David, from which it may
be seen, as yet however as through a glass, darkly, that the Lord is God
Himself, from and about whom is the Word. Now it is known in the whole
world that God is one, and no man possessed of sound reason denies it.
It remains therefore to confirm this from the Word and, in addition,
that the Lord is that God. i. That God is one, is confirmed by these
passages of the Word: Jesus said, The first of all the commandments is,
Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord; therefore thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul (Mark 12:29,
30). Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah; and thou shalt love
Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul (Deut. 6:4,
5). One came unto Jesus and said, Good Master, what good thing shall I
do that I may have eternal life? Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou
Me good? There is none good but the one God (Matt. 19:16, 17). That all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou alone art Jehovah (Isa. 37:
20). I am Jehovah and there is none else there is no God besides Me that
they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there
is no God besides Me: I am Jehovah and there is none else (Isa. 45:5,
6). O Jehovah of Armies, God of Israel, that dwellest on the cherubim,
Thou art the God, even Thou alone, over all the kingdoms of the earth
(Isa. 37:16). Is there a God besides Me? and a Rock? I know not any
(Isa. 44:8). Who is God save Jehovah? and who is a Rock save our God?
(Ps. 18:31). ii. That the Lord is that God, is confirmed by these
passages of the Word: Surely God is in thee, and there is none else,
there is no God. Verily Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of
Israel, the Savior (Isa. 45:14, 15). Have not I Jehovah? and there is no
God else besides Me, a just God and a Savior, there is none besides Me.
Look unto Me that ye may be saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am
God, and there is none else (Isa. 45:21, 22). I am Jehovah, and besides
Me there is no Savior (Isa. 43:11). I am Jehovah thy God, and thou shalt
acknowledge no God but Me; for there is no Savior besides Me (Hos.
13:4). Thus saith Jehovah the King of Israel, and his Redeemer Jehovah
of Armies, I am the First and I am the Last, and besides Me there is no
God (Isa. 44:6). Jehovah of Armies is His name, and thy Redeemer the
Holy One of Israel the God of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa.
54:5). In that day Jehovah shall be king over all the earth; in that day
there shall be one Jehovah, and His name one (Zech. 14:9). As the Lord
alone is the Savior and the Redeemer, and as it is said that Jehovah is
that Savior and Redeemer, and that there is none besides Him, it follows
that the one God is no other than the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

THE HOLY SPIRIT IS THE DIVINE PROCEEDING FROM, THE LORD, AND THIS IS THE
LORD HIMSELF. Jesus has said in Matthew: All power \[potestas\] is given
unto Me in heaven and on earth; go ye therefore and make disciples of
all nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you; and lo I am with you all the days even to the
consummation of the age (Matt. 28:18-20). It has already been shown that
the Divine called "the Father," and the Divine called "the Son," are a
one in the Lord; and it shall now be shown that "the Holy Spirit" is the
same as the Lord. \[2\] The reason why the Lord said that they were to
baptize into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit, is that there is in the Lord a trine or trinity; for there is
the Divine called the Father, the Divine Human called the Son, and the
proceeding Divine called the Holy Spirit. The Divine called the Father,
and the Divine called the Son, are the Divine ex Quo; <span
id="fr_11"></span>[46-1](#fn_11) and the proceeding Divine is the Divine
per Quod. <span id="fr_12"></span>[46-2](#fn_12) That the Divine which
proceeds from the Lord is no other than the Divine which is Himself,
will be seen in the treatises on the Divine Providence, Omnipotence,
Omnipresence, and Omniscience; <span id="fr_13"></span>[46-3](#fn_13)
for it is a matter of deep investigation. \[3\] That there is a trine in
the Lord may be illustrated by comparison with an angel, who has a soul
and a body, and also a proceeding. That which proceeds from him is
himself outside of him. I have been permitted to learn many things about
this proceeding, but this is not the place to present them. \[4\] After
death the first thing the angels teach every man who looks to God is
that the Holy Spirit is not any other than the Lord; and that "to go
forth" and "to proceed" is nothing else than to enlighten and teach by
the presence, which is according to the reception, of the Lord. The
result is that after death very many people put away the idea they had
formed in this world about the Holy Spirit, and receive the idea that it
is the Lord's presence with man through angels and spirits, by and
according to which the man is enlightened and taught. \[5\] Moreover, it
is usual in the Word to name two Divines, and sometimes three, which yet
are one; as Jehovah and God, Jehovah and the Holy One of Israel, Jehovah
and the Mighty One of Jacob, and also God and the Lamb. And as these are
one, it is said in other places, Jehovah alone is God, Jehovah alone is
holy, and He is the Holy One of Israel, and there is none besides Him;
and also instead of God it is sometimes said the Lamb, and instead of
the Lamb, God; this is done in the Revelation; the other expressions
occur in the Prophets. \[6\] That it is the Lord only who is meant by
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in Matthew 28:19 is evident from what
there precedes and what follows. In the preceding verse the Lord says,
"All power is given unto Me in heaven and on earth," and in the
following verse He says, "Lo, I am with you all the days, even to the
consummation of the age;" thus He speaks of Himself only, so that He
spoke in that manner \[about the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit\] to make
His disciples aware that there is a trinity in Him. \[7\] In order that
it may be known that the Holy Spirit is not a Divine other than the Lord
Himself, it shall be shown what is meant by "spirit" in the Word. By
"spirit" is meant, i. Man's life in general. ii. As man's life varies
according to his state, by "spirit" is meant the varying affection of
life in man. iii. Also the life of one who is regenerate, which is
called spiritual life. iv. But where "spirit" is said of the Lord, His
Divine life is meant, thus the Lord Himself. v. Specifically, the life
of His wisdom, which is called the Divine truth. vi. Jehovah Himself,
that is, the Lord, spoke the Word through the prophets.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

i\. That by "spirit" is meant man's life, is evident from ordinary
discourse, in which it is said that a man, when he dies, yields up his
spirit, so that by "spirit" in this sense is meant the life of the
respiration, and in fact the term "spirit" is derived from the
respiration, and this is why, in the Hebrew language, there is one word
for both "spirit" and "wind." There are in man two fountains of life,
one is the motion of the heart, and the other is the respiration of the
lungs. The life from the respiration of the lungs is what is properly
meant by "spirit" and also by "soul." That this acts as one with the
man's thought from the understanding, and that the life from the heart's
motion acts as one with his will's love, will be seen in its own place.
That man's life is meant in the Word by "spirit," is evident from these
passages: Thou gatherest in their breath \[spiritum\], they expire, and
return into dust (Ps. 104:29). He remembered that they were flesh, a
wind \[spiritus\] that passeth away, and cometh not again (Ps. 78:39).
When his breath has gone forth, he will return into earth (Ps. 146:4).
Hezekiah lamented that the life of his spirit should go forth (Isa.
38:16). The spirit of Jacob revived (Gen. 45:27). A molten image is
falsehood, and there is no breath in it (Jer. 51:17). The Lord Jehovih
said to the dry bones, I will cause breath to enter into you, that ye
may live. Come from the four winds O breath, and breathe upon these
slain, and they shall live; and the breath came into them, and they
revived (Ezek. 37:5-6, 9-10). Jesus took the daughter \[of Jairus\] by
the hand, and her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately (Luke
8:54, 55).

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

ii\. As man's life varies according to his state, by "spirit" is meant
the varying affection of life in man. As, 1: The life of wisdom:
Bezaleel was filled with the spirit of wisdom, intelligence, and
knowledge (Exod. 31:3). Thou shalt speak unto all that are wise-hearted,
whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom (Exod. 28:3). Joshua was
filled with the spirit of wisdom (Deut. 34:9). Nebuchadnezzar said of
Daniel \[in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. The queen said\] that
an excellent spirit of knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom was in him
(Dan. 4:8; 5:12). They that erred in spirit shall know intelligence
(Isa. 29:24). 2. The excitation of life: Jehovah hath stirred up the
spirit of the king of Media (Jer. 51:11). Jehovah hath stirred up the
spirit of Zerubbabel, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people
(Haggai 1:14). I will put a spirit in the king of Assyria, that he may
bear a rumor, and shall return into his own land (Isa. 37:7). Jehovah
hardened the spirit of Sihon the king (Deut. 2:30). That which cometh up
upon your spirit shall not be at all (Ezek. 20:32). 3. Freedom of life:
\[It is said of\] the four living creatures (which were cherubs) seen by
the prophet, Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went (Ezek. 1:12,
20). 4. Life in fear, pain or grief and anger: That every heart may
melt, and all hands be let down, and every spirit be faint (Ezek. 21:7).
My spirit hath failed upon me; my heart is amazed in the midst of me
(Ps. 142:3; 143:4). My spirit is consumed (Ps. 143:7). As for me Daniel,
my spirit was grieved (Dan. 7:15). The spirit of Pharaoh was troubled
(Gen. 41:8). Nebuchadnezzar said, My spirit was troubled (Dan. 2:3). I
went in sadness in the heat of my spirit (Ezek. 3:14). 5. A life of
various evil affections: Provided that in his spirit there is no guile
(Ps. 32:2). Jehovah hath mingled a spirit of perversities in the midst
thereof (Isa. 19:14). He said to the foolish prophets that go away after
their own spirit (Ezek. 13:3). The prophet is a fool, the man \[that
hath a\] spirit is mad (Hos. 9:7). Take ye heed to your spirit, and deal
not treacherously (Mal. 2:16). The spirit of whoredoms hath led them
astray (Hos. 4:12). The spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them
(Hos. 5:4). When the spirit of jealousy hath passed upon him (Num.
5:14). A man who wandereth in spirit and chattereth a lie (Micah 2:11).
A generation whose spirit was not steadfast with God (Ps. 78:8). Jehovah
hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep (Isa. 29:10). Ye shall
conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble; as for your spirit, fire
shall devour you (Isa. 33:11). 6. Infernal fire: I will cause the
unclean spirit to pass out of the land (Zech. 13:2). When the unclean
spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, and he
afterwards joineth to himself seven spirits worse than himself, and they
enter in and dwell there (Matt. 12:43-45). Babylon is become the hold of
every foul spirit (Rev. 17:2). 7. Besides the infernal spirits
themselves by whom men are troubled: Matt. 8:16; 10:1; 12:43-45; Mark
1:3-27; 9:17-29; Luke 4:33, 36; 6:17, 18; 7:21; 8:2, 29; 9:39, 42, 55;
11:24-26; 13:11; Rev. 13:15; 16:13, 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

iii\. That by "spirit" is meant the life of one who is regenerate, which
is called spiritual life: Jesus said, Except a man be born of water and
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God (John 3:5). I
will give you a new heart, and a new spirit. I will put My spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in My statutes (Ezek. 36:26, 27). To give a
new heart and a new spirit (Ezek. 11:19). Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me. Restore unto me the joy of
Thy salvation, and let a willing spirit uphold me (Ps. 51:10, 12). Make
you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel (Ezek. 18:31). Thou sendest forth Thy spirit, they are created,
and Thou renewest the faces of the earth (Ps. 104:30). The hour cometh,
and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth (John 4:23). Jehovah God giveth breath \[animam\] to the
people, and spirit to them that walk therein (Isa. 42:5). Jehovah
formeth the spirit of man in the midst of him (Zech. 12:1). With my soul
have I awaited Thee in the night; with my spirit in the midst of me have
I awaited Thee in the morning (Isa. 26:9). In that day shall Jehovah be
for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment (Isa. 28:5, 6).
My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior (Luke 1:47). They have quieted
my spirit in the land of the north (Zech. 6:8). Into Thy hand I commend
my spirit; Thou hast redeemed me (Ps. 31:5). Did not He make one, and
the rest in whom was spirit? (Mal. 2:15). After three days and a half
the spirit of life from God entered into the two witnesses that had been
killed by the beast (Rev. 11:11). I Jehovah the former of the mountains,
and the creator of the wind \[spiritus\] (Amos 4:13). O God, the God of
the spirits as to all flesh (Num. 16:22; 27:18). I will pour upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitant of Jerusalem, the spirit from on
high (Zech. 12:10). Until He hath poured upon us the spirit from on high
(Isa. 22:15). I will pour waters upon him that is thirsty, and brooks
upon the dry \[ground\], I will pour My spirit upon thy seed (Isa.
44:3). I will pour My spirit upon all flesh, also upon the servants and
the handmaids in those days will I pour out My spirit (Joel 2:28, 29).
(To pour out the spirit means to regenerate; as does also to give a new
heart and a new spirit.) \[2\] That by "spirit" is meant spiritual life
in those who are in humiliation: I dwell in a contrite and humble
spirit, and to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones (Isa. 57:15). The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise (Ps.
51:17). He will give the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness (Isa. 61:3). A woman forsaken and
grieved in spirit (Isa. 54:6). Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of the heavens. (Matt. 5:3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

iv\. That where "spirit" is said of the Lord, there is meant His Divine
life, thus the Lord Himself, is evident from these passages: He whom the
Father hath sent speaketh the words of God, for God hath not given the
spirit by measure unto Him; the Father loveth the Son, and hath given
all things into His hand (John 3:34, 35). There shall go forth a rod out
of the stem of Jesse, and the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon Him, the
spirit of wisdom and intelligence, the spirit of counsel and might (Isa.
11:1, 2). I have put My spirit upon Him, He shall bring forth judgment
to the nations (Isa. 42:1). When the enemy shall come as a pent-up
stream, the spirit of Jehovah shall lift up a standard against him; then
shall the Redeemer come to Zion (Isa. 59:19, 20). The spirit of the Lord
Jehovih is upon Me; Jehovah hath anointed Me to preach good tidings to
the poor (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18). Jesus knowing in His spirit that they
so reasoned within themselves (Mark 2:8). Jesus exulted in spirit, and
said (Luke 10:21). Jesus was troubled in His spirit (John 13:21). Jesus
sighed in His spirit (Mark 8:12). \[2\] "Spirit" as used for Jehovah
Himself, that is, the Lord: God is a Spirit (John 4:24). Who hath
directed the Spirit of Jehovah, or who is a man of His counsel? (Isa.
40:13). The Spirit of Jehovah led them by the hand of Moses (Isa. 63:12,
14). Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit, and whither shall I flee? (Ps.
139:7). Jehovah said, Not by might, but by My Spirit shall he do it
(Zech. 4:6). They provoked the Spirit of His holiness, therefore He was
turned to be their enemy (Isa. 63:10; Ps. 106:33, 40). My Spirit shall
not strive with man forever, for he is flesh (Gen. 6:3). I will not
contend to eternity, for the Spirit should fail before Me (Isa. 57:16).
The blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven; but he who
shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven (Matt.
12:31, 32; Mark 3:28-30; Luke 12:10). "Blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit," is blasphemy against the Lord's Divine; "a word against the Son
of man," is something said against the Word by wrongly interpreting its
meaning; for "the Son of man" is the Lord in respect to the Word, as has
been shown above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1-1](dld01.htm#fr_0) That is, a complex whole
which constitutes a unity. \[TRANSLATOR.\]

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2-1](dld01.htm#fr_1) In the expression "Divine
proceeding," Divine is not to be understood as an adjective qualifying
proceeding, but proceeding is to be taken as a verb (or participle)
describing the act which the divine there performs. Thus, the expression
does not mean a proceeding which is Divine, but a Divine that is in the
act of proceeding forth. "Divine proceeding," thus understood, exactly
translates Swedenborg's Divinum procedens. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4-1](dld01.htm#fr_2) The Latin has "Jehovah
shall say."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6-1](dld01.htm#fr_3) In the Apocalypse Revealed
(n. 612), it is "Savior;" in the Apocalypse Explained (n. 31-7), it is
"just and saving;" but the Hebrew is "saved," as given here by
Swedenborg. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_4"></span>[11-1](dld01.htm#fr_4) The term singular is the
correlative of universal, as particular is of general. The veriest
singulars are most absolute ones, the most singular or individually
distinct of all. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12-1](dld01.htm#fr_5) Concerning the Lord's
temptations or combats, see the small work on The New Jerusalem and its
Heavenly Doctrine, published in London (n. 201 and 302). And concerning
temptations in general (n. 187-200).

<span id="fn_6"></span>[20-1](dld01.htm#fr_6) Latin instaurare, to set
up, not originally, but in restoration and repair. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_7"></span>[26-1](dld01.htm#fr_7) Latin instaurare, to set
up, not originally, but in restoration and repair. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_8"></span>[27-1](dld01.htm#fr_8) Potestas, Greek is the
authority, command, and power that is exercised by a ruler. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_9"></span>[30-1](dld01.htm#fr_9) Literally, the divine from
which; that is, the Divine which is the source. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_10"></span>[32-1](dld01.htm#fr_10) That angels are human
forms, and that everything Divine has a tendency to the human form, may
be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 73-77, 453-460), and more
fully in the works which follow this present one, which will be from
Angelic Wisdom concerning the Lord.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[46-1](dld01.htm#fr_11) Literally, the Divine
from which; that is, the Divine which is the source. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_12"></span>[46-2](dld01.htm#fr_12) Literally, the Divine by
means of which; that is, the Divine which is the instrument or executive
agency. \[Tr.\]

<span id="fn_13"></span>[46-3](dld01.htm#fr_13) Although the treatise
here named was never published as a separate work, the subjects of it
are specially treated of in the first chapter of the True Christian
Religion. See also the references to the same subjects in this present
work (n. 65), in the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture (n. 32), and in the
Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine Love and the Divine Wisdom (n. 9).
\[Tr.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](dld02)
