[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pre02)  [Next](pre04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PROLOGUE

IN the beginning God created heaven and earth and all those things which
are in them; and last of all, two of human kind, Adam and Eve, from whom
the races are descended. And their offspring multiplied among themselves
and were scattered throughout the earth. But as time passed, the races
of men became unlike in nature: some were good and believed on the
right; but many more turned after the lusts of the world and slighted
God's command. Wherefore, God drowned the world in a swelling of the
sea, and all living things, save them alone that were in the ark with
Noah. After Noah's flood eight of mankind remained alive, who peopled
the earth; and the races descended from them. And it was even as before:
when the earth was full of folk and inhabited of many, then all the
multitude of mankind began to love greed, wealth, and worldly honor, but
neglected the worship of God. Now accordingly it came to so evil a pass
that they would not name God; and who then could tell their sons of
God's mighty wonders? Thus it happened that they lost the name of God;
and throughout the wideness of the world the man was not found who could
distinguish in aught the trace of his Creator. But not the less did God
bestow upon them the gifts of the earth: wealth and happiness, for their
enjoyment in the world; He increased also their wisdom, so that they
knew all earthly matters, and every phase of whatsoever they might see
in the air and on the earth.

One thing they wondered and pondered over: what it might mean, that the
earth and the beasts and the birds had one nature in some ways, and yet
were unlike in manner of

{p. 4}

life. In this was their nature one: that the earth was cleft into lofty
mountain-peaks, wherein water spurted up, and it was not needful to dig
longer for water there than in the deep valleys; so it is also with
beasts and birds: it is equally far to the blood in the head and the
feet. Another quality of the earth is, that in each year grass and
flowers grow upon the earth, and in the same year all that growth falls
away and withers; it is even so with beasts and birds: hair and feathers
grow and fall away each year. This is the third nature of the earth,
that when it is opened and dug up, the grass grows straightway on the
soil which is uppermost on the earth. Boulders and stones they likened
to the teeth and bones of living beings. Thus they recognized that the
earth was quick, and had life with some manner of nature of its own; and
they understood that she was wondrous old in years and mighty in kind:
she nourished all that lived, and she took to herself all that died.
Therefore they gave her a name, and traced the number of their
generations from her. The same thing, moreover, they learned from their
aged kinsmen: that many hundreds of years have been numbered since the
same earth yet was, and the same sun and stars of the heavens; but the
courses of these were unequal, some having a longer course, and some a
shorter.

From things like these the thought stirred within them that there might
be some governor of the stars of heaven: one who might order their
courses after his will; and that he must be very strong and full of
might. This also they held to be true: that if he swayed the chief
things of creation, he must have been before the stars of heaven; and
they saw that if he ruled the courses of the heavenly bodies, he must
also govern the shining of the sun, and the dews of the air, and the
fruits of the earth, whatsoever grows

{p. 5}

upon it; and in like manner the winds of the air and the storms of the
sea. They knew not yet where his kingdom was; but this they believed:
that he ruled all things on earth and in the sky, the great stars also
of the heaven, and the winds of the sea. Wherefore, not only to tell of
this fittingly, but also that they might fasten it in memory, they gave
names out of their own minds to all things. This belief of theirs has
changed in many ways, according as the peoples drifted asunder and their
tongues became severed one from another. But all things they discerned
with the wisdom of the earth, for the understanding of the spirit was
not given to them; this they perceived, that all things were fashioned
of some essence.

## II

The world was divided into three parts: from the south, extending into
the west and bordering on the Mediterranean Sea,--all this part was
called Africa, the southern quarter of which is hot, so that it is
parched with the sun. The second part, from west to north and bordering
on the ocean, is called Európá or Eneá; its northern part is so cold
that no grass grows upon it, and no man dwells there. From the north and
all down over the eastern part, even to the south, is called Asia. In
that region of the world is all fairness and pride, and the fruits of
the earth's increase, gold and jewels. There also is the centre of the
earth; and even as the land there is lovelier and better in every way
than in other places, so also were the sons of men there most favored
with all goodly gifts: wisdom, and strength of the body, beauty, and all
manner of knowledge.

{p. 6}

## III

Near the earth's centre was made that goodliest of homes and haunts that
ever have been, which is called Troy, even that which we call Turkland.
This abode was much more gloriously made than others, and fashioned with
more skill of craftsmanship in manifold wise, both in luxury and in the
wealth which was there in abundance. There were twelve kingdoms and one
High King, and many sovereignties belonged to each kingdom; in the
stronghold were twelve chieftains. These chieftains were in every manly
part greatly above other men that have ever been in the world. One king
among them was called Múnón or Mennón; and he was wedded to the daughter
of the High King Priam, her who was called Tróán; they had a child named
Trór, whom we call Thor. He was fostered in Thrace by a certain war-duke
called Lóríkus; but when he was ten winters old he took unto him the
weapons of his father. He was as goodly to look upon, when he came among
other men, as the ivory that is inlaid in oak; his hair was fairer than
gold. When he was twelve winters old he had his full measure of
strength; then he lifted clear of the earth ten bear-skins all at one
time; and then he slew Duke Lóríkus, his foster-father, and with him his
wife Lórá, or Glórá, and took into his own hands the realm of Thrace,
which we call Thrúdheim. Then he went forth far and wide over the lands,
and sought out every quarter of the earth, overcoming alone all berserks
and giants, and one dragon, greatest of all dragons, and many beasts. In
the northern half of his kingdom he found the prophetess that is called
Síbil, whom we call Sif, and wedded her. The lineage of Sif I cannot
tell; she was fairest of all women,

{p. 7}

and her hair was like gold. Their son was Lóridi, who resembled his
father; his son was Einridi, his son Vingethor, his son Vingener, his
son Móda, his son Magi, his son Seskef, his son Bedvig, his son Athra
(whom we call Annarr), his son Ítermann, his son Heremód, his son
Skjaldun (whom we call Skjöld), his son Bjáf (whom we call Bjárr), his
son Ját, his son Gudólfr, his son Finn, his son Fríallaf (whom we call
Fridleifr); his son was he who is named Vóden, whom we call Odin: he was
a man far-famed for wisdom and every accomplishment. His wife was
Frígídá, whom we call Frigg.

## IV

Odin had second sight, and his wife also; and from their foreknowledge
he found that his name should be exalted in the northern part of the
world and glorified above the fame of all other kings. Therefore, he
made ready to journey out of Turkland, and was accompanied by a great
multitude of people, young folk and old, men and women; and they had
with them much goods of great price. And wherever they went over the
lands of the earth, many glorious things were spoken of them, so that
they were held more like gods than men. They made no end to their
journeying till they were come north into the land that is now called
Saxland; there Odin tarried for a long space, and took the land into his
own hand, far and wide.

In that land Odin set up three of his sons for land-wardens. One was
named Vegdeg: he was a mighty king and ruled over East Saxland; his son
was Vitgils; his sons were Vitta, Heingistr's father, and Sigarr, father
of Svebdeg, whom we call Svipdagr. The second son of Odin was

{p. 8}

Beldeg, whom we call Baldr: he had the land which is now called
Westphalia. His son was Brandr, his son Frjódigar, (whom we call Fródi),
his son Freóvin, his son Uvigg, his son Gevis (whom we call Gave).
Odin's third son is named Sigi, his son Rerir. These the forefathers
ruled over what is now called Frankland; and thence is descended the
house known as Völsungs. From all these are sprung many and great
houses.

Then Odin began his way northward, and came into the land which they
called Reidgothland; and in that land he took possession of all that
pleased him. He set up over the land that son of his called Skjöldr,
whose son was Fridleifr;--and thence descends the house of the
Skjöldungs: these are the kings of the Danes. And what was then called
Reidgothland is now called Jutland.

## V

After that he went northward, where the land is called Sweden; the king
there was named Gylfi. When the king learned of the coming of those men
of Asia, who were called Æsir, he went to meet them, and made offer to
them that Odin should have such power in his realm as he himself
wielded. And such well-being followed ever upon their footsteps, that in
whatsoever lands they dwelt were good seasons and peace; and all
believed that they caused these things, for the lords of the land
perceived that they were unlike other men whom they had seen, both in
fairness and also in wisdom.

The fields and the choice lands in that place seemed fair to Odin, and
he chose for himself the site of a city which is now called Sigtún.
There he established chieftains in the

{p. 9}

fashion which had prevailed in Troy; he set up also twelve head-men to
be doomsmen over the people and to judge the laws of the land; and he
ordained also all laws as, there had been before, in Troy, and according
to the customs of the Turks. After that he went into the north, until he
was stopped by the sea, which men thought lay around all the lands of
the earth; and there he set his son over this kingdom, which is now
called Norway. This king was Sæmingr; the kings of Norway trace their
lineage from him, and so do also the jarls and the other mighty men, as
is said in the *Háleygjatal*. Odin had with him one of his sons called
Yngvi, who was king in Sweden after him; and those houses come from him
that are named Ynglings. The Æsir took wives of the land for themselves,
and some also for their sons; and these kindreds became many in number,
so that throughout Saxland, and thence all over the region of the north,
they spread out until their tongue, even the speech of the men of Asia,
was the native tongue over all these lands. Therefore men think that
they can perceive, from their forefathers' names which are written down,
that those names belonged to this tongue, and that the Æsir brought the
tongue hither into the northern region, into Norway and into Sweden,
into Denmark and into Saxland. But in England there are ancient lists of
land-names and place-names which may show that these names came from
another tongue than this.

{p. 13}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gylfaginning](pre04)
