[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby11)  [Next](sby13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### APPENDIX TO PART I

They say our hearts are our books, and our šeiḫs tell us everything from
the second Adam until now and the future. When they notice the sun rise,
they kiss the place where the rays first fall; they do the same at
sunset, where its rays last fall. Likewise they kiss the spot where the
moon first casts its rays and where it last casts them. They think,
moreover, that by the multiplication of presents to
[šeiḫs](errata.htm#5) and idols they keep troubles and afflictions away.

There is a great difference among the *ḳôchaks*, they contradict one
another. Some say, "Melek Ṭâ‘ûs appears to me and reveals to me many
revelations." Others say, "We appear to people in many different ways."
Some believe that Christ is Šeiḫ Šams himself. They say that they have
had prophets in all times; the *ḳôchaks* are the prophets. One of the
*kôchaks* says in one of his prophecies: "I was in Jonah's ship, where a
lot was cast in my presence. It fell on Jonah; and he was thrown into
the sea, where he remained forty days and nights." Another said: "I was
sitting with the great God, who said, 'I hope the time will come when I
shall send Christ to the world.' I said to him, 'Yes.' Then he sent him.
After making a sign in the sun, Christ came down to the earth." He
appeared to go

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

our sect only, and made for us seven circles, which are at Šeiḫ ‘Adî.
Now he appeared to us because we observe the necessary order, which the
other sects do not observe. Their origin and race are unknown; ours are
known. We are emirs and sons of emirs; we are *šeiḫs* and sons of
*šeiḫs*; we are *ḳôchaks* and sons of *ḳôchaks*, etc. But Christians and
Moslems make priests and mullas for themselves out of those who had none
of their kindred in those offices before, and never will have afterward.
We are better than they. We are allowed to drink wine; our young men
also may desire it when they, in company with women, engage in religious
dancing and playing. Some of the *ḳôchaks* and *šeiḫs*, however, are not
allowed to drink it. When one is about to die, he is Visited by a
*ḳôchaks*, who places a bit of Šeiḫ ‘Adî's dust in his mouth. Before he
is buried his face is anointed with it. Moreover, the dung of sheep is
placed on his tomb. Finally, food is offered on behalf of the dead. The
*ḳôchaks* pray for the dead at the graves, for which service they are
paid. They tell the relatives of the dead what they see in dreams and
visions, and the condition of their dead, whether they have been
translated to the human or to the animal race. Some people hide silver
or gold coins that they plan to take out in case they are born the
second time in this world. Some believe that the spirits of many
righteous persons travel in the air. Those spirits make revelations to
the *ḳôchaks*, who are acquainted with the world of mysteries and
secrets. Life and death are in their hands.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence the fate of
the people depends on the gratitude and honor which they show the
*ḳôchaks*. According to Yezidis, hell has no existence. It was created
in the time of the first Adam, they say, when our father, Ibrîḳ
al-Aṣfar, was born. <span id="fr_50"></span>[21](#fn_50) By reason of
his generosity and noble deeds, Ibrîḳ had many friends. Now, when he
viewed hell he became very sad. He had a small *baḳbûḳ aṣfar*, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[22](#fn_51) into which, as he kept weeping his tears
fell. In seven years it was filled. He then cast it into hell, and all
its fires were put out that mankind might not be tortured. This incident
relates to one of the noble deeds of our first father, Ibrîḳ al-Aṣfar.
They have many more such upright men of noble deeds. Such an one is
Mohammed Rašân, whose resting place is behind the mount of Šeiḫ
Mattie. <span id="fr_52"></span>[23](#fn_52) He (Rašân) is exceedingly
strong, so that the most sacred oaths are sworn by him. If any one
becomes sick, he takes refuge in making vows to *ḫasin*, *i.e.*, pillars
of idols. Now there is a place of religious pilgrimage which is called
Sitt Nafîsah. This place is a mulberry tree in the village of Ba‘ašîḳa.
Another such place is called ‘Abdi Rašân, and is in the villa of
Ḳarabek. A third place of pilgrimage is in the village Baḥzanie, which
is called Šeiḫ Bakû. Nearby is a spring, and beside this is a mulberry
tree. Whoever is afflicted with fever, goes to that tree, hangs on its
branches a piece of cloth from his clothes, and casts bread in the
spring for the fish. All this he does that he may be cured. They
entertain the belief that whoever unties or shakes off one of the shreds

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of cloth will catch the disease with which the man was afflicted when he
hung it up. There are many such trees in the village of Ba‘ašîḳa, and in
some other places. There is also a spring of water, called in the common
language ‘Ain aṣ-Ṣafra (Yellow Spring). The Yezidis call it
Kanî-Zarr. <span id="fr_53"></span>[24](#fn_53) In this swim those who
are afflicted with the disease of *abû-ṣafar* (jaundice.) But those who
are troubled with dropsy go for cure to the house of the Pir that lives
in the village of Man Reš.

When they assemble at Šeiḫ ‘Adî's, no one is allowed to cook anything.
Everyone is to eat from Šeiḫ ‘Adî's table. As to the *ḳôchaks*, every
one of them sits on a alone, as one sits in prayer. To them the laity
go, seeking succor. They give them money while making their petition,
and vow to the stone on which the *ḳôchak* sits, sheep and oxen,
everyone according to his means. Now, at the New Year the places are
given in contract. When they assemble at the New Year, they dance and
play with instruments of joy. Before eating the *kabdûš*, *i.e.*, the
vowed ox, they swim in the water of Zamzam, a spring coming from beneath
the temple of Šeiḫ ‘Adî. Then they eat in haste, snatching meat from the
pot like fanatics, so that their hands are frequently burned. This
practice is in accordance with their rules. After eating, they go up the
mountain, shooting with their guns, and then return to Šeiḫ ‘Adî.
Everyone of them takes a little dust and preserves it for the times of
wedding and death. They wear entwined girdles which they call the ties
of the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

back (belt). They baptize these and the *sanjaḳs* with the water of
Zamzam. He who is called Jawiš <span id="fr_54"></span>[25](#fn_54)
wears a stole which is woven from the hair of a goat It is nine spans in
length and around it are *sansûls* (tinsels).

When the gathering comes to an end, they collect the money from the
*ḳôchaks* and the contractors, and bring it to the emir. After everyone
has taken according to his rank, the remainder goes to the emir.

They have another gathering which takes place at the feast of Al-Hijâjj.
At this pilgrimage they go up to the mountain which is called Jabal
al-‘Arafât. <span id="fr_55"></span>[26](#fn_55) After remaining there
an hour, they hasten toward Šeiḫ ‘Adî. He who arrives there before his
companions is praised much. Hence everyone tries to excel. The one who
succeeds receives abundant blessings.

They still have another assembly. This is called "the road of the
*ḳôchaks*," when each, putting a rope around his neck, goes up the
mountain. After collecting wood they bring it to Šeiḫ ‘Adî, carrying it
on their backs. The wood is used for heating purposes and for the emir's
cooking.

During these assemblies the *sanjaḳs* are passed around. In the first
place they are washed with water made sour with sumac in order to be
cleansed from their rust. The water is given away in drinks for purposes
of blessing. In return money is taken. In the second place, the
*kôchaks* go around with the *sanjaḳs* to collect money.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

In their preaching, the šeiḫs tell the people that all kings have come
from their descent, such as Nisroch, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[27](#fn_56) who is Nasr-ad-Dîn, and Kamuš who is
Fahr-ad-Dîn, and Artâmîs, who is Šams-ad-Dîn, and many others, as Shabur
and Yoram; and many royal names of the ancient kings, together with
their own (Yezidi) kings, are from their seed. The sign of the Yezidi is
that he wears a shirt with a round bosom. It differs from that of the
other people, the bosom of whose shirts are open all the way down.

There is one occasion when no Yezidi will swear falsely, viz., when one
draws a circle on the ground, and tells him that this circle belongs to
Ṭâ‘ûs-Melek, Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and Yezîd, and *baryshabaḳei*. He places him in
the middle of the circle, and then tells him that Melek Ṭâ‘ûs and all
those who were mentioned above will not intercede for him after his
death, and that the shirt of the Jewish Nasim <span
id="fr_57"></span>[29](#fn_57) be on his neck, and that the hand of
Nasim be on his neck and eye, and that Nasim be his brother for the next
world, and let him be to him for a šeiḫ and a *pir* if he does not tell
the truth. Then if he swears to tell the truth, he cannot conceal
anything. For an oath made under such conditions is considered greater
than that made in the name of God, and even than that made in the name
of one of their prophets.

They fast three days in a year from morning till evening. The fast falls
in December, according to the oriental calendar. They have no
prayer <span id="fr_58"></span>[30](#fn_58) except what is mentioned
above, such as that referring to the sun

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and the moon, and asking help from šeiḫs and holy places when they say,
"O Šeiḫ ‘Adî, O šeiḫ Šams." and the like. They are all forbidden to
teach their children anything, with the exception of two stanzas which
they teach their children out of necessity and because it is
traditional.

A story is told about them by reliable people. Once when Šeiḫ Naṣir was
preaching in a village at Mount Sinjar, there was a Christian mason in
the audience who, seeing the house filled with people, thought they were
going to pray. He then pretended to take a nap, that he might amuse
himself with what he should hear. He knew the kurdish language. When the
Christian seemed to be asleep, but was really awake and listening, Šeiḫ
Naṣir began to preach saying: "Once the great God appeared to me in
vision. He was angry at Jesus because of a dispute with him. He
therefore caught him and imprisoned him in a den which had no water.
Before the mouth of the den he placed a great stone. Jesus remained in
the den a long time, calling upon the prophets and the saints for help
and asking their aid. Every one whose succor Jesus asked went to beg the
great God to release him. But God did not grant their requests. Jesus
therefore remained in a sorrowful state, knowing not what to do." After
this the preacher remained silent for a quarter of an hour, and thus a
great silence prevailed in the house. Then he went on to say: "O poor
Jesus, why are you so forgotten, so neglected? Do you not know that all
the prophets and all the saints have no favor with

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

the great God unto Melek Ṭâ’ûs? Why have you forgotten him and have not
called upon him?" Saying this, the preacher again remained silent as
before. Afterward he again continued: "Jesus remained in the den till
one day when he happened to remember Melek Ṭâ’ûs. He then sought his
aid, praying, 'O Melek Ṭâ’ûs, I have been in this den for some time. I
am imprisoned; I have sought the help of all the saints, and none of
them [could](errata.htm#6) deliver me. Now, save me from this den.' When
Melek Ṭâ’ûs heard this, he descended from heaven to earth quicker than
the twinkling of an eye, removed the stone from the top of the den, and
said to Jesus, 'Come up, behold I have brought thee out.' Then both went
up to heaven. When the great God saw Jesus, he said to him, 'O Jesus,
who brought thee out of the den? Who brought thee here without my
permission?' Jesus answered and said, 'Melek Ṭâ’ûs brought me out of the
den and up here.' Then God said, 'Had it been another, I would have
punished him, but Melek Ṭâ’ûs is much beloved by me; remain here for the
sake of my honor.' So Jesus remained in heaven." The preacher added,
"Notice that those who are without do not like Melek Ṭâ’ûs. Know ye that
in the resurrection he will not like them either, and he will not
intercede for them. But, as for us, he will put us all in a tray, carry
us upon his head, and take us into heaven, while we are in the tray on
his head." When the congregation heard this, they rose up, kissed his
clothes and feet, and received his blessing.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Now the views of the Yezidis regarding the birth of Christ and the
explanation of the name of the Apostle Peter, are found in one of their
stories, which runs thus: "Verily Mary the Virgin mother of Jesus, begat
Jesus in a manner unlike the rest of women. She begat him from her right
side, <span id="fr_59"></span>[31](#fn_59) between her clothes and her
body. At that time the Jews had a custom that, if a woman gave birth,
all her relatives and neighbors would bring her presents. The women
would call, carrying in their right hand a plate of fruits which were to
be found in that season, and in the left hand they would carry a stone.
This custom was a very ancient one. Therefore when Mary the Virgin gave
birth to Jesus, the wife of Jonah, who is the mother of Peter, came to
her; and, according to the custom, carried a plate of fruit in her right
hand and a stone in her left. As she entered and gave Mary the plate,
behold, the stone which was in her left hand begat a male. She called
his name Simon Cifa, that is, son of the stone. Christians do not know
these things as we do."

They have a story explaining the word heretic. It is this: When the
great God created the heavens, he put all the keys of the treasuries and
the mansions there in the hands of Melek Ṭâ’ûs, and commanded him not to
open a certain mansion. But he, without the knowledge of God, opened the
house and found a piece of paper on which was written. "Thou shalt
worship thy God alone, and him alone shalt thou serve." He kept the
paper with him and allowed no

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

one else to know about it. Then God created an iron ring and hung it in
the air between the heaven and the earth. Afterward he created Adam the
first. Melek Ṭâ’ûs refused to worship Adam when God commanded him to do
so. He showed the written paper which he took from the mansion and said,
"See what is written here." Then the great God said, "It may be that you
have opened the mansion which I forbade you to open." He answered,
"Yes." Then God said to him, "You are a heretic, because you have
disobeyed me and transgressed my commandment."

From this we know that God speaks in the Kurdish language, that is from
the meaning of this saying, "Go into the iron ring which I, thy God,
have made for whosoever does contrary to my commandment and disobeys
me."

When one criticizes such a story as this by saying that God drove Melek
Ṭâ’ûs from heaven and sent him to hell because of his pride before God
the most high, they do not admit that such is the case. They answer: "It
is possible that one of us in his anger should drive out his child from
his house and let him wait until the next day before bringing him back?
Of course not. Similar is the relation of the great God to Melek Ṭâ’ûs.
Verily he loves him exceedingly. You do not understand the books which
you read The Gospel says, 'No one ascended up to heaven but he who came
down from heaven.' No one came down from heaven but Melek Ṭâ’ûs and
Christ. From this we know that the great God has been reconciled to

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Melek Ṭâ’ûs, who
went up to heaven, just as God came down from heaven and went up again."

The following is a story told of a *kôchak*: It is related that at one
time there was no rain in the village of Ba‘ašîḳa. In this village there
was a Yezidi whose name was Kôchak Berû. There were also some saints and
men of vision dwelling there. They (people) gathered to ask Berû to see
about the rain. He told them, "Wait till tomorrow that I may see about
it." They came to him on the next day and said, "What have you done
concerning the question of rain? We are exceedingly alarmed by reason of
its being withheld." He answered: "I went up to heaven last night and
entered into the divan where the great God, Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and some other
šeiḫs and righteous men . were sitting. The priest Isaac was sitting
beside God. The great God said to me, 'What do you want, O Kôchak Berû;
why have you come here?' I said to him, 'My lord, this year the rain has
been withheld from us till now, and all thy servants are poor and needy.
We beseech thee to send us rain as thy wont.' He remained silent and
answered me not. I repeated the speech twice and thrice, beseeching him.
Then I turned to the šeiḫs who sat there, asking their help and
intercession. The great God answered me, 'Go away until we think it
over.' I came down and do not know what took place after I descended
from heaven. You may go to the priest Isaac and ask him what was said
after I came down." They went to the priest and told him the story, and
asked him what was said

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

after Kôchak Berû came down. This priest Isaac was a great joker. He
answered them, "After the *kôchak* came down, I begged God for rain on
your behalf. It was agreed that after six or seven days he would send
it." They waited accordingly, and by a strange coincidence, at the end
of the period it rained like a flood for some time. Seeing this, the
people believed in what they were told, and honored the priest Isaac,
looking upon him as one of the saints, and thinking that he must have
Yezidi blood in him. For more than twenty years this story has been told
as one of the tales of their saints.

Once Šeiḫ ‘Adî bn Musâfir and his *murids* were entertained by God in
heaven. When they arrived, they did not find straw for their animals.
Therefore Šeiḫ ‘Adî ordered his *murids* to carry straw from his
threshing floor on the earth. As it was being transported, some fell on
the way, and has remained as a sign in heaven unto our day. It is known
as the road of the straw man.

They think that prayer is in the heart; therefore they do not teach
their children about it. And in their book neither is there any rule
regarding prayer, nor is prayer considered a religious obligation.

Some assert that at one time Šeiḫ ‘Adî, in company with šeiḫ
‘Abd-al-Ḳâdir, made a pilgrimage to Mecca, where he remained four years.
After his absence Melek Ṭâ’ûs appeared to them (the two šeiḫs) in his
symbol. He dictated some rules to them and taught them many things. Then
he was hidden from them.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Four years later
Šeiḫ ‘Adî returned from Mecca; but they refused him and would not accept
him. They asserted that he had died or ascended to heaven. He remained
with them, but was without his former respect. When the time of his
death came, Melek Ṭâ’ûs appeared to them and declared, "This is Šeiḫ
‘Adî himself, honor him." Then they honored him and buried him with due
veneration, and made his tomb a place of pilgrimage. In their estimation
it is a more excellent spot than Mecca. Everyone is under obligation to
visit it once a year at least; and, in addition to this, they give a sum
of money through the šeiḫs to obtain satisfaction (that Šeiḫ ‘Adî may be
pleased with them). Whoever does is not is disobedient.

Moreover, it is said that the reason why the pilgrimage to his tomb is
regarded as excellent by us and by God is that in the resurrection Šeiḫ
‘Adî will carry in a tray all the Yezidis upon his head and take them
into paradise, without requiring them to give account or answer.
Therefore they regard the pilgrimage to his tomb as a religious duty
greater than the pilgrimage to Mecca.

There are some domes, huts, around the tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî. They are there
for the purpose of receiving blessings from the tomb. And they are all
attributed to the great Šeiḫs, as the hut of
‘Abd-al-Ḳâdir-al-Jîlânî; <span id="fr_60"></span>[32](#fn_60) the hut of
Šeiḫ Ḳadîb-al-Bân; the hut of Šeiḫ Šams-ad-Dîn; the hut of Šeiḫ
Manṣûr-al-Ḥallâj, and the hut of Šeiḫ Ḫasan-al-Baṣrî. There are also

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

some other huts. Each hut has a banner made of calico. It is a sign of
conquest and victory.

Eating of deer's meat is forbidden them, they say, because the deer's
eyes resemble the eyes of Šeiḫ ‘Adî. Verily his virtues are well-known
and his praiseworthy qualities are traditions handed down from
generation to generation. He was the first to accept the Yezidi
religion. He gave them the rules of the religious sect and founded the
office of the šeiḫ. In addition to this, he was renowned for his
devotion and religious exercise. From Mount Lališ, he used to hear the
preaching of ‘Abd-al-Ḳâdir-al-Jîlânî in Bagdad. He used to draw a circle
on the ground and say to the religious ones, "Whosoever wants to hear
the preaching of Al-Jîlânî, let him enter within this circle." The
following custom, which we have, began with him: If we wish to swear to
anyone, a šeiḫ draws a circle, and he who is to take an oath, enters
into it.

At one time, passing by a garden, Šeiḫ ‘Adî asked about lettuce; and, as
no one answered, he said, "Huss" (hush). For this reason lettuce is
forbidden and not eaten.

As regards fasting, they say about the month of Ramaḍân that it was dumb
and deaf. Therefore, when God commanded the Moslems to fast, he likewise
commanded the Yezidis, saying to them in the Kurdish language, "*sese*,"
meaning "three." The Mohammedans did not understand it; they took it for
"*se*," "thirty." For this reason, they (Yezidis) fast three days.
Moreover, they believe there are eating,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

drinking, and other earthly pleasures in the next world. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[33](#fn_61) Some hold that the rule of heaven is in
God's hands, but the rule of the earth is in Šeiḫ ‘Adî hands. Being
exceedingly beloved by God, he bestowed upon him according to ‘Adî's
desire.

They believe in the transmigration of souls. This is evinced by the fact
that when the soul of Manṣûr-at-Ḥallâj parted from his body when the
Caliph of Bagdad killed him and cast his head into the water, his soul
floated on the water. By a wonderful chance and a strange happening, the
sister of the said Manṣûr went to fill her jar. The soul of her brother
entered it. Without knowing what had happened, she came with it to the
house. Being tired, she felt thirsty and drank from the jar. At that
moment the soul of her brother entered her, but she did not perceive it
until she became pregnant. She gave birth to a son who resembled Šeiḫ
Manṣûr himself. He became her brother according to birth and her son
according to imputation. The reason why they do not use drinking-vessels
which have narrow mouths, or a net-like cover, is that when one drinks
water from them they make a sound. When the head of Šeiḫ Manṣûr was
thrown into the water it gurgled. In his honor they do not use the small
jars with narrow necks.

They assert that they expect a prophet who will come from Persia to
annul the law of Mohammed and abrogate Islam. They believe that there
are seven gods, and that each god administers the universe for ten
thousand years; and that one of these gods is

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lasiferos, the
chief of the fallen angels, who bears also the name Melek Ṭâ’ûs. They
make him a graven image after the form of a cock <span
id="fr_62"></span>[34](#fn_62) and worship it. They play the tambourine
and dance before it to make it rejoice with them. They (*ḳawwâls*)
travel within the Yezidis' villages to collect money, at which time they
take it into the houses that it may bless and honor them. Some say that
Šeiḫ ‘Adî is a deity; others that he is like a Vizier to God. To him all
things are referred. This is Melek Ṭâ’ûs' age. The ruling and
administrative power is in his hands until the thousandth year. When the
time comes to an end he will deliver the power to the next god to rule
and administer until another thousand years shall be ended, and so on
until the seventh god. And yet there is accord and love among these
gods, and none is jealous of the one who may rule and administer the
world for a period of ten thousand years. They have a book named Al
Jilwah that they ascribe to Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and they suffer no one who is not
one of them to read it.

Mention is made in some of their books that the First Cause is the
Supreme God, who before he created this world, was enjoying himself over
the seas; <span id="fr_63"></span>[35](#fn_63) and in his hand was a
great White Pearl, with which he was playing. Then he resolved to cast
it into the sea, and when he did so this world came into being.

Moreover, they think themselves not to be of the same seed from which
the rest of mankind sprung, but that they are begotten of the son of
Adam, who was born to Adam of his spittle. For this reason they

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

imagine themselves nobler and more pleasing to the gods than others.

They say they have taken fasting and sacrifice from Islam; baptism from
Christians; prohibition of foods from the Jews; their way of worship
from the idolaters; dissimulation of doctrine from the Rafiḍis
(Shi‘ites); human sacrifice and transmigration from the pre-Islamic
paganism of the Arabs and from the Sabians. They say that when the
spirit of man goes forth from his body, it enters into another man if it
be just; but if unjust, into an animal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[55:21](sby12.htm#fr_50) Ibrîḳ al-Aṣfar means
"the yellow pitcher."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[55:22](sby12.htm#fr_51) Bakbûḳ is a pitcher
with a narrow spout.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[55:23](sby12.htm#fr_52) <span id="page_85">p.
85</span> Mar Mattie is a Syrian monastery about seven hours' ride east
of Mosul, generally known by the name of Šeiḫ Mattie, in accordance with
the general custom of sheltering a Christian saint beneath a Moslem
title. Elijah is known as Al-Ḫuder, "the green one." Aphrates was bishop
of Šeiḫ Mattie. The church of this monastery is a large building,,
chiefly interesting as containing the tomb of the great Bar Hebraeus,
known as Abu-l-Faraj, who was ordained at Tripolis, and became in 1246
A. D. Metropolitan of Mosul. He lies buried, with his brother Barsom, in
the "Beth Kadišeh (sanctuary) of the church, and over them is placed the
inscription: "This is the grave of Mar Gregorias, and of Mar Barsome his
brother, the children of the Hebrew, on Mount Elpep" (the Syriac name
for Jabal Maḳlûb).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[56:24](sby12.htm#fr_53) *Kani* in Kurdish means
a spring; *zarr*, yellow. In Kurdish, as in Persian, the adjective
usually follows the modified noun; cf. Tartibi Jadid, Ta‘alimi Faresi.
*The New Method for Teaching Persian* (in the Turkish language, ed.
Kasbar, Constantinople, A. H. 1312), p. 18.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[57:25](sby12.htm#fr_54) Jawiš is a Turkish
word, signifying a sergeant.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[57:26](sby12.htm#fr_55) This ceremony, as well
as the names ‘Arafat, Zamzam, etc., seems to be a mere copy of the
Meccah Pilgrimage. ‘Arafât, "The Mount of Recognition," is situated
twelve miles from Mecca, a place where the pilgrims stay on the ninth
day of the day of the pilgrimage, and recite the midday and afternoon
prayer. The Mohammedan legend says, that when our first parents
forfeited heaven for eating wheat, they were cast down from the
Paradise, Adam fell on the Isle of Ceylon, and Eve near Jiddah (the port
of Mecca) in Arabia; and that, after separation of 200 years, Adam was
conducted by the Angel Gabriel to a mountain near Mecca, where he found
and knew <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> his wife, the mountain being
then named ‘Arafat, "Recognition."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[58:27](sby12.htm#fr_56) The god Nisroch of
Scripture, II Kings 19:37; Isa. 37: 38. There is no footnote 27--JBH.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58:29](sby12.htm#fr_57) A superstitious name
signifying an ill omen.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58:30](sby12.htm#fr_58) That is, public prayers
like those of the Mohammedans and of the Christians; cf. Al Mašrik, II,
313.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[61:31](sby12.htm#fr_59) The text has "her
hand."

<span id="fn_60"></span>[65:32](sby12.htm#fr_60) While the Yezidis
venerate ‘Abd al-Ḳâdir of Jîlân, the Nusairis curse him; cf. JAOS, VIII,
274.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[67:33](sby12.htm#fr_61) This belief is taken
from Mohammedanism.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[68:34](sby12.htm#fr_62) The Arabs worshiped a
deity under the form of a *nasr* (eagle), Aš-Šahrastânî, II, 434; Yakut,
IV, 780; *The Syriac Doctrine of Addai* (ed. George Philips), p. 24.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[68:35](sby12.htm#fr_63) Cf. Gen. 1: 2, and the
Babylonian Creation Epic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poem in Praise of Šeiḫ ‘Adî](sby13)
