[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby10)  [Next](sby12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MASHAF REŠ (THE BLACK BOOK)

In the beginning God created the White Pearl out of his most precious
essence. He also created a bird named Angar. He placed the White Pearl
on the back of the bird, and dwelt on it for forty thousand years. On
the first day, Sunday, God created Melek Anzazîl, and he is Ṭâ’ûs-Melek,
the chief of all, On Monday he created Melek Dardâel, and he is Šeiḫ
Ḥasan. Tuesday he created Melek Israfel, and he is Šeiḫ

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Šams (ad-Dîn).
Wednesday he created Melek Miḫâel, and he is Šeiḫ Abû Bakr. Thursday he
created Melek Azrâel, and he is Sajad-ad-Dîn. Friday he created Melek
Šemnâel, and he is Naṣir-ad-Dîn. Saturday he created Melek Nurâel, and
he is Yadin (Faḫr-ad-Dîn). And he made Melek Ṭâ’ûs ruler over all. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[8](#fn_37)

After this God made the form of the seven heavens, the earth, the sun,
and the moon. But Faḫr-ad-Dîn created man and the animals, and birds and
beasts. He put them all in pockets of cloth, and came out of the Pearl
accompanied by the Angels. Then he shouted at the Pearl with a loud
voice. Thereupon the White Pearl broke up into four pieces, and from its
midst came out the water which became an ocean. The world was round, and
was not divided. Then he created Gabriel and the image of the bird. He
sent Gabriel to set the four corners. He also made a vessel and
descended in it for thirty thousand years. After this he came and dwelt
in Mount Lališ. Then he cried out at the world, and the sea became
solidified and the land appeared, but it began to shake. At this time he
[commanded](errata.htm#1) Gabriel to bring two pieces of the White
Pearl; one he placed beneath the earth, the other stayed at the gate of
heaven. He then placed in them the sun and the moon; and from the
scattered pieces of the White Pearl he created the stars which he hung
in heaven as ornaments. He also created fruit-bearing trees and plants
and mountains for ornaments to the earth. He created the throne over the
carpet. <span id="fr_38"></span>[9](#fn_38) Then the Great God said: "O
Angels, I will

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

create Adam and Eve; and from the essence of Adam shall proceed Šehar bn
Jebr, and of him a separate community shall appear upon the earth, that
of Azazîl, *i.e.*, that of Melek Ṭâ’ûs, which is the sect of the
Yezidis. Then he sent Šeiḫ ‘Adî bn Musâfir from the land of Syria, and
he came (and dwelt in Mount) Lališ. Then the Lord came down to the Black
Mountain. Shouting, he created thirty thousand Meleks, and divided them
into three divisions. They worshiped him for forty thousand years, when
he delivered them to Melek Ṭâ’ûs who went up with them to heaven. At
this time the Lord came down to the Holy Land (al-Ḳuds), and commanded
Gabriel to bring earth from the four comers of the world, earth, air,
fire, and water. He created it and put in it the spirit of his own
power, and called it Adam.

Then he commanded Gabriel to escort Adam into Paradise, and to tell him
that he could eat from all the trees but not of wheat. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[10](#fn_39) Here Adam remained for a hundred years.
Thereupon, Melek Ṭâ’ûs asked God how Adam could multiply and have
descendants if he were forbidden to eat of the grain. God answered, "I
have put the whole matter into thy hands." Thereupon Melek Ṭâ’ûs visited
Adam and said "Have you eaten of the grain?" He answered, "No, God
forbade me." Melek Ṭâ’ûs replied and said, "Eat of the grain and all
shall go better with thee." Then Adam ate of the grain and immediately
his belly was inflated. But Melek Ṭâ’ûs drove him out of the garden, and
leaving him, ascended into heaven. Now

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adam was troubled
because his belly was inflated, for he had no outlet. God therefore sent
a bird to him which pecked at his anus and made an outlet, and Adam was
relieved.

Now Gabriel was away from Adam for a hundred years. And Adam was sad and
weeping. Then God commanded Gabriel to create Eve from under the left
shoulder of Adam., Now it came to pass, after the creation of Eve and of
all the animals, that Adam and Eve quarreled over the question whether
the human race should be descended from him or her, for each wished to
be the sole begetter of the race. This quarrel originated in their
observation of the fact that among animals both the male and the female
were factors in the production of their respective species. After a long
discussion Adam and Eve agreed on this: each should cast his seed into a
jar, close it, and seal it with his own seal, and wait for nine months.
When they opened the jars at the completion of this period, they found
in Adam's jar two children, male and female. Now from these two our
sect, the Yezidis, are descended. In Eve's jar they found naught but
rotten worms emitting a foul odor. And God caused nipples to grow for
Adam that he might suckle the children that proceeded from his jar. This
is the reason why man has nipples.

After this Adam knew Eve, and she bore two children, male and female;
and from these the Jews, the Christians, the Moslems, and other nations
and sects are descended. But our first fathers are Šeth, Noah,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

and Enosh, the righteous ones, who were descended from Adam only.

It came to pass that trouble arose between a man and his wife, resulting
from the denial on the part of the woman that the man was her husband.
The man persisted in his claim that she was his wife. The trouble
between the two was settled, however, through one of the righteous men
of our sect, who decreed that at every wedding a drum and a pipe should
be played as a testimony to the fact that, such a man and such a woman
were married legally.

Then Melek Ṭâ’ûs came down to earth for our sect (*i.e.*, the Yezidis),
the created ones, and appointed kings for us, besides the kings of
ancient Assyria, Nisroch, who is Našir-ad-Dîn; Kamush, who is Melek
Fahr-ad-Dîn, and Artâmîs, who is Melek Šams-(ad-)Dîn. After this we had
two kings, Šabur (Sapor) First (224-272 A. D.) and Second (309-379), who
reigned one hundred and fifty years; and our amirs down to the present
day have been descended from their seed. But we hated four kings.

Before Christ came into this world our religion was paganism. King Ahab
was from among us. And the god of Ahab was called Beelzebub. Nowadays we
call him Pir Bub. We had a king in Babylon, whose name was Baḫtnasar;
another in Persia, whose name was Aḥšuraš; and still another in
Constantinople, whose name was Agriḳâlus. The Jews, the Christians, the
Moslems, and even the Persians, fought us; but they failed to subdue us,
for in the strength of the Lord

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

we prevailed against them. He teaches us the first and last science. And
one of his teachings is:

Before heaven and earth existed, God was on the sea, as we formerly
wrote you. He made himself a vessel and traveled in it in
*kunsiniyat* <span id="fr_40"></span>[11](#fn_40) of the seas, thus
enjoying himself in himself. He then created the White Pearl and ruled
over it for forty years. Afterward, growing angry at the Pearl, he
kicked it; and it was a great surprise to see the mountains formed out
of its cry; the hills out of its wonders; the heavens out of its smoke.
Then God ascended to heaven, solidified it, established it without
pillars. He then spat upon the ground, and taking a pen in hand, began
to write a narrative of all the creation.

In the beginning he created six gods from himself and from his light,
and their creation was as one lights a light from another light. And God
said, "Now I have created the heavens; let some one of you go up and
create something therein." Thereupon the second god ascended and created
the sun; the third, the moon; the fourth, the vault of heaven; the
fifth, the *farġ* (*i.e.*, the morning star); the sixth, paradise; the
seventh, hell. We have already told you that after this they created
Adam and Eve.

And know that besides the flood of Noah, there was another flood in this
world. Now our sect, the Yezidis, are descended from Na‘umi, an honored
person, king of peace. We call him Melek Miran. The other sects are
descended from Ham, who despised his father. The ship rested at a
village called ‘Ain Sifni, <span id="fr_41"></span>[12](#fn_41) distant

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

from Mosul about five parasangs. The cause of the first flood was the
mockery of those who were without, Jews, Christians, Moslems, and others
descended from Adam and Eve. We, on the other hand, are descended from
Adam only, as already indicated: This second flood came upon our sect,
the Yezidis. As the water rose and the ship floated, it came above Mount
Sinjar, <span id="fr_42"></span>[13](#fn_42) where it ran aground and
was pierced by a rock. The serpent twisted itself like a cake and
stopped the hole. Then the ship moved on and rested on Mount Judie.

Now the species of the serpent increased, and began to bite man and
animal. It was finally caught and burned, and from its ashes fleas were
created. From the time of the flood until now are seven thousand years.
In every thousand years one of the seven gods descends to establish
rules, statutes, and laws, after which he returns to his abode. While
below, he sojourns with us, for we have every kind of holy places. This
last time the god dwelt among us longer than any of the other gods who
came before him. He confirmed the saints. He spoke in the Kurdish
language. He also illuminated Mohammed, the prophet of the Ishmaelites,
who had a servant named Mu‘âwiya, When God saw that Mohammed was not
upright before him, he afflicted him with a headache. The prophet then
asked his servant to shave his head, for Mu‘âwiya knew how to shave. He
shaved his master in haste, and with some difficulty. As a result, he
cut his head and made it bleed. Fearing that the blood might drop

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

to the ground, Mu‘âwiya licked it with his tongue. Whereupon Mohammed
asked, "What are you doing, Mu‘âwiya?" He replied, "I licked thy blood
with my tongue, for I feared that it might drop to the ground." Then
Mohammed said to him, "You have sinned, O Mu‘âwiya, you shall draw a
nation after you. You shall oppose my sect." Mu‘âwiya answered and said,
"Then I will not enter the world; I will not marry!'

It came to pass that after some time God sent scorpions upon Mu‘âwiya,
which bit him, causing his face to break out with poison. Physicians
urged him to marry lest he die. Hearing this, he consented. They brought
him an old woman, eighty years of age. in order that no child might be
born. Mu‘âwiya knew his wife, and in the morning she appeared a woman of
twenty-five, by the power of the great God. And she conceived and bore
our god Yezid. But the foreign sects, ignorant of this fact, say that
our god came from heaven, [despised](errata.htm#3) and driven out by the
great God. For this reason they blaspheme him. In this they have erred.
But we, the Yezidi sect, believe this not, for we know that he is one of
the above-mentioned seven gods. We know the form of his person and his
image. It is the form of a cock which we possess. None of us is allowed
to utter his name, nor anything that resembles it, such as *šeitân*
(Satan), *ḳaitân* (cord), *šar* (evil), *šat* (river), and the like. Nor
do we pronounce *mal‘ûn* (accursed), or *la‘anat* (curse), or
*na‘al* <span id="fr_43"></span>[14](#fn_43) (horseshoe), or any word
that has a similar sound. All these are forbidden us out of respect

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

for him. So *ḫass* (lettuce) is debarred. We do not eat it,. for it
sounds like the name of our prophetess Ḫassiah. Fish is prohibited, in
honor of Jonah the prophet. Likewise deer, for deer are the sheep of one
of our prophets. The peacock is forbidden to our Šeiḫ and his disciples,
for the sake of our Ṭâ’ûs. Squash also is debarred. It is forbidden to
pass water while standing, or to dress up while sitting down, or to go
to the toilet room, or to take a bath according to the custom of the
people. <span id="fr_44"></span>[15](#fn_44) Whosoever does contrary to
this is an infidel. Now the other sects, Jews, Christians, Moslems, and
others, know not these things, because they dislike Melek Ṭâ’ûs. He,
therefore, does not teach them, nor does he visit them. But he dwelt
among us; he delivered to us the doctrines, the rules, and the
traditions, all of which have become an inheritance, handed down from
father to son. After this, Melek Ṭâ’ûs returned to heaven.

One of the seven gods made the *sanjaḳs* <span
id="fr_45"></span>[16](#fn_45) (standards) and gave them to Solomon the
wise. After his death our kings received them. And when our god, the
barbarian Yezîd, was born, he received these *sanjaḳs* with great
reverence, and bestowed them upon our sect. Moreover, he composed two
songs in the Kurdish language to be sung before the *sanjaḳas* in this
language, which is the most ancient and acceptable one. The meaning of
the song is this:

Hallelujah to the jealous God.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As they sing it,
they march before the *sanjaḳs* with timbrels and pipes. These *sanjaḳs*
remain with our emir, who sits on the throne of Yezid. When these are
sent away, the *ḳawwâls* assemble with the emir, and the great general,
the šeiḫ, who is the representative of Šeiḫ Nasir-ad-Dîn, *i.e.*,
Nisroch, god of the ancient Assyrians. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[17](#fn_46) They visit the *sanjaḳs*. Then they send
each *sanjaḳ* in care of a *ḳawwâl* to its own place; one to Ḥalataneye,
one to Aleppo, one to Russia, and one to Sinjar. These *sanjaḳs* are
given to four *ḳawwâls* by contract. Before they are sent, the; are
brought to Šeiḫ ‘Adî's tomb, where they are baptized amid great singing
and dancing. After this each of the contractors takes a load of dust
from Šeiḫ ‘Adî's -tomb. He fashions it into small balls, each about the
size of a gall nut, and carries them along with the *sanjaḳs* to give
them away as blessings. When he approaches a town, he sends. a crier
before him to prepare the people to accept the *ḳawwâl* and his *sanjaḳ*
with respect and honor. All turn out in fine clothes, carrying incense.
The women shout, and all together sing joyful songs. The *ḳawwâl* is
entertained by the people with whom he stops. The rest give him silver
presents, everyone according to his means.

Besides these four *sanjaḳs*, there are three others, seven in all.
These three are kept in a sacred place for purposes of healing. Two of
them, however, remain with Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and the third remains in the
village of Baḥazanie, which is distant from Mosul about four hours.
Every four months these *ḳawwâls* 

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

travel about. One of them must travel in the province of the emir. They
travel in a fixed order, differing each year. Every time he goes out,
the traveler must cleanse himself with water made sour with *summaḳ*
(sumac) and anoint himself with an oil. He must also light a lamp at
each idol that has a chamber. This is the law that pertains to the
*sanjaḳs*.

The first day of our new year is called the *Serṣâlie*, *i.e.*, the
beginning of a year. It falls on the Wednesday of the first week in
April <span id="fr_47"></span>[18](#fn_47). On that day there must be
meat in every family. The wealthy must slaughter a lamb or an ox; the
poor must kill a chicken or something else. These should be cooked on
the night, the morning of which is Wednesday, New Year's day. With the
break of day the food should be blessed. On the first day of the year
alms should be given at tombs where the souls of the dead lie.

Now the girls, large and small, are to gather from the fields flowers of
every kind that have a reddish color. They are to make them into
bundles, and, after keeping them three days, they are to hang them on
the doors <span id="fr_48"></span>[19](#fn_48) as a sign of the baptism
of the people living in the houses. In the morning all doors will be
seen well decorated with red lilies. But women are to feed the poor and
needy who pass by and have no food; this is to be done at the graves.
But as to the *ḳawwâls*, they are to go around the tombs with timbrels,
singing in the Kurdish language. For so doing they are entitled to
money. On the above-mentioned day of *Serṣâlie* no instruments of joy
are to be played, because

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God is sitting on
the throne (arranging decrees for the year), <span
id="fr_49"></span>[20](#fn_49) and commanding all the wise and the
neighbors to come to him, And when he tells them that he will come down
to earth with song and praise, all arise and rejoice before him and
throw upon each the squash of the feast. Then God seals them with his
own seal. And the great God gives a sealed decision to the god who is to
come down. He, moreover, grants him power to do all things according to
his own will. God prefers doing good and charity to fasting and praying.
The worship of any idol, such as Seyed-ad-Dîn or Šeiḫ Šams is better
than fasting. Some layman is to give a banquet to a *kôchak* after the
fasting of the latter forty days, whether it be in summer or in winter.
If he (the *kôchak*) says this entertainment is an alms given to the
*sanjaḳ*, then he is not released from his fasting. When it comes to
pass that the yearly tithe-gatherer finds that the people have not fully
paid their tithes, he whips them till they become sick, and some even
die. The people are to give the *kôchaks* money to fight the Roman army,
and thus save the sect (Yezidis) from the wrath of the man of the year.

Every Friday a load of gifts is to be brought as an offering to an idol.
At that time, a servant is to call the people aloud from the roof of a
*kôchak's* house, saying, it is the call of the prophet to a feast. All
are to listen reverently and respectfully; and, on hearing it, every one
is to kiss the ground and the stone on which he happens to lean.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

It is our law that no *ḳawwâl* shall pass a razor over his face. Our law
regarding marriage is that at the time of the wedding a loaf of bread
shall be taken from the house of a *kôchak* and be divided between the
bride and the bridegroom, each to cat one-half. They may, however, eat
some dust from Šeiḫ ‘Adî's tomb instead of the bread for a blessing.
Marriage in the month of April is forbidden, for it is the first month
of the year. This rule, however, does not apply to *ḳawwâls*; they may
marry during this month. No layman is allowed to marry a *kôchak's*
daughter. Everyone is to take a wife from his own class. But our emir
may have for a wife any one whom he pleases to love. A layman may marry
between the ages of ten and eighty; he may take for a wife one woman
after another for a period of one year. On her way to the house of the
bridegroom, a bride must visit the shrine of every idol she may happen
to pass; even if she pass a Christian church, she must do the same. On
her arrival at the bridegroom's house, he must hit her with a small
stone in token of the fact that she must be under his authority.
Moreover, a loaf of bread must be broken over her head as a sip to her
that she must love the poor and needy. No Yezidi may sleep with his wife
on the night the morning of which is Wednesday, and the night the
morning of which is Friday. Whosoever does contrary to this commandment
is an infidel. If a man steal the wife of his neighbor, or his own
former wife, or her sister or mother, he is not obliged to give her
dowry, for

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

she is the booty of his hand. Daughters may not inherit their father's
wealth. A young lady may be sold as an acre of land is sold. If she
refuses to be married, then she must redeem herself by paying her father
a sum of money earned by her service and the labor of her hand.

Here ends Kitâb Reš, which is followed by several stories, some of which
are told secretly, some openly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37:8](sby11.htm#fr_37) In Menant's
[*Yezidis*](errata.htm#2), 48, the names of these seven angels are
somewhat differently given. According to Mohammedan tradition Zazil or
Azazil was the original name of the devil.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[37:9](sby11.htm#fr_38) By the "throne" here is
meant the throne of God, and by the "carpet" the earth; cf. Sura 60:
131.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[38:10](sby11.htm#fr_39) According to Moslem
belief, wheat was the forbidden fruit; see Baiḍâwi on Sura, ii, 33.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41:11](sby11.htm#fr_40) <span id="page_84">p.
84</span> Kunsiniyat is an obscure term.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41:12](sby11.htm#fr_41) ‘Ain Sifni is about
five miles from Ba‘adrie; cf. Layard, *Nineveh*, I, 272.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42:13](sby11.htm#fr_42) Yaḳût (III, 158)
mentions a similar tradition.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43:14](sby11.htm#fr_43) These are indications
of Mohammedan influence and censorship, for no Yezidi will ever write in
his sacred book such words as Šeitân, Šar, etc.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44:15](sby11.htm#fr_44) That is, those of other
religions.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[44:16](sby11.htm#fr_45) Sanjaḳ is a Turkish
word, meaning banner; it is the name by which the Yezidis generally
designate the sacred image of Melek Ṭâ’ûs.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[45:17](sby11.htm#fr_46) See note 27.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[46:18](sby11.htm#fr_47) The Harranian New Year
fell on the first day of April, and on the sixth day they slaughtered an
ox and ate it; cf. Fihrist, 322.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[46:19](sby11.htm#fr_48) A similar practice is
found among the Parsees of India, who hang a string of leaves across the
entrances to their houses at the beginning of every New Year.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[47:20](sby11.htm#fr_49) According to Babylonian
mythology, human destiny was decreed on the New Year's day and sealed on
the tenth day; cf. the *Hibbert Journal*, V, January, 1907. And
according to Talmud (Mišna, Roš hašana, 1:2), New Year's is the most
important judgment day, on which all creatures pass for judgment before
the Creator. On this day three books are opened, wherein the fate of the
wicked, the righteous, and those of the intermediate class are recorded.
Hence prayer and works of repentance are performed at the New Year from
the first to the tenth days, that an unfavorable decision might be
averted; cf. *Jewish Encyclopedia*, "Penitential Day." R. Akiba says:
"On New Year day all men are judged; and the decree is sealed on the Day
of Atonement;" cf. ibid., "Day of [Judgment](errata.htm#4)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix to Part I](sby12)
