[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby22)  [Next](sby24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

## CHAPTER II

## THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS IN YEZIDISM

Although comparatively few in number, ignorant, and practically without
a literature of any sort, the followers of Yezid are not without
definitely formulated doctrines of faith which bind them together as a
sect, and distinguish them from every other religious body. They cherish
two fundamental beliefs. They believe in a deity of the first degree,
God; and in a deity of the second degree, who, they seem to think, is
composed of three persons in one, Melek Ṭâ’ûs, Šeiḫ ‘Adî and
Yezid. <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_131)

### I

### THE YEZIDI VIEW OF GOD

It is not easy to discover whether the conception of God, which exists
to-day among the Yezidis, however shadowy, has come from Mohammedan or
Christian sources, or whether it comes from that primitive stage where
the worship of God and of inferior deities exists side by side. One
thing, however, is apparent, and that is that the Yezidi notion of God
does not seem to be influenced by any "positive religion"

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

which traces its origin to the teachings of a great religious founder,
who spoke as the organ of a divine revelation, and deliberately departed
from the traditional religion. The Yezidis' idea of God is rather an
image left on their mind than the result of any reflection. Hence,
simple as it is, this conception is not so easy to define. The notion,
so prominent in Greek philosophy, of God as an existence absolute and
complete in himself, unchangeable, outside of time and space, etc., is
unknown in Yezidi theology. So also the theocratic conception of Jehovah
in Judaism is foreign to the dogma of this sect. Not even the Mohammedan
idea of God as an absolute ruler, and the distinctive notion which the
Christians have of God as Christ-like in character, are to be found in
the religion of the devil-worshippers. And we have accustomed ourselves
to think of the Supreme Being in these conventional terms. There is one
element, however, which may be traced to Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, namely, the belief in a personal God. But Yezidism holds that
this deity is only the creator of the universe and not its sustainer.
Its maintenance, according to this system, is left to the seven gods.
Another element which may be said to be a remnant of some other
religions is the idea of a transcendent God. But in this point, as in
the other, the notion of transcendentalism in the religion of the
devil-worshippers is not of the same degree as that of the other
religions The former conceives of the Almighty as retiring far away, and
as having nothing to do with

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the affairs of the world, except once a year, on New Year's day, when he
sits on his throne, calls the gods unto him, and delivers the power into
the hands of [the](errata.htm#15) god who is to descend to the earth. To
sum up, the Yezidis' conception of a personal God is transcendental and
static of the extreme type. In this it resembles somewhat the Platonic
idea of the absolute. They call God in the Kurdish Khuda, and believe
that he manifested himself in three different forms; in the form of a
bird, Melek Ṭâ’ûs; in the form of an old man, Šeiḫ ‘Adî; and in the form
of a young man, Yezid. They do not seem to offer him a direct prayer or
sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[145:1](sby23.htm#fr_132) <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> P. Anastase: *Al-Mašrik*, Vol. II, p. 151;
Bedrus Efendi Ar-Riḍwani, his letter to A. N. Andrus, April 22, 1887.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Deity of the Second Degree: 1. Melek Ṭâ’ûs](sby24)
