[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby20)  [Next](sby22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### IV

### THE DOGMATIC VIEW OF MOHAMMEDAN SCHOLARS

While the Yezidi myth regards the sect as descendants of Adam, of Yezîd
bn Mu‘awiya, or of a colony from the north, while the Christian
tradition of the East traces them to a Christian origin, while among the
western orientalists some say that they were founded by Yezîd bn
Mu‘awiya, others that they are of Persian origin, etc., the Mohammedan
dogmatics, on the other hand, assert that they are *Murtaddoon*, that
is, apostates from Islam. To understand the significance of this term, I
must mention the several words used for those who are considered as
infidels according to Mohammedan theology. *Kafir* is one who hides or
denies the truth; *Mushrik* is one who ascribes companions to God;
*Mulhid* is one who has deviated from the truth; *Zandik* is one who
asserts his belief in the doctrine of dualism; *Munafik* is one who
secretly disbelieves in the mission of Mohammed; *Dahri* is an atheist;
*Watani* is a pagan or idolator; and finally *Murtadd* is one who
apostasizes from [Islam](errata.htm#13). The Yezidis are put in the
category of those who, after once accepting the religion of Islam, later
rejected it.

One author, of those to whose writings I had access, in an explicit
statement regards these people as apostates. I refer to
Amin-al-‘Omari-al Mausili (of Mosul). After praising Šeiḫ ‘Adî, the
Mosulian goes

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

on to say, "God tried him (*i.e.*, ‘Adî) by a calamity, to wit, the
appearance of Al-Murtaddoon, called the Yezidis because they pretended
to have been descended from Yezid. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[43](#fn_113) Another Mohammedan scholar that
mentions these people is Yasin Al-Ḫatib-al-‘Omari-al Mausili. Writing on
Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and praising him as the former writer does, he says, "He was
versed in the knowledge of the divine law. God tried him by a calamity
by raising up the Yezidis, who pretend that this Šeiḫ is God, and who
have made his tomb the object of their pilgrimage. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[44](#fn_114)

While these authors throw some light on the subject that the sect in
question derives its appellation from a historic person, they leave us
entirely in the dark as to who that person was, as the Arab historians
mention many prominent men who bore the name Yezid.

This obscurity regarding the person of the founder of the sect is made
clear by one whose work is equally, if not more, authoritative than that
of any other Mohammedan scholar on matters pertaining to religious and
philosophical sects. This authority is Mohammed Aš-Šahrastani. He is the
only Mohammedan writer that I could reach that, in a clear language,
traces this most interesting sect to its founder.

"The Yezidis are the followers of Yezîd bn Unaisa, who \[said that he\]
kept friendship with the first Muhakkama before the Azariḳa, and he
separated himself from those who followed after them with the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

exception of Al-Abaḍia, for with these he kept friendship. He believed
that God would send an apostle from among the Persians and would reveal
to him a book that is already written in heaven, and would reveal the
whole (book) to him at one time, <span
id="fr_116"></span>[45](#fn_115)and as a result he would leave the law
of Mohammed, the Chosen One, may God bless and save him!--and follow the
religion of the Sabians mentioned in the Koran. But these are not the
Sabians who are found in Ḥaran and Wasit. But Yezid kept friendship with
the people of the book who recognized the Chosen One as a prophet, even
though they did not accept his (Mohammed's) religion. And he said that
the followers of the ordinances are among those who agree with him; but
that others are hiding the truth and give companions to god and that
every sin, small or great, is idolatry. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[46](#fn_116)

It is clear, then, that Aš-Šahrastani finds the religious origin of this
interesting people in the person of Yezîd bn Unaisa. He calls them his
*Aseḥab*, *i.e.*, his followers, a term by which he designates the
relation between a sect and its originator. At-Ḥara<u>t</u>iyah he
describes as "Aseḥab al-Hare<u>t</u>," and "Al Ḥafeziyah Asehab Hafez,"
and so on. We are to understand, therefore, that to the knowledge of the
writer, bn Unaisa is the founder of the Yezidi sect, which took its name
from him.

Mohammed Aš-Šahrastani states also, in a logical way, the theological
views of the head of the Yezidis. Yezid, he says, is on the positive
side, in sympathy

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

with the first Muḥakkamah before the Azariḳa. Now, the first Muhakkamah
is an appellative applied to the Muslim schismatics called Al-Ḫawarij,
because they disallowed the judgment of the Hakaman, *i.e.*, the two
judges, namely ‘Abd Mousa al-Aš-‘Aree and Am ibn-al-‘As; and said that
judgment belongs only to God. And Al-Azariḳa were a heretical Muslim
sect called Al-Ḫawarij or Ḥeroriyah, so named in relation to Nafi‘
ibn-Al-Azraḳ. They asserted that ‘Ali committed an act of infidelity by
submitting his case to arbitration, and that the slaying of him by Ibn
Muljama was just; and they declare that the companions (of the Prophet)
were guilty of infidelity. Yezid moreover, is said to have been in
sympathy with Al-Abaḍiyah, a sect founded by ‘Abd-Allah Ibn Ibad, who
taught that if a man commits a kabirah or great sin he is an infidel and
not a believer.

It is evident, therefore, that according to this exposition the Yezid in
question was one of Al-Ḫawarij, and their principle is expressly
attributed to him: every sin, small or great, is idolatry. According to
this it might be inferred that the Yezidis were originally a Ḫarijite
sub-sect. They still hold to the Ḫarijite principle. (Cf. their position
to the Ottoman Government, pp. [71](sby13.htm#page_71)-74). As we said
some Mohammedan writers other than Ashahr-Astani also (pp.
[118](#page_118)-119) regard them as apostate Moslems, Aš-Šahrastani
himself classes them with the Moslem heretics. Now Al-Ḫawarij were the
first to rebel against ‘Ali at Ḥaroora, a certain suburb of Al-Koofa,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

from which it is distant two miles. They are called also Al-Ḥeroriyah,
because they first assembled there .and accepted the doctrine that
government belongs only to God. And one sect of Al-Ḫawarij was
An-Nâṣibiyah who made it a matter of religious obligation to bear a
violent hatred to ‘Ali. Such is the place of bn Unaisa among the Moslem
heretics, but this is only one side of his religious system. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[47](#fn_117)

There is another side to Yezid's doctrine. He held that God would send
an apostle from Persia, to whom he would reveal a book already written
in heaven. This apostle was to be an opponent of the prophet of Islam in
that he would leave, Mohammed's religion and follow that of the Sabians
mentioned in the Koran. These are referred to by Mohammed, together with
the Christians and the Jews, in three different places in the Book. One
such reference is in Surah 2, 59: "They who believe as well as Jews,
Christians and Sabeans, whoever believeth in God and in the Last Day,
and do that which is right, shall have their reward with their Lord!'

Surah 5, 73, also:

"They who believe as well as Jews, Christians and Sabeans, whoever of
them believe in God and the last Day, and do what is right, on them
shall no fear come; neither shall they be put to grief."

And Surah 22. 17:

"They who believe as well as Jews. Sabeans and Christians and the
Magians, and those who join gods

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

with God, verily God shall decide between them on the Day of
Resurrection."

 

In these passages Mohammed seems to regard the Sabians of the Koran as
believers in the true God and in the resurrection. And in Surah 22, 17,
he seems to distinguish them from Magians and polytheists. Hence we are
to infer that the Apostle of whom Yezid bn Unaisa says that he will come
from the land of the ’Ajam (Persian), will identify himself with the
religion of the Sabians. This implies that he will believe in the true
God and in the Day of Resurrection. But from some Arab writers we learn
more of these Ṣabian beliefs than the Prophet of Islam has mentioned.
According to some the Ṣabians were a sect of unbelievers who worshipped
the stars secretly, and openly professed to be Christians. According to
others, they were of the religion of Ṣabi, the son of Seth, the son of
Adam; while others said they resembled the Christians, except that their
*ḳiblah* was toward the South, from whence the wind blows. In the
*Kamûs* it ii said that they were of the religion of Noah. Al-Baiḍawi
says that some assert that they were worshippers of angels, and that
others say that they are the worshippers of stars. Al-Bertuni <span
id="fr_119"></span>[48](#fn_118) calls the Manichaeans of Samarḳand
Sabians. Bar Hebraeus <span id="fr_120"></span>[49](#fn_119) asserts
that the religion of the Sabians is the same as that of the ancient
Chaldeans. In commenting on Surah 2, 59, Zamaḫšari (Al-Keššaf) says that
the name Ṣabian comes from a root meaning one

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

who has departed from one religion to another religion, and that the
Ṣabians were those who departed from Judaism and Christianity and
worshipped angels. On this same verse, Šams Ad-Din Mohammed Al-Ḥarrani
(Jami Al-Bijan fi Tafsir Al-Koran) says: "The Sabians, *i.e.*, those who
departed from one religion to another religion, stood between the
Magians and the Jews and the Christians without having any revealed
religion of their own. According to some they were people of the Book;
according to others they were worshippers of angels; while others say,
they believed in one God but followed no Prophet." This same commentator
on Surah 5, 73, says: "The Ṣabians were a Christian sect; some say that
they were worshippers of angels; others assert that they worshipped God
alone, but had no revealed religion." On this same verse Zamaḫšari
remarks, "The Ṣabians were those who departed from all religions."

Now what Mohammed Aš-Šahrastani really means by the Ṣabians of the
Koran, I am unable to state. In his general discussion of Ṣabianism
however (vol. 2, pp. 201-250), he seems to speak of two main Ṣabian
sects. He refers to one together with the ancient philosophers; and
declares that the Ṣabians followed rational ordinances and judgments
which originally they may have derived from some prophetic authority,
but that they denied all prophecy. The philosophers followed their own
devices and took their system from no prophetic source. The authority we
are quoting

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

calls this sect "the original Sabian sect," and says that it followed
Seth and Enoch. In another place (vol. 1, p. 24) he writes, "The Jews
and the Christians follow a revealed Book; the Magians and the
Manichæans, a like Book; the original Ṣabian sect, ordinances and
judgments, but accepts no Book; the original philosophers, the atheists,
the star-worshippers, the idol-worshippers, and the Brahmans believe in
none of these."

The other main Ṣabian sect is mentioned together with the Jews, the
Christians, and the Moslems. The difference between these religious
bodies, according to Aš-Šahrastani, is that "the Sabians do not follow
the Law (of God) or Islam; the Christians and the Jews believe in these,
but do not accept the Law (religion) of Mohammed; while the Moslems
believe in them all.

Aš-Šahrastani, moreover, derives the name Ṣabian (p. 203) from a root
meaning one who turns aside, deviates; and declares that the Ṣabians
were those who turned aside from the statutes of God), and deviated from
the path of the prophets. He seems to regard the notion that man is
incapable of approaching God, and that therefore he is in constant need
of intercessors and mediators, as a controlling idea in Ṣabianism. This
belief, the writer points out, has manifested itself in three different
forms: in the veneration of angels among what he calls the followers of
angels; the adoration of stars among the followers of stars; and in the
worship of idols among the followers of idols, heathens (pp. 203, 244).
The

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

last two, we are told, are polytheists, and referred to in the Koranic
statement:

("When Abraham said to his father, Azar, 'Dost thou take idols for
gods?--Surah 6, 74. Said be--Abraham--'Do ye serve what ye hew
out?--Surah 37, 93. When he--Abraham--said to his father, 'Oh my sir!
why dost thou worship what can neither hear nor see nor avail thee
aught?--Surah 19, 43.")

And in the following references:

("And when the night overshadowed him he saw a star and said, 'This is
my Lord! And when he saw the moon beginning to rise he said, 'This is my
Lord! And when he saw the sun beginning to rise he said, 'This is my
Lord, this is greatest of all.'")--Surah 6, 76, 77, 78.

But Mohammed Aš-Šahrastani makes mention of another Ṣabian sect which he
names Al-Ḫarbâniyah (pp. 248-250). Its distinctive feature. he says, is
the belief that the Creator indwelleth in other beings. They held that
God is one in his essence, but many in his appearances. He dwells in the
seven planets, and in the earthly beings that are, rational, good, and
excellent in righteousness. Human body is his temple; he may abide
within it and live and move as a man. He is too good, we read, to create
anything evil. God is the source of good, and evil is either an
accidental and necessary thing, or related to the evil source. They
believed also, our authority informs us, in the transmigration of souls,
and taught that the Resurrection of which the prophets had spoken was
only the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

end of one generation and the beginning of another here on earth. This
doctrine, the Mohammedan critics affirm, is alluded to in the passages:

("Does he promise you that when ye are dead, and have become dust and
bones, that then ye will be brought forth? Away, away with what ye are
promised,--there is only our life in the world! We die and we live and
we shall not be raised.")--Surah 23, 37-39.

Now I cannot say which of the Ṣabian sects are those that "are mentioned
in the Koran," which Yezîd bn Unaisa says, the Persian Apostle will
follow; nor can I say which are those that "are found in Ḥarran and
Wasit." One thing, however, is clear: according to Aš-Šahrastani the
Ṣabians of the Koran differ in their faith from those of Ḥarran. The
Ḥarranians were remnants of the old heathen of Mesopotamia; they were
polytheistic, and star-worship hid the chief place in their religion, as
in the worship of the older Babylonian and Syrian faiths. They were
regarded as such by the Mohammedans, so that under Al-Mamûm, they
sheltered themselves under the name, Sabians, that they might be
entitled to the toleration which the Sabians of the Koran have because
they were considered among the people of the Book. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[50](#fn_120) Another thing to be noticed is that
there is a close resemblance between the belief of the Ṣabian sect which
Aš-Šahrastani calls Al-Ḫarbaniyah and that of the Yezidi sect.

Such is, in the main, the religion of the Persian

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Apostle and is
logically the religion of Yezîd bn Unaisa which announces the coming of
such a messenger. We may conclude, therefore, that the founder of the
Yezidi sect believed in God and in the Day of Resurrection; that he,
perhaps, honored the angels and the stars, and that he was neither
polytheistic nor a true believer in the Prophet of Islam. This last
point is referred to also explicitly in the statement quoted, that Yezid
associated himself with those of the people of the Book who recognized
Mohammed as a prophet though they did not become his followers. This is
the negative aspect, so to speak, of bn Unaisa's religious views. He is
also said to have claimed that the followers of the ordinances <span
id="fr_122"></span>[51](#fn_121) agreed with him. This statement tends
to indicate that he might have accepted some phases of the Muslim faith.
And the fact that he belonged to *Al-Hawarij* implies that he was one of
those who were "condemning and rejecting ‘Ali for his scandalous crime
of parleying with Muawiya, the first of the Omayyid line, and submitting
his claims to arbitration." Such are in brief the fundamental elements
in the religious system of one who may be held responsible for the rise
of the sect in question.

There can be no doubt, it seems to me, that the Yezidis are the
followers of Yezîd bn Unaisa. The statement of our authority, Mohammed
Aš-Šahrastani (see pp. [119](#page_119)-120), is so clear that it can
bear no other interpretation. And what is far more important, it comes
from the pen of one who is considered of the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

highest authority among the Arab scholars on questions relating to
philosophical and religious sects. In his bibliographical work Ibn
Ḫallikan speaks of his profound scholarship in the highest terms:
"Aš-Šahrastani, a dogmatic theologian of the ‘Ašarite sect, was
distinguished as an Imam and a doctor of the law. He displayed the
highest abilities as a jurisconsult. The Kitab al-Milal wa n-Niḥal
(treatise on religions and sects) is one of his works on scholastic
theology. He remained without in equal in that branch of science." Now,
Mohammed Aš-Šahrastani (A. H. 467-549) A. D. 1074-1133 was a
contemporary of ‘Adî (A. H. 465-555) A. D. 1072-1162, yet he makes no
allusion to him when he refers to the rise of this most interesting
sect; nor does he make mention of any other supposed founder except the
one he records. For these reasons I accept the historical assertion of
this distinguished author.

I am of the opinion, therefore, that the Yezidis received their name
from Yezid bn Unaisa, their founder as a kharijite sub sect in the early
period of Islam; that, attracted by Šeiḫ ‘Adî's reputation, they joined
his movement and took him for their chief religious teacher; that in the
early history of the sect and of ‘Adî many Christians, Persians, and
Moslems united with it; and that large survivals or absorptions of pagan
beliefs or customs are to be found in modern Yezidism. In other words
the actual religion of the Yezidis is syncretism in which it is easy to
recognize

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yezidi, Christian,
Moslem, especially sufism and pagan elements.

Like the master they believe in the true God and in the Resurrection,
honor the angels and the stars, disbelieve in the mission of Mohammed
and ignore ‘Ali, regard every sin, small or great, as idolatry or
infidelity, and expect the appearance of a prophet from Persia. The fact
of their connection with such a religious leader explains the reason why
they are hated by both the Sunnites and the Shiites. The followers of bn
My‘awiya can only be despised by the latter; but the believer such a
heretical one as the son of Unaisa are necessarily condemned by the
former also. For he was, as I have, already stated, anti-Mohammed and
anti-‘Ali. And it is worth remembering also that the fourth Calif is
more honored among the Moslems of Persia than his son Husein is; and
consequently any contemptuous attitude toward the father will give rise
to more bitter feeling on the part of his followers than the murder of
the son would occasion.

There is one question, however, which does not appear to be very easy to
answer; namely, how the Yezidis came to trace their origin to Yezîd bn
Mu‘awiya and not to Yezîd bn Unaisa. Three explanations may be given.
One is that their ignorance led them to mistake the former for the
latter, as they have identified many of their šeiḫs with angels and
deities. Among ignorant people, as these are, without record and without
any one who can read, the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

occasion of such an error is not strange. Another answer is that they
intentionally made the identification in order to escape the persecution
of the Sunnites, among whom most of them lived. Though specious, this
idea is not tenable, for it is not their habit to deny their origin for
the sake of safety. Even in that case, they would still be hated by the
Shiites. The third theory is that they have a notion that they are
descended from a noble personage, and the second Calif being such a
personage, their ignorance led them to take him for their founder. And
the identity of the two names, of course, helped much toward the
formation of the legend.

It is to be noticed that the religion of this Yezid contained, from its
inception, a fundamental doctrine which appealed to the pagans of Persia
more than it did to Al-jahaleen of Arabia. In its very structure it
insulted the latter country by despising its prophet. On the other hand,
it expressed its sympathy with a prophet from Persia and with his
religion. This declaration magnified Persia and its inhabitants and gave
them preëminence, thereby making an impression on the attitude of the
people toward Yezidism. Therefore they looked on it not as a foreign but
as a native cult. The entertaining of such a view, consequently, led
many fire, or devil-worshippers and the followers of Zoroastrianism to
embrace the new religion (Al-mašrik, vol. 2, p. 35). And if the
predicted teacher arose, we can imagine the great success which he must
have had among his countrymen.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This fact not only
accounts for the existence of traces of old Persian religion, but it
gives the reason why the Kurdish predominates over the Arab element in
Yezidism.

The new sect appears to have existed as a very loose organization after
the death of its founder: this looseness put them in a condition to
follow any one who would exhibit some qualifications for leadership.
Therefore, when they heard about ‘Adî they naturally flocked to him. And
it is very likely that, entertaining the idea of a coming prophet as
they still do, they might have thought him the promised one. What might
have added to the confirmation of this notion was his fame as a saint,
to whom a number of miracles were attributed. Even the lions and the
serpents which lived in his neighborhood and paid him frequent visits
were endowed, it is said, with supernatural sweetness.

From what we know of ‘Adî's movement, we have sufficient reason to
conclude that many Moslems and Christians followed him. The historians
of both faiths bear witness to the fact that ‘Adî's reputation was
widespread, and that people of every condition followed him (see pp.
[111](sby20.htm#page_111)-115). The Nestorian bishop of Arbela, whom
Yasin Al-‘Omari quotes (see [p. 114](sby20.htm#page_114)) asserts that
innumerable multitudes flocked to him, deplores the situation of the
Christian church resulting from this uprising, and complains of the
possession by the šeiḫ of a monastery belonging to his denomination.
Moreover, as has been shown, there

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

exist among the Yezidis certain Moslem and Christian practices which
cannot be accounted for on any other ground, since, so far as we know
their character, they make no compromise in matters of religion.

Not only Yezidi, Persian, Moslem, and Christian elements are to be found
in modern Yezidism, but there are many remains of the old pagan
religions which find expression in the devil-worshippers of to-day. Such
is the notion of the sacredness of the number seven, an idea which
belongs to the common stock of the ancient inhabitants of Mesopotamia.
The Yezidis have seven sanjaks, each has seven burners; their
[cosmogony](errata.htm#14) shows that God created seven angels or gods;
their principal prayer is the appeal to God through seven šeiḫs; the
sceptre engraved on the front of the temple of their great saint has
seven branches. This reminds us at once of the Ṣabians who adored seven
gods or angels who directed the course of seven planets; the seven days
of the week were dedicated to their respective deities. Moreover, we
note in the Babylonian-Assyrian poem, the seven gates through which
Ištar descended to the land without return. Likewise, the number seven
played an important part in the religious system of Israel.

Further, like the Ḥarranians, the modern *Šatan-parast* worship the sun
and the moon at their rising and setting. The sun was worshipped also in
Canaan, I Sam. 6: 9. The horses of the sun were worshipped in the temple
at Jerusalem, II Kings 25: 5, 11. The

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

worship of the host of heaven (the sun, the moon, the planets), were
found in Judea. In Babylon, there were at least two shrines to sun-god
Šamas, one at Sippar, and the other at Larsa.

Other survivals of the ancient religions found in Yezidism are the
worship of birds (see [p. 150](sby24.htm#page_150)); the special
importance attached to the New Year because of its bearing on individual
welfare by reason of the good or evil decision of the gods rendered them
(see pp. [46](sby11.htm#page_46), [174](sby28.htm#page_174)); and the
belief in occurrences of nuptials in the heavens (see [p.
174](sby28.htm#page_174)).

Moreover, many religious beliefs of the Pre-Islamic Arabs survive among
the modern Yezidis. Such is the belief in sacred wells in connection
with sanctuaries found in all parts of the Semitic region, the most
conspicuous of which is that of Mecca. Gifts were cast into this holy
water of Zamzam, as they were cast into the sacred wells of other
places. When the grandfather of Mohammed ‘Abd Al-Muttalib cleaned out
the well, he found two golden gazelles and, a number of swords. The
water of such holy springs was believed to possess healing power, and
was carried home by pilgrims, as the water of Zamzam now is (Yakut I,
434). <span id="fr_123"></span>[52](#fn_122) An impure person,
furthermore, dare not approach the sacred waters. A woman in her
uncleanness was afraid for her children's sake to bathe in the holy
water at the sanctuary of Dusares. According to Ibn Hišam "A woman who
adopts Islam breaks with the heathen god by purifying herself in this
pool." This was taken to mean that her

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

act was a breach of the ritual of the spot. And all the pilgrims changed
their clothes when they entered the sacred precinct. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[53](#fn_123)

Another common heathen practice in the time of Al-jahliya was the
worship of holy trees. According to Tabari there was a date-palm tree at
Nejran. It was adored at an annual feast, when it was hung all around
with fine clothes and women's ornaments. A similar tree to which the
people of Mecca resorted annually, and hung upon it weapons, garments,
ostriches' eggs, and other things, is spoken of in the tradition of the
prophet under the name of "dhat anwat," or "tree to hang things
on." <span id="fr_125"></span>[54](#fn_124) The Goddess Al-‘Ozza was
believed to reside in a tree. According to Yakut (III, 261), the tree at
Hadaibiya, mentioned in the Koran (sura XLVIII, 18) was visited by
pilgrims who expected to derive a blessing from it, till it was cut down
by the Calif Omar lest it should be worshipped like Al-Lat and Al-‘Ozza.
It was considered deadly to pluck a twig from such sacred trees.

The prevalence of stone-worship is another sign of paganism existing
before Islam, and noteworthy is the theory advanced by the Mohammedan
writers to account for its origin. According to Ibn Hišam <span
id="fr_126"></span>[55](#fn_125) the beginning of this idolatry was that
"the Meccans when their land became too narrow for them spread abroad
over the country, and all took stones from their sanctuary, the Kaaba,
out of reverence for their temple, and they set them up whenever they
formed

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

a settlement; and they walked around them as they used to go about the
Holy House. This led them at last to worship every stone that pleased
their fancy."

It is to be noticed, furthermore, that poly-demonism, *i.e.*, the belief
in divine powers, in spirits, is the most characteristic feature of the
old nomad religions. Many traces of this belief have been preserved in
the Old Testament, and also in the popular religion of the Syria and
Palestine of to-day. There are many instances in the Old Testament of
the belief in divine powers inhabiting springs, trees, stones. We may
refer to the sacred wells at Ḳadeš (Gen. 14: 7) and at Beeršeba (Gen.
21, 28, 30, 31 to the sacred oracular tree at Shekem (Gen. 12, 6; Deut.
11, 3); to the sacred stone of Bethel, which gave the place its name as
it is called "a house of God" (Gen. 28, 22). <span
id="fr_127"></span>[56](#fn_126)

Now, the traces of all these religious beliefs are found in modern
Yezidism. In connection with the temple of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, there is a sacred
spring, and there are similar ones in different parts of the Yezidi
districts. The water of these springs is held to have healing power, and
is carried by pilgrims to their homes. In these pools, especially in
that of ‘Adî's, the Yezidis cast coins, jewelry, and other presents,
which, they think, the chief saint takes from time to time; and to this
day no one may enter the holy valley with its sacred fountain, unless he
first purify his body and clothes. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[57](#fn_127) The devil-worshippers adore, likewise,
sacred trees. They make pilgrimages to

The original idea might have been that the waters, the stones, and the
trees themselves were divinities. In Jud. 5: 21, we have the statement:
"The river Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river
Kishon." Now Kais was the name of an Arabian god in Pre-Islamic time. In
Num. 5: 17 seq., an accused woman is tested by a sacred water. In Deut.
32: 4, "He is the rock," "rock" is as much a term for God as El, or
elohim; cf. verses 15, 18, 30-31; II Sam. 23: 3. In Ps. 18: 2, the word
rock is used of God, "the Lord is my rock." Jacob took the stone which
he had put under his head as a pillow, and raised it up as a pillar,
poured oil upon it and called it the "house of God," Gen. 28: 18, 19,
22. "The sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees" (II Sam. 5:
24), for which David was to wait, was nothing less than the divine voice
speaking to David in accordance with ancient conceptions.}

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

them, hang things on them, and entertain the belief that whoever unties
or shakes off a shred of cloth will be afflicted with disease. Again,
the Yezidis kiss the stones that satisfy their imagination, and make
vows to them (see pp. [41](sby11.htm#page_41), [56](sby12.htm#page_56)).
Nor is this all. The shouting of the Yezidi pilgrims, as they reach the
sacred territory, and the noisy ceremony of their hajj, with its
dancing <span id="fr_129"></span>[58](#fn_128) and its excitement--a
rite which has brought against them all sorts of accusations <span
id="fr_130"></span>[59](#fn_129)--are nothing but the remnants of
Pre-Islamic paganism. <span id="fr_131"></span>[60](#fn_130)

Such, then, are the steps which the religion of Yezid took before it
came to shape itself into its present form. It is made up of five
different elements, pagan, that contributed by the founder, Persian,
Mohammedan, and Christian. Does not such a state of affairs find a
historical parallel in some other religions? Take, for example,
Christianity. In it we find that the distinctive characteristics of the
founder have been wrapped up in many foreign elements brought in by
those who came from other religions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[119:43](sby21.htm#fr_114) Manhal-al-Uliya wa
Mašrab ul Asfiya, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî," quoted by M. N. Siouffi, Journal
Asiatique, 1885, p. 80.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[119:44](sby21.htm#fr_115) Al-Der-Al-Maknun
fi-1-Miater Al-Madiyat min Al-Ḳerûn, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî," quoted by M. N.
Siouffi, Journal Asiatique, 1885, p. 81.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[120:45](sby21.htm#fr_116) Contrary to Mohammed
to whom, according to Moslem belief, the Koran was revealed at
intervals.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[120:46](sby21.htm#fr_117) Kitab Al-Milal wa
n-Nihal, vol. I, p. 101 seq.

Ḥarran was a city in the north of Mesopotamia, and southeast of Edessa,
at the junction of the Damascus road with the highway from Nineveh to
Carchamish. The moon-god had a temple in Ḥarran, which enjoyed a high
reputation as a place of pilgrimage. The city retained its importance
down to the time of the Arab ascendency, but it is now in ruins. Yaḳut
(vol. II, p. 331) says: "It was the home of Ṣabians; that is, the
Harranians who are mentioned by the authors of Kutub Al-Milal wa
n-Nihal." As to Wasit this same Yakut (vol. IV, p. 881) mentions about
twenty different places bearing this name. The most prominent one is
that built by At-Hajjaj in 83 A. H. It is called Wasit "the
intermediate" because it was situated midway between Kufa and Basrah.
Another place Yakut (p. 889) mentions is Wasit ul-Raḳḳat, a town on the
western side of the Euphrates, and about two days' journey from Ḥarran.
Perhaps this is the Wasit that Aš-Šahrastanî means.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[122:47](sby21.htm#fr_118) On these sects. See
Aš-Šahrastanî, ibid, vol. II, pp. 85, 87, 89, 100 (42). His history, ed.
Sachau, Leibzig, 1878, p. 207.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[123:48](sby21.htm#fr_119) <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> At-Tarih, ed. Alton Salhanî, Beîrut, p. 266.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[123:49](sby21.htm#fr_120) There is no footnote
49 in the original--JBH.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[127:50](sby21.htm#fr_121) Filarist, p. 320.
The Arabs used to call the Prophet Aṣ-ṣabi, because he departed from the
religion of the Koreish to Al-Islam; cf. Al-Keššaf on Surah XXII, 17.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[128:51](sby21.htm#fr_122) Hudud, pl. of Hadad,
restrictive ordinances, or statutes, of God respecting things lawful and
things unlawful. The Hudud of God are of two kinds: First, those
ordinances respecting eatables, drinkables, marriage, etc., what are
lawful thereof and what are unlawful. Second, castigations, or
punishments, prescribed, or appointed, to be inflicted upon him who does
that which he has been forbidden to do. The first kind are called Hudud
because they denote limits which God has forbidden to transgress; the
second, because they prevent one's committing again those acts for which
they are appointed as punishments, or because the limits thereof are
determined. See Lane's Arabic Dictionary in Loco.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[134:52](sby21.htm#fr_123) Cf. also W. R.
Smith, *Religion of the Semites*, p. 167. and D. B. Stade's *Biblische
Theologie des Alten Testaments*, pp. 111 and 290.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[135:53](sby21.htm#fr_124) R. Smith, ibid, p.
49; cf. Ex. 3: 5, "And he said. Draw not nigh hither; put off thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground";
and Josh, 5: 15, "And the captain of the Lord's host said unto Joshua:
Loose thy shoe from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
holy. And Joshua did so."

In idolatrous days the Arabs did not wear any clothing in making the
circuit of the Kaaba. In Islam, the orthodox way is as follows: Arrived
within a short distance of Mecca, the pilgrims put off their <span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> ordinary clothing and assume the garb of a
hajjee. Sandals may be worn but not shoes, and the head must be left
uncovered. In Mandeanism, each person as he or she enters the Miškana,
or tabernacle, disrobes, and bathes in the little circular reservoir. On
emerging from the water, each one robes him or herself in the rasta, the
ceremonial white garment.--*The London Standard*, Oct. 19, 1894." Prayer
Meeting of the Starworshippers.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[135:54](sby21.htm#fr_125) Cf. R. Smith, ibid,
p. 185, and Stade, ibid, p. 111 seq.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[135:55](sby21.htm#fr_126) Weil's translation,
p. 39.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[136:56](sby21.htm#fr_127) Cf. R. Smith, ibid.
pp. 203-212; S. I. Curtiss' *Primitive Semitic Religion To-day*, pp.
84-.89; Stade, ibid, p. 114, seq.; see also II Sam. 5: 24, and John 5:
2, 3.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[136:57](sby21.htm#fr_128) Layard: *Nineveh and
Its Remains*, vol. I, p. 280.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[137:58](sby21.htm#fr_129) <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> Dancing might have been also a religious
ceremony in the Pre-Kanaanitic religion of Israel.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[137:59](sby21.htm#fr_130) The people in the
East are under the impression that the Yezidis violate the law of
morality during their festivals. According to Hurgronje (vol. 2, pp.
61-64), immorality is practised also in the sacred mosque of Mecca. This
practice may be a survival of the institution of Kadeshes, who offered
themselves in honor of the Deity in the sacred places where license
usually prevailed during the festivals (Gen, 38: 21, and Deut. 23: 18).

<span id="fn_130"></span>[137:60](sby21.htm#fr_131) Cf. R. W. Smith,
ibid, p. 432.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on Chapter I](sby22)
