[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby19)  [Next](sby21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

### THE SPECULATIVE THEORIES OF WESTERN ORIENTALISTS

Thus far we have been dealing with the different theories regarding the
origin of the Yezidis held in the East: the myth of the
devil-worshippers themselves, the Christian tradition. Now we turn our
attention to the West, which also has expressed itself on this subject.
The degree of interest shown in this particular case, however, differs
with different nationalities. The English-speaking scholars come

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

first; next come the French; then the Russians; and finally the
Italians. The German scholars seem to be interested mainly in certain
words and festive events. And, in the discussion of these, they go so
far in their unbounded speculation that one cannot tell whether the
people they deal with are the Yezidis in question, Assyrians,
Babylonians, Canaanites, Greeks, Romans or Jews. The German writers do
not seem to be interested so much in the problem of the origin of this
people as a sect, unless they regard the question as settled on the
ground of the Yezidis' own statement that they are the descendants of
Yezîd bn Mu‘awiya.

To tell the truth, the rise of the interest in the inquiry about the
founder of this sect on a scientific basis, is due, without question, to
the scholarship of the West. And any solution of the problem (and it
does not matter who does the work), in the last analysis, must be
accredited to the influences emanating from these scholars and these
scholars only. Nevertheless modern orientalists have been far from
approaching the solution of the question. This may be due in part to the
extreme interest which they have taken in the matter, an interest which
led them to accept the phenomena without critical examination. But the
inductive study of their respective writings tends to show that this is
due to their method of procedure rather than to anything else. They have
employed the philosophical and not the historical method. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[23](#fn_92) I do not mean to deny the value of such a
course of investigation in questions pertaining to

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

religion, but what I do mean to say is that the method of the scholars
in question is almost purely speculative, and they do not seem to appeal
to historical facts in support of their assumptions. The inevitable
consequence has been, therefore, that in their theories there exists an
uncertainty and indefiniteness that puzzles the student of history.

Another fact which the inductive study of the views of the western
scholars reveals is that their theories are nothing more nor less than
the expression of the Yezidis' tradition in terms of modern scholarship,
without, however, the showing of reasons for so doing. This fact will be
proved presently when we shall examine their respective writings.

Western orientalists are divided into three schools of opinion on the
question of the religious origin of the Yezidis. There are those who
hold that the sect takes its rise from Yezîd bn Mu‘awiya. This view is
advocated by a modern writer, who says, "The Arabs who accepted Mohammed
called those who did not Al-jahaleen, *i.e.*, the. ignorant ones. Among
the latter was Yezîd bn Mu‘awiya who refused to accompany Mu‘awiya, his
father, as an attendant upon his person. Many of the ignorant ones
rallied around Yezid, and he became the nucleus of the sect that
appropriated his name. The Yezidis possess a genealogical tree by means
of which they trace their religious origin back to him." <span
id="fr_94"></span>[24](#fn_93)

Now, the ground for this assertion, the writer does not give; he is
entirely silent as to the source of his

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

information: It is evident, therefore, that he is regarding the
superstitious theory of the Yezidis as a fact without making any
reflection upon it. He also seems to be confusing this Yezid with his
uncle of the same name, who, with Mu‘awiya his brother came in company
with their father Abu Sofian, to Mohammed to receive presents from the
Prophet. But the Arab historians tell us that not only Abu Sofian and
each of his two sons received a hundred camels but that they were each
presented with forty ounces of silver. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[25](#fn_94)

Then, too, many scholars deny that the name Yezidis is the original
appellation. Some assert it was put upon them by the Mohammedans as a
term of reproach. <span id="fr_96"></span>[26](#fn_95) Others maintain
that the sect adopted the name Yezid, son of Mu‘awiya to secure
toleration at the hands of the Mohammedans. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[27](#fn_96) But the scholar quoted may entertain the
view of those who say that the Yezidis are really the followers of Ibn
Mu‘awiya; but that they deny it for fear of persecution on the part of
Shiites. These latter hate Yezid, because he murdered ‘Ali's son,
Husein, who is regarded by them as their true Imam. This inference is
founded on the theory that the Mohammedans of Persia consider the people
in question as descendants of the Calif whose name is odious to
them. <span id="fr_98"></span>[28](#fn_97) But it is not certain that
the followers of ‘Ali entertain such a view regarding the origin of the
Yezidis. And, if they do, they have no historical facts to justify them
in their opinion. Their hatred of the sect can be better explained on

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the basis of the relation of the devil-worshippers to Yezîd bn Unaisa.
For he was one of those who most bitterly hated ‘Ali; see pp.
[121](sby21.htm#page_121), [122](sby21.htm#page_122),
[128](sby21.htm#page_128) of this book.

Furthermore, the theory of this school is neutralized by the fact that
none of the Arab historians mentions the son of the first Calif in the
Omayyid dynasty as a founder of any heretical sect. On the contrary,
they all agree that he was not only a Mohammedan but a successor of the
prophet, being the second calif in the Omayyid dynasty. Ibn Ḫallikan
mentions his name two or three times, and says that his works were
collected. He says nothing, however, as to his founding any religious
schism.

There is still another school among the western orientalists. I mean
those who hold that the religion of the devil-worshippers is of Persian
origin. They are of two wings. There are those who take their method of
procedure from the name Yezid or Yazd. They argue that this term in
Persian, Yazd (pla Yazdān), Avestan Yezata, 'worthy of worship', means
God, or good spirit, over against Ahriman, the evil principle. Hence,
the name Yezid, according to them, indicates the people that believe in
this good god. To the objection that the Yezidis worship the evil
spirit, answer is made that Yezid Ferfer is the name of the attendant of
the evil spirit among the Parsees. <span id="fr_99"></span>[29](#fn_98)
Others believe that the word "Yezid" signifies God. It indicates in the
plural the observers of superstitious doctrines as may be seen by the
idol Yezid, which the Bishop of Nagham overthrew. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[30](#fn_99) Still others say that

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

in the tradition of these people Yezid must have been an abbreviated
form of Aez-da-Khuda, that is, created of God. In support of this
theory, it is claimed that in reality the Yezidis worship God and not
the devil. It is thought by many, too, that the Yezidis derive their
name from Yazd, or Yezid, a name of a town in Central Persia, of which
the Parsees form the principal part of the inhabitants. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[31](#fn_100)

The other wing of the second school attempts to trace the origin of the
devil-worshippers to a Persian source on the basis of certain
resemblances between the two religions. Conspicuous among the
representatives of this school is Professor A. V. Jackson, of Columbia
University. This distinguished scholar is considered an eminent
authority on Iranian religions, and particularly an eye-witness
authority on the Yezidi question. His views, therefore, not only deserve
careful consideration, but they demand their full share in solving such
an important problem as the one under discussion. I have preferred his
discussion of this theory to that of others because he has expressed
himself clearly and consistently and without rendering himself liable to
misapprehension on the part of the reader. Briefly stated, Dr. Jackson's
position is as follows: "The Yezidis may actually show some surviving
traces of old devil-worship in Mazandaran, which Zoroaster anathematized
so bitterly," and "some old reminiscences of common Iranian faith." To
verify this hypothesis, he proceeds to point out many instances. One
example he

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

cites is that "the Yezidis are shocked if one spits upon the earth,
because they interpret this as an insult to the devil." He traces this
abhorrence to "Zoroastrian prescription, forbidding the earth in any way
to be defiled." "The Daevayasna or devil-worshippers in Avesta," he goes
on to say, "may indirectly have had a kindred notion, *i.e.*, not
mentioning the name of Satan." Moreover this American critic is informed
that the Yezidis "believe in a father primeval, that lived before Adam,
and did not fall into sin." And this information leads him to think that
such a notion helps "the Zoroastrian student to recognize at once a
far-off reminiscence of Avestan Gaya-Mashai, the Iranian Adam and
Eve." <span id="fr_102"></span>[31a](#fn_101)

One noticeable thing in favor of the two schools is that their method is
strictly scientific, in the modern sense of the term. It is a posteriori
and not a priori; it is inductive. Yet however scientific their method
may seem to be their conclusions cannot be accepted as final. For the
inductive method, according to the great French scientist, Poincaré,
cannot give us exact knowledge because its experiments do not cover all
the instances in a given case. There can be only a partial verification.
There will always remain some phenomena that cannot be brought within
the sphere of a particular observation. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[32](#fn_102) Now, this is exactly the case in the
subject under consideration. Only in some phases does the Yezidi
religion resemble that of the old Persians. There are other beliefs
which do not come under this category, and which seem to bear

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the traces of some other religions. What are we to do with these? <span
id="fr_104"></span>[33](#fn_103) The advocates of the theory in question
admit that such is the case, but they assert that "the resemblances of
the Yezidi religion to Christianity and Islam are accidental"; that
"owing to the residence of the Yezidis among the Mohammedans, the sect
naturally has much in common with Islam." <span
id="fr_105"></span>[34](#fn_104) But why are the resemblances to Iranism
not to be accounted for in the same way as those to other religions? Why
may not equally strong inference be made from the likeness to
Christianity? And what is the basis of such a discrimination? On these
questions we are left entirely in the dark. Now, it is this lack of
ground for their method of procedure that leads one to seek the solution
of the problem on some other verifiable hypothesis.

There is still another school among the western orientalists. I refer to
those who maintain that the Yezidi sect was founded by Šeiḫ ‘Adî. A
modern writer who holds this theory, after critically reviewing the
views held by the different scholars, proceeds to advance his own idea.
To [emphasize](errata.htm#10) it, and leave no room for further
criticism, he claims that the theory has been "generally" accepted. To
quote:

"It is generally agreed upon that the sect of the Yezidis was founded by
Šeiḫ ‘Adî. He is a historical personage, but it is exceedingly
difficult, and almost impossible, to establish any historical facts out
of the mist of very fantastic stories current about him." <span
id="fr_106"></span>[35](#fn_105)

He supports his notion by an appeal to an Arab

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

author, Kasi Ahmad ibn-Ḫallikan, from whom, according to this writer, an
extract relating to Šeiḫ ‘Adî was published by one who for years was a
resident of the city of Mosul. <span id="fr_107"></span>[36](#fn_106)
This statement that Ibn Ḫallikan gives the biography of ‘Adî is a fact
that cannot be questioned; but that ‘Adî founded the Yezidi sect is a
theory that is by no means "generally agreed upon." Nor can it be
substantiated. To justify this position, let me quote in full what the
Arab biographer and two other Mohammedan scholars have to say on the
problem.

1 What Ibn Ḫallikan has to say on Šeiḫ ‘Adî:

"The Šeiḫ ‘Adî Ibn Masafir Al-Hakkari was an ascetic, celebrated for the
holiness of his life, and the founder. of a religious order called after
him Al-‘Adawiah. His reputation spread to distant countries, and the
number of his followers increased to a great multitude. Their belief in
his sanctity was so excessive that, in saying their prayers, they took
him for their ḳibla; and imagined that in the next life they would have
in him their most precious treasure and their best support. Before this,
he had as a disciple a great number of eminent šeiḫs and men remarkable
for their holiness. He then retired from the world and fixed his
residence among the mountains of the Hakkari, near Mosul, where he built
a cell (or a monastery) and gained the favor of the people in that
country to a degree unexampled in the history of the anchorites. It is
said that the place of his birth was a village called Bait Far, situated
in the province of

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Baal-bek, and that
the house in which he was born is still visited (as a place of
sanctity). He died A. H. 557 (A. D. 1162), or as some say A. H. 555, in
the town where he resided (in the Hakkari region). He was interred in
the monastery that he had erected. His tomb is much frequented, being
considered by his followers one of the most sacred spots to which a
pilgrimage can be made. His descendants continue to wear the same
distinctive attire as he did and to walk in his footsteps. The
confidence placed in their merits is equal to that formerly shown to
their ancestor, and like him they are treated with profound respect. Abu
Ibarakat ibn Al-Mustawfi notices the Šeiḫ ‘Adî, in his history of
Arbela, and places him in the list of those persons who visited that
city. Muzaffar Ad-Din, the sovereign of Arbela, said that when a boy he
saw the Šeiḫ ‘Adî at Mosul. According to him, he was a man of medium
size and tawny complexion; he related also many circumstances indicative
of his great sanctity. The Šeiḫ died at the age of ninety years." <span
id="fr_108"></span>[37](#fn_107)

2 What Mohammed-Amin-Al-‘Omari has to say on Šeiḫ ‘Adî:

"They say that the Šeiḫ ‘Adî was one of the inhabitants of Ba‘albek;
that he transported himself to Mosul, and from thence to Jabal Laš, a
dependency of this city (Mosul), where he resided until his death. They
also say that he was from Ḥawran, and that his lineage goes back as far
as Marwan bn al-Ḥakam, also that he is Šaraf ad Din Abou’l Fadail ‘Adî
bn Masafir

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

bn Isma‘il bn Mousa bn Marwan bn al Ḥasan bn Marwan bn Mohammed bn
Marwan bn al Ḥakam, who died in the [year](errata.htm#11) 558. His
grave, which is well known, is the object of pious pilgrimages."

"God tried him by a calamity, to wit, the appearance of a sect of
apostates, called the Yezidis. because they claim to be descended from
Yezid. They adore the sun and render worship to the devil. The following
are some of the precepts of their faith that I found in a small tract
made by one of the inhabitants of Aleppo who knows their religion:

I. Adultery becomes lawful when committed by (mutual) consent.

II\. They pretend that when the day of judgment comes, the šeiḫ ‘Adî
will put them into a wooden basin which he will place on his head in
order to cause them to enter into Paradise while uttering these
contemptuous words: 'I do this (or, I make them do this) by compelling
God or in spite of him.'

III The visit which they pay to the tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî is for them a
pilgrimage which the devotees accomplished no matter how far distant,
the country is that they inhabit, and without being concerned about the
expenses that the journey carries with it." <span
id="fr_109"></span>[38](#fn_108)

3\. What Yasin Al-Hatib-al-Omari Al-Mausili has to say on Šeiḫ ‘Adî:

"In this year 557 died the saint and the pious devotee ‘Adî bn Musafir,
who performed miracles. His death took place in the city Hakkariya, one
of the dependencies of Mosul. His origin is from Ba‘albek,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

which he left in order to come to Mosul, that he might consecrate
himself to God. He passed a solitary life on the mountains and in
caverns where lions and other wild beasts visited him often."

"It is said that he was descended from the family of Omayyids, and this
is the lineage which he attributed to himself: ‘Adî bn Musafir bn
Isma‘il bn Mousa bn Marwan bn al-Ḥasan bn Marwan bn al-Ḥakam bn Al-‘Ass
bn Omayya."

"He was versed in the knowledge of the divine law. God tried him by a
calamity by raising the Yezidis, who pretended that this šeiḫ is God,
and who have made his tomb the object of their pilgrimage. They arrive
there every year at the sound of drums in order to give themselves to
games and debauchery."

"The Christians of the land, and especially the partisans of the
Nestorians are far from having the same opinion of the Šeiḫ ‘Adî as have
the Moslems or the Yezidis. The following passage which one reads in a
Chaldean manuscript entitled 'Awarda' <span
id="fr_110"></span>[39](#fn_109) and which I saw some time ago in the
Church of Karmalis, <span id="fr_111"></span>[40](#fn_110) proves this
sufficiently. This is the translation of the passage which I have
extracted from a song composed by a bishop of Arbil, in honor of Rabban
Hormuzd <span id="fr_112"></span>[41](#fn_111) and other saints, and in
which the author makes mention of ‘Adî in these terms:

"'Great misfortunes have followed, failing upon us; a formidable enemy
came to torment us. He was a descendant of Hagar, the slave of our
mother. This enemy who made our life unfortunate was a Mohammedan,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

called ‘Adî. He deceived us by vile tricks, and has finished by taking
possession of our riches and of our convent, which he consecrated to
things that are illicit (to have a strange worship). An innumerable
multitude of Mussulmen have attached themselves to him and have vowed to
him a blind submission. The renown of his name, which is Šeiḫ ‘Adî, has
spread down to our days in all the cities of all the countries.'" <span
id="fr_113"></span>[42](#fn_112)

These are the accounts which we have of Šeiḫ ‘Adî in his relation to the
Yezidis, and they deserve our special attention. For not only are the
writers scholars of the highest authority, but they are to a certain
extent eye-witness authorities. The last two are from the city of Mosul,
which is the only city in the Mohammedan world whose widely spreading
scholarship has acquired for it the name "Dar-al-‘Ulum," *i.e.*, the
home of sciences. Moreover, they come from a family whose members are
known as ‘Olama, highly intellectual, broad-minded Mohammedan gentlemen.
While at Mosul, I had the honor of calling often on Ḥasan. Efendi al
‘Omari, and especially on Suleiman Efendi al Omari. Ibn Ḫallikan as a
trustworthy biographer needs no further introduction than the mere
mentioning of his name. What adds to his reputation as a scholar is the
fact that, being a resident of Arbila in the province of Mosul, he had
at his command firsthand information.

Another noteworthy fact is that all three of these scholars agree in
their account of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, in their

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

tracing of his genealogy, in describing him as the most perfect model of
hermits, in praising him for his manner of life, which they regard as a
life of holiness. They agree also in their definition of the common
people's attitude toward the Šeiḫ: that he was deified and that his tomb
has been made the object of pilgrimage. And finally they are silent
about his supposed founding of the sect in question. There is no
intimation that he was a heretic, or that he established such a schism.
To be sure, Ibn Ḫallikan makes mention of a religious order which was
called after the Šeiḫ's name, but he designates them as ‘Adawia and not
as Yezidis. This might have been such an order as the Brotherhood of
Assanusi, called after Mohammed ibn ‘Ali as-Sanusi, or as many other
orders of dervishes and šeiḫs of mystical type, that have taken rise
from time to time in the religious history of Islam. The other two speak
of the appearance of the Yezidis, but they look at the incident as a
calamity to the šeiḫ because they deified him and worshipped at his
tomb. Their remarks tend to show that the Yezidi sect were known as such
before the time of ‘Adî; that their appellation was based on the
pretension that they were descendants of Yesid; that they were apostates
from Islam; that they were some of those who [were](errata.htm#12)
attached to ‘Adî by reason of his wide reputation as a saint, and were
led by their ignorance to take him for a god; and that they were
worshippers of the sun and the devil. It is inconceivable to us, if we
apply the principles of modern

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

criticism to what we know of the, character of the Mohammedan
historians, that they should write the life of one who is responsible
for the rise of a sect, the foundation of whose religion is the devil,
and not curse him and the devil with him a hundred million times.

Such are the theories that have been advanced in the discussion relating
to the religious origin of the Yezidi sect, and we have found not only
that they are far from reaching the solution of the problem, but also
that the method that they employ does not seem to be the proper one for
solving such a question. The tradition of the Yezidis that they are
descended from Yezîd bn Mu‘Awiya which has been accepted as the fact by
some western scholars is only a myth, without historical justification.
As to the Christian tradition, all that can tell us is that some Yezidis
might have been at one time Christians; but as to who was the founder of
the sect it gives us no light. Likewise, all that we can learn from the
theory advocated by the second school is that some phases of the Persian
religion might have survived with that of the devil-worshippers. We may
admit, I think, that some Yezidis are Persian in their origin. But as to
who was the originator of their religion this theory helps us not a
whit. So also we have found that the relation of Šeiḫ ‘Adî to this sect
is not that of a founder. He is only one of many whom their ignorance
led to class as deities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[104:23](sby20.htm#fr_93) I mean by the
philosophical method the attempt to prove certain assumption by
theorizing,, and by the historical method the endeavor to verify a
theory by obtaining data from historical sources. The former method is
based on speculation; the latter on historical inquiry.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[105:24](sby20.htm#fr_94) The Enc. of Mission,
p. 797. In his letter to me of date August 6, 1907, the Rev. A. N.
Andrus, of Mardin, says: "The Yezidis may be related in religious cult
with the Guebres of India."

<span id="fn_94"></span>[106:25](sby20.htm#fr_95) Muir: *Life of
Mohammed*, vol. IV, p. 151.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[106:26](sby20.htm#fr_96) Fraser: ibid, p. 205.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[106:27](sby20.htm#fr_97) Badger, ibid, p. 129.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[106:28](sby20.htm#fr_98) S. G. M., vol. 14.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[107:29](sby20.htm#fr_99) Eugene Bore: *Dict.
des Religions*, T. IV, *Art. Yezidis*, Southgate, ibid, p. 317.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[107:30](sby20.htm#fr_100) Fraser, ibid, p. 289.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[108:31](sby20.htm#fr_101) Jackson: *Persia,
Past and Present*, p. 10: J. A. O. S., 25, p. 178, New Int. Enc.
"Yezidis."

<span id="fn_101"></span>[109:31a](sby20.htm#fr_102) Jackson: *Persia,
Past and Present*, p. 10: J. A. O. S., 25, p. 178, New Int. Enc.
"Yezidis."

<span id="fn_102"></span>[109:32](sby20.htm#fr_103) H. Poincaré:
*Science and Hypothesis*. Trans. G. B. Halsted, p. 5 seq.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[110:33](sby20.htm#fr_104) The fact that the
importance of the method of comparative religion has been generally
recognized in the scientific world has led to the danger of rushing into
the other extreme of paying attention exclusively to points of
similarity and resemblance, and of entirely disregarding, or at any rate
thrusting into the background as unimportant that which is dissimilar.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[110:34](sby20.htm#fr_105) Southgate, ibid, p.
317; Jackson, J. A. O. S., Vol. XXV, p. 171.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[110:35](sby20.htm#fr_106) <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> Victor Dingelstedt, S. G. M., vol. XIV, p.
295.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[111:36](sby20.htm#fr_107) Siouffi, who was for
about twenty years a French vice-consul in Mosul.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[112:37](sby20.htm#fr_108) Ibn Ḫallikan, vol.
I, p. 316.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[113:38](sby20.htm#fr_109) Manhal Al-Uliya wa
Mašrab-ul-Aṣfia, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî," quoted by M. N. Siouffi, Journal
Asiatique, 1885, p. 80.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[114:39](sby20.htm#fr_110) Warda, "the rose,"
is the name of a collection of hymns composed by George Warda (1224 A.
D.), Bishop of Arbila; cf. Bar Hebraeus, Chron. Eccl., Vol. II, p. 402.
Warda is one of the most conspicuous writers of hymns in the thirteenth
century which was the age of song with the Nestorian church. His poems
have entered so largely into the use of the Nestorian church that one of
their service books is to this day called the Warda; Badger, *The
Nestorians*, vol. II, p. 25. Some of his hymns speak of the calamities
of the years 1224-1227. A few specimens are given by Cardaḥi in *Liber
Thesauri*, p. 51. Badger has translated one in his *Nestorians*, Vol.
II, pp. 51-57. Warda's poems have been edited by Heinrich Hilgenfeld,
*Ausgewählte Gesänge des Giworgis Warda von Arbil*, Leipzig, 1904, and
by Manna, Mosul, 1901.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[114:40](sby20.htm#fr_111) The village Karmalis
is about twelve miles distant from Mosul, and is inhabited by Chaldeans,
that is, Romanized Nestorians.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[114:41](sby20.htm#fr_112) Rabban Hormusd is a
Chaldean monastery at Alkoš, a village about twenty miles north of
Mosul.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[115:42](sby20.htm#fr_113) Al-Der-Al-Makn‘un
fi-l-Miater Al-Maḍiyat min Al-Ḳerun, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî," quoted by M. 14.
Siouffi, *Journal Asiatique*, 1885, p. 81.

Yaḳut (vol. IV, p. 374) also regards Šeiḫ ‘Adî an orthodox Mohammedan;
"Šeiḫ ‘Adî bn Musafir Aš-^Safe‘e, šeiḫ of the Kurds and their Imam."
‘Adî's orthodoxy is seen also in his writing. He wrote <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> ‘Itiḳad Ahl Al-Sunna "Belief of the
Sunnites," the Wasaya "Consuls to the Cailifs," and two odds both of
them mystic in their conception. They are all preserved in the Berlin
Library; cf. Clement Huart, *History of Arabic Literature*, p. 273.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Dogmatic View of Mohammedan Scholars](sby21)
