[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby28)  [Next](sby30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

### THE DAY OF SARSAL

In addition to the festivals mentioned above is the one observed on New
Year's day, the first Wednesday in April. On this day, the Yezidis say,
no drums are to be beaten, for God sits on the throne, holding a
conference at which he decrees the events of the year. They also stick
wild scarlet anemones to the entrance

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of their houses. The refraining from the sound of instruments of
pleasure on the part of orientals signifies a state of contrition.
Hence, it is very likely that the Yezidis entertain the view that on
this day God is decreeing their destiny for the coming year; that they
must now, therefore, adjust their relation to him with sincere sorrow
for sin. If this is so, the significance of the hanging of the flowers
at the entrance of their houses can be taken as intended to propitiate
the Evil Principle, and to ward off calamity during the coming year.
Such a belief has a parallel in many religions. According to Babylonian
mythology human destiny was decreed on New Year's day and sealed on the
tenth day thereafter. It was therefore necessary to placate the deity,
or at least to make sure of one's relation to him, before this
particular day. The New Year period was held, therefore, to be of
special importance because of the bearing on individual welfare by
reason of the good or the evil decision of the gods. Our modern custom
of wishing our friends a Happy New Year has perhaps some connection with
this idea. <span id="fr_158"></span>[7](#fn_157)

The Day of Atonement (Lev. 23: 27; 25: 29) had a most important place in
the Jewish ecclesiastical year. This was the occasion of a thorough
purification of the whole nation and of every individual member thereof
in their relation to Yahweh. It was designed to deepen afresh the
national and individual sense of sin and dread of the judgment of God.
According to Talmud (Mišna, Roš hašana, vol. I, 2)

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Roš hašana is the
most important judgment day, on which all creatures pass for judgment
before the Creator. On this day, three books are opened wherein the fate
of the wicked, the righteous and those of the intermediate class are
recorded. Hence prayer and works of repentance are performed on the New
Year from the first to the tenth that an unfavorable decision might be
averted (Jewish Ency., art. Penitential Day). R. Akiba says: "On New
Year Day all men are judged; and the degree is sealed on the Day of
Atonement (Ibid, art. Day of Judgment).

Moreover, the red lilies of the doors of the Yezidis remind us at once
of the blood sprinkled on the doorposts of the dwellings of the
Israelites ir Egypt as a sign for the Destroying Angel to pass over.
This notion is found also in a similar practice among the Parsees of
India, who hang a string of leaves across the entrances to their houses
at the beginning of every new year.

In the light of what has been said, the Yezidis' idea in giving food to
the poor at the grave on the day of Sarsal (New Year day), is to
propitiate God on behalf of the dead, who are, according to their
belief, reincarnated in some form or other. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[8](#fn_158)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[175:7](sby29.htm#fr_158) The Hibbert journal,
ibid.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[176:8](sby29.htm#fr_159) For different
interpretation of the Yezidi New Year, see Brockelmann in Z. D. M. G.,
vol. 55, p. 388.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on Chapter III](sby30)
