[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm19)  [Next](ssbm21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

### THE MAGIC OF REBUILDING THE UNWANTED FUTURE

### (<span class="smallcaps">Healing of Financial and Social Ills</span>)

The High Magic of Instant healing is accomplished through the aid of the
High Self. This is also true of the healing of purse and circumstances.

Both of these arts use the same basic mechanisms.

In the Bible we read the story of Jacob, who saw in a dream a ladder
reaching from earth to heaven, and angels ascending and descending on
it. The Lord stood above it and spoke to Jacob.

Like so many of the tales to be found in religion, there can be drawn a
comparative picture in the beliefs of Huna. In Huna the ladder is the
connecting cord of shadowy body stuff connecting the low self and the
High Self, who is the only "Lord" we can ever contact directly and know
something about. The Lord spoke to Jacob. The High Self sends its
mystical messages. The angels went up and down, perhaps as messengers.
The THOUGHT FORMS of the prayers go up and down on the cord as a ladder,
moving on the stream of vital force. The Lord promised Jacob that he
would be prospered. The High Self stands ready to help us in the same
way—provided we learn how to do our part.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Case 29</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Changing the Unwanted Future for the Wanted</span>

*Preliminary Notes:*

I wish to make this mechanism of High Magic as plain as possible for it
is vitally important. Most lives are a tangle, and to have those tangles
removed would mean everything to us.

In selecting this case from my own experience, I am able to give first
hand assurance that each step in the work is fully and correctly
described. I can vouch for the results, as they were in my own life—and
still are.

Contrary to my usual procedure, I shall stop to point out at each step
the reason for the things done, instead of waiting for the end of the
case to make comment.

*The Case:*

In the year 1932, in Honolulu, I owned a camera store which was hard hit
by the depression and the lack of tourist trade. Threatened with loss of
everything, I went to a kahuna for help.

The kahuna was a Hawaiian woman of about fifty. I had known her for some
time and when I told her that I was in trouble, she set to work at once
to see what could be done to right my affairs. We went into a small
dining room and sat down at the table. While she smoked and listened, I
told of my difficulties.

I was faced by the necessity of selling out my business, with the stock
and fixtures, or facing bankruptcy. The only person in Honolulu who
could buy my store to an advantage was my competitor. He owned a larger
and older camera store.

I had gone to him three times to try to get him to

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

buy me out at a very low figure, but could not interest him. I had paid
a real estate man a round sum to try to make the sale, and he had
failed. It began to look as if I would have to lose everything. My lease
had but a few weeks longer to run, and to renew my lease for the five
year period at an advance in rent was out of the question.

When I had explained everything and had answered a few questions, the
healer asked me to think very hard for a little while and then tell her
exactly what I wanted to have come to pass. I thought it all over again,
then said that I wanted to sell my business and stock and fixtures to my
competitor for eight thousand dollars, which would be a great bargain
even in bad times. I wanted to help my competitor amalgamate my business
and his own, and after that I wished to return to the Coast and to be
able to do some writing. I was quite definite.

The healer asked more questions. She would say, "And if that happens
that way, are you sure that it will not make a difference in your
plans?" She explained that I must overlook no possible contingency and
must weigh each step and consider its probable results. I had to
consider all the small details and imagine how each thing would work out
and react on some other part of the plan.

The idea was to prepare to make the "Prayer" to the High Self. The
thought forms of the prayer had to be unmixed with doubts and
uncertainties. They had to stand out clear and sharp and definite. Any
overlooked angle of the affair might bob up later to upset the working
out of the plan.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

The healer told me that in her experience most people sent to the High
Self a continuous jumble of conflicting wishes, plans, fears and hopes.
Each day and hour they changed their minds about what they wished to do
or become or have happen. As the High Self makes for us our futures from
our averaged thoughts which it contacts usually during our sleep, our
futures become a hit-and-miss jumble of events and contrary events, of
accidents and good and bad luck. Only the person who decides what he
wants and holds to his decision doggedly, working always in that
direction, can present to the High Self the proper thought forms from
which to build the future as desired and planned and worked toward.

After an hour of discussion the healer was satisfied. She announced that
the next step was to contact the High Self and ask whether or not the
plan was such that it could be made to materialize.

Instead of using the crystal gazing arrangement of a black smooth stone
swished with water in the bottom of a calabash bowl, she brought out a
glass tumbler, filled it with water, grated half a teaspoonful of yellow
ginger root into the water to cloud it and to act as a physical stimulus
to ward off spirit influence of the poltergeist type, should such be
near. The grating was done with a thumbnail from a small piece of fresh
ginger root out of the garden that afternoon. It was then evening.

The healer then asked for a silver dollar as a preliminary part of her
fee. This acted as a physical stimulus to her low self as it represented
a reward for work and service—thus appearing as a good thing to

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

the low self. The dollar was placed under the tumbler. She then shaded
her eyes from the overhead light and sat for a short time looking down
at the surface of the clouded water.

She soon began to see images and to get messages by some form of inner
voice. She would remain in a trance-like state for a moment or two,
rouse to speak to me to tell what she saw, or to ask a fresh question.
This continued for perhaps seven or eight minutes.

The visions in the crystal were all symbolic, and if the symbols were
things she had learned by experience to know as good, she counted the
answer favorable to my plans. She said she saw a door being opened,
then, a little later, a sheaf of wheat. She asked what these things
might mean to me or if I had been thinking about them—wishing to be sure
that she was not seeing them in my mind instead of from the High Self
via the low self.

When she was satisfied that the answer was favorable, she said, "The god
tells me that your prayer can be answered. The door is open. Your path
is not badly blocked, even if the door was not open all the way. I will
now ask what we must do for our part of the work."

Again she gazed into the water and entered the state in which she could
see with psychic senses. She began to see my competitor, who was also a
good friend of long standing. She described his appearance and checked
with me as to whether she was seeing him accurately or not. She saw his
office at the rear of his store and checked that with me. She also saw
the man

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

whom I had hired to sell my business and who had failed. When this
psychic examination of the matter was finished it was growing late.

"Have you hurt anyone?" the healer asked. "Why is the door not wide open
and why is your path a little blocked?"

I could think of no injury I had done anyone, and said so.

"Do you feel that you would cheat if you sold your store for eight
thousand dollars?" was the next question.

I assured her that I would consider the deal most fair.

"Then it is the little sin ideas which eat you inside because of your
Sunday School or Church training," she decided. "Most of the good
people, especially if they are good church people, have things like
that. To get rid of the feeling of guilt and clear your path to the god
you must fast until one o'clock for three days, and while you fast, you
must not smoke. After three days, give a gift to some person in need or
to some charity. This gift must be large enough to hurt you a
little—almost more than you can afford. This will make you feel deep
inside you that you have done enough to balance all your little sins.
After you have done these things, come to me again."

The healer was prescribing very excellent physical stimuli to impress
the low self in me that it was making amends for such acts as it
believed to be sins. I had no way of finding out what those small guilt
complexes might be, but that made no difference.

I carried out the orders during the three days, finding

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

them difficult enough to impress my low self not a little, as I have
been blessed with a good appetite and at that time loved to smoke. My
gift was made to the Salvation Army, this being to my mind a good
charity organization.

Again arriving in the evening, I sat with the healer at the round table.
She again made use of the tumbler mechanism in the same way, and after a
few minutes saw the door again, this time wide open. Announcing that my
path was now unblocked, she pushed the tumbler from her and reopened the
question of my plans. Had I made any changes in my plans? Was I still
sure that I wanted everything to happen just as I had stated?

When assured that my plans were clear and unchanged, she made ready to
make the prayer for me to the High Self.

When a kahuna prayed to his or her High Self, asking aid for a client,
the prayer automatically went to the High Self of the client as well.
This involves a belief that all High Selves are linked together in some
way we cannot understand and can hardly imagine. They are "many in one"
and "one in many." They are Unity in Separation. They have bonds closer
than those of bees in a hive. They have learned to work as a unit, but
each does individual works. We cannot grasp this, but, from the results
obtained through contact with the High Selves, this seems to be the
nearest we can come to understanding the matter.

To make the prayer, the healer rose and walked slowly back and forth,
breathing heavily. After a few minutes she paused beside the table, said
quietly that

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

she would now make the prayer to the god for me, and then—looking as
into a distance—began to speak in Hawaiian, slowly and with great force.
She voiced the prayer once, then repeated it, and then repeated it
again.

This thrice-spoken prayer was offered word for word and idea for idea as
nearly as possible, the full force of the suggestive will being mustered
to cause the low self to carry to the High Self the thought forms which
were being made by the carefully and firmly repeated prayer.

The High Self was contacted by the low self after a direct command from
the middle self of the healer, the tumbler not being used, as at this
time no return answer was expected or requested. When the prayer had
been thrice spoken, the healer resumed her chair and took a cigarette.
She smoked and rested after her effort. She had accumulated extra vital
force and had presented the prayer as a set of thought forms on a flow
of vital force.

Soon the tumbler was brought into action to see what message could be
had from the High Self, and what instructions might be given.

In the water surface in the tumbler appeared (to her) a scene in which I
did several things. It was an enactment of what the High Self had caused
my future to be. The old future was torn down and a new one had been
instantly constructed for me.

The old future had undoubtedly contained all the business failures which
seemed inevitable to me and which I feared and so visualized as I
worried. This probably would have been my future if I had not had

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the help of the High Self in changing the bad to the desired good.

We do not know the exact way in which the High Self makes the future for
the low and middle selves over which it stands as "guardian, parental
spirit." We can only guess that the thoughts we make into thought forms
are used in some way in shaping the future. At least, the thought forms
tell the High Self what we hope, fear, desire and plan. It seems that
our futures are made from these thought forms with all care being taken
not to intrude on our FREE WILL. We must be allowed to exert free will,
and unless we ask for help, it must not be given lest the free will be
cancelled. We cannot say why, but we can understand that such a
condition of affairs can be.

Because of our mental limitations we cannot conceive of a future made of
invisible material, but still containing all the events and conditions
which will materialize from minute to minute and hour to hour and day to
day for as far ahead as the invisible outline of the future is
"crystallized." Perhaps the future is made like the shadowy bodies of
the low and middle selves, and as are the thought forms. Perhaps thought
forms are made to grow into events. The kahunas did not know. We cannot
know. However, so long as we know that the future is made in some such
way and that it can be seen ahead in so far as it has been made, and
that IT CAN BE CHANGED, that is all we need to know.

The healer saw the new future in her tumbler of water and described to
me the things she saw that I must do, also telling me why. She seemed to
get the

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

idea of why things were done in some psychic way connected with the
psychic vision. The usual method of the High Self of giving symbols was
not used here.

"The god tells me," she would say, or "The god shows me."

She saw me going to my competitor with a paper in my hand. She said that
on the paper I had written out my proposition to sell, the price, and
all details. She said that the god told her that this man was the kind
who liked to see everything written out on paper, otherwise he would say
"No" from force of habit.

"You write it all out," she instructed. "Then next Tuesday at a quarter
after two you go to see him. He will be in his office sitting at his
desk and doing nothing. You put the paper on his desk and say, 'Have a
look at these figures, will you? I'll be back in about ten minutes.'
Then you go off and in ten minutes you come back. He will be finished
reading your paper and will say to you that he will buy your business."

To me this was unbelievably explicit and detailed. I asked how she knew,
and she told me that she saw me doing it in my new future, and that the
god made her understand why the proposition had to be written out.

I marveled at the instructions and promised to obey them to the letter.

At a quarter after two on the following Tuesday I went into my
competitor's place of business with my proposal carefully typed out in
full. I found him, as had been foreseen, idly sitting at his desk. I
placed the paper before him and asked him to look it over, saying I
would be back in ten minutes.

In ten minutes I returned, and he was waiting for me.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "I'll take you
up," he said. "I'll give you my check for a hundred dollars to bind the
bargain and you can make out the bill of sale."

So, with the help of the healer and the High Self, the deal was closed.
The price stipulated in the prayer was paid me. I stayed on to help get
my business amalgamated with that of my friendly competitor.

With the deal completed, I reported back to the kahuna, paying her all
she would allow, which was little enough considering the great service
she had rendered me.

Some time later, when I was about to finish up my business affairs and
leave for California, the healer ran a check on my future for me to see
about the part of the plan I had made which included a desire to do some
writing.

She made a fresh prayer asking that I be allowed to write, and then
inspected the future with the aid of the High Self via the low self, to
see what instructions were given for me. As she had done in the case of
the sale of the business, she now did for the writing.

"You will write eight books," she said after a long look into her
improvised gazing crystal. "That is as far ahead as the god shows me.
Eight books." She sighed. "But you will have to be very patient. It will
be a long time from the first book to the eighth. Many things will
happen and it will not be easy, although the last four books will be
easier than the first four and come faster."

That glimpse of the future which the healer got for me dates back to
1932. Now, in 1947, the first four books are water under the bridge.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

*Additional Comment:*

The psycho-religious system of the "Secret" (Huna) is, first, last and
above all, a WORKABLE system. It makes no pretense of understanding or
explaining those things which have to do with an Ultimate God which our
lower mental ability will not allow us to understand.

This is common sense and practicality. It is the true scientific
approach. It gives us a system free from the dogmatic and impractical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The High Self and the Healing in Psychic
Science](ssbm21)
