[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm12)  [Next](ssbm14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

### CHAPTER XII

### RAISING THE DEAD, PERMANENTLY AND TEMPORARILY

The dead can be raised. There are two kinds of "raising," however, one a
complete restoration to life in the physical body, the other a temporary
materialization of a physical body for a departed spirit to use. In both
these cases we find proofs of the correctness of the ancient beliefs of
the kahunas.

We have accounts of men being permanently raised from the dead in
Christian and other religious literature. The kahunas were able, under
certain conditions, to demonstrate such feats and also to explain them
in a comprehensible fashion.

The temporary raising of a living body for the use of a spirit of the
dead was common in Polynesia, and as "Materialization," has been studied
and repeatedly verified in Psychical Research.

#### <span class="smallcaps">CASE 22</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">A Kahuna Raises the Dead Before Dr. Brigham</span>

*Preliminary Notes:*

It takes but a short time in a warm climate like that of Hawaii for a
dead body to begin to decay. However, there is a condition of deep
trance or coma which so closely resembles death that there is a grave
danger of

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

being mistaken for dead if in such a condition, and of being buried
alive.

The kahunas believed that decay could not set in until the shadowy body
of the low self was entirely withdrawn from the body. The two spirits of
the lower man can be out of the physical body in their shadowy bodies,
and can travel to a great distance, as is done in "astral travel," but
there is always a connecting thread (the "silver cord" of Theosophy) of
shadowy material joining the physical body and the low shadowy body. It
is only when this thread is broken that decay sets in.

After the connecting thread is broken, it would take an act of the High
Self to restore tissues which had begun to decay and make possible the
return to life of the one who had died. On the other hand, if the thread
is unbroken, as is often the case when death comes without an injury to
the tissues, as in drowning, life may be restored if a return to the
body is made possible for the spirits.

The shadowy body of the low self, as has already been explained, is an
ideal storage place for vital force, and when the spirits leave the
physical body, most of the vital force is taken along in the shadowy
body. When the dense physical body is left behind, after the removal of
the elements of consciousness and vital force from it, unconsciousness
and inaction result. Studies made of patients suffering from epilepsy,
show that after the characteristic "cry" and fall, there is no action of
either the body waves or brain waves, as measured by recording
instruments. The indication is that the two selves of the patient, in
their shadowy bodies, have been driven out of the body temporarily, or,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

as an alternate possibility, the two selves have remained in the body
but have been robbed of the last vestige of vital force by a spirit of
the obsessing type. Consciousness returns to the patient in about the
length of time required to rebuild the supply of vital force.

*The Case:*

Dr. Brigham, during one of his field trips in search of rare indigenous
plants in Hawaii, took refuge in a coastal village during a very severe
storm. In the storm a native lad of about sixteen was drowned. All
efforts to revive him failed, and a kahuna living some distance away was
summoned.

The kahuna, an old man, arrived and began work about eight hours after
the accident. The boy's body was cold, and, when examined by Dr. Brigham
shortly before the arrival of the kahuna, seemed to have begun to
stiffen in *rigor mortis*.

The kahuna sat down near the body and set to work to use his psychic
powers to learn what had become of the lad's two spirits. In this work,
as he later explained, he had the help of several spirit friends. (The
shadowy body cord must still have connected the body to the low self of
the lad, although probably stretched to the breaking point.) The boy's
selves were found wandering in a confused state, and brought back to the
body, being urged to remain there and make every possible effort to
reenter it.

The body was warmed, and while the kahuna applied his hands to it, he
gave of his own vital force. He also used verbal suggestion to cause the
return into the body, using as a physical stimulus a stroking and
squeezing, as if the spirits were reentering by way of one of the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

big toes, and was being squeezed up the leg into the body. The kahuna
also invoked "the god" (High Self) asking for aid. After about an hour
he announced that the spirits of the boy were entering the body.
Gradually the flesh became warmer. The heart began to beat and the boy
opened his eyes. The recovery was so rapid that in a short time he was
asking for food.

Dr. Brigham, greatly impressed by the demonstration of kahuna magic,
asked many questions of the kahuna, learning little beyond the fact that
the "god" whose aid had been given was one of the *Aumakuas*, or
parental and greatly trustworthy spirits who have formerly been men
living in bodies on earth.

He kept track of the Hawaiian lad for a number of years and there seemed
never to have been appreciable after effects from the death by drowning.

*Comment:*

The aid of spirits who have once been men and women in the flesh, is no
new thing. The annals of Spiritualism and Psychical Research are filled
with accounts of successful healing of the living through the
ministrations of the spirit "dead." The most successful of these spirit
healers often speak of their work being done by prayers to higher
spirits or the conventional concept of God.

The spirits, like the living, have no way to make direct contact with
the level of consciousness one step above, and can only speculate about
the High Beings and their form of mentation which enables them to use a
mysterious power for magical healing. Many spirits have given their
ideas of the mechanisms by which healing is accomplished, but even when
they claim to have exact knowledge, no two of them agree.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

They are amusingly like the living—each evolving his own explanation and
rejecting all others. In the face of the sharp contradictions found in
the explanations given by the spirits of the dead, we do well to fall
back on the ancient explanations given by the kahunas, for they are
correct in all details so far as we are able to check them with our
present limited knowledge, and what is more important, THEY WORK as a
basis for practical application.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Case 23</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Raising the Dead Temporarily. Full Materialization</span>

*Preliminary Notes:*

Nothing in Psychical Research has been so fascinating, so incredible, so
violently denied (if futilely), so inexplicable or so deeply significant
as "full materialization," or the temporary raising of the dead.

In raising the dead, as the process applies to the spirits of those long
since passed over, there is the same need for the various elements which
constitute a normal living man. The low and middle spirits of the
deceased individual come to a spiritualistic seance. They furnish the
element of consciousness. They live in the combined low and middle
shadowy bodies, so bring these with them and thus furnish a mold of the
physical body which they once had on the earth level. What the High Self
lacks is the former physical body and its naturally large charge of
vital force. To supply this lack, vital force and physical matter are
drawn from the circle of living sitters. The physical matter is changed
to the thin ectoplasmic form and then solidified in the mold of the
spirit's low shadow body.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

This results in a "full materialization" of an actual living, breathing,
warm and completely normal physical body with the two spirits resident
inside it. Such bodies have repeatedly stood close medical inspection.
However, they are not permanent. In from a minute to seldom more than an
hour, the ectoplasmic material is returned to the living and the solid
form vanishes.

It is conceivable that such a materialized body might be permanent if
borrowed physical substance did not have to be returned. The Second
Coming of Jesus might thus be accomplished were some devotee willing to
step out of the flesh into the life of the departed and give his body to
be used in this way to fill the mold of the shadowy body of the great
Teacher.

In one of the Pacific islands a few years ago, there was quite a furor
caused by a group of Polynesian natives who held secret seances at night
and succeeded in getting a dead chief raised by the process of
materialization. This chief, who had died a leper, was very wise and
much loved. Oddly enough, he materialized and remained in the body for
much longer periods than is common in the West. Because the authorities
feared that the natives would be stirred to rebellion by the chief, the
excuse was made that the materialization might spread leprosy, and the
seances were broken up.

*The Cases:*

#### (A) THE KAHUNAS AND MASS MATERIALIZATION IN HAWAII.

In Hawaii, where the kahunas were the most powerful workers in psychic
phenomena, mass materializations have been reported down the years.
Usually a native

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

chief with from ten to fifty of his followers (all long dead)
materialize at night and march through the countryside. Often they
materialize drums and torches. Sometimes they remain invisible but the
sound of marching feet and of the drums and voices may be clearly heard.
These ghostly processions are well known in Hawaii, have often been well
substantiated, and many times described in books and articles about the
Islands.

Dr. John Tanner, who studied the kahunas in Hawaii for some time, told
me that he was at Waikiki Beach one night when he heard the ghostly
marchers in procession moving toward the center of Honolulu. He guessed
that they might be following the route described as usual by the older
Hawaiians—that from Waikiki to the royal tombs near the old Missionary
Church at the center of the city. Taking his car he drove to the old
church and waited. In a surprisingly short time the same sounds of
marching feet became audible, also soft chanting and low conversation.
The sounds seemed to be swallowed up by the tomb of a native king long
dead, in the church yard. Dr. Tanner saw nothing.

Dr. Brigham had many first-hand accounts of seeing visible marchers by
torchlight and moonlight. The Hawaiians agree that the fully
materialized marchers, armed with war clubs and spears, are dangerous to
anyone who interferes with them. If such a procession is seen to
approach, the wise native gets out of the way, or hides himself and
remains very quiet while watching it pass. There are several accounts of
men having been killed by such marchers. One Hawaiian of my acquaintance

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

claimed to have run face to face into a small group of such marchers,
all armed, and garbed in feather cloaks. One warrior rushed at him with
a spear, but he instantly called out that he was a living relative and a
friend. He was given time to tell his name and to recite the names of
his ancestors. It was almost inevitable that, traced back a few
generations, he should come to a family relation with any former citizen
of these parts—and he did. He was pardoned for his accidental intrusion
into the line of march and sent on his way.

While it is evident that much fiction has been added to the commonly
accepted facts concerning the ghostly processions in Hawaii, I have no
doubt that the basic facts are true. Legendary lore of the Polynesians
is filled with accounts of mass and single materializations. The "gods"
help the spirits of the dead to materialize, and it is related that
vital force and substance for ectoplasm are borrowed from the living
while they sleep, or, on rare occasions, are taken from animal and plant
life.

#### (B) A BISHOP MATERIALIZES AFTER FOUR HUNDRED YEARS OF DEATH.

Carlo Mirabelli, a South American medium of Italian blood, provided
excellent examples of nearly all types of psychic phenomena.

Dr. Fodor writes: "\[Mirabelli's\] phenomena of materialization were
astounding. The figures were not only complete, they were not only
photographed, but medical men made minute examinations which lasted

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

sometimes as long as for fifteen minutes and stated that the newly
constituted human beings had perfect anatomical structure. After the
examination was completed the figure began to dissolve from the feet
upwards, the bust and arms floating in the air. One of the doctors
exclaimed; 'But this is too much,' and rushed forward and seized the
half of the body. The next moment he uttered a shrill cry and sank
unconscious to the ground. On returning to consciousness he only
remembered that when he had seized the phantom it had felt as if his
fingers were pressing a spongy, flaccid mass of substance. Then he
received a shock and lost consciousness. For thirty-six minutes in broad
daylight the materialization of the little daughter of Dr. Souza, who
died of influenza, was visible to all the sitters. She appeared in her
grave clothes. Her pulse was tested. Father and child were photographed.
Then the phantom raised itself and floated in the air.…

"In another sitting Mirabelli announced that he saw the body of Bishop
Dr. Jose de Carmago Barros who lost his life in a shipwreck. 'A sweet
smell as of roses filled the room. The medium went into trance. A fine
mist was seen in the circle \[of sitters\]. The mist, glowing as if of
gold, parted and the bishop materialized, with all the robes and
insignia of office. He called his own name. Dr. Souza stepped to him. He
palpitated the body, touched his teeth, tested the saliva, listened to
the heart-beat, investigated the working of the intestines, nails and
eyes, without finding anything amiss. Then the other attending persons
convinced themselves of the reality of the apparition. The

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

Bishop bent smilingly over Mirabelli and looked at him silently. Then he
slowly dematerialized.' 'At the sixth sitting, Mirabelli, tied and
sealed, disappeared from the room, and was found in another room still
in trance. All seals on doors and windows were found in order, as well
as the seals on Mirabelli himself.' Once among fourteen investigators
his arms dematerialized. On the photograph only a slight shadow is
visible."

#### (C) YOLANDE AND HER MATERIALIZATIONS.

Mme. Elizabeth d’Esperance, a famous medium, had, among other spirits
who materialized at her seances an Arab girl of fifteen named Yolande.
This girl would appear as a mist and take several minutes to become
fully materialized. Then, in good light, she was accustomed to talk with
the living and to make objects in the room appear and disappear. She
produced apports in great numbers, and caused plants to grow in
waterbottles filled with water and sand, a large plant being grown in a
few minutes. The medium was found by the investigator Alexander N.
Aksakof, on one occasion, to have dematerialized the lower half of her
body while visible spirit materializations were in the seance room. The
upper half of the medium seemed to be suspended in air. She was not in
trance, and was frightened to discover her condition, calling the
investigator's attention to the situation. Others present also assured
themselves that there was nothing in the collapsed garments of the
medium below the waist. Ten years later, Aksakof published a weighty

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

opinion which years of study and observation had forced upon him: the
opinion that, in some cases at least, "the body of the medium is
entirely absorbed for the production of apparitions.…"

#### (D) ANIMAL MATERIALIZATIONS.

The kahuna contention that all things have shadowy bodies which are
molds of their microscopic parts as well as of their full form and
shape, applies to animals as well as men. (Also insects and inert
objects such as rocks.)

Gambier Bolton had a peculiar experience. He had befriended and doctored
a wounded seal at a Zoo, but the seal had died. Ten days after its
death, at a seance with Mrs. Craddock, and with a number of men of
science present, a seal—seemingly the one known to Bolton—materialized
and flapped its way across the room, staying close to Bolton for several
minutes. The spirits officiating at the seance were asked to explain
this. They said, "Their actions (those of animals at seances where they
materialize) are altogether independent of us. Whilst we are busily
engaged in conducting our experiments with human entities who wish to
materialize in your midst, the animals get into the room in some way
which we do not understand, and which we cannot prevent; obtain, from
somewhere, sufficient matter with which to build up temporary bodies;
coming just when they choose, roaming about the room just as they
please; and disappearing just when it suits them, and not before; and we
have no power to prevent this

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

so long as the affection existing between them and their late owners is
so strong as it was in the instances which have come under our notice."

Dr. Fodor points out that the above statement from the medium's spirit
controls seems contradicted by the fact that in the famous animal
materializations at the Kluski seances, there invariably appeared a
human apparition acting as keeper of such animals as appeared. The
keepers and animals seldom moved about at the same time, but the
keepers, although still, were to be plainly seen. However, there was one
animal which appeared with no keeper. It was an ape man spoken of by the
investigators as Pithecanthropus. It had coarse shaggy hair, smelled
like a cross between a deer and a wet dog, and was frolicsome, evidently
of a low level of intelligence, but gentle and ready to obey. Its great
strength caused fear at a few of the sittings at which it appeared. It
lifted heavy men, seated in their chairs, high above the heads of the
others. It picked up a large and very heavy case of books and carried it
about the room, also a large sofa. It made only smacking sounds and
scratched itself frequently.

Dogs, cats, parrots, bats, weasels and many other dead pets have
returned to visit their former owners at seances. Hairs from one small
pet animal were left behind in some lace in which its leg had been
entangled during the appearance (the lace had been torn four inches).
These hairs were placed in a light-tight and damp-proof box and were
inspected often. After a few days the hairs dwindled in size, and before
long vanished entirely, evidently dematerializing much more slowly than
had the little animal itself.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

#### (E) PARTIAL MATERIALIZATIONS OF THE LIVING

A number of instances have been reported by investigators in which the
living have appeared at seances in partial materializations. Horace Leaf
saw the head, shoulders and one arm of a relative alive and living four
hundred miles distant. A conversation was carried on in which matters
known only to themselves were discussed for several minutes. Alfred Vout
Peters, in a seance with Cecil Husk, saw the materialization (apparently
almost complete) of a living friend who, it was later learned, had been
asleep at his home at the time.

Dr. Nandor Fodor, in his long article on Materialization in his
*Encyclopaedia of Psychic Science*, made a comment which bears strongly
on the ancient theories of the kahunas (unknown to Dr. Fodor at the time
of writing). "Indeed, one is tempted to speculate whether it would be
possible to build up, through the process of dematerialization and
materialization a living organism on altered lines. Perhaps some of the
miraculous cures in which organic parts of the body had been restored
will find an explanation in the future along such speculative lines."

#### (F) CHANGES IN NORMAL SIZE IN MATERIALIZATION.

Many reports have included the appearance of materialized forms which
were either larger or smaller than it is to be supposed the living
person had been. This is similar to the phenomena of elongation of the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

living mediums at seances, in which the medium's body has been seen to
become longer by as much as two feet. (The kahunas believed that the
shadowy body of a thing could be made larger or smaller.)

Mme. Bisson studied a naked female figure not more than eight inches
tall which repeatedly materialized, often with a change of hair
arrangement, dancing and performing gymnastic exercises. It even stood
on Mme. Bisson's hand some of the time, but usually on the hand of the
medium, Eva.

In the sittings of Mme. Ignath small heads the size of walnuts and very
beautiful materialized in glasses of water. The spirit control, Nona,
gave the opinion that they were materialized plastic thought forms.

Partial materializations such as heads and hands have often been seen to
be only a fraction of normal size.

#### (G) MATERIALIZED CLOTHING

Very few of the temporarily materialized spirits have come without
clothing. Harry Price, most careful and skeptical of the S.P.R.
investigators, in a recent book tells of the periodic materialization of
a little girl unclothed—in dark seances held by her mother and a few
friends, one a good medium. Attending such a seance, Price found the
bare little body warm, solid and of normal weight in his hands. The
child spoke a few words in answer to a question. The floor of the room
had been sprinkled with white powder, the openings sealed, and all
precautions taken against fraud. No footprints crossed the powdered
floor and no seals were broken, satisfying Price of the genuineness of
the materialization.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

On the other hand, spirits clothe themselves in materials ranging from
misty gray vapors to cloth so solid that pieces of it have repeatedly
been cut off by investigators to study after the dematerialization of
spirit and garb. A peculiarity of the materialized fabric is that it is
nearly always lighter and finer than ordinarily would be the case.

Sylvan J. Muldoon, famous for his practice and reports on astral travel,
writes of once seeing clothing forming itself around his astral body
when it had left the physical body but a few feet. The clothing was
identical to that on his living body which lay recumbent on his bed.

Not only do the bodies of mediums dematerialize partly or completely at
materializing seances on occasion, but sometimes their clothing also
vanishes for the time being—though at other times it is left behind.
Usually the cloth materialized at a seance remains white, even if the
vanishing clothing of the medium is black.

Katie King, a spirit who frequently materialized at Miss Florence Cook's
seances and was much studied by Sir William Crookes, often allowed the
fabric of her ghostly clothing to be examined. Sometimes she cut as many
as a dozen pieces from the bottom of her skirt and handed them to
sitters to be examined. The holes in the skirt immediately closed up as
the sitters watched. Most of this fabric vanished when the phantom
dematerialized, but a few pieces were rendered enduring, in which case
similar holes were found cut in the skirt of the medium after the seance
ended, tending to show that the material of her skirt had been borrowed
for

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

materialization purposes, and that it was not returned when pieces were
rendered permanent.

In passing it must be noted that the fabric of the ghostly garment was
not like that of the skirt in which a hole had been left. It is thus
seen that it is possible to transform matter through the process of
dematerialization and materialization, changing one thing to another,
and rendering the changed part permanent—as must be done in instant
healing if the kahuna theory is correct.

Katie King said that in making bits of drapery permanent she was forced
to take away permanently some of the medium's vitality (check the kahuna
theory that all materializing operations involve the use of vital force
of the living) and so weakening her. This material when presented to
drapers with the request that it be matched, proved to be like nothing
in the market. The drapers expressed the opinion that it might be cloth
of Chinese manufacture.

A piece of Yolande's spirit dress was torn off and made permanent at a
sitting with Mme. d’Esperance in Christiania. A similar hole, partly
torn and partly cut appeared later in the medium's skirt. The piece from
the spirit's skirt was *several times larger* but of exactly the same
shape. The fabric was white and much lighter in texture, being almost as
thin as gauze, but composed of definitely woven threads.

Some materialized fabric has been found not to be woven. It resembles
filmy sheets of material slightly like rubber, often filled with holes
to make it appear like lace.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

At a sitting with George Spriggs in Cardiff, a piece of the rich, bright
red silk girdle of a materialized spirit form was cut off and left
behind. It soon faded, but at a later seance, when called to the
attention of the same spirit, was restored to its original color and
lustre in some unexplained way.

Locks of hair cut from the heads of materialized spirits and left behind
as permanent or as slowly vanishing souvenirs, have in almost all cases
been found to be softer and finer than the hair of the medium through
whose seance the apparition was enabled to materialize.

#### (H) MATERIALIZATION OF THE "LITTLE PEOPLE."

Fairies and other "little people" seem to materialize in visible and
even tangible forms at times, most often in the presence of children.
Around the year 1915 two young girls in England used their father's
camera to get pictures of fairies and gnomes. The pictures were
published and quite a stir created. A better camera was provided and
more pictures obtained. The charge of the suspicious that the negatives
could have been "faked" was never proved.

In Hawaii there is a belief in the gnomes or *menehunes*, these
materializing at times and resembling the brownies of other lands.
During my stay in Honolulu the papers were filled with accounts and
comments after school children discovered one of the little men on the
playground and followed him excitedly until he took fright and escaped
from them by diving under a building set a few feet off the ground. He
seemed to disappear

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

into thin air under the building. The teacher, hearing the shouts, came
on the scene and questioned the children. They all told the same story
and described the little man in the same way.

The *menehunes* were credited with the building of many stone walls to
enclose arms of the shallow sea and act as artificial fish ponds. In
native folk lore a variety of such "little people" receive mention.

While the evidence of the materialization of elves, fairies, gnomes and
their like is poorly verified, it would seem to be a mistake not to
mention the possibility of their reality in listing the materials of the
study at this point.

*Comment:*

Several things need to be especially noted in the above cases. The shock
which rendered the doctor unconscious when he seized an apparition at
one of Mirabelli's seances, indicates the electrical factor involved in
materialization. Many investigators have studied the evidence of
electrical vital or psychic force at work during materialization and
have found it very real, even if its function was not fully understood.
Spirits of the dead give contradictory opinions as to the nature and use
of the force, some saying it is drawn from the brain of medium or
sitters, others saying it comes from their bodies, and still others
saying it is present in the atmosphere and has only to be collected.

Modern studies by medical men have proved that, when the electro-vital
"body electricity" or "mind electricity" or both, are exhausted in a
living person, unconsciousness results. This agrees with the kahuna
belief that all consciousness functions only when there

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

is at hand a proper amount of vital force of the necessary voltage.
(Remember that they believe that the low self makes the vital force from
foods we eat, that the middle self takes this low voltage force and
steps up its voltage for its use in "will," and that the High Self takes
the force and steps up its voltage to the highest voltage—in which
condition it becomes similar to the "atom smashing" voltages known to
science.)

The vitality of mediums and sitters at seances has often been depleted
by materializations. The famous medium, D. D. Home, was sometimes left
lying almost unconscious on the floor after such a seance. One
investigator, F. W. H. Meyers, was so depleted after a seance that he
went to bed for two days. Mediums frequently have been forced to take
long rest periods between sittings.

The kahunas, in their healing practices, watched for the danger of the
theft of vital force from the living by the dead. While doctors do not
recognize such possibilities at the present time, it is evident, in the
light of the long study of the kahuna lore, that some illness is
directly caused by such theft of vital force. The doctors do, however,
know that when vital force falls below par in the individual, the
control of the conscious mind over the subconscious is greatly weakened,
causing thought impressions to enter the subconscious without being
subjected to the usual process of judgment by reason, causing
unreasonable complexes or fixations. We have seen that shock impressions
are dangerous when one is very tired or vitality is low because of
illness or strain; that if, for some reason the normal supply of vital
force continues for some time to fall,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

depressive states come, and—at more advanced stages—insanity results.

While medical men make no mention of the rest of the usual story, the
patient, once insanity becomes pronounced, seems no longer to suffer so
greatly from lack of vital force. Often there is violent physical
action—indicating that the kahunas were right in thinking that the
spirits of the dead often obsess the living, beginning by stealing vital
force and ending by pushing out the resident pair of spirits and taking
over the body for themselves—thus accomplishing a form of "rising from
the dead" for themselves. (Doctors frown on the idea, but when they
administer insulin shock or electrical shock to cure the insane, they
are doing nothing more or less than the physicians of early times when
they made the stay of obsessing spirits so painful in the body of the
insane patient that the invaders left, allowing the rightful owners of
the body to return.)

The passage of matter through matter in materialization is demonstrated
when apports and even bodies of large animals and men are dematerialized
and brought through closed and sealed doors to be materialized in the
seance room. This indicates the fact that in the dematerialized state
physical substance is sufficiently thin to pass through wood and other
not-too-dense substances. (Glass seems too dense to allow such passage
of thin materials or shadowy body molds through it.)

It is not necessary for the spirit of a dead person to materialize in
denser form in order to carry vital force with it. Also, dematerialized
physical substances need not be solidified to the visible state to be
used as an invisible hand in moving solid objects, providing there

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

is enough vital force lodged in the invisible ectoplasmic substance used
by the spirit.

A case illustrating this came under my observation. A young man was to
arrive by plane and have dinner with his sweetheart and her mother. The
plane crashed and he was killed in the landing. A few minutes later the
door bell rang at the house he had intended to visit. The sweetheart
answered the bell but found no one there. The bell rang three times, the
mother joining the girl in trying to learn who had caused the ringing.
Some months later, at a seance, the young man communicated through a
medium saying that he had not been aware of his death, and had gone to
the home where he had been expected. He rang the bell three times, being
greatly surprised and agitated to find that he was not seen or
recognized by his friends. He failed after the third ring to be able to
press the button (vital force evidently expended) and concluded that
something was very wrong.

All the evidence accumulated by the study of hundreds of cases of
haunting and poltergeist phenomena indicates that the kahunas were right
in believing that the spirits of the dead can store large amounts of
vital force in the shadowy body of the low self. At the moment of sudden
death the shadowy body is charged with vital force, and seems to remain
charged and ready to ring bells and do other kinds of work until the
charge is exhausted. The poltergeist, being usually a low self cut off
from his middle self after death, and given to childish antics, steals
vital force from the living and uses it to move solid objects or make
noises. The shadowy body appears to be an excellent storage battery

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

for vital force, and when heavily charged, may become sufficiently solid
to be used to move material objects. A small amount of. ectoplasmic
material of the invisible and very thin grade may be needed to stiffen
the shadowy body—later study may show whether or not this is true.

In cases where animals materialize at seances, one can only conclude
that High Selves are present and doing the work. If the spirits of the
dead disagree so largely on how materialization is accomplished, so
showing that they are ignorant of the part played by the High Selves, it
stands to reason that animals would not have sufficient intelligence to
cause a materialization for themselves.

One more thing should be kept in mind. The materials of a supposedly
living and fleshly nature used in forming ectoplasm with which to
materialize animals, birds and insects, cannot be said to come from the
medium and sitters. It must be found in other quarters by the High
Selves and borrowed for temporary use. In fact, materializations have
often been observed when no visible material was drawn from either
medium or sitters, although the expenditure of vital force from the
circle is very usual.

In the blacker phases of ceremonial magic it is probable that the vital
force of sacrificed animals or even humans, was taken and used by
spirits, but it is to be concluded that the High Selves would never use
vital force or the bodily materials of sacrificial victims. The kahuna
name for the High Self was "Entirely Trustworthy Parental Self," and
there seems to be no question as to its aversion to cruelty.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

With the end of this chapter I finish the work of presenting the basic
elements in the theories of Huna, together with some of the proofs
derived from comparison with the findings of Psychic Science and the
Psychologies, also, to a lesser extent, various religious beliefs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Life-Giving Secrets of Lomilomi and Laying on
of Hands](ssbm14)
