[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc44014)  [Next](cc44016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:1-4

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** For the law having a shadow of good
things to come, *and* not the very image of the things, can never with
those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the
comers thereunto perfect.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Umbram enim habens lex futurorum
bonorum, non ipsam vivam imaginem rerum, sacrificiis quae quotannis
eadem continenter offeruntur nunquam potest eos qui accedunt perficere
(*vel, sanctificare*.)

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** For then would they not have ceased to
be offered? because that the worshippers once purged should have had no
more conscience of sins.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Alioqui annon desiisent offeri?
propterea quod nullam amplius conscientiam peccatorum haberent cultores
semel purgati.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** But in those *sacrifices there is* a
remembrance again *made* of sins every year.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Atqui in his fit quotannis
commemoratio peccatorum.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** For *it is* not possible that the
blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Impossible enim est ut sanguis
taurorum tollat peccata.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span><span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**1.** *For the Law having a shadow,* *etc.*
He has borrowed this similitude from the pictorial art; for a shadow
here is in a sense different from what it has in <span
id="xvi.i-p12.2"></span>[Col 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p12.2"></span>; where he calls the ancient rites or ceremonies
shadows, because they did not possess the real substance of what they
represented. But he now says that they were like rude lineaments, which
shadow forth the perfect picture; for painters, before they introduce
the living colors by the pencil, are wont to mark out the outlines of
what they intend to represent. This indistinct representation is called
by the Greeks σκιαγραφία, which you might call in Latin, “<span
id="xvi.i-p12.3"></span>umbratilem“, shadowy. The Greeks had also the
εἰκὼν, the full likeness. Hence also “eiconia” are called images (<span
id="xvi.i-p12.4"></span>*imagines*) in Latin, which represent to the
life the form of men or of animals or of places.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>The difference then which the Apostle makes
between the Law and the Gospel is this, — that under the Law was
shadowed forth only in rude and imperfect lines what is under the Gospel
set forth in living colors and graphically distinct. He thus confirms
again what he had previously said, that the Law was not useless, nor its
ceremonies unprofitable. For though there was not in them the image of
heavenly things, finished, as they say, by the last touch of the artist;
yet the representation, such as it was, was of no small benefit to the
fathers; but still our condition is much more favorable. We must however
observe, that the things which were shown to them at a distance are the
same with those which are now set before our eyes. Hence to both the
same Christ is exhibited, the same righteousness, sanctification, and
salvation; and the difference only is in the manner of painting or
setting them forth.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>*Of good things to come,* *etc.* These, I
think, are eternal things. I indeed allow that the kingdom of Christ,
which is now present with us, was formerly announced as future; but the
Apostle’s words mean that we have a lively image of future blessings. He
then understands that spiritual pattern, the full fruition of which is
deferred to the resurrection and the future world. At the same time I
confess again that these good things began to be revealed at the
beginning of the kingdom of Christ; but what he now treats of is this,
that they are not only future blessings as to the Old Testament, but
also with respect to us, who still hope for them.

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>*Which they offered year by year,* *etc.* He
speaks especially of the yearly sacrifice, mentioned in <span
id="xvi.i-p15.1"></span>[Lev
16:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001.md)<span id="xvi.i-p15.1"></span>,
though all the sacrifices are here included under one kind. Now he
reasons thus: When there is no longer any consciousness of sin, there is
then no need of sacrifice; but under the Law the offering of the same
sacrifice was often repeated; then no satisfaction was given to God, nor
was guilt removed nor were consciences appeased; were it otherwise there
would have been made an end of sacrificing. We must further carefully
observe, that he calls those the same sacrifices which were appointed
for a similar purpose; for a better notion may be formed of them by the
design for which God instituted them, than by the different beasts which
were offered.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>And this one thing is abundantly sufficient
to confute and expose the subtlety of the Papists, by which they seem to
themselves ingeniously to evade an absurdity in defending the sacrifice
of the mass; for when it is objected to them that the repetition of the
sacrifice is superfluous, since the virtue of that sacrifice which
Christ offered is perpetual, they immediately reply that the sacrifice
in the mass is not different but the same. This is their answer. But
what, on the contrary, does the Apostle say? He expressly denies that
the sacrifice which is repeatedly offered, though the same, is
efficacious or capable of making an atonement. Now, though the Papists
should cry out a thousand times that the sacrifice which Christ once
offered is the same with, and not different from what they make daily, I
shall still always contend, according to the express words of the
Apostle, that since the offerings of Christ availed to pacify God, not
only an end was put to former sacrifices, but that it is also impious to
repeat the sacrifice. It is hence quite evident that the offering of
Christ in the mass is sacrilegious.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md)

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span><span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**3.** *A remembrance again,* *etc.* Though
the Gospel is a message of reconciliation with God, yet it is necessary
that we should daily remember our sins; but what the Apostle means is,
that sins were brought to remembrance that guilt might be removed by the
means of the sacrifice then offered. It is not, then, any kind of
remembrance that is here meant, but that which might lead to such a
confession of guilt before God, as rendered a sacrifice necessary for
its removal.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>Such is the sacrifice of the mass with the
Papists; for they pretend that by it the grace of God is applied to us
in order that sins may be blotted out. But since the Apostle concludes
that the sacrifices of the Law were weak, because they were every year
repeated in order to obtain pardon, for the very same reason it may be
concluded that the sacrifice of Christ was weak, if it must be daily
offered, in order that its virtue may be applied to us. With whatever
masks, then, they may cover their mass, they can never escape the charge
of an atrocious blasphemy against Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span><span id="xvi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**4.** *For it is not possible,* *etc.* He
confirms the former sentiment with the same reason which he had adduced
before, that the blood of beasts could not cleanse souls from sin. The
Jews, indeed, had in this a symbol and a pledge of the real cleansing;
but it was with reference to another, even as the blood of the calf
represented the blood of Christ. But the Apostle is speaking here of the
efficacy of the blood of beasts in itself. He therefore justly takes
away from it the power of cleansing. There is also to be understood a
contrast which is not expressed, as though he had said, “It is no wonder
that the ancient sacrifices were insufficient, so that they were to be
offered continually, for they had nothing in them but the blood of
beasts, which could not reach the conscience; but far otherwise is the
power of Christ’s blood: It is not then right to measure the offering
which he has made by the former sacrifices.”

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:5-10

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Wherefore when he cometh into the
world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body
hast thou prepared me:

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Quapropter egrediens in mundum dicit,
Sacrificium et oblationem noluisti, corpus autem aptasti mihi;

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span>**6.** In burnt offerings and *sacrifices*
for sin thou hast had no pleasure.

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Holocausta et victimas pro peccato
non probasti;

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God.

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Tunc dixi, Ecce adsum; in capite
libri scriptum est de me, ut faciam, O Deus, voluntatem tuam.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>**8.** Above when he said, Sacrifice and
offering and burnt offerings and *offering* for sin thou wouldest not,
neither hadst pleasure *therein*; which are offered by the law;

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Quum prius dixesset, sacrificium et
oblationem, holocausta et victimas pro peccato noluisti, neque
comprobasti quae secundum legem offeruntur;

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>**9.** Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy
will, O God. He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second.

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Tunc dixit, Ecce adsum ut faciam, O
Deus, voluntatem tuam, tollit prius ut secundum statuat:

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>**10.** By the which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once *for all*

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span>**10.** In qua voluntate sanctificati sumus
per oblationem corporis Iesu Christi semel.

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span>**5.** *Wherefore, when he cometh,* *etc.*
This entering into the world was the manifestation of Christ in the
flesh; for when he put on man’s nature that he might be a Redeemer to
the world and appeared to men, he is said to have then come into the
world, as elsewhere he is said to have descended from heaven. (<span
id="xvi.ii-p16.1"></span>[Joh
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041)<span id="xvi.ii-p16.1"></span>..md)
And yet the <span id="xvi.ii-p16.2"></span>[Ps
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p16.2"></span>,
which he quotes, seems to be improperly applied to Christ, for what is
found there by no means suits his character, such as, “My iniquities
have laid hold on me,” except we consider that Christ willingly took on
himself the sins of his members. The whole of what is said, no doubt,
rightly accords with David; but as it is well known that David was a
type of Christ, there is nothing unreasonable in transferring to Christ
what David declared respecting himself, and especially when mention is
made of abolishing the ceremonies of the Law, as the case is in this
passage. Yet all do not consider that the words have this meaning, for
they think that sacrifices are not here expressly repudiated, but that
the superstitious notion which had generally prevailed, that the whole
worship of God consisted in them, is what is condemned; and if it be so,
it may be said that this testimony has little to do with the present
question. It behaves us, then, to examine this passage more minutely,
that it may appear evident whether the apostle has fitly adduced it.

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span>Everywhere in the Prophets sentences of
this kind occur, that sacrifices do not please God, that they are not
required by him, that he sets no value on them; nay, on the contrary,
that they are an abomination to him. But then the blame was not in the
sacrifices themselves, but what was adventitious to them was referred
to; for as hypocrites, while obstinate in their impiety, still sought to
pacify God with sacrifices, they were in this manner reproved. The
Prophets, then, rejected sacrifices, not as they were instituted by God,
but as they were vitiated by wicked men, and profaned through unclean
consciences. But here the reason is different, for he is not condemning
sacrifices offered in hypocrisy, or otherwise not rightly performed
through the depravity and wickedness of men; but he denies that they are
required of the faithful and sincere worshippers of God; for he speaks
of himself who offered them with a clean heart and pure hands, and yet
he says that they did not please God.

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span>Were any one to except and say that they
were not accepted on their own account or for their own worthiness, but
for the sake of something else, I should still say that unsuitable to
this place is an argument of this kind; for then would men be called
back to spiritual worship, when ascribing too much to external
ceremonies; then the Holy Spirit would be considered as declaring that
ceremonies are nothing with God, when by men’s error they are too highly
exalted.

<span id="xvi.ii-p19"></span>David, being under the Law, ought not
surely to have neglected the rite of sacrificing. He ought, I allow, to
have worshipped God with sincerity of heart; but it was not lawful for
him to omit what God had commanded, and he had the command to sacrifice
in common with all the rest. We hence conclude that he looked farther
than to his own age, when he said, *Sacrifice thou wouldest not.* It
was, indeed, in some respects true, even in David’s time, that God
regarded not sacrifices; but as they were yet all held under the yoke of
the schoolmaster, David could not perform the worship of God in a
complete manner, unless when clothed, so to speak, in a form of this
kind. We must, then, necessarily come to the kingdom of Christ, in order
that the truth of God’s unwillingness to receive sacrifice may fully
appear. There is a similar passage in <span id="xvi.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p19.1"></span>,
“Thou wilt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption;” for though God
delivered David for a time from corruption, yet this was not fully
accomplished except in Christ.

<span id="xvi.ii-p20"></span>There is no small importance in this, that
when he professes that he would do the *will* of God, he assigns no
place to sacrifices; for we hence conclude that without them there may
be a perfect obedience to God, which could not be true were not the Law
annulled. I do not, however, deny but that David in this place, as well
as in <span id="xvi.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p20.1"></span>,
so extenuated external sacrifices as to prefer to them that which is the
main thing; but there is no doubt but that in both places he cast his
eyes on the kingdom of Christ. And thus the Apostle is a witness, that
Christ is justly introduced as the speaker in this Psalm, in which not
even the lowest place among God’s commandments is allowed to sacrifices,
which God had yet strictly required under the Law.

<span id="xvi.ii-p21"></span>*But a body hast thou prepared me,* *etc.*
The words of David are different, “An ear hast thou bored for me,” a
phrase which some think has been borrowed from an ancient rite or custom
of the Law, (<span id="xvi.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ex
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006)<span id="xvi.ii-p21.1"></span>;.md)
for if any one set no value on the liberty granted at the jubilee, and
wished to be under perpetual servitude, his ear was bored with an awl.
The meaning, as they thinks was this, “Thou shalt have me, O Lord, as a
servant forever.” I, however, take another view, regarding it as
intimating docility and obedience; for we are deaf until God opens our
ears, that is, until he corrects the stubbornness that cleaves to us.
There is at the same time an implied contrast between the promiscuous
and vulgar mass, (to whom the sacrifices were like phantoms without any
power,) and David, to whom God had discovered their spiritual and
legitimate use and application.

<span id="xvi.ii-p22"></span>But the Apostle followed the Greek
translators when he said, “A body hast thou prepared;” for in quoting
these words the Apostles were not so scrupulous, provided they perverted
not Scripture to their own purpose. We must always have a regard to the
end for which they quote passages, for they are very careful as to the
main object, so as not to turn Scripture to another meaning; but as to
words and other things, which bear not on the subject in hand, they use
great freedom.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md)

<span id="xvi.ii-p24"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p25"></span>**7.** *In the volume or chapter of the
book,* *etc.* *Volume* is properly the meaning of the Hebrew word; for
we know that books were formerly rolled up in the form of a cylinder.
There is also nothing unreasonable in understanding *book* as meaning
the Law, which prescribes to all God’s children the rule of a holy life;
though it seems to me a more suitable view to consider him as saying,
that he deemed himself to be in the catalogue of those who render
themselves obedient to God. The Law, indeed, bids us all to obey God;
but David means, that he was numbered among those who are called to obey
God; and then he testifies that he obeyed his vocation, by adding, *I
come to do thy will;* and this peculiarly belongs to Christ. For though
all the saints aspire after the righteousness of God, yet it is Christ
alone who was fully competent to do God’s will.

<span id="xvi.ii-p26"></span>This passage, however, ought to stimulate
us all to render prompt obedience to God; for Christ is a pattern of
perfect obedience for this end, that all who are his may contend with
one another in imitating him, that they may together respond to the call
of God, and that their life may exemplify this saying, *Lo, I come.* To
the same purpose is what follows, *It is written,* that is, that we
should do the will of God, according to what is said elsewhere, that the
end of our election is, to be holy and unblamable in his sight. (<span
id="xvi.ii-p26.1"></span>[Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022)<span id="xvi.ii-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.ii-p27"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p28"></span>**9.** *He taketh away,* *etc.* See now why
and for what purpose this passage was quoted, even that we may know that
the full and perfect righteousness under the kingdom of Christ stands in
no need of the sacrifices of the Law; for when they are removed, the
will of God is set up as a perfect rule. It hence follows, that the
sacrifices of beasts were to be removed by the priesthood of Christ, as
they had nothing in common with it. For there was no reason, as we have
said, for him to reject the sacrifices on account of an accidental
blame; for he is not dealing with hypocrites, nor does he condemn the
superstition of perverted worship; but he denies that the usual
sacrifices are required of a pious man rightly instructed, and he
testifies that without sacrifices God is fully and perfectly obeyed.

<span id="xvi.ii-p29"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p30"></span>**10.** *By the which will,* *etc.* After
having accommodated to his subject David’s testimony, he now takes the
occasion to turn some of the words to his own purpose, but more for the
sake of ornament than of explanation. David professed, not so much in
his own person as in that of Christ, that he was ready to do the will of
God. This is to be extended to all the members of Christ; for Paul’s
doctrine is general, when he says, “This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that every one of you abstain from uncleanness”. (<span
id="xvi.ii-p30.1"></span>[1Th 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003.md)<span
id="xvi.ii-p30.1"></span>.) But as it was a supereminent example of
obedience in Christ to offer himself to the death of the cross, and as
it was for this especially that he put on the form of a servant, the
Apostle says, that Christ by offering himself fulfilled the command of
his Father, and that we have been thus *sanctified.*  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) When he adds*, through the offering of
the body,* *etc.*, he alludes to that part of the Psalm, where he says,
“A body hast thou prepared for me,” at least as it is found in Greek. He
thus intimates that Christ found in himself what could appease God, so
that he had no need of external aids. For if the Levitical priests had a
fit body, the sacrifices of beasts would have been superfluous. But
Christ alone was sufficient, and was by himself capable of performing
whatever God required.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:11-18

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**11.** And every priest standeth daily
ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never
take away sins:

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Et omnis quidem sacerdos quotidie
ad ministrandum adstat, et easdem saepius offerendum victimas, quae
nunquam possunt tollere peccata:

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span>**12.** But this man, after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God;

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Ipse autem una pro peccatis oblata
victima, perpetuo sedet in dextera Dei;

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>**13.** From henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool.

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Quod reliquum est expectans donec
ponantur inimici sui scabellum pedum suorum.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>**14.** For by one offering he hath
perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>**14.** Una enim oblatione consecravit
(*vel, perfecit*) in perpetuum eos qui sanctificantur.

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span>**15.** *Whereof* the Holy Ghost also is a
witness to us: for after that he had said before,

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span>**15.** Testimonium autem reddit nobis
etiam Spiritus Sanctus; nam postquam praedixerat,

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span>**16.** This *is* the covenant that I will
make with them after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into
their hearts, and in their minds will I write them;

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span>**16.** Hoc esse testamentum quod statuam
cum ipsis post dies illos, dicit Dominus, ut ponam leges meas in corda
illorum, et in mentibus eorum inscribam illas,

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span>**17.** And their sins and iniquities will
I remember no more.

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span>**17.** Et peccatorum et iniquitatum eorum
non recordabor amplius.

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span>**18.** Now where remission of these *is,
there is* no more offering for sin.

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span>**18.** Porro ubi fit horum remissio, non
est amplius oblatio pro peccato.

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p20"></span>**11.** *And every priest,* *etc.* Here is
the conclusion of the whole argument, — that the practice of daily
sacrificing is inconsistent with and wholly foreign to the priesthood of
Christ; and that hence after his coming the Levitical priests whose
custom and settled practice was daily to offer, were deposed from their
office; for the character of things which are contrary is, that when one
thing is set up, the other falls to the ground. He has hitherto labored
enough, and more than enough, in defending the priesthood of Christ; the
conclusion then is, that the ancient priesthood, which is inconsistent
with this, has ceased; for all the saints find a full consecration in
the one offering of Christ. At the same time the word τετελείωκεν, which
I render “has consecrated,” may yet be rendered “has perfected;” but I
prefer the former meaning, because he treats here of sacred things.
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p22"></span>By saying, *them who are sanctified,* he
includes all the children of God; and he reminds us that the grace of
sanctification is sought elsewhere in vain.

<span id="xvi.iii-p23"></span>But lest men should imagine that Christ is
now idle in heaven, he repeats again that he *sat down at God’s right
hand;* by which phrase is denoted, as we have seen elsewhere, his
dominion and power. There is therefore no reason for us to fear, that he
will suffer the efficacy of his death to be destroyed or to lie buried;
for he lives for this end, that by his power he may fill heaven and
earth. He then reminds us in the words of the Psalm how long this state
of things is to be, even until Christ shall lay prostrate all his
enemies. If then our faith seeks Christ sitting on God’s right hand, and
recumbs quietly on him as there sitting, we shall at length enjoy the
fruit of his victory; yea, when our foes, Satan, sin, death, and the
whole world are vanquished, and when corruption of our flesh is cast
off, we shall triumph for ever together with our head.

<span id="xvi.iii-p24"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p25"></span>**15.** *The Holy Ghost also is a
witness,* *etc.*  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) This testimony
from Jeremiah is not adduced the second time without reason or
superfluously. He quoted it before for a different purpose, even to show
that it was necessary for the Old Testament to be abrogated, because
another, a new one, had been promised, and for this end, to amend the
weakness of the old.  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) But he has
now another thing in view; for he takes his stand on these words alone,
*Their iniquities will I remember no more;* and hence he concludes, that
there is no more need of a sacrifice since sins are blotted out.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p29"></span>This inference may indeed seem not to be
well founded; for though formerly there were innumerable promises as to
the remission of sins under the Law and in the prophets, yet the Church
ceased not to offer sacrifices; hence remission of sins does not exclude
sacrifices. But if you consider each particular more closely, you will
find that the fathers also had the same promises as to the remission of
sins, under the Law, as we have at this day; relying on them, they
called on God, and rejoiced in the pardon they obtained. And yet the
Prophet, as though he had adduced something new and unheard of before,
promises that there would be no remembrance of sins before God under the
new covenant. Hence we may conclude, that sins are now remitted in a way
different from what they were formerly; but this difference is not in
the promise, nor in faith, but in the very price by which remissions is
procured. God then does not now remember sins, because an expiation has
been made once for all; otherwise what is said by the Prophet would have
been to no purpose, that the benefit of the New Testament was to be this
— that God would no more remember sins.

<span id="xvi.iii-p30"></span>Now, since we have come to the close of
the discussion respecting the priesthood of Christ, readers must be
brief reminded, that the sacrifices of the Law are not more effectually
proved here to have been abolished, than the sacrifice of the mass
practiced by the Papists is proved to be a vain fiction.

<span id="xvi.iii-p31"></span>They maintain that their mass is a
sacrifice for expiating the sins of the living and of the dead; but the
Apostle denies that there is now any place for a sacrifice, even since
the time in which the prophecy of Jeremiah has been fulfilled.

<span id="xvi.iii-p32"></span>They try to make an evasion by saying,
that it is not a new sacrifice, or different from that of Christ, but
the same; on the contrary, the Apostle contends that the same sacrifice
ought not to be repeated, and declares that Christ’s sacrifice is only
one, and that it was offered for all; and, further, he often claims for
Christ alone the honor of being a priest, so that no one was fit to
offer him but himself alone.

<span id="xvi.iii-p33"></span>The Papists have another evasion, and call
their sacrifice bloodless; but the Apostle affirms it as a truth without
exception, that death is necessary in order to make a sacrifice.

<span id="xvi.iii-p34"></span>The Papists attempt to evade again by
saying, that the mass is the application of the one sacrifice which
Christ has made; but the Apostle teaches us on the contrary, that the
sacrifices of the Law were abolished by Christ’s death for this reason,
because in them a remembrance of sins was made; it hence appears
evident, that this kind of application which they have devised has
ceased.

<span id="xvi.iii-p35"></span>In short, let the Papists twist themselves
into any forms they please, they can never escape from the plain
arguments of the Apostle, by which it appears clear that their mass
abounds in impieties; for first, according to the Apostle’s testimony,
Christ alone was fit to offer himself; in the mass he is offered by
other hands; — secondly, the Apostle asserts that Christ’s sacrifice was
not only one, but was also once offered, so that it is impious to repeat
it; but in the mass, however they may prate about the sacrifice, yet it
is evidently made every day, and they themselves confess it; — thirdly,
the Apostle acknowledges no sacrifice without blood and death; they then
chatter in vain, that the sacrifice they offer is bloodless; — fourthly,
the Apostle in speaking of obtaining pardon for sins, bids us to flee to
that one sacrifice which Christ offered on the cross, and makes this
distinction between us and the fathers, that the rite of continually
sacrificing was done away by the coming of Christ; but the Papists, in
order to make the death of Christ efficacious, require daily
applications by means of a sacrifice; so that they calling themselves
Christians, differ nothing from the Jews except in the external symbol.

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:19-23

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**19.** Having therefore, brethren, boldness
to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus,

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span>**19.** Habentes itaque, fratres, fiduciam
ingrediendi in sancta per sanguinem Iesu,

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span>**20.** By a new and living way, which he
hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**20.** Via quam dedicavit nobis recentem ac
vivam per velum, hoc est carnem suam,

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>**21.** And *having* an high priest over the
house of God;

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span>**21.** Et sacerdotem magnum super domum
Dei,

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>**22.** Let us draw near with a true heart
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>**22.** Accedamus cum sincero corde in
certitudine fidei, aspersi cordibus a conscientia mala, et abluti
corpore aqua munda;

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>**23.** Let us hold fast the profession of
*our* faith without wavering; (for he *is* faithful that promised;)

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>**23.** Teneamus confessionem spei
inflexibilem, fidelis enim qui promisit.

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span>**19.** *Having therefore, brethren,*
*etc.* He states the conclusion or the sum of his previous doctrine, to
which he then fitly subjoins a serious exhortation, and denounces a
severe threatening on those who had renounced the grace of Christ. Now,
the sum of what he had said is, that all the ceremonies by which an
access under the Law was open to the sanctuary, have their real
fulfillment in Christ, so that to him who has Christ, the use of them is
superfluous and useless To set this forth more fully, he allegorically
describes the access which Christ has opened to us; for he compares
heaven to the old sanctuary, and sets forth the things which have been
spiritually accomplished in Christ in typical expressions. Allegories do
indeed sometimes obscure rather than illustrate a subject; but when the
Apostle transfers to Christ the ancient figures of the Law, there is no
small elegance in what he says, and no small light is attained; and he
did this, that we may recognize as now really exhibited in him whatever
the Law shadowed forth. But as there is great weight almost in every
word, so we must remember that there is here to be understood a
contrast, — the truth or reality as seen in Christ, and the abolition of
the ancient types.

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>He says first, that we have *boldness to
enter into the holiest.* This privilege was never granted to the fathers
under the Law, for the people were forbidden to enter the visible
sanctuary, though the high priest bore the names of the tribes on his
shoulders, and twelve stones as a memorial of them on his breast. But
now the case is very different, for not only symbolically, but in
reality an entrance into heaven is made open to us through the favor of
Christ, for he has made us a royal priesthood.  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span>He adds, *by the blood of Jesus,* because
the door of the sanctuary was not opened for the periodical entrance of
the high priest, except through the intervention of blood. But he
afterwards marks the difference between this blood and that of beasts;
for the blood of beasts, as it soon turns to corruption, could not long
retain its efficacy; but the blood of Christ, which is subject to no
corruption, but flows ever as a pure stream, is sufficient for us even
to the end of the world. It is no wonder that beasts slain in sacrifice
had no power to quicken, as they were dead; but Christ who arose from
the dead to bestow life on us, communicates his own life to us. It is a
perpetual consecration of the way, because the blood of Christ is always
in a manner distilling before the presence of the Father, in order to
irrigate heaven and earth.

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span>**20.** *Through the veil,* *etc.* As the
veil covered the recesses of the sanctuary and yet afforded entrance
there, so the divinity, though hid in the flesh of Christ, yet leads us
even into heaven; nor can any one find God except he to whom the man
Christ becomes the door and the way. Thus we are reminded, that Christ’s
glory is not to be estimated according to the external appearance of his
flesh; nor is his flesh to be despised, because it conceals as a veil
the majesty of God, while it is also that which conducts us to the
enjoyment of all the good things of God.

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p21"></span>**21.** *And having a high priest,* *etc.*
Whatever he has previously said of the abrogation of the ancient
priesthood, it behaves us now to bear in mind, for Christ could not be a
priest without having the former priests divested of their office, as it
was another order. He then intimates that all those things which Christ
had changed at his coming ought to be relinquished; and God has set him
over his whole house for this end, — that every one who seeks a place in
the Church, may submit to Christ and choose him, and no other, as his
leader and ruler.  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p23"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p24"></span>**22.** *Let us draw near with a true
heart,* *etc.* As he shows that in Christ and his sacrifice there is
nothing but what is spiritual or heavenly, so he would have what we
bring on our part to correspond. The Jews formerly cleansed themselves
by various washings to prepare themselves for the service of God. It is
no wonder that the rites for cleansing were carnal, since the worship of
God itself, involved in shadows, as yet partook in a manner of what was
carnal. For the priest, being a mortal, was chosen from among sinners to
perform for a time sacred things; he was, indeed, adorned with precious
vestments, but yet they were those of this world, that he might stand in
the presence of God; he only came near the work of the covenant; and to
sanctify his entrance, he borrowed for a sacrifice a brute animal either
from herd or the flock. But in Christ all these things are far superior;
He himself is not only pure and innocent, but is also the fountain of
all holiness and righteousness, and was constituted a priest by a
heavenly oracle, not for the short period of a mortal life, but
perpetually. To sanction his appointment an oath was interposed. He came
forth adorned with all the gifts of the Holy Spirit in the highest
perfection; he propitiated God by his own blood, and reconciled him to
men; he ascended up above all the heavens to appear before God as our
Mediator.

<span id="xvi.iv-p25"></span>Now, on our part, nothing is to be brought
but what corresponds with all this, as there ought to be a mutual
agreement or concord between the priest and the people. Away then with
all the external washings of the flesh, and cease let the whole
apparatus of ceremonies; for the Apostle sets a *true* *heart,* and the
certainty of faith, and a cleansing from all vices, in opposition to
these external rites. And hence we learn what must be the frame of our
minds in order that we may enjoy the benefits conferred by Christ; for
there is no coming to him without an upright or a true heart, and a sure
faith, and a pure conscience.

<span id="xvi.iv-p26"></span>Now, a *true* or sincere heart is opposed
to a heart that is hypocritical and deceitful.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) By the term *full assurance,*
πληροφορία the Apostle points out the nature of faith, and at the same
time reminds us, that the grace of Christ cannot be received except by
those who possess a fixed and unhesitating conviction. The *sprinkling
of the heart from an evil conscience* takes place, either when we are,
by obtaining pardon, deemed pure before God, or when the heart, cleansed
from all corrupt affections, is not stimulated by the goads of the
flesh. I am disposed to include both these things.  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) What follows, *our bodies washed with
pure water,* is generally understood of baptism; but it seems to me more
probable that the Apostle alludes to the ancient ceremonies of the Law;
and so by water he designates the Spirit of God, according to what is
said by Ezekiel, “I will sprinkle clean water upon you.” (<span
id="xvi.iv-p29.2"></span>[Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)<span id="xvi.iv-p29.2"></span>..md)
The meaning is, that we are made partakers of Christ, if we come to him,
sanctified in body and soul; and yet that this sanctification is not
what consists in a visible parade of ceremonies, but that it is from
faith, pure conscience, and that cleanness of soul and body which flows
from, and is effected by, the Spirit of God. So Paul exhorts the
faithful to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
since they had been adopted by God as his children.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) (<span id="xvi.iv-p30.2"></span>[2Co
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="xvi.iv-p30.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p31"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p32"></span>**23.** *Let us hold fast,* *etc.* As he
exhorts here the Jews to persevere, he mentions hope rather than faith;
for as hope is born of faith, so it is fed and sustained by it to the
last. He requires also *profession* or confession, for it is not true
faith except it shows itself before men. And he seems indirectly to
touch the dissimulation of those who paid too much attention, in order
to please their own nation, to the ceremonies of the Law. He therefore
bids them not only to believe with the heart, but also to show and to
profess how much they honored Christ.

<span id="xvi.iv-p33"></span>But we ought carefully to notice the reason
which he subjoins, *for he is faithful that promised.* For we hence
first learn, that our faith rests on this foundation, that God is true,
that is, true to his promise, which his word contains; for that we may
believe, the voice or word of God must precede; but it is not every kind
of word that is capable of producing faith; a promise alone is that on
which faith recumbs. And so from this passage we may learn the mutual
relation between the faith of men and the promise of God; for except God
promises, no one can believe.  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md)

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:24-27

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**24.** And let us consider one another to
provoke unto love and to good works:

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span>**24.** Et consideremus nos mutuo in
aemulationem charitatis et bonorum operum;

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span>**25.** Not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together, as the manner of some *is*; but exhorting *one
another*: and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span>**25.** Neque deseramus aggregationem nostri,
quemadmodum mos est quibusdam; sed exhortemur, idque eo magis, quia
videtis approppinquantem diem.

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>**26.** For if we sin willfully after that we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more
sacrifice for sins,

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span>**26.** Voluntarie enim peccantibus nobis
post acceptam veritatis notitiam, non amplius relinquitur pro peccatis
hostia;

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>**27.** But a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span>**27.** Sed terribilis expectatio judicii, et
zelus ignis qui devorabit adversarios.

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span><span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span>**24.** *And let us consider one another,*
*etc.* I doubt not but that he addresses the Jews especially in this
exhortation. It is well­known how great was the arrogance of that
nation; being the posterity of Abraham, they boasted that they alone, to
the exclusion of all others, had been chosen by the Lord to inherit the
covenant of eternal life. Inflated by such a privilege, they despised
other nations, and wished to be thought as being alone in the Church of
God; nay, they superciliously arrogated to themselves the name of being
The Church. It was necessary for the Apostles to labor much to correct
this pride; and this, in my judgment, is what the Apostle is doing here,
in order that the Jews might not bear it ill that the Gentiles were
associated with them and united as one body in the Church.

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span>And first, indeed, he says, *Let us consider
one another;* for God was then gathering a Church both from the Jews and
from the Gentiles, between whom there had always been a great discord,
so that their union was like the combination of fire and water. Hence
the Jews recoiled from this, for they thought it a great indignity that
the Gentiles, should be made equal with them. To this goad of wicked
emulation which pricked them, the Apostle sets up another in opposition
to it, even that of *love;* or the word παροξυσμὸς, which he uses,
signifies the ardor of contention. Then that the Jews might not be
inflamed with envy, and be led into contention, the Apostle exhorts them
to a godly emulation, even to stimulate one another to love.  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md)

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span><span id="xvi.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p19"></span>**25.** *Not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together,* *etc.* This confirms the view that has been given.
The composition of the Greek word ought to be noticed; for ἐπὶsignifies
an addition; then ἐπισυναγωγὴ, assembling together, means a congregation
increased by additions. The wall of partition having been pulled down,
God was then gathering those as his children who had been aliens from
the Church; so the Gentiles were a new and unwonted addition to the
Church. This the Jews regarded as a reproach to them, so that many made
a secession from the Church, thinking that such a mixture afforded them
a just excuse; nor could they be easily induced to surrender their own
right; and further, they considered the right of adoption as peculiar,
and as belonging exclusively to themselves. The Apostle, therefore,
warns them, lest this equality should provoke them to forsake the
Church; and that he might not seem to warn them for no reason, he
mentions that this neglect was common to many.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md)

<span id="xvi.v-p21"></span>We now understand the design of the apostle,
and what was the necessity that constrained him to give this
exhortation. We may at the same time gather from this passage a general
doctrine:

<span id="xvi.v-p22"></span>It is an evil which prevails everywhere
among mankind, that every one sets himself above others, and especially
that those who seem in anything to excel cannot well endure their
inferiors to be on an equality with themselves. And then there is so
much morosity almost in all, that individuals would gladly make churches
for themselves if they could; for they find it so difficult to
accommodate themselves to the ways and habits of others. The rich envy
one another; and hardly one in a hundred can be found among the rich,
who allows to the poor the name and rank of brethren. Unless similarity
of habits or some allurements or advantages draw us together, it is very
difficult even to maintain a continual concord among ourselves.
Extremely needed, therefore, by us all is the admonition to be
stimulated to love and not to envy, and not to separate from those whom
God has joined to us, but to embrace with brotherly kindness all those
who are united to us in faith. And surely it behaves us the more
earnestly to cultivate unity, as the more eagerly watchful Satan is,
either to tear us by any means from the Church, or stealthily to seduce
us from it. And such would be the happy effect, were no one to please
himself too much, and were all of us to preserve this one object,
mutually to provoke one another to love, and to allow no emulation among
ourselves, but that of doing “good works”. For doubtless the contempt of
the brethren, moroseness, envy, immoderate estimate of ourselves, and
other sinful impulses, clearly show that our love is either very cold,
or does not at all exist.

<span id="xvi.v-p23"></span>Having said, “Not forsaking the assembling
together,” he adds, *But exhorting* one another; by which he intimates
that all the godly ought by all means possible to exert themselves in
the work of gathering together the Church on every side; for we are
called by the Lord on this condition, that every one should afterwards
strive to lead others to the truth, to restore the wandering to the
right way, to extend a helping hand to the fallen, to win over those who
are without. But if we ought to bestow so much labor on those who are
yet aliens to the flock of Christ, how much more diligence is required
in exhorting the brethren whom God has already joined to us?

<span id="xvi.v-p24"></span>*As the manner of some is,* *etc.* It hence
appears that the origin of all schisms was, that proud men, despising
others, pleased themselves too much. But when we hear that there were
faithless men even in the age of the Apostles, who departed from the
Church, we ought to be less shocked and disturbed by similar instances
of defection which we may see in the present day. It is indeed no light
offense when men who had given some evidence of piety and professed the
same faith with us, fall away from the living God; but as it is no new
thing, we ought, as I have already said, to be less disturbed by such an
event. But the Apostle introduced this clause to show that he did not
speak without a cause, but in order to apply a remedy to a disease that
was making progress.

<span id="xvi.v-p25"></span>*And so much the more,* *etc.* Some think
this passage to be of the same import with that of Paul,

<span id="xvi.v-p26"></span>“It is time to awake out of sleep, for now
is our salvation nearer than when we believed.” (<span
id="xvi.v-p26.1"></span>[Ro 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md)<span
id="xvi.v-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.v-p27"></span>But I rather think that reference is here
made to the last coming of Christ, the expectation of which ought
especially to rouse us to the practice of a holy life as well as to
careful and diligent efforts in the work of gathering together the
Church. For to what end did Christ come except to collect us all into
one body from that dispersion in which we are now wandering? Therefore,
the nearer his coming is, the more we ought to labor that the scattered
may be assembled and united together, that there may be one fold and one
shepherd (<span id="xvi.v-p27.1"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="xvi.v-p27.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.v-p28"></span>Were any one to ask, how could the Apostle
say that those who were as yet afar off from the manifestation of
Christ, saw the day near and just at hand? I would answer, that from the
beginning of the kingdom of Christ the Church was so constituted that
the faithful ought to have considered the Judge as coming soon; nor were
they indeed deceived by a false notion, when they were prepared to
receive Christ almost every moment; for such was the condition of the
Church from the time the Gospel was promulgated, that the whole of that
period might truly and properly be called the last. They then who have
been dead many ages ago lived in the last days no less than we. Laughed
at is our simplicity in this respect by the worldly­wise and scoffers,
who deem as fabulous all that we believe respecting the resurrection of
the flesh and the last judgment; but that our faith may not fail through
their mockery, the Holy Spirit reminds us that a thousand years are
before God as one day, (<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>[2Pe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>;.md) so
that whenever we think of the eternity of the celestial kingdom no time
ought to appear long to us. And further, since Christ, after having
completed all things necessary for our salvation, has ascended into
heaven, it is but reasonable that we who are continually looking for his
second manifestation should regard every day as though it were the last.
 <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md)

<span id="xvi.v-p31"></span><span id="xvi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p32"></span>**26.** *For if we sin willfully,* or
*voluntarily etc.* He shows how severe a vengeance of God awaits all
those who fall away from the grace of Christ; for being without that one
true salvation, they are now as it were given up to an inevitable
destruction. With this testimony *Novatus* and his sect formerly armed
themselves, in order to take away the hope of pardon from all
indiscriminately who had fallen after baptism. They who were not able to
refute his calumny chose rather to deny the authority of this Epistle
than to subscribe to so great an absurdity. But the true meaning of the
passage, unaided by any help from any other part, is quite sufficient of
itself to expose the effrontery of *Novatus*

<span id="xvi.v-p33"></span>Those who *sin,* mentioned by the Apostle,
are not such as offend in any way, but such as forsake the Church, and
wholly alienate themselves from Christ. For he speaks not here of this
or of that sin, but he condemns by name those who willfully renounced
fellowship with the Church. But there is a vast difference between
particular fallings and a complete defection of this kind, by which we
entirely fall away from the grace of Christ. And as this cannot be the
case with any one except he has been already enlightened, he says, *If
we sin willfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth;* as though he had said, “If we knowingly and willingly renounce
the grace which we had obtained.” It is now evident how widely apart is
this doctrine from the error of *Novatus*

<span id="xvi.v-p34"></span>And that the Apostle here refers only to
apostates, is clear from the whole passage; for what he treats of is
this, that those who had been once received into the Church ought not to
forsake it, as some were wont to do. He now declares that there remained
for such no sacrifice for sin, because they had willfully sinned after
having received the knowledge of the truth. But as to sinners who fall
in any other way, Christ offers himself daily to them, so that they are
to seek no other sacrifice for expiating their sins. He denies, then,
that any sacrifice remains for them who renounce the death of Christ,
which is not done by any offense except by a total renunciation of the
faith.

<span id="xvi.v-p35"></span>This severity of God is indeed dreadful, but
it is set forth for the purpose of inspiring terror. He cannot, however,
be accused of cruelty; for as the death of Christ is the only remedy by
which we can be delivered from eternal death, are not they who destroy
as far as they can its virtue and benefit worthy of being left to
despair? God invites to daily reconciliation those who abide in Christ;
they are daily washed by the blood of Christ, their sins are daily
expiated by his perpetual sacrifice. As salvation is not to be sought
except in him, there is no need to wonder that all those who willfully
forsake him are deprived of every hope of pardon: this is the import of
the adverb ἔτι, more. But Christ’s sacrifice is efficacious to the godly
even to death, though they often sin; nay, it retains ever its efficacy,
for this very reason, because they cannot be free from sin as long as
they dwell in the flesh. The Apostle then refers to those alone who
wickedly forsake Christ, and thus deprive themselves of the benefit of
his death.

<span id="xvi.v-p36"></span>The clause, “after having received the
knowledge of the truth,” was added for the purpose of aggravating their
ingratitude; for he who willingly and with deliberate impiety
extinguishes the light of God kindled in his heart has nothing to allege
as an excuse before God. Let us then learn not only to receive with
reverence and prompt docility of mind the truth offered to us, but also
firmly to persevere in the knowledge of it, so that we may not suffer
the terrible punishment of those who despise it.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md)

<span id="xvi.v-p38"></span><span id="xvi.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p39"></span>**27.** *But a certain fearful looking for,*
*etc.* He means the torment of an evil conscience which the ungodly
feel, who not only have no grace, but who also know that having tasted
grace they have lost it forever through their own fault; such must not
only be pricked and bitten, but also tormented and lacerated in a
dreadful manner. Hence it is that they war rebelliously against God, for
they cannot endure so strict a Judge. They indeed try in every way to
remove the sense of God’s wrath, but all in vain; for when God allows
them a short respite, he soon draws them before his tribunal, and
harasses them with the torments which they especially shun.

<span id="xvi.v-p40"></span>He adds, *fiery indignation,* or the heat of
fire; by which he means, as I think, a vehement impulse or a violent
ardor. The word *fire* is a common metaphor; for as the ungodly are now
in a heat through dread of divine wrath, so they shall then burn through
the same feeling. Nor is it unknown to me, that the sophists have
refinedly speculated as to this fire; but I have no regard of their
glosses, since it is evident that it is the same mode of speaking as
when Scripture connects fire with worm. (<span
id="xvi.v-p40.1"></span>[Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span id="xvi.v-p40.1"></span>..md)
But no man doubts but that worm is used metaphorically to designate that
dreadful torment of conscience by which the ungodly are gnawed.  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)

<span id="xvi.v-p42"></span>*Which shall devour the adversaries.* It
shall so devour them as to destroy, but not to consume them; for it will
be inextinguishable. And thus he reminds us, that they are all to be
counted the enemies of Christ who have refused to hold the place granted
them among the faithful; for there is no intermediate state, as they who
depart from the Church give themselves up to Satan.

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:28-31

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>**28.** He that despised Moses’ law died
without mercy under two or three witnesses:

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span>**28.** Qui abjecerit legem Mosis, sine
misericordia sub duobus vel tribus testibus moritur:

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span>**29.** Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the
Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of
grace?

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span>**29.** Quanto putatis graviore dignus
judicabitur supplicio qui Filium Dei conculcaverit, et sanguinem
Testamenti, per quem fuerat sanctificatus, profanum duxerit, et Spiritum
gratiae contumelia affecerit?

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span>**30.** For we know him that hath said,
Vengeance *belongeth* unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And
again, The Lord shall judge his people.

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span>**30.** Novimus enim quis dicat, Mihi
vindicta, et ego rependam, dicit Dominus; et rursum, Dominus judicabit
populum suum.

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span>**31.** *It is* a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>**31.** Horribile est incidere in manus Dei
viventis.

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p12"></span>**28.** *He that despised,* *etc.* This is
an argument from the less to the greater; for if it was a capital
offense to violate the law of Moses, how much heavier punishment does
the rejection of the gospel deserve, a sin which involves so many and so
heinous impieties! This reasoning was indeed most fitted to impress the
Jews; for so severe a punishment on apostates under the Law was neither
new to them, nor could it appear unjustly rigorous. They ought then to
have acknowledged that vengeance just, however severe, by which God now
sanctions the majesty of his Gospel  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p14"></span>Hereby is also confirmed what I have
already said, that the Apostle speaks not of particular sins, but of the
entire denial of Christ; for the Law did not punish all kinds of
transgressions with death, but apostasy, that is, when any one wholly
renounced religion; for the Apostle referred to a passage in <span
id="xvi.vi-p14.1"></span>[De
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p14.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) where we find, that if any one
violated God’s covenant by worshipping foreign gods, he was to be
brought outside of the gate and stoned to death.

<span id="xvi.vi-p16"></span>Now, though the Law proceeded from God, and
Moses was not its author, but its minister, yet the Apostle calls it the
law of Moses, because it had been given through him: this was said in
order to amplify the more the dignity of the Gospel, which has been
delivered to us by the Son of God.

<span id="xvi.vi-p17"></span>*Under two or three witnesses,* *etc.* This
bears not on the present subject; but it was a part of the civil law of
Moses that two or three witnesses were required to prove the accused
guilty. However, we hence learn what sort of crime the Apostle meant;
for had not this been added, an opening would have been left for many
false conjectures. But now it is beyond all dispute that he speaks of
apostasy. At the same time that equity ought to be observed which almost
all statesmen have adopted, that no one is to be condemned without being
proved guilty by the testimony of two witnesses.  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p19"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p20"></span>**29.** *Who has trodden under foot the Son
of God,* *etc.* There is this likeness between apostates under the Law
and under the Gospel, that both perish without mercy; but the kind of
death is different; for the Apostle denounces on the despisers of Christ
not only the deaths of the body, but eternal perdition. And therefore he
says that a sorer punishment awaits them. And he designates the
desertion of Christianity by three things; for he says that thus the Son
of God is trodden under foot, that his blood is counted an unholy thing,
and that despite is done to the Spirit of grace. Now, it is a more
heinous thing to tread under foot than to despise or reject; and the
dignity of Christ is far different from that of Moses; and further, he
does not simply set the Gospel in opposition to the Law, but the person
of Christ and of the Holy Spirit to the person of Moses.

<span id="xvi.vi-p21"></span>*The blood of the covenant,* *etc.* He
enhances ingratitude by a comparison with the benefits. It is the
greatest indignity to count the blood of Christ unholy, by which our
holiness is effected; this is done by those who depart from the faith.
For our faith looks not on the naked doctrine, but on the blood by which
our salvation has been ratified. He calls it the blood of the
*covenant*, because then only were the promises made sure to us when
this pledge was added. But he points out the manner of this confirmation
by saying that we are *sanctified*; for the blood shed would avail us
nothing, except we were sprinkled with it by the Holy Spirit; and hence
come our expiation and sanctification. The apostle at the same time
alludes to the ancient rite of sprinkling, which availed not to real
sanctification, but was only its shadow or image.  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p23"></span>*The Spirit of grace.* He calls it the
Spirit of grace from the effects produced; for it is by the Spirit and
through his influence that we receive the grace offered to us in Christ.
For he it is who enlightens our minds by faith, who seals the adoption
of God on our hearts, who regenerates us unto newness of life, who
grafts us into the body of Christ, that he may live in us and we in him.
He is therefore rightly called the Spirit of grace, by whom Christ
becomes ours with all his blessings. But to do despite to him, or to
treat him with scorn, by whom we are endowed with so many benefits, is
an impiety extremely wicked. Hence learn that all who willfully render
useless his grace, by which they had been favored, act disdainfully
towards the Spirit of God.

<span id="xvi.vi-p24"></span>It is therefore no wonder that God so
severely visits blasphemies of this kind; it is no wonder that he shows
himself inexorable towards those who tread under foot Christ the
Mediator, who alone reconciles us to himself; it is no wonder that he
closes up the way of salvation against those who spurn the Holy Spirit,
the only true guide.  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p26"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p27"></span>**30.** *For we know him that hath said,*
*etc.* Both the passages are taken from <span
id="xvi.vi-p27.2"></span>[Deut. 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p27.2"></span>.
But as Moses there promises that God would take vengeance for the wrongs
done to his people, it seems that the words are improperly and
constrainedly applied to the vengeance referred to here; for what does
the Apostle speak of? Even that the impiety of those who despised God
would not be unpunished. Paul also in <span id="xvi.vi-p27.3"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p27.3"></span>,
knowing the true sense of the passage, accommodates it to another
purpose; for having in view to exhort us to patience, he bids us to give
place to God to take vengeance, because this office belongs to him; and
this he proves by the testimony of Moses. But there is no reason why we
should not turn a special declaration to a universal truth. Though then
the design of Moses was to console the faithful, as they would have God
as the avenger of wrongs done to them; yet we may always conclude from
his words that it is the peculiar office of God to take vengeance on the
ungodly. Nor does he pervert his testimony who hence proves that the
contempt of God will not be unpunished; for he is a righteous judge who
claims to himself the office of taking vengeance.

<span id="xvi.vi-p28"></span>At the same time the Apostle might here
also reason from the less to the greater, and in this manner: “God says
that he will not suffer his people to be injured with impunity, and
declares that he will surely be their avenger: If he suffers not wrongs
done to men to be unpunished, will he not avenge his own? Has he so
little or no care and concern for his own glory, as to connive at and
pass by indignities offered to him?” But the former view is more simple
and natural, — that the Apostle only shows that God will not be mocked
with impunity, since it is his peculiar office to render to the ungodly
what they have deserved.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p30"></span>*The Lord shall judge his people.* Here
another and a greater difficulty arises; for the meaning of Moses seems
not to agree with what here intended. The Apostle seems to have quoted
this passage as though Moses had used the word punish, and not judge;
but as it immediately follows by way of explanation, “He will be
merciful to his saints,” it appears evident that to judge here is to act
as a governor, according to its frequent meaning in the Hebrew; but this
seems to have little to do with the present subject. Nevertheless he who
weighs well all things will find that this passage is fitly and suitably
adduced here; for God cannot govern the Church without purifying it, and
without restoring to order the confusion that may be in it. Therefore
this governing ought justly to be dreaded by hypocrites, who will then
be punished for usurping a place among the faithful, and for
perfidiously using the sacred name of God, when the master of the family
undertakes himself the care of setting in order his own house. It is in
this sense that God is said to arise to judge his people, that is, when
he separates the truly godly from hypocrites, (<span
id="xvi.vi-p30.1"></span>[Ps 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004.md)<span
id="xvi.vi-p30.1"></span>;) and in <span id="xvi.vi-p30.2"></span>[Ps
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p30.2"></span>,
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) where the Prophet speaks of
exterminating hypocrites, that they might no more dare to boast that
they were of the Church, because God bore with them; he promises peace
to Israel after having executed his judgment.

<span id="xvi.vi-p32"></span>It was not then unreasonably that the
apostle reminded them that God presided over his Church and omitted
nothing necessary for its rightful government, in order that they might
all learn carefully to keep themselves under his power, and remember
that they had to render an account to their judge.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p34"></span>He hence concludes that *it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.* A mortal man, however
incensed he may be, cannot carry his vengeance beyond death; but God’s
power is not bounded by so narrow limits; besides, we often escape from
men, but we cannot escape from God’s judgment. Who soever then considers
that he has to do with God, must (except he be extremely stupid) really
tremble and quake; nay, such an apprehension of God must necessarily
absorb the whole man, so that no sorrows, or torments can be compared
with it. In short, whenever our flesh allures us or we flatter ourselves
by any means in our sins, this admonition alone ought to be sufficient
to arouse us, that “it is a fearful thing to fall into to hands of the
living God;” for his wrath is furnished with dreadful punishments which
are to be forever.

<span id="xvi.vi-p35"></span>However, the saying of David, when he
exclaimed, that it was better to fall into Gods hands than into the
hands of men, (<span id="xvi.vi-p35.1"></span>[2Sa
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014)<span id="xvi.vi-p35.1"></span>,.md)
seems to be inconsistent with what is said here. But this apparent
inconsistency vanishes, when we consider that David, relying confidently
on God’s mercy, chose him as his Judge rather than men; for though he
knew that God was displeased with him, yet he felt confident that he
would be reconciled to him; in himself, indeed, he was prostrate on the
ground, but yet he was raised up by the promise of grace. As then he
believed God not to be inexorable, there is no wonder that he dreaded
his wrath less, than that of men; but the Apostle here speaks of God’s
wrath as being dreadful to the reprobate, who being destitute of the
hope of pardon, expect nothing but extreme severity, as they have
already closed up against themselves the door of grace. And we know that
God is set forth in various ways according to the character of those
whom he addresses; and this is what David means when he says, “With the
merciful thou wilt be merciful, and with the froward thou wilt be
froward.” (<span id="xvi.vi-p35.2"></span>[Ps
18:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025.md)<span
id="xvi.vi-p35.2"></span>.)  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md)

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:32-35

<span id="xvi.vii-p2"></span>**32.** But call to remembrance the former
days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions;

<span id="xvi.vii-p3"></span>**32.** Recordamini dierum superiorum,
quibus illuminati multum certamen sustinuistis passionum;

<span id="xvi.vii-p4"></span>**33.** Partly, whilst ye were made a
gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye
became companions of them that were so used.

<span id="xvi.vii-p5"></span>**33.** Partim dum probris et
afflictionibus fuistis traducti, partim dum socii facti estis eorum qui
sic conversabantur.

<span id="xvi.vii-p6"></span>**34.** For ye had compassion of me in my
bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.

<span id="xvi.vii-p7"></span>**34.** Etenim vinculis meis compassi
estis, et rapinam bonorum vestrorum suscepistit cum guidio, scientes vos
habere meliorem substantiam in coelis et manentem:

<span id="xvi.vii-p8"></span>**35.** Cast not away therefore your
confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.

<span id="xvi.vii-p9"></span>**35.** Ne abjiciatis igitur fiduciam
vestram quae remunerationem magnam habet.

<span id="xvi.vii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p12"></span>**32.** *But call to remembrance,* *etc.*
In order to stimulate them, and to rouse their alacrity to go forward,
he reminds them of the evidences of piety which they had previously
manifested; for it is a shameful thing to begin well, and to faint in
the middle of our course, and still more shameful to retrograde after
having made great progress. The remembrance then of past warfare, if it
had been carried on faithfully and diligently under the banner of
Christ, is at length useful to us, not as a pretext for sloth, as though
we had already served our time, but to render us more active in
finishing the remaining part of our course. For Christ has not enlisted
us on this condition, that we should after a few years ask for a
discharge like soldiers who have served their time, but that we should
pursue our warfare even to the end.

<span id="xvi.vii-p13"></span>He further strengthens his exhortation by
saying, that they had already performed great exploits at a time when
they were as yet new recruits: the more shame then would it be to them,
if now they fainted after having been long tried; for the word
*enlightened* is to be limited to the time when they first enlisted
under Christ, as though he had said, “As soon as ye were initiated into
the faith of Christ, ye underwent hard and arduous contests; now
practice ought to have rendered you stronger, so as to become more
courageous.” He, however, at the same time reminds them, that it was
through God’s favor that they believed, and not through their own
strength; they were enlightened when immersed in darkness and without
eyes to see, except light from above had shone upon them. Whenever then
those things which we have done or suffered for Christ come to our
minds, let them be to us so many goads to stir us on to higher
attainments.  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md)

<span id="xvi.vii-p15"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p16"></span>**33.** *Partly, whilst ye were made,*
*etc.* We see who they were whom he addresses, even those whose faith
had been proved by no common trials, and yet he refrains not from
exhorting them to greater things. Let no man therefore deceive himself
by self-flattery as though he had reached the goal, or had no need of
incentives from others.

<span id="xvi.vii-p17"></span>Now he says, that they had been *made
gazingstocks both by reproaches and afflictions,* or exposed to public
shame by reproaches and distresses, as though they were exposed on a
public theater.  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) We hence learn
that the persecutions which they had sustained were remarkably severe.
But we ought especially to notice the latter clause, when he says that
they became *companions*, or associates of the godly in their
persecutions; for as it is Christ’s cause for which all the godly
contend, and as it is what their contend for in common, whatever one of
them suffers, all the rest ought to transfer, as it were, to themselves;
and this is what ought by all means to be done by us, unless we would
separate ourselves from Christ himself.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md)

<span id="xvi.vii-p20"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p21"></span>**34.** *And took joyfully,*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) *etc.* There is no doubt but as they
were men who had feelings, the loss of their goods caused them grief;
but yet their sorrow was such as did not prevent the joy of which the
Apostle speaks. As poverty is deemed an evil, the plunder of their goods
considered in itself touched them with grief; but as they looked higher,
they found a cause for joy, which allayed whatever grief they felt. It
is indeed thus necessary that our thoughts should be drawn away from the
world, by looking at the heavenly recompense; nor do I say any other
thing but what all the godly find to be the case by experience. And no
doubt we joyfully embrace what we are persuaded will end in our
salvation; and this persuasion the children of God doubtless have
respecting the conflicts which they undertake for the glory of Christ.
Hence carnal feelings never so prevail in overwhelming them with grief,
but that with their minds raised up to heaven they emerge into spiritual
joy.

<span id="xvi.vii-p24"></span>And this is proved by what he subjoins,
*knowing that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.*
Joyfully then did they endure the plundering of their goods, not because
they were glad to find themselves plundered; but as their minds were
fixed on the recompense, they easily forgot the grief occasioned by
their present calamity. And indeed wherever there is a lively perception
of heavenly things, the world with all its allurements is not so
relished, that either poverty or shame can overwhelm our minds with
grief. If then we wish to bear anything for Christ with patience and
resigned minds, let us accustom ourselves to a frequent meditation on
that felicity, in comparison with which all the good things of the world
are nothing but refuse. Nor are we to pass by these words, “knowing that
ye have”;  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) for except one be
fully persuaded that the inheritance which God has promised to his
children belongs to him, all his knowledge will be cold and useless.

<span id="xvi.vii-p26"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p27"></span>**35.** *Cast not away, therefore,* *etc.*
He shows what especially makes us strong to persevere, even the
retaining of confidence; for when that is lost, we lose the recompense
set before us. It hence appears that confidence is the foundation of a
godly and holy life. By mentioning *reward,* he diminishes nothing from
the gratuitous promise of Salvation; for the faithful know that their
labor is not vain in the Lord in such a way that they still rest on
God’s mercy alone. But it has been often stated elsewhere how reward is
not incompatible with the gratuitous imputation of righteousness.

<span id="xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 10:36-39

<span id="xvi.viii-p2"></span>**36.** For ye have need of patience,
that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

<span id="xvi.viii-p3"></span>**36.** Patientiae enim opus habetis, ut
quum voluntatem Dei feceritis obtineatis promissionem.

<span id="xvi.viii-p4"></span>**37.** For yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

<span id="xvi.viii-p5"></span>**37.** Adhuc enim pusillum temporis,
quando qui venturus est veniet et non tardabit.

<span id="xvi.viii-p6"></span>**38.** Now the just shall live by faith:
but if *any man* draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

<span id="xvi.viii-p7"></span>**38.** Justus autem ex fide vivet, et si
subductus fuerit non oblectabitur anima mea in eo.

<span id="xvi.viii-p8"></span>**39.** But we are not of them who draw
back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.

<span id="xvi.viii-p9"></span>**39.** Nos autem non sumus subductionis
in perditionem, sed fidei in acquisitionem animae.

<span id="xvi.viii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.viii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p12"></span>**36.** *For ye have need of patience,*
*etc.* He says that patience is necessary, not only because we have to
endure to the end, but as Satan has innumerable arts by which he
harasses us; and hence except we possess extraordinary patience, we
shall a thousand times be broken down before we come to the half of our
course. The inheritance of eternal life is indeed certain to us, but as
life is like a race, we ought to go on towards the goal. But in our way
there are many hindrances and difficulties, which not only delay us, but
which would also stop our course altogether, except we had great
firmness of mind to pass through them. Satan craftily suggests every
kind of trouble in order to discourage us. In short, Christians will
never advance two paces without fainting, except they are sustained by
patience.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) This then is the only
way or means by which we can firmly and constantly advance; we shall not
otherwise obey God, nor even enjoy the promised inheritance, which is
here by metonymy called the “promise”.

<span id="xvi.viii-p14"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p15"></span>**37.** *For yet a little while,* or,
*for yet a very little time, etc.* That it may not be grievous to us to
endure, he reminds us that the time will not be long. There is indeed
nothing that avails more to sustain our minds, should they at any time
become faint, than the hope of a speedy and near termination. As a
general holds forth to his soldiers the prospect that the war will soon
end, provided they hold out a little longer; so the Apostle reminds us
that the Lord will shortly come to deliver us from all evils, provided
our minds faint not through want of firmness.

<span id="xvi.viii-p16"></span>And in order that this consolation might
have more assurance and authority, he adduces the testimony of the
Prophet Habakkuk. (<span id="xvi.viii-p16.1"></span>[Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="xvi.viii-p16.1"></span>..md)
But as he follows the Greek version, he departs somewhat from the words
of the Prophet. I will first briefly explain what the Prophet says, and
then we shall compare it with what the Apostle relates here.

<span id="xvi.viii-p17"></span>When the Prophet had spoken of the
dreadful overthrow of his own nation, being terrified by his prophecy,
he had nothing to do but to quit as it were the world, and to betake
himself to his watchtower; and his watchtower was the Word of God, by
which he was raised as it were into heaven. Being thus placed in this
station, he was bidden to write a new prophecy, which brought to the
godly the hope of salvation. Yet as men are naturally unreasonable, and
are so hasty in their wishes that they always think God tardy, whatever
haste he may make, he told them that the promise would come without
delay; at the same time he added, “If it tarries, wait for it.” By which
he meant, that what God promises will never come so soon, but that it
seems to us to tarry, according to an old proverb, “Even speed is delay
to desire.” Then follow these words, “Behold, his soul that is lifted up
is not upright in him; but the just shall live by his faith.” By these
words he intimates that the ungodly, however they may be fortified by
defenses, should not be able to stand, for there is no life of security
but by faith. Let the unbelieving then fortify themselves as they
please, they can find nothing in the whole world but what is fading, so
that they must ever be subject to trembling; but their faith will never
disappoint the godly, because it rests on God. This is the meaning of
the Prophet.

<span id="xvi.viii-p18"></span>Now the Apostle applies to God what
Habakkuk said of the promise; but as God by fulfilling his promises in a
manner shows what he is, as to the subject itself there is not much
difference; nay, the Lord comes whenever he puts forth his hand to help
us. The Apostle follows the Prophet in saying, That it would be shortly;
because God defers not his help longer than it is expedient; for he does
not by delaying time deceive us as men are wont to do; but he knows his
own time which he suffers not to pass by without coming to our aid at
the moment required. Now he says, *He that cometh will come, and will
not tarry.* Here are two clauses: by the first we are taught that God
will come to our aid, for he has promised; and by the second, that he
will do so in due time, not later than he ought.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md)

<span id="xvi.viii-p21"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p22"></span>**38.** *Now the just,* *etc.* He means
that patience is born of faith; and this is true, for we shall never be
able to carry on our contests unless we are sustained by faith, even as,
on the other hand, John truly declares, that our victory over the world
is by faith. (<span id="xvi.viii-p22.1"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span id="xvi.viii-p22.1"></span>..md)
It is by faith that we ascend on high; that we leap over all the perils
of this present life, and all its miseries and troubles; that we possess
a quiet standing in the midst of storms and tempests. Then the Apostle
announced this truth, that all who are counted just before God do not
live otherwise than by faith. And the future tense of the verb *live,*
betokens the perpetuity of this life. Let readers consult on this
subject <span id="xvi.viii-p22.2"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.viii-p22.2"></span>,
 <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) and <span
id="xvi.viii-p23.3"></span>[Ga
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.viii-p23.3"></span>,
where this passage is quoted.

<span id="xvi.viii-p24"></span>*But if any man draw back,* *etc.* This
is the rendering of <span id="xvi.viii-p24.1"></span>עפלה elation, as
used by the Prophet, for the words are, “Where there shall be elation or
munition, the soul of that man shall not continue right in him.” The
Apostle gives here the Greek version, which partly agrees with the words
of the Prophet, and partly differs from them. For this drawing back
differs but little, if anything, from that elation or pride with which
the ungodly are inflated, since their refractory opposition to God
proceeds from that false confidence with which they are inebriated; for
hence it is that they renounce his authority and promise themselves a
quiet state, free from all evil. They may be said, then, to draw back,
when they set up defenses of this kind, by which they drive away every
fear of God and reverence for his name. And thus by this expression is
intimated the power of faith no less than the character of impiety; for
pride is impiety, because it renders not to God the honor due to him, by
rendering man obedient to him. From self­security, insolence, and
contempt, it comes that as long as it is well with the wicked, they
dare, as one has said, to insult the clouds. But since nothing is more
contrary to faith than this drawing back, for the true character of
faith is, that it draws a man unto submission to God when drawn back by
his own sinful nature.

<span id="xvi.viii-p25"></span>The other clause, “He will not please my
soul,” or as I have rendered it more fully, “My soul shall not delight
in him,” is to be taken as the expression of the Apostle’s feeling; for
it was not his purpose to quote exactly the words of the Prophet, but
only to refer to the passage to invite readers to a closer examination
of it.  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md)

<span id="xvi.viii-p30"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p31"></span>**39.** *But we are not of them which
draw back,* *etc.* The Apostle made a free use of the Greek version,
which was most suitable to the doctrine which he was discussing; and he
now wisely applies it. He had before warned them, lest by forsaking the
Church they should alienate themselves from the faith and the grace of
Christ; he now teaches them that they had been called for this end, that
they might not draw back. And he again sets faith and drawing back in
opposition the one to the other, and also the preservation of the soul
to its perdition.

<span id="xvi.viii-p32"></span>Now let it be noticed that this truth
belongs also to us, for we, whom God has favored with the light of the
Gospel, ought to acknowledge that we have been called in order that we
may advance more and more in our obedience to God, and strive constantly
to draw nearer to him. This is the real preservation of the soul, for by
so doing we shall escape eternal perdition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc44015.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span> No remark is made on the second verse.
Doddridge and Beza read the first clause without negative οὐκ and not as
a question, according to the Vulg. And the Syr. Versions, “Otherwise
they would have ceased to be offered.” Most MSS. favor our present
reading. There is no real difference in the meaning.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>The words, “no more conscience of sins,” are
rendered by Beza, “no more conscious of sins;” by Doddridge, “no more
consciousness of sins;” and by Stuart, “no longer conscious of sins.”
The true meaning is no doubt thus conveyed. We meet with two other
instances of conscience, συνειδήσης, being followed by what may be
called the genitive case of the object, “conscience of the idol,” i.e.,
as to the idol, <span id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>[1Co
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>, —
“conscience of God,” i.e., as to God, or towards God, <span
id="xvi.i-p18.2"></span>[1Pe 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p18.2"></span>. And here, “conscience of sins,” must mean
conscience with reference to sins, i.e., conviction of sins, a
conscience apprehensive of what sins deserve. It is a word, says
Parkhurst, which “is rarely found in the ancient heathen writers;” but
it occurs often in the New Testament, though not but once in the Sept.,
<span id="xvi.i-p18.3"></span>[Ec
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020.md)<span id="xvi.i-p18.3"></span>.
Its common meaning is conscience, and not consciousness, though it may
be so rendered here, consistently with the real meaning of the passage.
Michaelis in his Introduction to the New Testament, is referred to by
Parkhurst, as having produced two instances, one from Philo, and the
other from Diod. Siculus, in which it means “consciousness.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc44015.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p23"></span> This is no doubt true; but here the
identity of meaning is difficult to be made out. See Appendix I 2. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc44015.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p31"></span> “Sanctified,” here, as in <span
id="xvi.ii-p31.1"></span>[Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p31.1"></span>,
includes the idea of expiation; it is to be sanctified, or cleansed from
guilt, rather than from pollution, because it is said to be by the
offering of the body of Christ, which was especially an expiation for
sins, as it appears from what follows; and the main object of the
quotation afterwards made was to show that by his death remission of
sins is obtained.

<span id="xvi.ii-p32"></span>“By the which will,” or, by which will, is
commonly taken to mean, “By the accomplishing of which will;” or ἐν̀ may
be taken as in <span id="xvi.ii-p32.1"></span>[Heb
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p32.1"></span>,
in the sense of κατὰ, “according to which will we are cleansed (that is,
from guilt) through the offering of the body of Christ once made.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p33"></span>“Will” here does not mean the act of
willing, but the object of the will, that which God wills, approves and
is pleased with, and is set in opposition to the legal sacrifices. And
as there is a οἱ in many good copies after ἐσμὲν, some have rendered the
verse thus, “By which will we are cleansed who are cleansed by the
offering of the body of Christ once made.” Thus “the will,” or what
pleased God, is first opposed to the sacrifices, and then identified
with the offering of Christ’s body. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc44015.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p21"></span> See Appendix K 2.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc44015.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p26"></span> “Now testify to us does also the Holy
Spirit;” such may be the rendering of the words. The δὲ is translated
“And,” by Macknight, and “Morever,” by Stuart, but “Now” seems the most
suitable. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc44015.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p27"></span> The quotation as made here affords a
remarkable instance of what Calvin has previously said, that the
Apostles were not very scrupulous in the use of words, but attended to
the meaning. The words have been before quoted in <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.1"></span>[Heb
8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010.md)<span
id="xvi.iii-p27.1"></span>. There we have “into their mind — καρδίας,”
here, “into their minds — διανοιῶν;” and in <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.2"></span>[Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p27.2"></span>
in chapter 8, and <span id="xvi.iii-p27.3"></span>[Heb
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p27.3"></span>
in this chapter, are in words wholly different, though in meaning
essentially the same. We need not wonder then that there is sometimes a
variety in quotations made from the Old Testament, since the Apostle
varies in a quotation when given the second time by himself. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc44015.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p28"></span> This quotation clearly shows the meaning
of the word “sanctified.” The sanctified, or those atoned for, or
expiated, were made perfect by having their sins perfectly and
completely forgiven them. The sufficiently of Christ’s sacrifice for
taking away sins, for a full and complete remission, is the subject
throughout, and not the effect of that sacrifice in the work of
sanctification. The chapter begins with sins as to the conscience; and
here the words of Jeremiah are referred to, not for the purpose of
showing that the new covenant provides for the renovation of the heart,
(though it includes that too.) but of proving that it secures the free
and full remission of sins, procured, as stated before, by the one
sacrifice of Christ, once offered and perpetually efficacious. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc44015.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span> Macknight makes this “entrance” to be
death! As though the Apostle was speaking of what was future, while in
<span id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>[Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022.md)<span id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>,
with which the contents of this verse and the following are connected,
he says, “let us draw near;” that is, we who have this entrance, even
“the new and living way.” Possessing such a privilege, they were to draw
nigh. It is clearly an entrance and a way which believers now possess. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc44015.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p22"></span> See Appendix L 2.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc44015.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p27"></span> This true, sincere, or upright heart,
freed from vice and pollution, was symbolized by the washing at the end
of the verse. Without washing the priests were not allowed to minister,
and were threatened with death, <span id="xvi.iv-p27.1"></span>[Ex
30:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#019.md)<span
id="xvi.iv-p27.1"></span>; and when any of them touched an unclean
thing, he was not allowed to eat of holy things until he washed himself,
see <span id="xvi.iv-p27.2"></span>[Le
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#006.md)<span id="xvi.iv-p27.2"></span>.
Washing the body was a most important thing, as it symbolized the inward
washing of the heart, which alone makes us true, or sincere, or faithful
to God.

<span id="xvi.iv-p28"></span>We have here two things — a sincere heart,
and assurance of faith: the last is then set forth by sprinkling, a word
borrowed for Levitical rites; and the first by the washing of the body
as under the law. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc44015.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p29"></span> Πονηρὸς means <span
id="xvi.iv-p29.1"></span>רע in Hebrew, the evil of sin wicked, and also
the effect of sin, miserable It seems to be in the latter sense here; a
miserable conscience is one oppressed with guilt. So Grotius and Stuart
regard the meaning. It is the same as “consciousness of sin” in verse 2.
What seems to be meant is an accusing or guilty conscience, laboring
under the pressure of conscious sin. But Doddridge and Scott, like
Calvin, combine the two ideas of guilt and pollution; though washing,
afterwards mentioned, appears more appropriately to refer to the latter;
and forgiveness is what is most commonly connected with the blood of
Christ. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc44015.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p30"></span> See Appendix M 2.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc44015.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p34"></span> Our version has “faith,” but it should be
“hope,” as found in almost all copies. “Profession of hope” is a
Hebraism for professed hope, or the hope we profess. He mentioned
“faith” in the preceding verse, and now “hope” as being its daughter,
and as that which especially sustained them under their trials. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc44015.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span> The words literally are, “And let us
observe (or take notice of) one another for the instigation of love and
of good works;” that is, “Let us notice the state and circumstances of
each other for the purpose of stimulating love and acts of kindness and
benevolence, its proper fruits.” Love is the principle, and good or
benevolent works are what it produces.

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span>“And let us attentively consider one another
in order  
to the quickening of love and good works.” — Macknight.

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span>“Let us moreover attentively regard one
another for the sake  
of exciting to love and good works.” — Stuart.

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span>The idea of emulation seems not to be
included in the words. The meaning of the exhortation is, to take
opportunity which circumstances afforded, to promote love and the
exercise of benevolence. As an instance of the want of love, he notices
in the next verse their neglect of meeting together for divine worship;
and by not meeting together they had no opportunity of doing the good
work admonishing and exhorting one another. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc44015.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p20"></span> Another view is commonly given of the cause
of this neglect; it was the dread of persecution, according to
Doddridge; and Scott says, that it was either “timidity or
lukewarmness.” As the Apostle had previously mentioned “love” the
probability is that the main cause was coldness and indifference; and
the cause of such a neglect is still for the most part the same. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc44015.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p29"></span> “As ye see drawing nigh the day;” so are
the words literally. The day of judgment, say some; the day of
Jerusalem’s destruction, say other. Doddridge introduces both in his
paraphrase; and Scott and Bloomfield regard the day of judgment as
intended; but Stuart is in favor of the opinion that the destruction of
Jerusalem is what is referred to, and so Hammond and Mede.

<span id="xvi.v-p30"></span>The word “day” is applied to both. The day
of judgment is called “that day,” (<span id="xvi.v-p30.1"></span>[Jude
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006)<span id="xvi.v-p30.1"></span>;.md)
and the destruction of Jerusalem is called the Son of man’s day, “his
day,” (<span id="xvi.v-p30.2"></span>[Lu
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#024)<span id="xvi.v-p30.2"></span>.md)
And both these days must have been well known to the Hebrews to whom
Paul was writing. The reference, then, might have been well thus made to
either without any addition. But the sentence itself seems to favor the
opinion that the day of Jerusalem is intended; “as ye see,” he says;
which denotes that there were things in the circumstances of the times
which clearly betokened the approaching ruin of that city and nation. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc44015.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p37"></span> See Appendix N 2.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc44015.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p41"></span> It is πυρὸς ζὢλος, “heat of fire;” which
means hot or burning fire; the genitive here, as in some other
instances, is the main subject. See chapter 3:13, note. The language is
still borrowed from the Old Testament: God often destroyed the
rebellious among the Israelites with fire — a symbol of the dreadful
punishment of the wicked hereafter. See <span
id="xvi.v-p41.2"></span>[Le 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#002.md)<span
id="xvi.v-p41.2"></span>; <span id="xvi.v-p41.3"></span>[Nu
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.3"></span>.
The word ζὢλος is properly heat, but is used in a variety of senses;
heat of emulation — “envy,” <span id="xvi.v-p41.4"></span>[Ac
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.4"></span>; —
of wrath — “indignation” <span id="xvi.v-p41.5"></span>[Ac
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.5"></span>; —
of concern, good and bad — “zeal,” <span id="xvi.v-p41.6"></span>[Ro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.6"></span>,
and <span id="xvi.v-p41.7"></span>[Php
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.7"></span>; —
of suspicion as to love — “jealousy,” <span id="xvi.v-p41.8"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.8"></span>; —
and of affection — “love,” <span id="xvi.v-p41.9"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.v-p41.9"></span>. It
is the context that determines the character of this heat. Here is has
evidently its literal meaning, as being connected with fire, only the
noun is used for the adjective. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc44015.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p13"></span> “Despised” of our version ought to have
been “rejected,” as Calvin renders the word, for the renouncing of the
Law is what is meant. Followed by “commandment” in <span
id="xvi.vi-p13.1"></span>[Mr 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#009.md)<span
id="xvi.vi-p13.1"></span>, it is rendered “reject,” and “cast off” when
followed by “faith” in <span id="xvi.vi-p13.2"></span>[1Ti
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p13.2"></span>;
and “cast off” would be very suitable here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc44015.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p15"></span> Both Doddridge and Stuart refer to <span
id="xvi.vi-p15.1"></span>[Num. 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030.md),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p15.1"></span>,
but incorrectly, as there the specific sin of apostasy is not mentioned,
nor is there mention made of witnesses. Besides, it is not the
presumptuous or willful sin there referred to, that is here intended,
but the sin of apostasy, when it is the result of a free choice, without
any outward constraining power as under violent persecution. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc44015.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p18"></span> “Neither the king nor the Senate,” says
Grotius, “had the power to pardon.” It is to be observed that God
delegated the power to execute apostates to the rulers of Israel: but we
find here that he has under the Gospel resumed that power and holds it
in his own hands; the execution of the vengeance belongs alone to him,
and the punishment will be everlasting perdition. Then to assume such a
power now is a most impious presumption, whether done by civil or
ecclesiastical rulers. To put apostates or heretics to death, receives
no sanction from the Gospel, and is wholly alien to its spirit. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc44015.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p22"></span> The words “covenant,” and “sanctified,”
and “unclean” or “unholy,” are derived from the old dispensation. “The
blood of the covenant” was the blood shed on the cross; and the
reference to it is not as sprinkled for the ratifying of the covenant,
but as the blood of atonement, as “the blood of the New Testament, or
rather covenant, “shed for many for the remission of sins,” <span
id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>[Mt
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>.
Then “sanctified” has the same meaning here as in <span
id="xvi.vi-p22.2"></span>[Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p22.2"></span>
and in <span id="xvi.vi-p22.3"></span>[Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p22.3"></span>,
expiated or atoned for; “by which he has expiated.” He who professes the
Christian faith, professes to believe in the atoning sacrifice of
Christ, that Christ shed his blood for many for the remission of sins.
As to “unholy,” or rather unclean, such was the blood of a malefactor or
impostor, and as such Christ was counted by the Jews and by every Jew
who returned to Judaism. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc44015.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p25"></span> Most strangely does Schleusner paraphrase
this clause, “contumaciously repudiating the divine favor.” The case
here contemplated is the same with that in <span
id="xvi.vi-p25.1"></span>[Heb
6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p25.1"></span>.
The Holy Spirit is there so distinctly mentioned that it is impossible
to turn or change the plain meaning of the passage; and to be “partakers
of the Holy Spirit” was no doubt to be in that age. Here he is mentioned
only as the holy Spirit of grace, i.e., the bestower of grace, or it may
be taken as meaning “the gracious” or benevolent “Spirit;” as “God of
all grace” in <span id="xvi.vi-p25.2"></span>[1Pe
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p25.2"></span>,
may mean either the author and giver of every grace, or the most
gracious God, though the former meaning is most consistent with the
context

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc44015.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p29"></span> The quotation is literally neither from
the Hebrew nor from the Sept., but is the same as quoted in <span
id="xvi.vi-p29.1"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p29.1"></span>;
which seems to show that Paul is the Author of both epistles. The Hebrew
is, “Mine is vengeance and recompense;” and the Sept., “In the day
vengeance will I recompense.” The sense is the same, though the words
are different. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc44015.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p31"></span> The original text referred to <span
id="xvi.vi-p31.2"></span>[Ps
125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p31.2"></span>,
which seems to be directed more at the fact that the wicked will not
persevere over the righteous, whereas <span id="xvi.vi-p31.3"></span>[Ps
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p31.3"></span>
refers to the wicked joining the “workers of iniquity,” and that “peace
will be upon Israel”; neither are quite as explicit as the commentary in
terms of the final destruction of the wicked, but in my humble opinion,
verse 5 has more relevance.*-fj.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc44015.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p33"></span> See Appendix O 2.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc44015.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p36"></span> The original text had <span
id="xvi.vi-p36.2"></span>[Ps
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p36.2"></span>,
but because the quote comes partly from the first half of verse 25, and
partly from the last half of verse 26, and is emphasized by verse 27, I
decided that all three verses should be referenced.*-fj.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc44015.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p14"></span> “A great fight of affliction,” is
rendered by Doddridge, “a great contest of sufferings;” by Macknight. “a
great combat of afflictions;” and by Stuart, “a great contest with
sufferings.” The last word may be deemed as the genitive case of the
object, “a great contest as to sufferings;” or the word πολλὴν, may be
rendered, “long contest as to sufferings.” Doddridge remarks that
contest ὑπομέω is used to show the courage displayed. But “endure,” is
in the case not the proper word, but “sustain,” If “endure” be retained,
then we must give its secondary sense to ἄθλησιν, toil, labor, struggle;
and so Schleusner does, “Ye endured the great toil of sufferings,” or, a
great struggle with sufferings. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc44015.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p18"></span> The words may be rendered, “When ye were
publicly exposed to reproaches and afflictions,” or, to revilings and
persecutions. They were reproached with bad names, or reviled, and also
oppressed and persecuted. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc44015.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p19"></span> The latter clause of this verse is
rendered the same as in our version by Beza and Macknight, while
Grotius, Doddridge, Stuart and Bloomfield, give in effect this
rendering, “when ye became partakers (i.e., in sympathy, and in their
losses) with those who were so treated.” It signifies, says Grotius,
that they sympathized with their brethren in their calamities, and also
succored them as far as they could by praying for them, and
administering to their wants. In <span id="xvi.vii-p19.1"></span>[Mt
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#030.md)<span id="xvi.vii-p19.1"></span>,
κοινωνοὶ αὐτῶν is rendered, “partakers with them,” or sharers with them;
and so it might be rendered here, “sharers with those who were so
treated,” i.e., sharers in reproach and suffering. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc44015.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p22"></span> The preceding clause is literally “For ye
sympathized with my bonds.” There is a different reading, “For ye
sympathized with the prisoners — δεσμίοις. The authority as to MSS. is
nearly equal; and there is nothing decisive in the context. A similar
phrase is in <span id="xvi.vii-p22.1"></span>[Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span id="xvi.vii-p22.1"></span>.
“who cannot sympathize with our infirmities.” Grotius, Hammond and
Stuart, are in the text as it is, and also Bishop Jebb, and Bloomfield.

<span id="xvi.vii-p23"></span>There is here a clear instance of an
inverted order as to the subjects previously mentioned which often occur
in the Prophets, and in other parts of Scripture. The last subject in
the previous verse is here first referred to, and then the first. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc44015.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p25"></span> Calvin leaves out ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, as the
Vulg. does. The ἐν is deemed by most spurious, but most retain ἑαυτοῖς,
though they do not connect it as in our version, with “knowing,” and
render the clause thus, “knowing that you have for yourselves in heaven
a better and an enduring substance,” or property or possession. The word
for “substance” occurs only here, except in the plural number in <span
id="xvi.vii-p25.1"></span>[Ac
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045.md)<span id="xvi.vii-p25.1"></span>.
It occurs often in the Sept., and stands for words in Hebrew, which
signify substance, wealth, riches, possessions. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc44015.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p13"></span> Or, “patient waiting,” as rendered by
Erasmus and Stuart, and not “perseverance,” as rendered by Macknight.
They were to suffer patiently their trials, looking forward to their
termination; and in order to encourage them patiently to endure, he
reminds them in the next verse that it will only be for a very short
time. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc44015.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p19"></span> It is evident from the manner in which
the quotation is made, that the Apostle meant only to adapt to his own
purpose the passage in Habakkuk; he does not quote it in the order in
which it is found there, nor literally from the Hebrew, nor wholly so
from the Sept. What is said in Habakkuk of the vision, he applies here
to the Lord. Surely, such a use of a passage is legitimate.

<span id="xvi.viii-p20"></span>The coming of Christ mentioned here,
according to Mede, was his coming to destroy Jerusalem, and to put an
end to the Jewish polity. If “the approaching day,” in <span
id="xvi.viii-p20.1"></span>[Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025.md)<span
id="xvi.viii-p20.1"></span>, be considered to be that event then the
same event is most probably referred to here. Besides, he speaks here of
the enmity of the unbelieving Jews; and as our Savior represented the
destruction of Jerusalem as a blessing to his people, it becomes still
more probable that Christ’s coming to destroy that nation is intended. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc44015.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p23"></span> The Book has <span
id="xvi.viii-p23.2"></span>[Ro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.viii-p23.2"></span>,
— an obvious typesetting error.*-fj.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc44015.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p26"></span> This verse, with the exception of the
two clauses being inverted, and of my being not added to “faith,” is
literally the same with the Sept. But the last clause here and the first
in Habakkuk, differs in words materially from the Hebrew, according to
the received text. There are two MSS. which give <span
id="xvi.viii-p26.1"></span>עלפה instead of <span
id="xvi.viii-p26.2"></span>עפלה, a transposition of two letters. If not
exactly in words. The Hebrew, then, would be as follows —

<span id="xvi.viii-p27"></span>Behold the fainting! Not right is his
soul within him;  
But the righteousness by his faith shall he live.

<span id="xvi.viii-p28"></span>The fainting i.e., as to faith and he who
“draws back,” or withdraws through fear, as the verb means, are
descriptive of the same character. To persevere in expecting the
fulfillment of a promise, is the subject in Habakkuk and also in this
passage. And then, that the soul of the fainting is not right, is the
same as to say that such a soul is not what God approves.

<span id="xvi.viii-p29"></span>A theological dispute has arisen, though
unnecessarily, from the construction of the last clause in this verse.
The introduction of “any one,” or any man, has been objected to, and
that it ought to be “but if he,” i.e., “the righteousness” draw back,
etc. The probability is, that as “anyone” should not be ascribed to
Beza, for Pagininus and others had done so before him. However, the
doctrine of perseverance is in no way imperiled by leaving out “any
one.” The Bible is full of this mode of addressing Christians, and yet
the Bible assures us that the sheep of Christ shall never perish.
Warnings and admonitions are the very means which God employs to secure
the final salvation of his people; and to conclude from such warnings
that they may finally fall away, is by no means a legitimate argument. —
*Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc44016.md)
