[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44000)  [Next](cc44002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>No doubt the Epistle next in importance to that
to the Romans is this to the Hebrews. The truths explained in it might,
indeed, have been deduced from other portions of Scripture; but it is a
vast advantage and a great satisfaction to find them expressly set
forth, and distinctly stated by an inspired Apostle.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>In condescension to our ignorance, it has
pleased God, not only to give us what might have been deemed sufficient
for our information, but also to add “line upon line,” so that there
might be every help given to those who have a desire to know the truth,
and every reasonable accuse taken away from such as resolve to oppose
it, and to follow the guidance of self­will, and the delusions of their
own proud minds and depraved hearts. It might then, seem strange to us
that defect, insufficiency, and obscurity have been ascribed to the
Scriptures, did we not know that these have been made by such as wish
Revelation to be otherwise than it is; they having imbibed errors and
adopted superstitions to which it yields no countenance, but which it
condemns in terms so plain, that they must be represented as defective
or obscure in order to be evaded.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>There are especially two parties who find this
Epistle in no way favorable to them — the Papists and the Socinians. The
Sole Priesthood of Christ, and his Sole Sufficient Sacrifice, are here
so distinctly stated, that the former cannot resist the evidence except
by the subtle arts of the most consummate sophistry; and the latter find
it a very difficult task to neutralize the strong and clear testimony
here given as to the Divinity of our Savior and his Atonement. Though
these parties are wholly opposed to one another, yet, like Herod and
Pilate, they unite in degrading the Savior — the one indirectly, by
substituting others in his place; and the other in open manner, by
denying his dignity and the character and efficacy of his death. But by
both the Savior is equally dishonored.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>There have been more disputes about this Epistle
than any other portion of Scripture; but many of the questions which
have been raised have been of a very trifling character, as though
learned men were idle and had nothing else to do; and this has been the
case, especially with the divines of the German school, not only with
regard to this Epistle, but with respect to many other subjects.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>Disquisitions called learned, have been written
as to the character of this Epistle, whether it be properly an Epistle,
or something that ought to be called by some other name!  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Then it has been a subject learnedly
discussed, to whom in particular the Epistle was sent, whether to the
dispersed Jews, or to those in Palestine — whether to a particular
Congregation, or to the Hebrews in general?  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Such questions are comparatively of very
little importance; and to spend time and talent in discussing them, is a
work frivolous and useless; and not only so, but also mischievous,
calculated to serve the purposes of Popery and Infidelity; for to render
thus apparently important what is not so, and on which no degree of
certainty can be obtained, is to involve men in a mist which may lead
them astray.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Another subject has been much discussed, which
is of no great consequence, as the inspiration of the Epistle is not
thereby endangered, and that is the language in which the Epistle was
originally written. An opinion prevailed among some of the Early Fathers
that it was written in Hebrew, or rather in Syro­Chaldee language, and
that it was translated into Greek by Luke, Clement, or Barnabas. It was
stated as an *opinion*, confirmed by no authority, and founded mainly on
two circumstances — that it was written to Hebrews, and that its style
is different from that of Paul in his other Epistles. Almost all modern
divines regard this opinion as not well founded. The Greek language was
in Paul’s time well known throughout Palestine; the “General Epistles,”
intended for the Jews as well as the Gentiles, were written in Greek;
and *there is no record of any copy of this Epistle in Hebrew*. As to
the style, it differs not more from that of the other Epistles than what
may be observed in writers in all ages, or what might be expected in
Paul when advanced in years, compared with what he wrote in his younger
days. It may be further added, that the Epistle itself contains things
which seem to show that it was written in Greek: Hebrew words are
interpreted, <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>[Heb
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002)<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>; the
passages quoted are mostly from the *Septuagint*, and not from the
Hebrew; and there is the use of a word, rendered “Testament,” in <span
id="ii-p9.2"></span>[Heb 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017)<span
id="ii-p9.2"></span>, in the sense of a Will, which the Hebrew word
never means.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>There are only two questions of real importance
— the canonicity of the Epistle, and its Author.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>As to the first, it has never been doubted
except by some of the strange heretics in the first ages. There is quite
as much external testimony in its favor as most portions of the New
Testament. It was from the first received by the Churches, Eastern and
Western, as a portion of the Inspired Volume. It is found in the very
first versions of the New Testament, the *Syriac* and the *Italic*.
These versions were made as early as the end of the second century,
about 140 years after the date of this Epistle.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) The testimony of the Fathers from the
earliest time is uniformly the same in this respect. The Epistle is
acknowledged by them all as a portion of Holy Writ.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>But with regard to the Author there has been a
diversity of opinion, though, when all things are duly weighed, without
reason. From the *earliest times*, the Eastern Church acknowledge Paul
as the Author. Some in the Western Church, in the third and the fourth
century, did not regard Paul as the Author, but Luke, or Clement, or
Barnabas. Jerome and Augustine in the fifth century, a more enlightened
age than the two preceding centuries, ascribed to Paul the authorship;
and since their time the same opinion has prevailed in the Western, as
it did from the beginning in the Eastern Church. How to account for a
different opinion in the Western Church during the third and the fourth
century, is difficult. Some think it was owing to the Novalien Heresy,
which some parts of this Epistle were supposed to favor, though without
any good reason.

<span id="ii-p14"></span>As far then as the testimony of history goes,
almost the whole weight of evidence is in favor of Paul being the
Author.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>With regard to modern times, the prevailing
opinion has been that it is the Epistle of Paul. Luther, indeed,
ascribed it to Apollos — a mere conjecture. Calvin, as we find, supposed
that either Luke or Clement was the author; for which there are no
satisfactory reasons. Beza differed from his illustrious predecessor,
and regarded Paul as the writer; and such has been the opinion
entertained by most of the successors of the Reformers, both in this
country and on the Continent, as proved by their confessions of Faith.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>About the middle of the seventeenth century
there seems to have been a revival of the controversy; for in the year
1658 the younger Spanheim wrote an elaborate treatise on the subject, in
which he canvasses the whole evidence, both historical and internal, and
affords the strongest ground for the conclusion that Paul was the writer
of this Epistle. Since that time, till late years, his arguments were
regarded by most as conclusive. But some of the German divines, who seem
to have a taste for exploded opinions, have again revived the question,
produced afresh the old arguments, and added some new ones to them. But
a second Spanheim has appeared in the person of Professor Stuart, of
America, who has published a learned Commentary on this Epistle, and
prefixed to it a long Introduction, in which he has fully entered into
the subject, and more fully than his predecessor. The labor and toil
which this Introduction must have cost its author, were no doubt very
great; for every argument, however frivolous, (and some of the arguments
are *very* frivolous indeed,) is noticed, and everything plausible is
most clearly exposed.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>The evidence both external and internal is so
satisfactory, that an impression is left on the mind, that Paul was the
author of this Epistle, nearly equal to what his very name prefixed to
it would have produced. Indeed the writer can truly say, that he now
entertains no more doubt on the subject than if it had the Apostle’s own
superscription.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="ii-p19"></span>As to the date of this Epistle, it is commonly
supposed to have been written late in 62 or early in 63, about the time
that Paul was released from his first imprisonment at Rome.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>There seem to be especially two reasons why
Paul did not commence this Epistle in his usual manner: first, because
he was not specifically an Apostle to the Jews, but to the Gentiles; and
secondly, because the contents of the Epistle are such that it was not
necessary for him to assume his Apostolic character; for the arguments
are founded on testimonies found in the Old Testament, and not on his
authority as a commissioned Apostle. His main object appears to have
been to show and prove that the Gospel is but a fulfillment of the
ancient Scriptures, which the Jews themselves received as divine. His
arguments and his examples are throughout borrowed from the Old
Testament. This is a fact that is too often overlooked, to which
Macknight, in an especial manner, very justly refers.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>The Epistle begins by indicating a connection
between the Old and the New Testament: both are revelations from the
same God; He who spoke by the Prophets in the Old, speaks by His Son in
the New. Then the obvious and inevitable conclusion is, that the New is
but the Old completed. It is on this ground that the whole argument of
the Epistle proceeds.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>Having thus clearly intimated the connection
between the two Testaments, the Apostle immediately enters on his great
subject — the superiority of Him who introduced the perfected
dispensation over all connected with the previous incomplete,
elementary, and, in a great measure, symbolical dispensation, even over
angels and Moses and the Levitical high­priest. And this subject
occupies the largest portion of the Epistle, extending from the *first*
chapter to the 19th verse of the *tenth* chapter. From that verse to the
end of the Epistle, we have exhortations, warnings, examples of faith
and patience, admonitions, directions, and salutations.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>Then the Epistle divides itself into two main
parts: —

<span id="ii-p24"></span>**1.** The didactic, including the *ten* first
chapters, with the exception of the latter part of the tenth.

<span id="ii-p25"></span>**2.** The parainetic or hortative, from the
19th verse of the tenth chapter to the end of the Epistle.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>The first part may be thus divided, —

<span id="ii-p27"></span>**1.** Christ’s superiority over angels —
warnings ­objections answered, ch. 1 and 2.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>**2.** Christ’s superiority over Moses —
warnings as to faith and the promised rest, ch. 3 and 4:13.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>**3.** Christ’s superiority over the Levitical
high­priest, as to his appointment, the perpetuity of his office, his
covenant, and the efficacy of his atonement, ch. 4:14, to 10:19.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>The second part admits of these divisions, —

<span id="ii-p31"></span>**1.** Exhortation to *persevere*, derived from
the free access in a new way to God; from the awful fate of apostates;
and from their own past example, ch. 10:19­37.

<span id="ii-p32"></span>**2.** Exhortation to *faith* and *patience*,
derived from the example of the ancient saints, ch. 10:38, to the end of
ch. 11.

<span id="ii-p33"></span>**3.** Exhortation to encounter *trials* and
*afflictions*, derived from the example of Christ; and from the love of
God, as manifested by afflictions, ch. 12:1­13.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>**4.** Exhortation to *peace* and *holiness*,
derived from our superior privileges, and the aggravated guilt of no
electing Him who speaks to us from heaven, ch. 12:14­29.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>**5.** Various directions and cautions,
requests and salutations, ch. 13.

<span id="ii-p36"></span>The former part, the didactic, has many
digressions, and hence the difficulty sometimes of tracing the course of
the Apostle’s reasoning. But it was his practice as appears from his
other epistles, to apply, as it were, the subject, as he proceeds.
Having in the *first* chapter proved the superiority of Christ over
angels, he points out at the beginning of the *second* the great danger
of disregarding his doctrine, and of neglecting his salvation, an
inference drawn from what had been previously proved. He then proceeds
with the same subject, Christ’s superiority over angels, answers an
objection derived from his human nature, and shows the necessity there
was that he should become man; as he could not otherwise have
sympathized with lost creatures, nor have atoned for their Sins. Here he
first refers to him in express terms as a priest.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>Then in ch. 3 he proceeds to show Christ’s
superiority over Moses; and having done so, he goes on in verse 7 to
warn the Hebrews against following the example of their forefathers,
who, through unbelief, lost the land of promise; and he pursues this
subject to the end of the 13th verse of ch. 4.

<span id="ii-p38"></span>The last section of the didactic part commences
at ch. 4 and extends to verse 19 of the tenth chapter; it occupies
nearly *six* chapters, and contains several episodes, so that it is
sometimes no easy matter to trace the connection.

<span id="ii-p39"></span>He begins this portion by calling attention to
Christ as a high­priest, whom he had before represented as such at the
end of ch. 2; where he mentions *two* things respecting him — that he
became man, in order that he might atone for sin, and in order that he
might be capable of sympathizing with his people. But here he refers
mainly to the *last*, to his sufferings; and in order to anticipate an
objection from the fact that he was a suffering Savior, he mentions his
appointment, which, according to the testimony of David in the Book of
Psalms, was to be according to the order of Melchisedec. Without going
on with this subject, he makes a digression, and evidently for the
purpose of making them more attentive to the explanation he was going to
give of Melchisedec as a type of Christ in his priesthood.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>This digression contains several particulars.
To arouse their attention and stimulate them, he blames them for their
ignorance, mentions the danger of continuing satisfied with the
knowledge of first principles, and the impossibility of restoration in
case of apostasy; he gives an illustration of this from unproductive
land after culture and rain; reminds them of their past commendable
conduct, and encourages them to activity and zeal by an assurance
respecting the certainty of Gods promises, ch. 5:12, to the end of ch.
6.

<span id="ii-p41"></span>In chap. 7 he proceeds with Melchisedec as the
type of Christ in his priestly office. Christ is a priest according to
his order, not according to that of Aaron; then Aaron *must* have been
superseded. According to the testimony of David, Christ’s priesthood
excelled that of Aaron in two things — it was established by an *oath*,
and it was to he perpetuated “forever,” ch. 7 to the end of the 25th
verse.

<span id="ii-p42"></span>He now goes on to the other part of this
subject, to speak of Christ as making an atonement for sin, ch. 7:26,
having before spoken of him as a sympathizing priest from the
circumstance of having been a sufferer. While speaking of his expiation,
he refers to the covenant of which he was the Mediator, for expiations
depended on the covenant. Respecting the new covenant, he quotes the
express words of Jeremiah; and it included the remission of sins, and
remission of sins necessarily implies an expiation. Then in the *ninth*
chapter he refers to the old covenant, the tabernacle, and its services,
and proves the insufficiency of these services, they being only typical
of what was to come. From the *tenth* chapter to the 19th verse he
pursues the same subject, and shows that the sacrifices under the Law
were insufficient for the remission of sins, and that this could only be
obtained through the Mediator of the new covenant promised by God
through his prophet Jeremiah, chapter. 7:26, to chapter.10:19.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="ii-p44"></span>Here the Apostle completes the *first* part,
having stated at large in the last portion of it the claims of Christ as
a high­priest, and these claims are fully confirmed by the testimonies
of the ancient Scriptures. His arguments are such that it is impossible
really to understand and believe the Old Testament and to deny the New;
the latter being most evidently the fulfillment of the former. The Old
Testament distinctly speaks of another priesthood different from that of
Aaron, and of another covenant different from that made with the
children of Israel, and of one which would confer the remission of sins,
which the other could not do. Now these are the testimonies not of the
New but of the Old Testament; and the New exhibits a priest and a
covenant exactly answerable to the priest and the covenant which the Old
Testament refers to and describes. Nothing can be more plain and more
conclusive than the Apostle’s arguments on this subject.

<span id="ii-p45"></span>The parainetic or hortative portion of the
Epistle, extending from chap. 10:19 to the end, requires no further
explanation.

<span id="ii-p46"></span>We especially learn from this Epistle that the
distinctive character of the old dispensation was symbolical, and of the
new spiritual. The old abounded in forms, rituals, and ceremonies; the
new exhibits what these things signified and typified. To have recourse
again to symbols and rituals, is to prefer darkness to light, to reverse
the order of things, and to disregard a favor which kings and prophets
in ancient times desired to enjoy. This is not only an evidence of
fatuity, but it is also ingratitude and sin, and it ought never to be
deemed as innocent or harmless. Having the glorious light of the Gospel,
let us walk in the light, and never regard “beggarly elements” as things
to be perpetuated and admired.

<span id="ii-p47"></span>This Commentary was translated into English by
Clement Cotton, from the French Version, and was published in 1605 under
the following title: — “A Commentarie on the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews. By Iohn Calvin. Translated ovt of French. *The Lawe was given
by Moses, but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ* <span
id="ii-p47.1"></span>[Joh 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span
id="ii-p47.1"></span>. Imprinted at London by Felix Kingston, for
*Arthur Iohnson*, and are to be sold at his shop neere the great North
doors of Pauls, at the signs of the white Horse. 1605.” Like his
translation of Isaiah, that of the Commentary on the Hebrews, “though
not altogether suitable to modern taste, is faithful, vigorous,
idiomatic, and not inelegant.”

<span id="ii-p48"></span>The “Epistle Dedicatorie” to Cotton’s patron,
Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, and his Address “to the Reader,” have
been reprinted as a specimen of the style of such performances at that
period.

<span id="ii-p49"></span>J. O.  
Thrussington, August 1853

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc44001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> To say that it has not the unusual introductory
form of an Epistle, is no valid objection; for we find the case to be
the same with regard to the First Epistle of John. It begins in a way
very similar to this, while in the two following the usual mode is
adopted.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc44001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p8"></span> The following account seems sufficiently
satisfactory on this point: — “Clement of Alexandria, Jerome, Euthalius
\[Epiphanius?\], Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact and others, were of
opinion that the Epistle to the Hebrews was sent to the Jews living in
Judea, who in the Apostle’s time were called *Hebrews* to distinguish
them from the jews in the Gentile countries, who were called
*Hellenists* or Grecians, <span id="ii-p8.1"></span>[Acts
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001), [Acts
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029), [Acts
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020)<span id="ii-p8.1"></span>. In
that opinion these ancient authors were well founded, because as Lardner
observes, this letter appears to have been written to persons dwelling
in one place, <span id="ii-p8.2"></span>[Heb.
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#019),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#024)<span id="ii-p8.2"></span>, namely,
to the inhabitants of Judea, and to those of them especially who lived
in Jerusalem.” — *Macknight*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc44001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p12"></span> It is indeed thought, as stated by *Horne* in
his Introduction, that the *Syriac* version was made at the end of the
*first*, or at the beginning of the *second* century. In that case, it
was made less than 40 years after the Epistle was written.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc44001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p18"></span> The arguments in favor of Paul being the
author of this Epistle are briefly found in Horne’s Introduction to the
Critical Study of the Scriptures; but those who wish to see the subject
fully handled, and that with great discrimination and judgment, must
read Stuart’s Introduction to his Commentary on this epistle. Dr.
Bloomfield uses no exaggerated language when he says, that is “very
elaborate and invaluable.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc44001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p43"></span> There is an elaborate analysis of the subject
from chapter 4:14, to chapter 10:19, by Stuart at the commencement of
his notes on Chapter 5; but it is not satisfactory. He seems to have
overlooked that there are two sections to this part, the one referring
mainly to the appointment of Christ as a priest, which stands connected
with this sufferings, and His capability of sympathy, chapter 4:14 to
7:25; and the other referring to the expiation he made as Mediator of
the new covenant, chapter 7:26 to chapter 10:9. The text which is the
ground of the first section is <span id="ii-p43.1"></span>[Ps
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span id="ii-p43.1"></span>; the
passage on which the second section is built is <span
id="ii-p43.2"></span>[Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="ii-p43.2"></span>,
in connection with <span id="ii-p43.3"></span>[Ps
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span id="ii-p43.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clement Cotton's Dedicatory to the First English Edition of
1605](cc44002)
