[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc44001)  [Next](cc44003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span> 

<span id="iii-p2"></span>TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE

<span id="iii-p3"></span>ROBERT EARLE OF SALISBVRIE, VICOVNT

<span id="iii-p4"></span>Cranbourne, Baron of Essendon, Principall
Secretarie to

<span id="iii-p5"></span>the Kings most excellent Maiestie, Master of
the

<span id="iii-p6"></span>Court of Wardes and Liueries, and one of

<span id="iii-p7"></span>his Highnesse most Honourable

<span id="iii-p8"></span>Priuie Counsell.

<span id="iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii-p10"></span>Grace and peace be multiplied

<span id="iii-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii-p12"></span>Right Honorable, such has been the singular
care and fatherly providence of God over his church in these last times:
that according to his own most gratious promise (through the means of
preaching and writing) knowledge has overflowed in all places, as the
waters that cover the sea. Hence it is come to pass, that even this
nation also, albeit utterly unworthy to receive so much as the least
sprincklings of this knowledge, has not withstanding been replenished
and filled therewith, almost from corner to corner. Many chosen and
worthy instruments has the Lord raised up here and there for this
purpose. But amongst the rest, none for whom there is greater cause of
thankfulness, than for that rare and excellent light of this age, *Mr.
Calvin*: whether in respect of the large and many volumes, which with
unwearable pains he has written, or the exceeding fruits which the
Churches have thereby gained. So that all of sound judgment will
acknowledge, that God had poured out upon him a principal portion and
measure of his spirit to profit with all, <span
id="iii-p12.1"></span>[1Co 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii-p12.1"></span>. Whereof, as his whole works give sufficient
proofs, so his Commentaries especially. For besides his sincerity and
faithfulness in delivering the true and natural sense of the holy
Scriptures; he has this as peculiar to himself, that with his
faithfulness and sincerity he always matches an exceeding plainness and
gravity: whereby his Reader may obtain that he seeks, both with great
ease, and with very little loss of time.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>Divers of these his Commentaries, Right
Honorable, have been already translated to the great benefit of this
nation: others yet remain untranslated, which doubtless would be no less
beneficial. The which, as I have earnestly desired; so, had gifts and
means been in any measure answerable, it had been performed ere this.
For the present, I have been bold to give your Honor a small taste
thereof in these my poor first fruits: wherein although my pains are no
way sufficient to commend the same unto your Honor, yet I doubt not but
the matter itself will be found worthy of your H. patronage. For where
are the natures and offices of Christ so largely described; the doctrine
of the free remission of sins in Christ’s blood better established, or
faith with her effects more highly commended, than in this Epistle to
the Hebrews?

<span id="iii-p14"></span>Now as touching the reasons, Right Honorable,
that have moved me hereunto, they are briefly these; First, I was not
ignorant what singular love and affection your Honor bare to the author
of this Commentary for his work’s sake, whereof many also are witnesses.
Unto which, if your Honor should be pleased to add a second favor in
Patronizing these his labors, I thought it would be a special means to
revive his memory again, now almost decayed amongst us.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>Secondly, I was persuaded that if your
Lordship, whom it has pleased the Almighty so highly to advance, being
also a favorer and defender of the truth, and of all good causes; would
permit this works to pass under your Honors protection: that it would be
both better esteemed, and the more acceptably received of all.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>Lastly, my good Lord. As I cannot conceal that
deep and inward affection of love and duties which I owe unto your
Honor, in regard of the near employments which sometimes a dear friend
of mine had about your Lordship in your young years: so by this
dedication it was my desire to testify part of a thankful mind, in
respect that you have not suffered neither length of time, nor your H.
weighty affairs in matters of state, to wear the same out of your
Honorable remembrance: as by the great favors your H. has lately showed
in that behalf, does plainly appear.

<span id="iii-p17"></span>Thus in most humble manner craving pardon for
my great boldness, I humbly end; beseeching the most high God, possessor
of heaven and earth, to pour out the abundance of all blessings both
upon you and yours in this life, and to crown your H. and them with
immortal blessedness in his kingdom of Gloria, through Christ.

<span id="iii-p18"></span>Your Honours in all humble and dutifull
affection  
ever to bee commanded,

<span id="iii-p19"></span>Clement Cotton

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clement Cotton's Forward to the Reader](cc44003.md)
