[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc44010)  [Next](cc44012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 6:1-2

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Therefore leaving the principles of
the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again
the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quare omisso sermone principii
Christi, ad perfectionem feramur, non jacentes rursum fundamentum
poenitentiae ab operibus mortuis et fidei in Deum.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of
laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal
judgment.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** (Baptismatum doctrinae et impositionis
manuum) et resurrectionis mortuorum et judicii aeterni.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span><span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Therefore, leaving,* *etc.* To his
reproof he joins this exhortation, — that leaving first principles they
were to proceed forward to the goal. For by *the word of beginning* he
understands the first rudiments, taught to the ignorant when received
into the Church. Now, he bids them to leave these rudiments, not that
the faithful are ever to forget them, but that they are not to remain in
them; and this idea appears more clear from what follows, the comparison
of a *foundation;* for in building a house we must never leave the
foundation; and yet to be always engaged in laying it, would be
ridiculous. For as the foundation is laid for the sake of what is built
on it, he who is occupied in laying it and proceeds not to the
superstruction, wearies himself with foolish and useless labor. In
short, as the builder must begin with the foundation, so must he go on
with his work that the house may be built. Similar is the case as to
Christianity; we have the first principles as the foundation, but the
higher doctrine ought immediately to follow which is to complete the
building. They then act most unreasonably who remain in the first
elements, for they propose to themselves no end, as though a builder
spent all his labor on the foundation, and neglected to build up the
house. So then he would have our faith to be at first so founded as
afterwards to rise upwards, until by daily progress it be at length
completed.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md)

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>*Of repentance from dead works,* *etc.* He
here refers to a catechism commonly used. It is hence a probable
conjecture that this Epistle was written, not immediately after the
promulgation of the Gospel, but when they had some kind of polity
established in the Churches; such as this, that the catechumen made a
confession of his faith before he was admitted to baptism. And there
were certain primary points on which the pastor questioned the
catechumen, as it appears from the various testimonies of the fathers;
there was an examination had especially on the creed called the
Apostles’ Creed. This was the first entrance, as it were, into the
church to those who were adults and enlisted under Christ, as they were
before alienated from faith in him. This custom the Apostle mentions,
because there was a short time fixed for catechumens, during which they
were taught the doctrine of religion, as a master instructs his children
in the alphabet, in order that he may afterwards advance them to higher
things.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>But let us examine what he says. He mentions
*repentance* and *faith,* which include the fullness of the Gospel; for
what else does Christ command his Apostles to preach, but repentance and
faith? When, therefore, Paul wished to show that he had faithfully
performed his duty, he alleged his care and assiduity in teaching these
two things. It seems then (as it may be said) unreasonable that the
Apostle should bid repentance and faith to be omitted, when we ought to
make progress in both through the whole course of our life. But when he
adds, *from dead works,* he intimates that he speaks of first
repentance; for though every sin is a dead work, either as it leads to
death, or as it proceeds from the spiritual death of the soul; yet the
faithful, already born again of the Spirit of God, cannot be said
properly to repent from dead works. Regeneration is not indeed made
perfect in them; but because of the seed of new life which is in them,
however small it may be, this at least may be said of them that they
cannot be deemed dead before God. The Apostle then does not include in
general the whole of repentance, the practice of which ought to continue
to the end; but he refers only to the beginning of repentance, when they
who were lately and for the first time consecrated to the faith,
commenced a new life. So also the word, *faith,* means that brief
summary of godly doctrine, commonly called the Articles of Faith.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>To these are added, *the resurrection of the
dead and eternal judgment.* These are some of the highest mysteries of
celestial wisdom; nay, the very end of all religion, which we ought to
bear in mind through the whole course of our life. But as the very same
truth is taught in one way to the ignorant, and in another way to those
who have made some proficiency, the Apostle seems here to refer to the
common mode of questioning, “Dost thou believe the resurrection of the
dead? Dost thou believe eternal life?” These things were suitable to
children, and that only once; therefore to turn back to them again was
nothing else but to retrograde.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span><span id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**2.** *Of the doctrine of baptisms,* *etc.*
Some read them separately, “of baptisms and of doctrine;” but I prefer
to connect them, though I explain them differently from others; for I
regard the words as being in apposition, as grammarians say, according
to this form, “Not laying again the foundation of repentance, of faith
in God, of the resurrection of the dead, which is the doctrine of
baptisms and of the laying on of hands.” If therefore these two clauses,
the doctrine of baptisms and of the laying on of hands, be included in a
parenthesis, the passage would run better; for except you read them as
in apposition, there would be the absurdity of a repetition. For what is
the doctrine of baptism but what he mentions here, faith in God,
repentance, judgment, and the like?

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>Chrysostom thinks that he uses “baptisms” in
the plural number, because they who returned to first principles, in a
measure abrogated their first baptism: but I cannot agree with him, for
the doctrine had no reference to many baptisms, but by baptisms are
meant the solemn rites, or the stated days of baptizing.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>With baptism he connects the *laying on of
hands;* for as there were two sorts of catechumens, so there were two
rites. There were heathens who came not to baptism until they made a
profession of their faith. Then as to these, these, the catechizing was
wont to precede baptism.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) But the
children of the faithful, as they were adopted from the womb, and
belonged to the body of the Church by right of the promise, were
baptized in infancy; but after the time of infancy, they having been
instructed in the faith, presented themselves as catechumens, which as
to them took place after baptism; but another symbol was then added, the
laying on of hands.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>This one passage abundantly testifies that
this rite had its beginning from the Apostles, which afterwards,
however, was turned into superstition, as the world almost always
degenerates into corruptions, even with regard to the best institutions.
They have indeed contrived the fiction, that it is a sacrament by which
the spirit of regeneration is conferred, a dogma by which they have
mutilated baptism for what was peculiar to it, they transferred to the
imposition of hands. Let us then know, that it was instituted by its
first founders that it might be an appointed rite for prayer, as
Augustine calls it. The profession of faith which youth made, after
having passed the time of childhood, they indeed intended to confirm by
this symbol, but they thought of nothing less than to destroy the
efficacy of baptism. Wherefore the pure institution at this day ought to
be retained, but the superstition ought to be removed. And this passage
tends to confirm pedobaptism; for why should the same doctrine be called
as to some baptism, but as to others the imposition of hands, except
that the latter after having received baptism were taught in the faith,
so that nothing remained for them but the laying on of hands?

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 6:3-6

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And this will we do, if God permit.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et hoc faciemus, siquidem permiserit
Deus.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** For *it is* impossible for those who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Nam impossibile est eos qui semel
fuerunt illuminati, gustaveruntque donum coeleste, et participes facti
fuerunt Spiritus sancti,

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** And have tasted the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come,

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** Et gustaverunt bonum Dei verbum,
virtutesque futuri seculi,

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**6.** If they shall fall away, to renew
them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and put *him* to an open shame.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**6.** Prolapsi sunt, iterum renovari ad
poenitentiam, rursum crucifigentes sibi ipsis Filium Dei et ostentui
habentes.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**3.** *This will we do,* *etc.* A dreadful
denunciation follows; but the Apostle thus fulminated, lest the Jews
should indulge their own supineness, and trifle with the favor of God;
as though he had said, “There ought not in this case it to be any delay;
for there will not always be the opportunity for making progress; it is
not in man’s power to bound at once, whenever he pleases, from the
starting point to the goal; but progress in our course is the special
gift of God.”

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *For it is impossible,* *etc.* This
passage has given occasion to many to repudiate this Epistle, especially
as the Novatians armed themselves with it to deny pardon to the fallen.
Hence those of the Western Church, in particular, refused the authority
of this Epistle, because the sect of Novatus annoyed them; and they were
not sufficiently conversant in the truth so as to be equal to refute it
by argument. But when the design of the Apostle is understood, it then
appears evident that there is nothing here which countenances so
delirious an error. Some who hold sacred the authority of the Epistle,
while they attempt to dissipate this absurdity, yet do nothing but evade
it. For some take “impossible” in the sense of rare or difficult, which
is wholly different from its meaning. Many confine it to that repentance
by which the catechumens in the ancient Church were wont to be prepared
for baptism, as though indeed the Apostles prescribed fasting, or such
things to the baptized. And then what great thing would the Apostle have
said, by denying that repentance, the appendage of baptism, could be
repeated? He threatens with the severest vengeance of God all those who
would cast away the grace which had been once received; what weight
would the sentence have had to shake the secure and the wavering with
terror, if he only reminded them that there was no longer room for their
first repentance? For this would extend to every kind of offense. What
then is to be said? Since the Lord gives the hope of mercy to all
without exception, it is wholly unreasonable that any one for any cause
whatever should be precluded.

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>The knot of the question is in the word,
*fall away.* Whosoever then understands its meaning, can easily
extricate himself from every difficulty. But it must be noticed, that
there is a twofold falling away, one particular, and the other general.
He who has in anything, or in any ways offended, has fallen away from
his state as a Christian; therefore all sins are so many fallings. But
the Apostle speaks not here of theft, or perjury, or murder, or
drunkenness, or adultery; but he refers to a total defection or falling
away from the Gospel, when a sinner offends not God in some one thing,
but entirely renounces his grace.

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>And that this may be better understood, let
us suppose a contrast between the gifts of God, which he has mentioned,
and this falling away. For he falls away who forsakes the word of God,
who extinguishes its light, who deprives himself of the taste of the
heavens or gift, who relinquishes the participation of the Spirit. Now
this is wholly to renounce God. We now see whom he excluded from the
hope of pardon, even the apostates who alienated themselves from the
Gospel of Christ, which they had previously embraced, and from the grace
of God; and this happens to no one but to him who sins against the Holy
Spirit. For he who violates the second table of the Law, or transgresses
the first through ignorance, is not guilty of this defection; nor does
God surely deprive any of his grace in such a way as to leave them none
remaining except the reprobate.

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>If any one asks why the Apostle makes
mention here of such apostasy while he is addressing believers, who were
far off from a perfidy so heinous; to this I answer, that the danger was
pointed out by him in time, that they might be on their guard. And this
ought to be observed; for when we turn aside from the right way, we not
only excuse to others our vices, but we also impose on ourselves. Satan
stealthily creeps on us, and by degrees allures us by clandestine arts,
so that when we go astray we know not that we are going astray. Thus
gradually we slide, until at length we rush headlong into ruin. We may
observe this daily in many. Therefore the Apostle does not without
reason forewarn all the disciples of Christ to beware in time; for a
continued torpor commonly ends in lethargy, which is followed by
alienation of mind.

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>But we must notice in passing the names by
which he signalizes the knowledge of the Gospel. He calls it
*illumination;* it hence follows that men are blind, until Christ, the
light of the world, enlightens them. He calls it *a tasting of the
heavenly gift;* intimating that the things which Christ confers on us
are above nature and the world, and that they are yet tasted by faith.
He calls it the *participation* of the Spirit; for he it is who
distributes to every one, as he wills, all the light and knowledge which
he can have; for without him no one can say that Jesus is the Lord,
(<span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>[1Co
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>;.md)
he opens for us the eyes of our minds, and reveals to us the secret
things of God. He calls it a *tasting of the good word of God;* by which
he means, that the will of God is therein revealed, not in any sort of
way, but in such a way as sweetly to delight us; in short, by this title
is pointed out the difference between the Law and the Gospel; for that
has nothing but severity and condemnation, but this is a sweet testimony
of God’s love and fatherly kindness towards us. And lastly, he calls it
a *tasting of the powers of the world to come;* by which he intimates,
that we are admitted by faith as it were into the kingdom of heaven, so
that we see in spirit that blessed immortality which is hid from our
senses.  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>Let us then know, that the Gospel cannot be
otherwise rightly known than by the illumination of the Spirit, and that
being thus drawn away from the world, we are raised up to heaven, and
that knowing the goodness of God we rely on his word.

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>But here arises a new question, how can it
be that he who has once made such a progress should afterwards fall
away? For God, it may be said, calls none effectually but the elect, and
Paul testifies that they are really his sons who are led by his Spirit,
(<span id="xii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span id="xii.ii-p21.1"></span>;.md)
and he teaches us, that it is a sure pledge of adoption when Christ
makes us partakers of his Spirit. The elect are also beyond the danger
of finally falling away; for the Father who gave them to be preserved by
Christ his Son is greater than all, and Christ promises to watch over
them all so that none may perish. To all this I answer, That God indeed
favors none but the elect alone with the Spirit of regeneration, and
that by this they are distinguished from the reprobate; for they are
renewed after his image and receive the earnest of the Spirit in hope of
the future inheritance, and by the same Spirit the Gospel is sealed in
their hearts. But I cannot admit that all this is any reason why he
should not grant the reprobate also some taste of his grace, why he
should not irradiate their minds with some sparks of his light, why he
should not give them some perception of his goodness, and in some sort
engrave his word on their hearts. Otherwise, where would be the temporal
faith mentioned by <span id="xii.ii-p21.2"></span>[Mr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#017.md)<span id="xii.ii-p21.2"></span>?
There is therefore some knowledge even in the reprobate, which
afterwards vanishes away, either because it did not strike roots
sufficiently deep, or because it withers, being choked up.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>And by this bridle the Lord keeps us in
fear and humility; and we certainly see how prone human nature is
otherwise to security and foolish confidence. At the same time our
solicitude ought to be such as not to disturb the peace of conscience.
For the Lord strengthens faith in us, while he subdues our flesh: and
hence he would have faith to remain and rest tranquilly as in a safe
haven; but he exercises the flesh with various conflicts, that it may
not grow wanton through idleness.

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span><span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span>**6.** *To renew them again into
repentance,* *etc.* Though this seems hard, yet there is no reason to
charge God with cruelty when any one suffers only the punishment of his
own defection; nor is this inconsistent with other parts of Scripture,
where God’s mercy is offered to sinners as soon as they sigh for it,
(<span id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Eze
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#027)<span id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>;.md)
for repentance is required, which he never truly feels who has once
wholly fallen away from the Gospel; for such are deprived, as they
deserve, of God’s Spirit and given up to a reprobate mind, so that being
the slaves of the devil they rush headlong into destruction. Thus it
happens that they cease not to add sin to sin, until being wholly
hardened they despise God, or like men in despair, express madly their
hatred to him. The end of all apostates is, that they are either smitten
with stupor, and fear nothing, or curse God their judge, because they
cannot escape from him.  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span>In short, the Apostle warns us, that
repentance is not at the will of man, but that it is given by God to
those only who have not wholly fallen away from the faith. It is a
warning very necessary to us, lest by often delaying until tomorrow, we
should alienate ourselves more and more from God. The ungodly indeed
deceive themselves by such sayings as this, — that it will be sufficient
for them to repent of their wicked life at their last breath. But when
they come to die, the dire torments of conscience which they suffer,
prove to them that the conversion of man is not an ordinary work. As
then the Lord promises pardon to none but to those who repent of their
iniquity, it is no wonder that they perish who either through despair or
contempt, rush on in their obstinacy into destruction. But when any one
rises up again after falling, we may hence conclude that he had not been
guilty of defection, however grievously he may have sinned.

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span>*Crucifying again,* *etc.* He also adds
this to defend God’s severity against the calumnies of men; for it would
be wholly unbecoming, that God by pardoning apostates should expose his
own Son to contempt. They are then wholly unworthy to obtain mercy. But
the reason why he says, that Christ would thus be crucified again, is,
because we die with him for the very purpose of living afterwards a new
life; when therefore any return as it were unto death, they have need of
another sacrifice, as we shall find in the tenth chapter. Crucifying
*for themselves* means as far as in them lies. For this would be the
case, and Christ would be slandered as it were triumphantly, were it
allowed men to return to him after having fallen away and forsaken him.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hebrews
6:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** For the earth which drinketh in the
rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by
whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God:

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**7.** Siquidem terra quae imbrem saepius
in se venientem imbibit, et progignit herbam commodam iis opera quorum
et colitur, recipit benedictionem a Deo:

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>**8.** But that which beareth thorns and
briers *is* rejected, and *is* nigh unto cursing; whose end *is* to be
burned.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**8.** At quae produxerit spinas et
tribulos, reproba est, et obnoxia maledictioni, cujus exitus tendit ad
combustionem.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**9.** But, beloved, we are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we
thus speak.

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**9.** Caeterum persuasimus nobis de vobis,
dilecti, quae sint iis meliora, et cum salute conjunta, tametsi sic
loquamur.

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>**10.** For God *is* not unrighteous to
forget your work and labor of love, which ye have shewed toward his
name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>**10.** Non enim injustus est Deus, ut
obliviscatur operis vestri et laboris in charitatem impensi, quem
ostendistis erga nomen ejus, dum ministrastis sanctis, et ministratis.

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**7.** *For the earth,* *etc.* This is a
similitude most appropriate to excite a desire to make progress in due
time, for as the earth cannot bring forth a good crop in harvest except
it causes the seed as soon as it is sown to germinate, so if we desire
to bring forth good fruit, as soon as the Lord sows his word, it ought
to strike roots in us without delay; for it cannot be expected to
fructify, if it be either choked or perish. But as the similitude is
very suitable, so it must be wisely applied to the design of the
Apostle.

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span>The earth, he says, which by sucking in
the rain immediately produces a blade suitable to the seed sown, at
length by God’s blessing produces a ripe crop; so they who receive the
seed of the Gospel into their hearts and bring forth genuine shoots,
will always make progress until they produce ripe fruit. On the
contrary, the earth, which after culture and irrigation brings, forth
nothing but thorns, affords no hope of a harvest; nay, the more that
grows which is its natural produce, the more hopeless is the case. Hence
the only remedy the husbandman has is to burn up the noxious and useless
weeds. So they who destroy the seed of the Gospel either by their
indifference or by corrupt affections, so as to manifest no sign of good
progress in their life, clearly show themselves to be reprobates, from
whom no harvest can be expected.

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>The Apostle then not only speaks here of
the fruit of the Gospel, but also exhorts us promptly and gladly to
embrace it, and he further tells us, that the blade appears presently
after the seed is sown, and that growing follows the daily irrigations.
Some render θοτάνην εὔθετὸν “a seasonable shoot,” others, “a shoot
meet;” either meaning suits the place; the first refers to time, the
second to quality.  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) The
allegorical meanings with which interpreters have here amused
themselves, I pass by, as they are quite foreign to the object of the
writer.

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span><span id="xii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p17"></span>**9.** *But we are persuaded,* *etc.* As
the preceding sentences were like thunderbolts, by which readers might
have been struck dead, it was needful to mitigate this severity. He
therefore says now, that he did not speak in this strain, as though he
entertained such an opinion of them. And doubtless whosoever wishes to
do good by teaching, ought so to treat his disciples as ever to add
encouragement to them rather than to diminish it, for there is nothing
that can alienate us more from attending to the truth than to see that
we are deemed to be past hope. The Apostle then testifies that he thus
warned the Jews, because he had a good hope of them, and was anxious to
lead them to salvation. We hence conclude, that not only the reprobate
ought to be reproved severely and with sharp earnestness, but also the
elect themselves, even those whom we deem to be the children of God.

<span id="xii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p19"></span>**10.** *For God is not unrighteous,*
*etc.* These words signify as much as though he had said, that from good
beginnings he hoped for a good end.

<span id="xii.iii-p20"></span>But here a difficulty arises, because he
seems to say that God is bound by the services of men: “I am persuaded,”
he says, “as to your salvation, because God cannot forget your works.”
He seems thus to build salvation on works, and to make God a debtor to
them. And the sophists, who oppose the merits of works to the grace of
God, make much of this sentence, “God is not unrighteous.” For they
hence conclude that it would be unjust for him not to render for works
the reward of eternal salvation. To this I briefly reply that the
Apostle does not here speak avowedly of the cause of our salvation, and
that therefore no opinion can be formed from this passage as to the
merits of works, nor can it be hence determined what is due to works.
The Scripture shows everywhere that there is no other fountain of
salvation but the gratuitous mercy of God: and that God everywhere
promises reward to works, this depends on that gratuitous promise, by
which he adopts us as his children, and reconciles us to himself by not
imputing our sins. Reward then is reserved for works, not through merit,
but the free bounty of God alone; and yet even this free reward of works
does not take place, except we be first received into favor through the
kind mediation of Christ.

<span id="xii.iii-p21"></span>We hence conclude, that God does not pay
us a debt, but performs what he has of himself freely promised, and thus
performs it, inasmuch as he pardons us and our works; nay, he looks not
so much on our works as on his own grace in our works. It is on this
account that he forgets not our works, because he recognizes himself and
the work of his Spirit in them. And this is to be *righteous,* as the
Apostle says, for he cannot deny himself. This passage, then,
corresponds with that saying of Paul, “He who has begun in you a good
work will perfect it.” (<span id="xii.iii-p21.1"></span>[Php
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="xii.iii-p21.1"></span>..md)
For what can God find in us to induce him to love us, except what he has
first conferred on us? In short, the sophists are mistaken in imagining
a mutual relation between God’s righteousness and the merits of our
works, since God on the contrary so regards himself and his own gifts,
that he carries on to the end what of his own goodwill he has begun in
us, without any inducement from anything we do; nay, God is righteous in
recompensing works, because he is true and faithful: and he has made
himself a debtor to us, not by receiving anything from us; but as
Augustine says, by freely promising all things.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md)

<span id="xii.iii-p24"></span>*And labor of love,* *etc.* By this he
intimates that we are not to spare labor, if we desire to perform duty
towards our neighbors; for they are not only to be helped by money, but
also by counsel, by labor, and in various other ways. Great sedulity,
then, must be exercised, many troubles must be undergone, and sometimes
many dangers must be encountered. Thus let him who would engage in the
duties of love, prepare himself for a life of labor.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md)

<span id="xii.iii-p26"></span>He mentions in proof of their love, that
they had *ministered* and were still *ministering* to the *saints.* We
are hence reminded, that we are not to neglect to serve our brethren. By
mentioning the *saints*, he means not that we are debtors to them alone;
for our love ought to expand and be manifested towards all mankind; but
as the household of faith are especially recommended to us, peculiar
attention is to be paid to them; for as love, when moved to do good, has
partly a regard to God, and partly to our common nature, the nearer any
one is to God, the more worthy he is of being assisted by us. In short,
when we acknowledge any one as a child of God, we ought to embrace him
with brotherly love.

<span id="xii.iii-p27"></span>By saying that they *had ministered* and
were *still ministering,* he commended their perseverance; which in this
particular was very necessary; for there is nothing to which we are more
prone than to weariness in well­doing. Hence it is, that though many are
found ready enough to help their brethren, yet the virtue of constancy
is so rare, that a large portion soon relax as though their warmth had
cooled. But what ought constantly to stimulate us is even this one
expression used by the apostle, that the love shown to the saints is
shown *towards the name* of the Lord; for he intimates that God holds
himself indebted to us for whatever good we do to our neighbors,
according to that saying,

<span id="xii.iii-p28"></span>“What ye have done to one of the least of
these,  
ye have done to me,” (<span id="xii.iii-p28.2"></span>[Mt
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p28.2"></span>;)

<span id="xii.iii-p29"></span>and there is also another,

<span id="xii.iii-p30"></span>“He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the
Lord.”  
(<span id="xii.iii-p30.2"></span>[Pr
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 6:11-15

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**11.** And we desire that every one of you
do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end:

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**11.** Desideramus autem ununquemque
vestrum idem ostendere studium ad certitudinem spei usque in finem;

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span>**12.** That ye be not slothful, but
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>**12.** Ne segnes (*vel, molles, aut fluxi*)
reddamini, sed potius imitatores eorum qui per fidem et patientiam
haereditario obtinuerunt promissiones.

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>**13.** For when God made promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself,

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>**13.** Abrahae enim promittens Deus,
quandoquidem majorem per quem juraret, non habebat, juravit per seipsum;

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** Saying, Surely blessing I will bless
thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>**14.** Dicens, Nisi benedicens benedixero
tibi, et multiplicans multicavero te.

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span>**15.** And so, after he had patiently
endured, he obtained the promise.

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span>**15.** Atque ita quum patienter
expectasset, consequutus est promissionem.

<span id="xii.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p13"></span><span id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p14"></span>**11.** *And we desire,* *etc.* As he
blended with exhortation, lest he should altogether grieve their minds;
so he now freely reminds them of what was still wanting in them, lest
his courtesy should appear to have in it any flattery. “You have made,”
he says, “your love evident by many acts of kindness; it remains,
however, that your faith should correspond with it; you have sedulously
labored not to be wanting in your duties to men; but with no less
earnestness it behooves you to make progress in faith, so as to manifest
before God its unwavering and full certainty.”

<span id="xii.iv-p15"></span>Now, by these words the Apostle shows that
there are two parts in Christianity which correspond with the two tables
of the Law. Therefore, he who separates the one from the other, has
nothing but what is mutilated and mangled. And hence it appears what
sort of teachers they are who make no mention of faith, and enjoin only
the duty of honesty and uprightness towards men; nay, it is a profane
philosophy, that dwells only on the outward mask of righteousness, if
indeed it deserves to be called philosophy; for it so unreasonably
performs its own duties, that it robs God, to whom the preeminence
belongs, of his own rights. Let us then remember, that the life of a
Christian is not complete in all its parts, unless we attend to faith as
well as to love.

<span id="xii.iv-p16"></span>*To the full assurance of hope,* or, *to
the certainty of hope, etc.* As they who professed the Christian faith
were distracted by various opinions, or were as yet entangled in many
superstitions, he bids them to be so fixed in firm faith, as no longer
to vacillate nor be driven here and there, suspended between alternate
winds of doubts. This injunction is, however, applicable to all; for, as
the truth of God is unchangeably fixed, so faith, which relies on him,
when it is true, ought to be certain, surmounting every doubt. It is a
full assurance, πληροφορία,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) an
undoubting persuasion, when the godly mind settles it with itself, that
it is not right to call in question what God, who cannot deceive or lie,
has spoken.

<span id="xii.iv-p18"></span>The word hope, is here to be taken for
faith, because of its affinity to it. The Apostle, however, seems to
have designedly used it, because he was speaking of perseverance. And we
may hence conclude how far short of faith is that general knowledge
which the ungodly and the devils have in common; for they also believe
that God is just and true, yet they derive hence no good hope, for they
do not lay hold on his paternal favor in Christ. Let us then know that
true faith is ever connected with hope.

<span id="xii.iv-p19"></span>He said *to the end,* or perfection; and he
said this, that they might know that they had not yet reached the goal,
and were therefore to think of further progress. He mentioned diligence,
that they might know that they were not to sit down idly, but to strive
in earnest. For it is not a small thing to ascend above the heavens,
especially for these who hardly creep on the ground, and when
innumerable obstacles are in the way. There is indeed, nothing more
difficult than to keep our thoughts fixed on things in heaven, when the
whole power of our nature inclines downwards, and when Satan or
numberless devices draw us back to the earth. hence it is, that he bids
us to beware of sloth or effeminacy.

<span id="xii.iv-p20"></span><span id="xii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p21"></span>**12.** *But followers,* or *imitators,
etc.* To sloth he opposes imitation; it is then the same thing as though
he said, that there was need of constant alacrity of mind; but it had
far more weight, when he reminded them, that the fathers were not made
partakers of the promises except through the unconquerable firmness of
faith; for examples convey to us a more impressive idea of things. When
a naked truth is set before us, it does not so much affect us, as when
we see what is required of us fulfilled in the person of Abraham. But
Abraham’s example is referred to, not because it is the only one, but
because it is more illustrious than that of any other. For though
Abraham had this faith in common with all the godly; yet it is not
without reason that he is called the father of the faithful. It is,
then, no wonder that the Apostle selected him from all the rest, and
turned towards him the eyes of his readers as to the clearest mirror of
faith.

<span id="xii.iv-p22"></span>*Faith and patience,* *etc.* What is meant
is, a firm faith, which has patience as its companion. For faith is what
is, chiefly required; but as many who make at first a marvelous display
of faith, soon fail, he shows, that the true evidence of that faith
which is not fleeting and evanescent, is endurance. By saying that the
*promises* were obtained by *faith,* he takes away the notion of merits;
and still more clearly by saying, that they came by “inheritance”; for
we are in no other way made heirs but by the right of adoption.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md)

<span id="xii.iv-p25"></span><span id="xii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p26"></span>**13.** *For when God made a promise to
Abraham,* *etc.* His object was to prove, that the grace of God is
offered to us in vain, except we receive the promise by faith, and
constantly cherish it in the bosom of our heart. And he proves it by
this argument, that when God promised a countless offspring to Abraham,
it seemed a thing incredible; Sarah had been through life barren; both
had reached a sterile old age, when they were nearer the grave than to a
conjugal bed; there was no vigor to beget children, when Sarah’s womb,
which had been barren through the prime of life, was now become dead.
Who could believe that a nation would proceed from them, equaling the
stars in number, and like the sand of the sea? It was, indeed, contrary
to all reason. Yet Abraham looked for this and feared no disappointment,
because he relied on the Word of God.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) We must, then, notice the circumstance
as to time, that the Apostle’s reasoning may appear evident; and what he
subjoins refers to this — that he was made partaker of this blessing,
but that it was after he had waited for what no one could have thought
would ever come to pass. In this way ought glory to be given to God; we
must quietly hope for what he does not as yet show to our senses, but
hides from us and for a long time defers, in order that our patience may
be exercised.

<span id="xii.iv-p28"></span>Why God did *swear by himself* we shall
presently see. The manner of swearing, *Except blessing I will bless
thee,* we have explained what it means in the third chapter: God’s name
is not here expressed, but must be understood, for except he performs
what he promises, he testifies that he is not to he counted true and
faithful.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 6:16-20

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**16.** For men verily swear by the greater:
and an oath for confirmation *is* to them an end of all strife.

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>**16.** Nam homines quidem per eum jurant qui
major est, et omnis ipsis controversiae finis est jusjurandum in
confirmationem.

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span>**17.** Wherein God, willing more abundantly
to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed *it* by an oath:

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span>**17.** In quo Deus volens uberius ostendere
haeridibus promissionis immutabilem consilii sui firmitudinem,
interposuit jusjurandum;

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>**18.** That by two immutable things, in
which *it was* impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us:

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>**18.** Ut per duas res immutabiles, in
quibus impossibile sit Deum mentiri, validam consolationem habeamus nos
qui confugimus ad obtinendam propositam spem;

<span id="xii.v-p8"></span>**19.** Which *hope* we have as an anchor of
the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within
the veil;

<span id="xii.v-p9"></span>**19.** Quam velut anchoram habemus animae
tutam et firmam, et quae ingreditur ad ea quae intro velum sunt;.

<span id="xii.v-p10"></span>**20.** Whither the forerunner is for us
entered, *even* Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec.

<span id="xii.v-p11"></span>**20.** Quo praecursor noster ingressus est
Iesus, secondum ordinem Melchisedec factus in aeternum pontifex.

<span id="xii.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="xii.v-p13"></span><span id="xii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p14"></span>**16.** *For men,* *etc.* It is an argument
from the less to the greater; if credit is given to man, who is by
nature false, when he swears, and for this reason, because he confirms
what he says by God’s name, how much more credit is due to God, who is
eternal truth, when he swears by himself?

<span id="xii.v-p15"></span>Now he mentions several things to commend
this declaration; and first he says that men *swear by the greater;* by
which he means that they who are wanting in due authority borrow it from
another. He adds that there is so much reverence in an oath that it
suffices for confirmation, and puts an end to all disputes where the
testimonies of men and other proofs are wanting. Then is not he a
sufficient witness for himself whom all appeal to as a witness? Is he
not to obtain credit for what he says, who, by his authority, removes
all doubts among others? If God’s name, pronounced by man’s tongue,
possesses so much superiority, how much more weight ought it to have,
when God himself swears by his own name? Thus much as to the main point.

<span id="xii.v-p16"></span>But here in passing, two things are to be
noticed, — that we are to swear by God’s name when necessity requires,
and that Christians are allowed to make an oath, because it is a lawful
remedy for removing contentions. God in express words bids us to swear
by his name; if other names are blended with it, the oath is profaned.
For this there are especially three reasons: when there is no way of
bringing the truth to light, it is not right, for the sake of verifying
it, to have recourse to any but to God, who is himself eternal truth;
and then, since he alone knows the heart, his own office is taken from
him, when in things hidden, of which men can form no opinion, we appeal
to any other judge; and thirdly, because in swearing we not only appeal
to him as a witness, but also call upon him as an avenger of perjury in
case we speak falsely. It is no wonder, then, that he is so greatly
displeased with those who swear by another name, for his own honor is
thus disparaged. And that there are different forms often used in
Scripture, makes nothing against this truth; for they did not swear by
heaven or earth, as though they ascribed any divine power to them, or
attributed to them the least portion of divinity, but by this indirect
protestation, so to speak, they had a regard to the one true God. There
are indeed various kinds of protestations; but the chief one is, when we
refer to God as a judge and directly appeal to his judgment­seat;
another is, when we name things especially dear to us as our life, or
our head, or anything of this kind; and the third is, when we call
creatures as witnesses before God. But in all these ways we swear
properly by no other than by God. hence they betray their impiety no
less than their ignorance, who contend that it is lawful to connect dead
saints with God so as to attribute to them the right of punishing.

<span id="xii.v-p17"></span>Further, this passage teaches us, as it has
been said, that an oath may be lawfully used by Christians; and this
ought to be particularly observed, on account of fanatical men who are
disposed to abrogate the practice of solemn swearing which God has
prescribed in his Law. For certainly the Apostle speaks here of the
custom of swearing as of a holy practice, and approved by God. Moreover,
he does not say of it as having been formerly in use, but as of a thing
still practiced. Let it then be employed as a help to find out the truth
when other proofs are wanting.

<span id="xii.v-p18"></span><span id="xii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p19"></span>**17.** *God, willing,* *etc.* See how
kindly God as a gracious Father accommodates himself to our slowness to
believe; as he sees that we rest not on his simple word, that he might
more fully impress it on our hearts he adds an oath. Hence also it
appears how much it concerns us to know that there is such a certainty
respecting his goodwill towards us, that there is no longer any occasion
for wavering or for trembling. For when God forbids his name to be taken
in vain or on a slight occasion, and denounces the severest vengeance on
all who rashly abuse it, when he commands reverence to be rendered to
his majesty, he thus teaches us that he holds his name in the highest
esteem and honor. The certainty of salvation is then a necessary thing;
for he who forbids to swear without reason has been pleased to swear for
the sake of rendering it certain. And we may hence also conclude what
great account he makes of our salvation; for in order to secure it, he
not only pardons our unbelief, but giving up as it were his own right,
and yielding to us far more than what we could claim, he kindly provides
a remedy for it.

<span id="xii.v-p20"></span>*Unto the heirs of promise,* *etc.* He seems
especially to point out the Jews; for though the heirship came at length
to the Gentiles, yet the former were the first lawful heirs, and the
latter, being aliens, were made the second heirs, and that beyond the
right of nature. So Peter, addressing the Jews in his first sermon,
says,

<span id="xii.v-p21"></span>“To you and to your children is the promise
made, and to those who are afar of, whom the Lord shall call.” (<span
id="xii.v-p21.1"></span>[Ac 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039.md)<span
id="xii.v-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.v-p22"></span>He left indeed a place for adventitious
heirs, but he sets the Jews in the first rank, according to what he also
says in the third chapter, “Ye are the children of the fathers and of
the covenant,” etc. (<span id="xii.v-p22.1"></span>[Ac
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)<span id="xii.v-p22.1"></span>..md)
So also in this place the Apostle, in order to make the Jews more ready
to receive the covenant, shows that it was for their sakes chiefly it
was confirmed by an oath. At the same time this declaration belongs at
this day to us also, for we have entered into the place quitted by them
through unbelief

<span id="xii.v-p23"></span>Observe that what is testified to us in the
Gospel is called the *counsel* of God, that no one may doubt but that
this truth proceeds from the very inmost thoughts of God. Believers
ought therefore to be fully persuaded that whenever they hear the voice
of the Gospel, the secret counsel of God, which lay hid in him, is
proclaimed to them, and that hence is made known to them what he has
decreed respecting our salvation before the creation of the world.

<span id="xii.v-p24"></span><span id="xii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p25"></span>**18.** *That by two immutable things,*
*etc.* What God says as well as what he swears is immutable. (<span
id="xii.v-p25.1"></span>[Ps 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006.md)<span
id="xii.v-p25.1"></span>; <span id="xii.v-p25.2"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span id="xii.v-p25.2"></span>..md)
It may be with men far otherwise; for their vanity is such that there
cannot be much firmness in their word. But the word of God is in various
ways extolled; it is pure and without any dross, like gold seven times
purified. Even Balaam, though an enemy, was yet constrained to bring
this testimony,

<span id="xii.v-p26"></span>“God is not like the sons of men that he
should lie, neither like men that he should repent: has he then said,
and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?”
(<span id="xii.v-p26.1"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span id="xii.v-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.v-p27"></span>The word of God, then, is a sure truth, and
in itself authoritative, (αὐτόπιστος self­worthy of trust.) But when an
oath is added it is an overplus added to a full measure. We have, then,
this strong consolation, that God, who cannot deceive when he speaks,
being not content with making a promise, has confirmed it by an oath.
 <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md)

<span id="xii.v-p29"></span>*Who have fled for refuge,* *etc.* By these
words he intimates that we do not truly trust in God except when we
forsake every other protection and flee for refuge to his sure promise,
and feel assured that it is our only safe asylum. Hence by the word flee
is set forth our poverty and our need; for we flee not to God except
when constrained. But when he adds *the hope set before us,* he
intimates that we have not far to go to seek the aid we want, for God
himself of his own free will meets us and puts as it were in our hand
what we are to hope for; it is *set before us.* But as by this truth he
designed to encourage the Jews to embrace the Gospel in which salvation
was offered to them; so also he thus deprived the unbelieving, who
rejected the favor presented to them, of every excuse. And doubtless
this might have been more truly said after the promulgation of the
Gospel than under the Law: “There is now no reason for you to say, ‘Who
shall ascent into heaven? Or, Who shall descend into the deep? Or, Who
shall pass over the sea? For nigh is the word, it is in thy mouth and in
thy heart.’”  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) (<span
id="xii.v-p30.1"></span>[De 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md)<span
id="xii.v-p30.1"></span>; <span id="xii.v-p30.2"></span>[Ro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="xii.v-p30.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.v-p31"></span>But there is a metonymy in the word *hope,*
for the effect is put for the cause; and I understand by it the promise
on which our hope leans or relies, for I cannot agree with those who
take *hope* here for the thing hoped for — by no means: and this also
must be added, that the Apostle speaks not of a naked promise, suspended
as it were in the air, but of that which is received by faith; or, if
you prefer a short expression, the hope here means the promise
apprehended by faith. By the word *laying hold,* as well as by *hope,*
he denotes firmness.

<span id="xii.v-p32"></span><span id="xii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p33"></span>**19.** *As an anchor,* *etc.* It is a
striking likeness when he compares faith leaning on God’s word to an
anchor; for doubtless, as long as we sojourn in this world, we stand not
on firm ground, but are tossed here and there as it were in the midst of
the sea, and that indeed very turbulent; for Satan is incessantly
stirring up innumerable storms, which would immediately upset and sink
our vessel, were we not to cast our anchor fast in the deep. For nowhere
a haven appears to our eyes, but wherever we look water alone is in
view; yea, waves also arise and threaten us; but as the anchor is cast
through the waters into a dark and unseen place, and while it lies hid
there, keeps the vessel beaten by the waves from being overwhelmed; so
must our hope be fixed on the invisible God. There is this difference, —
the anchor is cast downwards into the sea, for it has the earth as its
bottom; but our hope rises upwards and soars aloft, for in the world it
finds nothing on which it can stand, nor ought it to cleave to created
things, but to rest on God alone. As the cable also by which the anchor
is suspended joins the vessel with the earth through a long and dark
intermediate space, so the truth of God is a bond to connect us with
himself, so that no distance of place and no darkness can prevent us
from cleaving to him. Thus when united to God, though we must struggle
with continual storms, we are yet beyond the peril of shipwreck. Hence
he says, that this anchor is *sure* and *steadfast,* or safe and firm.
 <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) It may indeed be that by the
violence of the waves the anchor may be plucked off, or the cable be
broken, or the beaten ship be torn to pieces. This happens on the sea;
but the power of God to sustain us is wholly different, and so also is
the strength of hope and the firmness of his word.

<span id="xii.v-p35"></span>*Which entereth into that,* or *those
things, etc.* As we have said, until faith reaches to God, it finds
nothing but what is unstable and evanescent; it is hence necessary for
it to penetrate even into heaven. But as the Apostle is speaking to the
Jews, he alludes to the ancient Tabernacle, and says, that they ought
not to abide in those things which are seen, but to penetrate into the
inmost recesses, which lie hid within the veil, as though he had said,
that all the external and ancient figures and shadows were to be passed
over, in order that faith might be fixed on Christ alone.

<span id="xii.v-p36"></span>And carefully ought this reasoning to be
observed, — that as Christ has entered into heaven, so faith ought to be
directed there also: for we are hence taught that faith should look
nowhere else. And doubtless it is in vain for man to seek God in his own
majesty, for it is too far removed from them; but Christ stretches forth
his hand to us, that he may lead us to heaven. And this was shadowed
forth formerly under the Law; for the high priest entered the holy of
holies, not in his own name only, but also in that of the people,
inasmuch as he bare in a manner the twelve tribes on his breast and on
his shoulders; for as a memorial for them twelve stones were wrought on
the breastplate, and on the two onyx stones on his shoulders were
engraved their names, so that in the person of one man all entered into
the sanctuary together. Rightly then does the Apostle speak, when he
reminds them that our high priest has entered into heaven; for he has
not entered only for himself, but also for us. There is therefore no
reason to fear that access to heaven will be closed up against our
faith, as it is never disjoined from Christ. And as it becomes us to
follow Christ who is gone before, he is therefore called our
*Forerunner,* or precursor.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc44011.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span> See Appendix S.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc44011.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span> Calvin has followed some of the fathers in
his exposition of these two clauses, who refer to a state of things
which did not exist in the Church for a considerable time after the
Apostolic age.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>What is here said comports with the time of
the Apostles, and with that only more particularly. “Baptisms,” being in
the plural number, have been a knotty point to many; but there is an
especial reason for this in an Epistle to the Hebrews; some of them had
no doubt been baptized by John, such were afterwards baptized only in
the name of Christ, <span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>[Ac
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>,
but those who not so baptized, were doubtless baptized in the name of
Trinity. “The laying on of hands” on the baptized was an Apostolic
practice, by which the miraculous gift of tongues was bestowed. <span
id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>[Acts 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#015.md),
[Acts 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006.md)<span
id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>To understand the different things mentioned
in the first two verses, we must consider the particulars stated in the
4th and the 5th verses; they are explanatory of each other. The penitent
were “the enlightened;” “faith towards God” was “the heavenly gift;” the
baptized, who had hands laid on them, were those who were “made
partakers of the Holy Ghost;” the prospect and promise of a
“resurrection,” was “the good word of God;” and “eternal judgment,” when
believed made them to feel “the powers (or the powerful influences) of
the word to come.” Thus the two passages illustrate one another. Such is
the meaning which Schleusner gives δυνάμεις in this passage, which Scott
and Bloomfield have adopted. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc44011.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span> See Appendix T.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc44011.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span> See Appendix U.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc44011.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span> Some render the verb “renew” actively, in
this way, — “For it is impossible as to those who have been once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made
partakers of holy spirit, and have tasted the good word of God and the
powers of the world to come, and have fallen away, to renew them again
unto repentance, since they crucify again as to themselves to Son of
God, and expose him to open shame.”

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span>This is more consistent with the foregoing,
for the Apostle speaks of teaching. It is as though he had said “It is
impossible for us as teachers;” as they had no commission. To “renew”
may be rendered to “restore.” It is only found here, but is used by the
Sept. for a verb which means renewing in the sense of restoring. See
<span id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ps.
103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md), [Ps.
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>[La
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>.
Josephus applies it to the renovation or restoration of the temple. The
“crucifying” was what they did by falling away; for they thereby
professed that he deserved to be crucified as an imposter, and thus
counted his blood, as it is said in <span id="xii.ii-p27.3"></span>[Heb
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029.md)<span id="xii.ii-p27.3"></span>,
“unholy,” as the blood of a malefactor; and they thus also exhibited him
as an object of public contempt. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc44011.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span> The word βοτάνη here means everything the
earth produces service for food. It only occurs here in the New
Testament, but is commonly used by the Sept. for <span
id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>עשב, which has the same extensive meaning:
fruit or fruits would be its best rendering here. The word εὔθετος is
also found in <span id="xii.iii-p15.2"></span>[Luke
9:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062.md), [Luke
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#034.md)<span id="xii.iii-p15.2"></span>;
and it means fit, meet, suitable, or useful; and the last is the meaning
given it here by Grotius, Schleusner, Stuart, Bloomfield, and others. It
is indeed true that it is used in the Sept. in the sense of seasonable.
See <span id="xii.iii-p15.3"></span>[Ps
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.iii-p15.3"></span> —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc44011.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p22"></span> Nothing can exceed the clearness and the
truth of the preceding remarks.

<span id="xii.iii-p23"></span>The word ἄδικος, unrighteousness, is
rendered by many, unmerciful or unkind. But the reason for such a
meaning is this: There are three kinds, we may say, of righteousness —
that of the law, of love, and of promise. To act according to the law is
to be righteous; to comply with what love requires, that is, to be kind
and charitable, is to be righteous, and hence almsgiving is called
righteousness has often the meaning of faithfulness or mercy. See <span
id="xii.iii-p23.1"></span>[1Jo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.iii-p23.1"></span>.
Therefore the meaning here is, that God is not so unrighteous as not to
fulfill his promise. Hence the notion of merit is at once shown to be
groundless. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc44011.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p25"></span> See Appendix X.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc44011.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p17"></span> This noun and the verb from which it
comes, are peculiar to the new testament, but the latter is once used in
the Sept., <span id="xii.iv-p17.1"></span>[Ec
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.iv-p17.1"></span>.
The metaphor is taken from a ship in full sail, or from a tree fully
laden with fruit. Fullness or perfection is the general idea. It is
applied to knowledge in <span id="xii.iv-p17.2"></span>[Col
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002.md)<span id="xii.iv-p17.2"></span>,
and to faith in <span id="xii.iv-p17.3"></span>[Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022.md)<span id="xii.iv-p17.3"></span>.
It is also found once more in <span id="xii.iv-p17.4"></span>[1Th
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.iv-p17.4"></span>,
and is applied to the assurance with which the gospel was preached. It
may be rendered certainly, or assurance, or full assurance. As a passive
participle it means to be fully persuaded in <span
id="xii.iv-p17.5"></span>[Ro 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021.md)<span
id="xii.iv-p17.5"></span>, and in <span id="xii.iv-p17.6"></span>[Ro
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.iv-p17.6"></span>.
See Appendix Y. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc44011.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p23"></span> The word for “patience” is properly
long-suffering, or forbearance, <span id="xii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.iv-p23.1"></span>;
but it is used here in the same sense of patient expectation, as the
participle clearly means in verse 15.

<span id="xii.iv-p24"></span>As to “inherit,” the present, as Grotius
says, is used for the past tense — “who inherited,” or rather, “became
heirs to the promises.” They did not really possess them, as we find in
<span id="xii.iv-p24.1"></span>[Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.iv-p24.1"></span>,
but heired them, as we may say; they died in faith and became entitled
to them. The word “promises” is used here as well as in chapter 11; for
many things were included in what God had promised to the fathers, but
chiefly the Messiah and the heavenly inheritance. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc44011.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p27"></span> It is said, that having “patiently
endured” or rather waited, “he obtained the promise,” that is, of a
numerous posterity, the particular thing previously referred to. After
having waited for twenty-five years, (see <span
id="xii.iv-p27.1"></span>[Ge
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.iv-p27.1"></span>,
and <span id="xii.iv-p27.2"></span>[Ge
17:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001.md)<span
id="xii.iv-p27.2"></span>,) a son was given him; and this beginning of
the fulfilled promise was a pledge of its full accomplishment. This case
is brought forward as an example of waiting faith. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc44011.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="xii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p28"></span> The “two immutable things,” says most, are
the promise and the oath. But some of late, such as Stuart, have
disputed this interpretation; and they hold that they are two oaths, —
the first was made to Abraham respecting a Son (the Messiah) in whom all
nations should be blessed; and the second refers to Christ’s priesthood,
recorded in <span id="xii.v-p28.1"></span>[Ps
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.v-p28.1"></span>.
This is the clearly to go out of the passage for its interpretation. The
case of the fathers, and especially Abraham, in verses 12, 13, 14 and
15, was introduced for the sake of illustration. And having mentioned
God’s oath with regard to Abraham, he proceeds in verse 16 to state the
use of an oath among men, and evidently reverting to the promise of
eternal life implied in “the hope” mentioned in verse 11, he says that
God confirmed that promise, called here God’s “counsel,” by an oath; and
the oath specially referred to seems to have been that respecting the
priesthood of his Son, more than once mentioned before and at the end of
this chapter; for upon his priesthood in an especial manner depended the
promise of eternal life. The “counsel” of God means his revealed counsel
or gracious purpose, his promise of eternal life to those who believe.
In establishing a priesthood by an oath, he confirmed this promise, for
its accomplishment depended on that priesthood. To call two oaths two
immutable things is nothing so apposite as to call so the promise and
the oath by which the priesthood was established. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc44011.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="xii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p30"></span> The “strong consolation” is rendered by
Theophylact “strong encouragement;” nor is it unsuitable here. The
influence of the “two immutable things” was no other than to give strong
encouragement to those who believed: the tendency was to confirm them in
the faith. Stuart gives it the meaning of “persuasion,” and renders the
passage thus, “So that by two immutable things, concerning which is
impossible for God to lie, we, who have sought for refuge, might be
strongly persuaded to hold fast the hope that is set before us.” The
great objection to this is the separation of “fleeing” from the latter
part of the sentence, which I find is done by none; and to seek for
refuge, or to flee for refuge, is not the meaning of καταφυγόντες, but
merely to flee; and to construe it by itself gives no meaning. We are
hence under the necessity of construing it with what follows, “That we
might have a strong consolation (or encouragement) who have fled to lay
hold on the hope set before us.” So Beza substantially, and Doddridge,
and Macknight. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc44011.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="xii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p34"></span> “Safe,” that is safely fixed; and “firm,”
that is strong, so as not to be bent nor broken, as Parens says. Stuart
seems to have inverted the proper meaning of the words, as he applies
ἀσφαλὢ to the anchor as having been made of good materials, and θεβαίαν
as signifying that it is firmly fixed. The first word means what cannot
fall, be subverted, or overthrown, and must therefore refer to what is
safely fixed; and the other means firm, stable, constant, enduring. So
Schleusner renders the words, “<span id="xii.v-p34.1"></span>tutam ac
firmam,” safe and firm; and he quotes Phavorinus as giving the meaning
of the first word ἕδραιος, steadfast. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc44011.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="xii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p37"></span> Calvin’s version is “Where our precursor
Jesus has entered.” The πρόδρομος is one who goes before to prepare the
way for those who follow him. It is used in the Sept. to designate the
first ripe grapes and the first ripe figs. <span
id="xii.v-p37.1"></span>[Nu 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#020.md)<span
id="xii.v-p37.1"></span>; <span id="xii.v-p37.2"></span>[Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.v-p37.2"></span>.
These were the precursors for us (or, in our behalf) Jesus has entered.”
He has not only gone to prepare a place for his people; but he is also
their leader whom they are to follow; and where he has entered they
shall also enter. His entrance is a pledge of their entrance. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc44012.md)
