[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44009)  [Next](cc44011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 5:1-6

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** For every high priest taken from among
men is ordained for men in things *pertaining* to God, that he may offer
both gifts and sacrifices for sins:

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Omnis namque Pontifex ex hominibus
assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur de eis quae (*vel, ordinat ea
quae*) ad Deum pertinent, ut offerat dona et sacrifia pro peccatis;

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Who can have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also
is compassed with infirmity.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Qui possit placabilem (*vel,
moderatum*) se praebere ignorantibus et errantibus, quando ipse quoque
circumdatus est infirmitate.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And by reason hereof he ought, as for
the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et propter hanc debet, quemadmodum pro
populo, ita et pro seipso offerre pro peccatis.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And no man taketh this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as *was* Aaron.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ac nemo sibi usurpat honorem, sed qui
vocatur a Deo, sicut et Aaron.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5.** So also Christ glorified not himself
to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son,
to day have I begotten thee.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quare nec Christus seipsum
glorificavit ut esset Pontifex, sed qui loquutus est ad eum, Filius meus
es tu, ego hodie genui te.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6.** As he saith also in another *place*,
Thou *art* a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quemadmodum et alibi dicit, Tu es
sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedec.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span><span id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**1.** *For every high priest,* *etc.* He
compares Christ with the Levitical priests, and he teaches us what is
the likeness and the difference between them; and the object of the
whole discourse is, to show what Christ’s office really is, and also to
prove that whatever was ordained under the law was ordained on his
account. Hence the Apostle passes on at last to show that the ancient
priesthood was abolished.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>He first says that the priests were *taken
from among men;* secondly, that they did not act a private part but for
the whole people; thirdly, that they were not to come empty to appease
God, but furnished with sacrifices; fourthly, that they were not to be
exempt from human infirmities, that they might more readily succor the
distressed; and lastly, that they were not presumptuously to rush into
this office, and that then only was the honor legitimate when they were
chosen and approved by God. We shall consider briefly each of these
points.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>We must first, however, expose the ignorance
of those who apply these things to our time, as though there was at this
day the same need of priests to offer sacrifices; at the same time there
is no necessity for a long refutation. For what can be more evident than
that the reality found in Christ is compared with its types, which,
being prior in time, have now ceased? But this will appear more fully
from the context. How extremely ridiculous then are they who seek by
this passage to establish and support the sacrifice of the mass! I now
return to the words of the Apostle.

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>*Taken from among men,* *etc.* This he says
of the priests. It hence follows that it was necessary for Christ to be
a real man; for as we are very far from God, we stand in a manner before
him in the person of our priest, which could not be, were he not one of
us. Hence, that the Son of God has a nature in common with us, does not
diminish his dignity, but commends it the more to us; for he is fitted
to reconcile us to God, because he is man. Therefore Paul, in order to
prove that he is a Mediator, expressly calls him man; for had he been
taken from among angels or any other beings, we could not by him be
united to God, as he could not react down to us.

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>*For men,* *etc.* This is the *second*
clause; the priest was not privately a minister for himself, but was
appointed for the common good of the people. But it is of great
consequence to notice this, so that we may know that the salvation of us
all is connected with and revolves on the priesthood of Christ. The
benefit is expressed in these words, *ordains those things which pertain
to God.* They may, indeed, be explained in two ways, as the verb
καθίσταται has a passive as well as an active sense. They who take it
passively give this version, “is ordained in those things,” etc.; and
thus they would have the preposition *in* to be understood; I approve
more of the other rendering, that the high priest takes care of or
ordains the things pertaining to God; for the construction flows better,
and the sense is fuller.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) But still
in either way, what the Apostle had in view is the same, namely, that we
have no intercourse with God, except there be a priest; for, as we are
unholy, what have we to do with holy things? We are in a word alienated
from God and his service until a priest interposes and undertakes our
cause.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>*That he may offer both gifts,* *etc.* The
*third* thing he mentions respecting a priest is the offering of gifts.
There are however here two things, gifts and sacrifices; the first word
includes, as I think, various kinds of sacrifices, and is therefore a
general term; but the second denotes especially the sacrifices of
expiation. Still the meaning is, that the priest without a sacrifice is
no peacemaker between God and man, for without a sacrifice sins are not
atoned for, nor is the wrath of God pacified. Hence, whenever
reconciliation between God and man takes place, this pledge must ever
necessarily precede. Thus we see that angels are by no means capable of
obtaining for us God’s favor, because they have no sacrifice. The same
must be thought of Prophets and Apostles. Christ alone then is he, who
having taken away sins by his own sacrifice, can reconcile God to us.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span><span id="xi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**2.** *Who can,* *etc.* This *fourth* point
has some affinity to the first, and yet it may be distinguished from it;
for the Apostle before taught us that mankind are united to God in the
person of one man, as all men partake of the same flesh and nature; but
now he refers to another thing, and that is, that the priest ought to be
kind and gentle to sinners, because he partakes of their infirmities.
The word which the Apostle uses, μετριοπαθεῖν is differently explained
both by Greek and Latin interpreters.  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) I, however, think that it simply means
one capable of sympathy. All the things which are here said of the
Levitical priests do not indeed apply to Christ; for Christ we know was
exempt from every contagion of sin; he therefore differed from others in
this respect, that he had no necessity of offering a sacrifice for
himself. But it is enough for us to know that he bare our infirmities,
though free from sin and undefiled. Then, as to the ancient and
Levitical priests, the Apostle says, that they were subject to human
infirmity, and that they made atonement also for their own sins, that
they might not only be kind to others when gone astray, but also condole
or sympathize with them. This part ought to be so far applied to Christ
as to include that exception which he mentioned before, that is, that he
bare our infirmities, being yet without sin. At the same time, though
ever free from sin, yet that experience of infirmities before described
is alone abundantly sufficient to incline him to help us, to make him
merciful and ready to pardon, to render him solicitous for us in our
miseries. The sum of what is said is, that Christ is a brother to us,
not only on account of unity as to flesh and nature, but also by
becoming a partaker of our infirmities, so that he is led, and as it
were formed, to show forbearance and kindness. The participle, δυνάμενος
is more forcible than in our common tongue, <span
id="xi.i-p26.3"></span>*qui possit,* “who can,” for it expresses aptness
or fitness. *The ignorant* and those *out of the way,* or erring, he has
named instead of sinners, according to what is done in Hebrew; for <span
id="xi.i-p26.4"></span>שגגה, *shegage,* means every kind of error or
offense, as I shall have presently an occasion to explain.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span><span id="xi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**4.** *And no man,* *etc.* There is to be
noticed in this verse partly a likeness and partly a difference. What
makes an office lawful is the call of God; so that no one can rightly
and orderly perform it without being made fit for it by God. Christ and
Aaron had this in common, that God called them both; but they differed
in this, that Christ succeeded by a new and different way and was made a
perpetual priest. It is hence evident that Aaron’s priesthood was
temporary, for it was to cease. We see the object of the Apostle; it was
to defend the right of Christ’s priesthood; and he did this by showing
that God was its author. But this would not have been sufficient, unless
it was made evident that an end was to be put to the old in order that a
room might be obtained for this. And this point he proves by directing
our attention to the terms on which Aaron was appointed, for we are not
to extend them further than God’s decree; and he will presently make it
evident how long God had designed this order to continue. Christ then is
a lawful priest, for he was appointed by God’s authority. What is to be
said of Aaron and his successors? That they had as much right as was
granted them by the Lord, but not so much as men according to their own
fancy concede to them.

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>But though this has been said with reference
to what is here handled, yet we may hence draw a general truth, — that
no government is to be set up in the Church by the will of men, but that
we are to wait for the command of God, and also that we ought to follow
a certain rule in electing ministers, so that no one may intrude
according to his own humor. Both these things ought to be distinctly
noticed for the Apostle here speaks not of persons only, but also of the
office itself; nay, he denies that the office which men appoint without
God’s command is lawful and divine. For as it appertains to God only to
rule his Church, so he claims this right as his own, that is, to
prescribe the way and manner of administration. I hence deem it as
indisputable, that the Papal priesthood is spurious; for it has been
framed in the workshop of men. God nowhere commands a sacrifice to be
offered now to him for the expiation of sins; nowhere does he command
priests to be appointed for such a purpose. While then the Pope ordains
his priests for the purpose of sacrificing, the Apostle denies that they
are to be counted lawful priests; they cannot therefore be such, except
by some new privilege they exalt themselves above Christ, for he dared
not of himself to take upon him this honor, but waited for the command
of the Father.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>This also ought to be held good as to
persons, that no individual is of himself to seize on this honor without
public authority. I speak now of offices divinely appointed. At the same
time it may sometimes be, that one, not called by God, is yet to be
tolerated, however little he may be approved, provided the office itself
be divine and approved by God; for many often creep in through ambition
or some bad motives, whose call has no evidence; and yet they are not to
be immediately rejected, especially when this cannot be done by the
public decision of the Church. For during two hundred years before the
coming of Christ the foulest corruptions prevailed with respect to the
priesthood, yet the right of honor, proceeding from the calling of God,
still continued as to the office itself; and the men themselves were
tolerated, because the freedom of the Church was subverted. It hence
appears that the greatest defect is the character of the office itself,
that is, when men of themselves invent what God has never commanded. The
less endurable then are those Romish sacrificers, who prattle of nothing
but their own titles, that they may be counted sacred, while yet they
have chosen themselves without any authority from God.

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span><span id="xi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**5.** *Thou art my Son,* *etc.* This passage
may seem to be far­fetched; for though Christ was begotten of God the
Father, he was not on this account made also a priest. But if we
consider the end for which Christ was manifested to the world, it will
plainly appear that this character necessarily belongs to him. We must
however bear especially in mind what we said on the first chapter; that
the begetting of Christ, of which the Psalmist speaks, was a testimony
which the Father rendered to him before men. Therefore the mutual
relation between the Father and the Son is not what is here intended;
but regard is rather had to men to whom he was manifested. Now, what
sort of Son did God manifest to us? One indued with no honor, with no
power? Nay, one who was to be a Mediator between himself and man; his
begetting then included his priesthood.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span><span id="xi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>**6** *As he saith in another place,* or,
*elsewhere, etc.* Here is expressed more clearly what the Apostle
intended. This is a remarkable passage, and indeed the whole Psalm from
which it is taken; for there is scarcely anywhere a clearer prophecy
respecting Christ’s eternal priesthood and his kingdom. And yet the Jews
try all means to evade it, in order that they might obscure the glory of
Christ; but they cannot succeed. They apply it to David, as though he
was the person whom God bade to sit on his right hand; but this is an
instance of extreme effrontery; for we know that it was not lawful for
kings to exercise the priesthood. On this account, Uzziah, that is, for
the sole crime of intermeddling with an office that did not belong to
him, so provoked God that he was smitten with leprosy. (<span
id="xi.i-p37.1"></span>[2Ch 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#018)<span
id="xi.i-p37.1"></span>.) It is therefore certain that neither David nor
any one of the kings is intended here.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>If they raise this objection and say, that
princes are sometimes called <span id="xi.i-p38.1"></span>
כהנים*cohenim*, priests, I indeed allow it, but I deny that the word can
be so understood here. For the comparison here made leaves nothing
doubtful: Melchisedec was God’s priest; and the Psalmist testifies that
that king whom God has set on his right hand would be a \|kohen\|
according to the order of Melchisedec. Who does not see that this is to
be understood of the priesthood? For as it was a rare and almost a
singular thing for the same person to be a priest and a king, at least
an unusual thing among God’s people, hence he sets forth Melchisedec as
the type of the Messiah, as though he had said, “The royal dignity will
not prevent him to exercise the priesthood also, for a type of such a
thing has been already presented in Melchisedec.” And indeed all among
the Jews, possessed of any modesty, have conceded that the Messiah is
the person here spoken of, and that his priesthood is what is commended.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span>What is in Greek, κατὰ τάξιν *according to
the order,* is in Hebrew, <span id="xi.i-p39.1"></span>על-דברתי
*ol-deberti*, and means the same, and may be rendered, “according to the
way” or manner: and hereby is confirmed what I have already said, that
as it was an unusual thing among the people of God for the same person
to bear the office of a king and of a priest, an ancient example was
brought forward, by which the Messiah was represented. The rest the
Apostle himself will more minutely set forth in what follows.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 5:7-11

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Who in the days of his flesh, when he
had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
feared;

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Qui in diebus carnis suae, quum et
precationes et supplicationes obtulisset cum clamore valido et lachrymis
ei qui poterat eum ex morte servare, et exauditus esset ex suo metu:

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Though he were a Son, yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered;

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Tametsi Filius erat, didicit ex iis
quae passus est, obedientiam;

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>**9.** And being made perfect, he became the
author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him;

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Et sanctificatus omnibus qui illi
obediunt, factus fuit causa aeternae salutis,

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>**10.** Called of God an high priest after
the order of Melchisedec.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Cognominatus a Deo sacerdos secundum
ordinem Melchisedec:

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>**11.** Of whom we have many things to say,
and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>**11.** De quo nobis multus sermo et
difficilis explicatu, quandoquidem tardi facti estis auribus.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>**7.** *Who in the days,* *etc.* As the form
and beauty of Christ is especially disfigured by the cross, while men do
not consider the end for which he humbled himself, the Apostle again
teaches us what he had before briefly referred to, that his wonderful
goodness shines forth especially in this respect, that he for our good
subjected himself to our infirmities. It hence appears that our faith is
thus confirmed, and that his honor is not diminished for having borne
our evils.

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span>He points out two causes why it behooved
Christ to suffer, the proximate and the ultimate. The proximate was,
that he might learn obedience; and the ultimate, that he might be thus
consecrated a priest for our salutation.

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span>*The days of his flesh* no doubt mean his
life in this world. It hence follows, that the word *flesh* does not
signify what is material, but a condition, according to what is said in
<span id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>[1Co
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)<span id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>,
“Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God.” Rave then do
those fanatical men who dream that Christ is now divested of his flesh,
because it is here intimated that he has outlived the days of his flesh
for it is one thing to be a real man, though endued with a blessed
immortality; it is another thing to be liable to those human sorrows and
infirmities, which Christ sustained as long as he was in this world, but
has now laid aside, having been received into heaven.

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span>Let us now look into the subject. Christ who
was a Son, who sought relief from the Father and was heard, yet suffered
death, that thus he might be taught to obey. There is in every word a
singular importance. By *days of the flesh* he intimates that the time
of our miseries is limited, which brings no small alleviation. And
doubtless hard were our condition, and by no means tolerable, if no end
of suffering were set before us. The three things which follow bring us
also no small consolations; Christ was a Son, whom his own dignity
exempted from the common lot of men, and yet he subjected himself to
that lot for our sakes: who now of us mortals can dare refuse the same
condition? Another argument may be added, — though we may be pressed
down by adversity, yet we are not excluded from the number of God’s
children, since we see him going before us who was by nature his only
Son; for that we are counted his children is owing only to the gift of
adoption by which he admits us into a union with him, who alone lays
claim to this honor in his own right.

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span>*When he had offered up prayers,* *etc.* The
second thing he mentions respecting Christ is, that he, as it became
him, sought a remedy that he might be delivered from evils; and he said
this that no one might think that Christ had an iron heart which felt
nothing; for we ought always to consider why a thing is said. Had Christ
been touched by no sorrow, no consolation could arise to us from his
sufferings; but when we hear that he also endured the bitterest agonies
of mind, the likeness becomes then evident to us. Christ, he says, did
not undergo death and other evils because he disregarded them or was
pressed down by no feeling of distress, but he prayed with tears, by
which he testified the extreme anguish of his soul.  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) Then by *tears* and *strong crying* the
Apostle meant to express the intensity of his grief, for it is usual to
show it by outward symptoms; nor do I doubt but that he refers to that
prayer which the Evangelists mention, “Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me,” (<span id="xi.ii-p19.3"></span>[Mt
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)<span id="xi.ii-p19.3"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p19.4"></span>[Lu
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042)<span id="xi.ii-p19.4"></span>;)
and also to another, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (<span
id="xi.ii-p19.5"></span>[Mt 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="xi.ii-p19.5"></span>.) For in the second instance mention is made by
the evangelists of strong crying; and in the first it is not possible to
believe that his eyes were dry, since drops of blood, through excessive
grief, flowed from his body. It is indeed certain that he was reduced to
great straits; and being overwhelmed with real sorrows, he earnestly
prayed his Father to bring him help.  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

<span id="xi.ii-p22"></span>And what application is to be made of this?
Even this, that whenever our evils press upon us and overwhelm us, we
may call to mind the Son of God who labored under the same; and since he
has gone before us there is no reason for us to faint. We are at the
same time reminded that deliverance from evils can be found from no
other but from God alone, and what better guidance can we have as to
prayer than the example of Christ? He betook himself immediately to the
Father. And thus the Apostle indicates what ought to be done by us when
he says that he offered prayers to him who was able to deliver him from
death; for by these words he intimates that he rightly prayed, because
he fled to God the only Deliverer. His *tears* and *crying* recommend to
us ardor and earnestness in prayer, for we ought not to pray to God
formally, but with ardent desires.

<span id="xi.ii-p23"></span>*And was heard,* *etc.* Some render the
following words, “on account of his reverence” or fears but I wholly
differ from them. In the first place he puts the word alone ἐυλαθείας
without the possessive “his”; and then there is the preposition ἀπὸ
“from,” not ὑπὲρ “on account of,” or any other signifying a cause or a
reason. As, then, εὐλάθεια means for the most part fear or anxiety, I
doubt not but that the Apostle means that Christ was heard from that
which he feared, so that he was not overwhelmed by his evils or
swallowed up by death. For in this contest the Son of God had to engage,
not because he was tried by unbelief, the source of all our fears, but
because he sustained as a man in our flesh the judgment of God, the
terror of which could not have been overcome without an arduous effort.
Chrysostom interprets it of Christ’s dignity, which the Father in a
manner reverenced; but this cannot be admitted. Others render it
“piety.” But the explanation I have given is much more suitable, and
requires no long arguments in its favor.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88)

<span id="xi.ii-p25"></span>Now he added this third particular, lest we
should think that Christ’s prayers were rejected, because he was not
immediately delivered from his evils; for at no time was God’s mercy and
aid wanting to him. And hence we may conclude that God often hears our
prayers, even when that is in no way made evident. For though it belongs
not to us to prescribe to him as it were a fixed rule, nor does it
become him to grant whatsoever requests we may conceive in our minds or
express with our tongues, yet he shows that he grants our players in
everything necessary for our salvation. So when we seem apparently to be
repulsed, we obtain far more than if he fully granted our requests.

<span id="xi.ii-p26"></span>But how was Christ heard from what he
feared, as he underwent the death which he dreaded? To this I reply,
that we must consider what it was that he feared; why was it that he
dreaded death except that he saw in it the curse of God, and that he had
to wrestle with the guilt of all iniquities, and also with hell itself?
Hence was his trepidation and anxiety; for extremely terrible is God’s
judgment. He then obtained what he prayed for, when he came forth a
conqueror from the pains of death, when he was sustained by the saving
hand of the Father, when after a short conflict he gained a glorious
victory over Satan, sin, and hell. Thus it often happens that we ask
this or that, but not for a right end; yet God, not granting what we
ask, at the same time finds out himself a way to succor us.

<span id="xi.ii-p27"></span><span id="xi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p28"></span>**8.** *Yet learned he obedience,* *etc.*
The proximate end of Christ’s sufferings was thus to habituate himself
to obedience; not that he was driven to this by force, or that he had
need of being thus exercised, as the case is with oxen or horses when
their ferocity is to be tamed, for he was abundantly willing to render
to his Father the obedience which he owed. But this was done from a
regard to our benefit, that he might exhibit to us an instance and an
example of subjection even to death itself. It may at the same time be
truly said that Christ by his death learned fully what it was to obey
God, since he was then led in a special manner to deny himself; for
renouncing his own will, he so far gave himself up to his Father that of
his own accord and willingly he underwent that death which he greatly
dreaded. The meaning then is that Christ was by his sufferings taught
how far God ought to be submitted to and obeyed.

<span id="xi.ii-p29"></span>It is then but right that we also should by
his example be taught and prepared by various sorrows, and at length by
death itself, to render obedience to God; nay, much more necessary is
this in our case, for we have a disposition contumacious and
ungovernable until the Lord subdues us by such exercises to bear his
yoke. This benefit, which arises from the cross, ought to allay its
bitterness in our hearts; for what can be more desirable than to be made
obedient to God? But this cannot be effected but by the cross, for in
prosperity we exult as with loose reins; nay, in most cases, when the
yoke is shaken off, the wantonness of the flesh breaks forth into
excesses. But when restraint is put on our will, when we seek to please
God, in this act only does our obedience show itself; nay, it is an
illustrious proof of perfect obedience when we choose the death to which
God may call us, though we dread it, rather than the life which we
naturally desire.

<span id="xi.ii-p30"></span><span id="xi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p31"></span>**9.** *And being made perfect,* or
*sanctified, etc.* Here is the ultimate or the remoter end, as they call
it, why it was necessary for Christ to suffer: it was that he might thus
become initiated into his priesthood, as though the Apostle had said
that the enduring of the cross and death were to Christ a solemn kind of
consecration, by which he intimates that all his sufferings had a regard
to our salvation. It hence follows, that they are so far from being
prejudicial to his dignity that they are on the contrary his glory; for
if salvation be highly esteemed by us, how honorably ought we to think
of its cause or author? For he speaks not here of Christ only as an
example, but he ascends higher, even that he by his obedience has
blotted out our transgressions. He became then the cause of salvation,
because he obtained righteousness for us before God, having removed the
disobedience of Adam by an act of an opposite kind, even obedience.

<span id="xi.ii-p32"></span>*Sanctified* suits the passage better than
“made perfect.” The Greek word τελειωθεὶς means both; but as he speaks
here of the priesthood, he fitly and suitably mentions sanctification.
And so Christ himself speaks in another place, “For their sakes I
sanctify myself.” (<span id="xi.ii-p32.1"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span id="xi.ii-p32.1"></span>.)
It hence appears that this is to be properly applied to his human
nature, in which he performed the office of a priest, and in which he
also suffered.  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="xi.ii-p34"></span>*To all them that obey him.* If then we
desire that Christ’s obedience should be profitable to us, we must
imitate him; for the Apostle means that its benefit shall come to none
but to those who obey. But by saying this he recommends faith to us; for
he becomes not ours, nor his blessings, except as far as we receive them
and him by faith. He seems at the same time to have adopted a universal
term, *all,* for this end, that he might show that no one is precluded
from salvation who is but teachable and becomes obedient to the Gospel
of Christ.

<span id="xi.ii-p35"></span><span id="xi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p36"></span>**10.** *Called of God,* or *named by God,
etc.* As it was necessary that he should pursue more at large the
comparison between Christ and Melchisedec, on which he had briefly
touched, and that the mind of the Jews should be stirred up to greater
attention, he so passes to a digression that he still retails his
argument.

<span id="xi.ii-p37"></span><span id="xi.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p38"></span>**11.** He therefore makes a preface by
saying that he had *many things* to say, but that they were to prepare
themselves lest these things should be said in vain. He reminds them
that they were *hard* or difficult things; not indeed to repel them, but
to stimulate them to greater attention. For as things that are easily
understood render us slothful, so we become more keenly bent on hearing
when anything obscure is set before us. He however states that the cause
of the difficulty was not in the subject but in themselves. And indeed
the Lord speaks to us so clearly and without any obscurity, that his
word is rightly called our light; but its brightness become dim through
our darkness.  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) This happens partly
through our dullness and partly through our sloth; for though we are
very dull to understand the truth of God, yet there is to be added to
this vice the depravity of our affections, for we apply our minds to
vanity rather than to God’s truth. We are also continually impeded
either by our perverseness, or by the cares of the world, or by the
lusts of our flesh*. Of whom* does not refer to Christ, but to
Melchisedec; yet he is not referred to as a private man, but as the type
of Christ, and in a manner personating him.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 5:12-14

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**12.** For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which *be* the first
principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have need of
milk, and not of strong meat.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Nam quum debeatis esse doctores pro
ratione temporis, rursum opus habetis, ut quis vos doceat elementa
initii sermonum Dei; et facti estis ii quibus lacte opus sit et non
solido cibo.

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span>**13.** For every one that useth milk *is*
unskillful in the word of righteousness: for he is a babe.

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Nam quisquis lactis est particeps,
imperitus est sermonis justitae, infans est enim.

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span>**14.** But strong meat belongeth to them
that are of full age, *even* those who by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>**14.** Perfectorum vero est solidus cibus,
qui propter assuetudinem sensus habent exercitatos ad discretionem boni
et mali.

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span><span id="xi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span>**12.** *For when for the time ye ought,*
*etc.* This reproof contains in it very sharp goads to rouse the Jews
from their sloth. He says that it was unreasonable and disgraceful that
they should still continue in the elements, in the first rudiments of
knowledge, while they ought to have been teachers. “You ought,” he says,
“to have been the instructors of others, but ye are not even disciples
capable of comprehending an ordinary truth; for ye do not as yet
understand the first rudiments of Christianity.” That he might, however,
make them the more ashamed of themselves, he mentions the “first
principles,” or the elements of the beginning of God’s words, as though
he had said, You do not know the alphabet. We must, indeed, learn
through life; for he alone is truly wise who owns that he is very far
from perfect knowledge; but we ought still to profit so much by learning
as not to continue always in the first principles. Nor are we to act in
such a way, that what is said by Isaiah should be verified in us,

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span>“There shall be to you a precept on
precept, a precept on precept,” *etc.* (<span
id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010)<span id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>;)

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span>but we ought, on the contrary, so to exert
ourselves, that our progress may correspond to *the time* allowed us.

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span>Doubtless, not only years, but days also,
must be accounted for; so that every one ought to strive to make
progress; but few there are who summon themselves to an account as to
past time, or who show any concern for the future. We are, therefore,
justly punished for our sloth, for most of us remain in elements fitted
for children. We are further reminded, that it is the duty of every one
to impart the knowledge he has to his brethren; so that no one is to
retain what he knows to himself, but to communicate it to the
edification of others.  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="xi.iii-p15"></span>*Such as have need of milk.* Paul uses the
same metaphor in <span id="xi.iii-p15.1"></span>[1Co
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="xi.iii-p15.1"></span>;
and he reproaches the Corinthians with the same fault with what is
mentioned here, at least with one that is very similar; for he says,
that they were carnal and could not bear solid food. Milk then means an
elementary doctrine suitable to the ignorant. Peter takes the word in
another sense, when he bids us to desire the milk that is without
deceit, (<span id="xi.iii-p15.2"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)<span id="xi.iii-p15.2"></span>;)
for there is a twofold childhood, that is, as to wickedness, and as to
understanding; and so Paul tells us, “Be not children in understanding,
but in wickedness.” (<span id="xi.iii-p15.3"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="xi.iii-p15.3"></span>.)
They then who are so tender that they cannot receive the higher
doctrine, are by way of reproach called children.

<span id="xi.iii-p16"></span>For the right application of doctrines is
to join us together, so that we may grow to a perfect manhood, to the
measure of full age, and that we should not be like children, tossed
here and there, and carried about by every wind of doctrine. (<span
id="xi.iii-p16.1"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="xi.iii-p16.1"></span>.)
We must indeed show some indulgence to those who have not yet known much
of Christ, if they are not capable as yet of receiving *solid food,* but
he who has had time to grow, if he till continues a child, is not
entitled to any excuse. We indeed see that Isaiah brands the reprobate
with this mark, that they were like children newly weaned from the
breasts. (<span id="xi.iii-p16.2"></span>[Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)<span id="xi.iii-p16.2"></span>.)
The doctrine of Christ does indeed minister milk to babes as well as
strong meat to adults; but as the babe is nourished by the milk of its
nurse, not that it may ever depend on the breast, but that it may by
degrees grow and take stronger food; so also at first we must suck milk
from Scripture, so that we may afterwards feed on its bread. The Apostle
yet so distinguishes between milk and strong food, that he still
understands sound doctrine by both, but the ignorant begin with the one,
and they who are well­taught are strengthened by the other.

<span id="xi.iii-p17"></span><span id="xi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p18"></span>**13.** *For every one who uses milk,* or,
*who partakes of milk, etc.* He means those who from tenderness or
weakness as yet refuse solid doctrine; for otherwise he who is grown up
is not averse to milk. But he reproves here an infancy in understanding,
such as constrains God even to prattle with us. He then says, that babes
are not fit to receive the *word of righteousness,* understanding by
righteousness the perfection of which he will presently speak.  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) For the Apostle does not here, as I
think, refer to the question, how we are justified before God, but takes
the word in a simpler sense, as denoting that completeness of knowledge
which leads to perfection, which office Paul ascribes to the Gospel in
his epistle to the <span id="xi.iii-p19.6"></span>[Col
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028)<span id="xi.iii-p19.6"></span>;
as though he had said, that those who indulge themselves in their
ignorance preclude themselves from a real knowledge of Christ, and that
the doctrine of the Gospel is unfruitful in them, because they never
reach the goal, nor come even near it.

<span id="xi.iii-p20"></span><span id="xi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p21"></span>**14.** *Of full age,* or *perfect, etc.*
He calls those perfect who are adults; he mentions them in opposition to
babes, as it is done in <span id="xi.iii-p21.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006), [1 Cor.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="xi.iii-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.iii-p21.2"></span>[Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span id="xi.iii-p21.2"></span>.
For the middle and manly age is the full age of human life; but he calls
those by a figure men in Christ; who are spiritual. And such he would
have all Christians to be, such as have attained by continual practice a
habit to *discern between good and evil.* For he cannot have been
otherwise taught aright in the truth, except we are fortified by his
protection against all the falsehoods and delusions of Satan; for on
this account it is called the sword of the Spirit. And Paul points out
this benefit conferred by sound doctrine when he says, “That we may not
be carried about by every wind of doctrine.” (<span
id="xi.iii-p21.3"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="xi.iii-p21.3"></span>.)
And truly what sort of faith is that which doubts, being suspended
between truth and falsehood? Is it not in danger of coming to nothing
every moment?

<span id="xi.iii-p22"></span>But not satisfied to mention in one word
the mind, he mentions all the *senses,* in order to show that we are
ever to strive until we be in every way furnished by God’s word, and be
so armed for battle, that Satan may by no means steal upon us with his
fallacies.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="xi.iii-p25"></span>It hence appears what sort of Christianity
there is under the Papacy, where not only the grossest ignorance is
commended under the name of simplicity, but where the people are also
most rigidly prevented from seeking real knowledge; nay, it is easy to
judge by what spirit they are influenced, who hardly allow that to be
touched which the Apostle commands us to handle continually, who imagine
that a laudable neglect which the Apostle here so severely reproves, who
take away the word of God, the only rule of discerning rightly, which
discerning he declares to be necessary for all Christians! But among
those who are freed from this diabolical prohibition and enjoy the
liberty of learning, there is yet often no less indifference both as to
hearing and reading. When thus we exercise not our powers, we are
stupidly ignorant and void of all discernment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc44010.htm#fr_83) <span
id="xi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span> The former view is what is commonly taken,
“is appointed;” and it comports with the subject in hand — the
appointment of the priest, as it appears evident from what follows in
verses 5 and 6. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc44010.htm#fr_84) <span
id="xi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span> “The classic or philosophic use of the word
μετριοπαθεῖν, may be briefly explained. The Stoics maintained that a man
should be ἀπαθὴς, i.e., not subject to passions, such as anger, fear,
hope, joy, etc. The Platonists on the other hand averred that a wise man
should μετριοπαθὴς, moderate in his affections, and not ἀπαθὴς. The
leading sense, then, or the word μετριοπαθεῖν, is to be moderate in our
feelings or passions.” — Stuart.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>But this is not exactly its meaning here.
Schleusner, quoting the Greek Lexicographers, shows that it was used in
the sense of being indulgent, or of acting kindly and forgivingly, or
forebearingly; and this seems to be its meaning in this passage. The
sentence is rendered by Macknight, “Being able to have a right measure
of compassion on the ignorant and erring.” It may be rendered, “Being
capable of duly feeling for the ignorant and the erring,” or the
deceived, that is by sin. See as to the ignorant <span
id="xi.i-p26.1"></span>[Le
5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017)<span id="xi.i-p26.1"></span>;
and as to the deceived by passions or interest, see <span
id="xi.i-p26.2"></span>[Le 6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)<span
id="xi.i-p26.2"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc44010.htm#fr_85) <span
id="xi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span> This passage, “Thou art my Son,” etc., in
this place, is only adduced to show that Christ was the Son of God:
Christ did not honor or magnify or exalt himself, (for so δοξάζω means
here,) but he who said to him, “Thou art my son,” etc., did honor or
exalt him. This is the meaning of the sentence. The verse may thus be
rendered, —

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>**5.** So also Christ, himself he did not
exalt to be a high priest, but he who had said to him, “My son art thou,
I have this day begotten thee.”

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>It is the same as though he had said, “Christ
did not make himself a high priest but God.” And the reason why he
speaks of God as having said “My Son,” etc., seems to be this, — to show
that he who made him king (for the reference in <span
id="xi.i-p35.1"></span>[Ps 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="xi.i-p35.1"></span> is to his appointment as a king) made him also a
high priest. And this is confirmed by the next quotation from <span
id="xi.i-p35.2"></span>[Ps
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p35.2"></span>;
for in the first verse he is spoken of as a king, and then in verse 4
his priesthood is mentioned. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc44010.htm#fr_86) <span
id="xi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p19"></span> “Prayers and supplications” are nearly of
the same meaning; the first word means a request, a petition, strictly a
prayer; and the last an earnest or humble entreaty. The last word is
found only here in the New Testament; once in the Septuagint, in <span
id="xi.ii-p19.1"></span>[Job 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#003)<span
id="xi.ii-p19.1"></span>; and once in the Apocrypha, <span
id="xi.ii-p19.2"></span>[2 Macc.
9:18](../../../bib/apo/ma2009.htm#018)<span id="xi.ii-p19.2"></span>.
Hesychius, as quoted by Schleusner, gives παράκλησις, request, entreaty,
as its meaning: it comes from ἱκέτης, a suppliant. The word ἱκετηρία,
which is here used means first an olive branch wrapped in wool, carried
by suppliants as a symbol of entreaty and hence used often in the sense
of entreaty and supplication. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc44010.htm#fr_87) <span
id="xi.ii-p19.6"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p20"></span> Stuart on this passage very justly
observes, “If Jesus died as a common virtuous suffered, and merely as a
martyr to the truth, without any vicarious suffering laid upon him, then
is his death a most unaccountable event in respect to the manner of his
behavior while suffering it; and it must be admitted that multitudes of
humble, sinful, meek and very imperfect disciples of Christianity have
surpassed their Master in the fortitude, and collected firmness and calm
complacency which are requisite to triumph over the pangs of a dying
hour. But who can well believe this? Or who can regard Jesus as a simple
sufferer in the ordinary way upon the cross, and explain the mysteries
of his dreadful horror before and during the hours of crucifixion?”

<span id="xi.ii-p21"></span>What is referred to is certainly
inexplicable, except we admit what is often and in various ways plainly
taught us in God’s word, that Christ died for our sins. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc44010.htm#fr_88) <span
id="xi.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p24"></span> The idea of the effect of hearing, that is
deliverance, is no doubt included in εἰσακουσθεὶς, “having been heard,”
as it is sometimes in the corresponding word in Hebrew; so that Stuart
is justified in the rendering it delivered, — “and being delivered from
that which he feared.” It is rendered the same by Macknight, “and being
delivered from fear.” Both Beza and Grotius render the last word fear;
and this is its meaning as used in the Septuagint. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc44010.htm#fr_89) <span
id="xi.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p33"></span> The word τελειωθεὶς, means here the same as
in <span id="xi.ii-p33.1"></span>[Heb
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span id="xi.ii-p33.1"></span>.
Stuart gives it the same meaning here as in the former passage, “Then
when exalted to glory,” etc.; but this does not comport with what
follows, for it was not his exaltation to glory that qualified him to be
“the author (or the causer or effecter) of eternal salvation,” but his
perfect or complete work in suffering, by his having completely and
perfectly performed the work of atonement. And that his suffering in
obedience to God’s will, even his vicarious suffering, is meant here,
appears also from the following reference to his being a priest after
the order of Melchisedec. The meaning then seems to be, that Christ
having fully completed his work as a priest, and that by suffering,
became thereby the author of eternal salvation. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc44010.htm#fr_90) <span
id="xi.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p39"></span> The literal rendering is “Of whom we have
many a word to say, and hardly explainable,” or hard to be explained.
This hardness of explanation was however owing to their dullness of
comprehension, as Calvin justly observes. “Hard to be uttered” of our
version is not correct; nor is “hard to be understood” of Doddridge
right. Macknight gives the true meaning, “difficult to be explained.”
Beza’s is the same. The reason is added “Since dull (or sluggish) ye are
become in ears,” or in hearings. To be dull in ears is to be
inattentive; but to be sluggish in ears seems to mean stupidity,
slowness of comprehension. The latter is evidently meant here; that is,
a tardiness or slowness in understanding. To hear with the ear is in the
language of Scripture to understand. (<span id="xi.ii-p39.1"></span>[Mt
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)<span id="xi.ii-p39.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p39.2"></span>[Joh
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043)<span id="xi.ii-p39.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p39.3"></span>[1Co
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)<span id="xi.ii-p39.3"></span>.)
Hence to be sluggish in ears is to be slow or tardy in understanding the
Word of God. Stuart therefore gives the sense, “Since ye are dull of
apprehension.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc44010.htm#fr_91) <span
id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span> Our version of this clause is very literal
and compact, and sufficiently plain, “For when for the time ye ought to
be teachers.” Its elegance and conciseness are not retained either by
Macknight or by Stuart. What is implied in the words, “for the time,” is
sufficiently evident without being expressed. As to the following
sentence, “Ye have need,” etc., some difficulty has been found in the
construction. I render it as follows, “Ye have again need of this — that
some one should teach you the first principles of the oracles of God.” I
take τίνα to be accusative before “teach.” The word “oracles” is used by
Peter in the same sense, as designating the doctrines of the Gospels,
<span id="xi.iii-p14.1"></span>[1Pe
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)<span id="xi.iii-p14.1"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc44010.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p19"></span> This is the view of Grotius and others,
but some regard “the word of righteousness” as a paraphrasis for the
Gospel; and Stuart renders it, “the word of salvation.” Dr. Owen says
that the Gospel is called “the word of righteousness,” because it
reveals the righteousness of God, <span id="xi.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="xi.iii-p19.1"></span>.
It may also be so called, because it reveals and contains the truth, the
full truth, partly revealed previously. The word “righteousness” has
this meaning both in the Old and New Testaments. See <span
id="xi.iii-p19.2"></span>[Ps 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)<span
id="xi.iii-p19.2"></span>; <span id="xi.iii-p19.3"></span>[Isa.
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span id="xi.iii-p19.3"></span>;
and <span id="xi.iii-p19.4"></span>[Mt
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023)<span id="xi.iii-p19.4"></span>,
<span id="xi.iii-p19.5"></span>[2Co
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015)<span id="xi.iii-p19.5"></span>.
“The ministers of righteousness” in the last text are opposed to false
ministers. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc44010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p23"></span> The word for “senses” means literally the
organs of the senses, such as the eyes, the ears, etc., but here as
signifying the senses themselves, as seeing, hearing, tasting, and
smelling, by means of which those grown up are enabled by long
experience to know what is good and wholesome for them, and also what is
bad and injurious. By this comparison, which is here carried out fully,
he intimates that the grown up in Christian truth attain by the habit of
exercising all the senses or faculties of their minds, a capacity to
distinguish between good and evil, between truth and error, in religion.

<span id="xi.iii-p24"></span>The doctrine of reserve cannot be drawn
from this passage; for though the Apostle says that they were not
capable, owing to their sloth, or taking strong food, he yet lays it
before them. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc44011)
