[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44013)  [Next](cc44015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 9:1-5

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then verily the first *covenant* had
also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Habebat quidem prius illud
justificationes cultus et sanctum mundanum:

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** For there was a tabernacle made; the
first, wherein *was* the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread;
which is called the sanctuary.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tabernaculum enim primum compositum
erat, in quo candelabrum et mensa et panum propositio; quod dicitur
sanctuarium.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** And after the second veil, the
tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all;

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Post secundum autem velum tabernaculum
quod sancta sanctorum dicitur;

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Which had the golden censer, and the
ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein *was* the
golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables
of the covenant;

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Aureum habens thuribulum et arcam
foederis undique coopertam auro, in qua urna aurea habens manna, et
virga Aaronis quae floruerat, et tabulae testamenti;

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And over it the cherubims of glory
shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Supra autem ipsam cherubin gloriae
obumbrantes propitiatorium; de quibus non attinet nunc dicere
sigillatim.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span><span id="xv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**1** *Then verily the first,* *etc*  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) After having spoken generally of the
abrogation of the old covenant, he now refers specially to the
ceremonies. His object is to show that there was nothing practiced then
to which Christ’s coming has not put an end. He says first, that under
the old covenant there was a specific form of divine worship, and that
it was peculiarly adapted to that time. It will hereafter appear by the
comparison what kind of things were those rituals prescribed under the
Law.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>Some copies read, πρώτη σκηνὴ the first
tabernacle; but I suspect that there is a mistake as to the word
“tabernacle;” nor do I doubt but that some unlearned reader, not finding
a noun to the adjective, and in his ignorance applying to the tabernacle
what had been said of the covenant, unwisely added the word σκηνὴ
tabernacle. I indeed greatly wonder that the mistake had so prevailed,
that it is found in the Greek copies almost universally.  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) But necessity constrains me to follow
the ancient reading. For the Apostle, as I have said, had been speaking
of the old covenant; he now comes to ceremonies, which were additions,
as it were, to it. He then intimates that all the rites of the Mosaic
Law were a part of the old covenant, and that they partook of the same
ancientness, and were therefore to perish.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>Many take the word λατρείας as an accusative
plural. I agree with those who connect the two words together,
δικαιώματα λατρείας for institutes or rites, which the Hebrews call
<span id="xv.i-p18.1"></span>חוקים, and the Greeks have rendered by the
word δικαιώματα ordinances. The sense is, that the whole form or manner
of worshipping God was annexed to the old covenant, and that it
consisted of sacrifices, ablutions, and other symbols, together with the
sanctuary. And he calls it a *worldly sanctuary,* because there was no
heavenly truth or reality in those rites; for though the sanctuary was
the effigy of the original pattern which had been shown to Moses; yet an
effigy or image is a different thing from the reality, and especially
when they are compared, as here, as things opposed to each other. Hence
the sanctuary in itself was indeed earthly, and is rightly classed among
the elements of the world, it was yet heavenly as to what it signified.
 <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span><span id="xv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**2.** *For there was a tabernacle,* *etc.*
As the Apostle here touches but lightly on the structure of the
tabernacle, that he might not be detained beyond what his subject
required; so will I also designedly abstain from any refined explanation
of it. It is then sufficient for our present purpose to consider the
tabernacle in its three parts, — the first was the court of the people;
the middle was commonly called the sanctuary; and the last was the inner
sanctuary, which they called, by way of eminence, *the holy of holies.*
 <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>As to the first sanctuary, which was
contiguous to the court of the people, he says that there were the
*candlestick* and *the table* on which the *shew­bread* was set: he
calls this place, in the plural number, the holies. Then, after this is
mentioned, the most secret place, which they called the holy of holies,
still more remote from the view of the people, and it was even hid from
the priests who ministered in the first sanctuary; for as by a veil the
sanctuary was closed up to the people, so another veil kept the priests
from the holy of holies. There, the Apostle says, was the θυμιατήριον by
which name I understand the altar of incense, or fumigation, rather than
the censer;  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) then *the ark of
the covenant*, with its covering, *the two cherubim, the golden pot*
filled with *manna, the rod of Aaron, and the two tables.* Thus far the
Apostle proceeds in describing the tabernacle.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>But he says that the pot in which Moses had
deposited the manna, and Aaron’s rod which had budded, were in the ark
with the two tables; but this seems inconsistent with sacred history,
which in <span id="xv.i-p25.1"></span>[1Ki
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p25.1"></span>,
relates that there was nothing in the ark but the two tables. But it is
easy to reconcile these two passages: God had commanded the pot and
Aaron’s rod to be laid up before the testimony; it is hence probable
that they were deposited in the ark, together with the tables. But when
the Temple was built, these things were arranged in a different order,
and certain history relates it as a thing new that the ark had nothing
else but the two tables.  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span><span id="xv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**5.** *Of which we cannot now,* *etc.* As
nothing can satisfy, curious men, the apostle cuts off every occasion
for refinements unsuitable to his present purpose, and lest a longer
discussion of these things should break off the thread of his argument.
If, therefore, any one should disregard the Apostle’s example, and dwell
more minutely on the subject, he would be acting very unreasonably.
There might be, indeed, an occasion for doing this elsewhere; but it is
now better to attend to the subject of which he treats: it may further
be said, that to philosophize beyond just limits, which some do, is not
only useless, but also dangerous. There are some things which are not
obscure and fitted for the edification of faith; but discretion and
sobriety ought to be observed, lest we seek to be wise above what God
has been pleased to reveal.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 9:6-12

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Now when these things were thus
ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle,
accomplishing the service *of God*

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**6.** His vero sic compositis, in prius
tabernaculum semper ingrediuntur sacerdotes qui sacra peragunt:

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span>**7.** But into the second *went* the high
priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for
himself, and *for* the errors of the people:

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**7.** At in secundum semel quotannis solus
pontifex, non sine sanguine quem offert pro suis et populi ignorantiis:

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>**8.** The Holy Ghost this signifying, that
the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the
first tabernacle was yet standing:

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Hoc declarante Spiritu Sancto, nondum
manifestatum esse sanctorum viam, stante adhuc priore tabernaculo;

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Which *was* a figure for the time then
present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not
make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience;

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Quae similitudo erat in praesens
tempus, quo dona et hostiae offeruntur quae non possunt secundum
conscientiam sanctificare cultorem;

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>**10.** *Which stood* only in meats and
drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed *on them*
until the time of reformation.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Solum in cibis et potibus et
diversis ablutionibus et sanctifictionibus carnis usque ad tempus
correctionis imposita.

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span>**11.** But Christ being come an high priest
of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not
made with hands, that is to say, not of this building;

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span>**11.** Christus autem superveniens pontifex
futurorum bonorum per majus et perfectius tabernaculum non manufactum,
hoc est, non hujus creationis;

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span>**12.** Neither by the blood of goats and
calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption *for us*

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span>**12.** Neque per sanguinem hircorum et
vitulorum, sed per proprium sanguinem intravit semel in sancta, aeterna
redemptione inventa.

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p17"></span><span id="xv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p18"></span>**6.** *Now, when these things were thus
ordained,* *etc.* Omitting other things, he undertakes to handle the
chief point in dispute: he says that the priests who performed sacred
rites were wont to enter the first tabernacle daily, but that the chief
priest entered the holy of holies only yearly with the appointed
sacrifice. He hence concludes, that while the tabernacle under the Law
was standing, the sanctuary was closed up, and that only through that
being removed could the way be open for us to the kingdom of God. We see
that the very form of the ancient tabernacle reminded the Jews that they
were to look for something else. Then foolishly did they act who, by
retaining the shadows of the Law, willfully obstructed their own way.

<span id="xv.ii-p19"></span>He mentions πρώτην σκηνὴν the first
tabernacle, in <span id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>[Heb
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002)<span id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>, in
a different sense from what it has here, for here it means the first
sanctuary, but there the whole tabernacle; for he sets it in opposition
to the spiritual sanctuary of Christ, which he presently mentions. He
contends that this had fallen for our great benefit, for through its
fall a more familiar access to God has been obtained for us.

<span id="xv.ii-p20"></span><span id="xv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p21"></span>**7.** *For himself and for the errors of
the people,* or for his own and the ignorances of the people. As the
verb \|shagag\|, means in Hebrew to err, to mistake, so \|shgagah\|,
derived from it, properly denotes error, or mistake; but yet it is
generally taken for any kind of sin; and doubtless we never sin except
when deceived by the allurements of Satan. The Apostle does not
understand by it mere ignorance, as they say, but, on the contrary, he
includes also voluntary sins; but as I have already said, no sin is free
from error or ignorance; for however knowingly and willfully any one may
sin, yet it must be that he is blinded by his lust, so that he does not
judge rightly, or rather he forgets himself and God; for men never
deliberately rush headlong into ruin, but being entangled in the
deceptions of Satan, they lose the power of judging rightly.  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143)

<span id="xv.ii-p24"></span><span id="xv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p25"></span>**9.** *Which was a figure,* *etc.* The word
παραθολὴ, used here, signifies, as I think, the same thing with
ἀντίτυπος, antitype; for he means that that tabernacle was a second
pattern which corresponded with the first. For the portrait of a man
ought to be so like the man himself, that when seen, it ought
immediately to remind us of him whom it represents. He says further,
that it was a *figure,* or likeness, *for the time then present,* that
is, as long as the external observance was in force; and he says this in
order to confine its use and duration to the time of the Law; for it
means the same with what he afterwards adds, that all the ceremonies
were imposed until the time of reformation; nor is it any objection that
he uses the present tense in saying, *gifts are offered;* for as he had
to do with the Jews, he speaks by way of concession, as though he were
one of those who sacrificed. *Gifts* and *sacrifices* differ, as the
first is a general term, and the other is particular.

<span id="xv.ii-p26"></span>*That could not make him that did the
service perfect as pertaining to the conscience;* that is, they did not
reach the soul so as to confer true holiness. I do not reject the words,
*make perfect,* and yet I prefer the term *sanctify,* as being more
suitable to the context. But that readers may better understand the
meaning of the Apostle, let the contrast between the flesh and the
conscience be noticed; he denies that worshippers could be spiritually
and inwardly cleansed by the sacrifices of the Law. It is added as a
reason, that all these rites were of the flesh or carnal. What then does
he allow them to be? It is commonly supposed, that they were useful only
as means of training to men, conducive to virtue and decorum. But they
who thus think do not sufficiently consider the promises which are
added. This gloss, therefore, ought to be wholly repudiated. Absurdly
and ignorantly too do they interpret *the ordinances of the flesh,* as
being such as cleansed or sanctified only the body; for the Apostle
understands by these words that they were earthly symbols, which did not
reach the soul; for though they were true testimonies of perfect
holiness, yet they by no means contained it in themselves, nor could
they convey it to men; for the faithful were by such helps led, as it
were, by the hand to Christ, that they might obtain from him what was
wanting in the symbols.

<span id="xv.ii-p27"></span>Were any one to ask why the Apostle speaks
with so little respect and even with contempt of Sacraments divinely
instituted, and extenuates their efficacy? This he does, because he
separates them from Christ; and we know that when viewed in themselves
they are but beggarly elements, as Paul calls them. (<span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ga 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.ii-p28"></span><span id="xv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p29"></span>**10.** *Until the time of reformation,*
*etc.* Here he alludes to the prophecy of Jeremiah. (<span
id="xv.ii-p29.1"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="xv.ii-p29.1"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) The new covenant succeeded the
old as a reformation. He expressly mentions *meats* and *drinks,* and
other things of minor importance, because by these trifling observances
a more certain opinion may be formed how far short was the Law of the
perfection of the Gospel.  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145)

<span id="xv.ii-p32"></span><span id="xv.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p33"></span>**11.** *But Christ being come,* *etc.* He
now sets before us the reality of the things under the Law, that it may
turn our eyes from them to itself; for he who believes that the things
then shadowed forth under the Law have been really found in Christ, will
no longer cleave to the shadows, but will embrace the substance and the
genuine reality.

<span id="xv.ii-p34"></span>But the particulars of the comparison
between Christ and the ancient high priest, ought to be carefully
noticed. He had said that the high priest alone entered the sanctuary
once a year with blood to expiate sins. Christ is in this life the
ancient high priests for he alone possesses the dignity and the office
of a high priest; but he differs from him in this respect, that he
brings with him eternal blessings which secure a perpetuity to his
priesthood. Secondly, there is this likeness between the ancient high
priest and ours, that both entered the holy of holies through the
sanctuary; but they differ in this, that Christ alone entered into
heaven through the temple of his own body. That the holy of holies was
once every year opened to the high priest to make the appointed
expiation — this obscurely prefigured the one true sacrifice of Christ.
To enter once then was common to both, but to the earthly it was every
year, while it was to the heavenly forever, even to the end of the
world. The offering of blood was common to both; but there was a great
difference as to the blood; for Christ offered, not the blood of beasts,
but his own blood. Expiation was common to both; but that according to
the Law, as it was inefficacious, was repeated every year; but the
expiation made by Christ is always effectual and is the cause of eternal
salvation to us. Thus, there is great importance almost in every word.
Some render the words, “But Christ standing by,” or asking; but the
meaning of the Apostle is not thus expressed; for he intimates that when
the Levitical priests had for the prefixed time performed their office,
Christ came in their place, according to what we found in the seventh
chapter.  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146)

<span id="xv.ii-p36"></span>*Of good things to come,* *etc.* Take these
for eternal things; for as μέλλων καιρὸς, time to come, is set in
opposition to the present τῷ ἐνεστηκότι; so future blessings are to the
present. The meaning is, that we are led by Christ’s priesthood into the
celestial kingdom of God, and that we are made partakers of spiritual
righteousness and of eternal life, so that it is not right to desire
anything better. Christ alone, then, has that by which he can retain and
satisfy us in himself.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147)

<span id="xv.ii-p38"></span>*By a greater and more perfect tabernacle,*
etc. Though this passage is variously explained, yet I have no doubt but
that he means the body of Christ; for as there was formerly an access
for the Levitical high priest to the holy of holies through the
sanctuary, so Christ through his own body entered into the glory of
heaven; for as he had put on our flesh and in it suffered, he obtained
for himself this privilege, that he should appear before God as a
Mediator for us. In the first place, the word sanctuary is fitly and
suitably applied to the body of Christ, for it is the temple in which
the whole majesty of God dwells. He is further said to have made a way
for us by his body to ascend into heaven, because in that body he
consecrated himself to God, he became in it sanctified to be our true
righteousness, he prepared himself in it to offer a sacrifice; in a
word, he made himself in it of no reputation, and suffered the death of
the cross; therefore, the Father highly exalted him and gave him a name
above every name, that every knee should bow to him. (<span
id="xv.ii-p38.1"></span>[Php
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="xv.ii-p38.1"></span>.)
He then entered into heaven through his own body, because on this
account it is that he now sits at the Father’s right hand; he for this
reason intercedes for us in heaven, because he had put on our flesh, and
consecrated it as a temple to God the Father, and in it sanctified
himself to obtain for us an eternal righteousness, having made an
expiation for our sins.  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148)

<span id="xv.ii-p42"></span>It may however seem strange, that he denies
the body of Christ to be *of this building*; for doubtless he proceeded
from the seed of Abraham, and was liable to sufferings and to death. To
this I reply, that he speaks not here of his material body, or of what
belongs to the body as such, but of the spiritual efficacy which
emanates from it to us. For as far as Christ’s flesh is quickening, and
is a heavenly food to nourish souls, as far as his blood is a spiritual
drink and has a cleansing power, we are not to imagine anything earthly
or material as being in them. And then we must remember that this is
said in allusion to the ancient tabernacle, which was made of wood,
brass, skins, silver, and gold, which were all dead things; but the
power of God made the flesh of Christ to be a living and spiritual
temple.

<span id="xv.ii-p43"></span><span id="xv.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p44"></span>**12.** *Neither by the blood of goats,*
*etc.* All these things tend to show that the things of Christ so far
excel the shadows of the Law, that they justly reduce them all to
nothing. For what is the value of Christ’s blood, if it be deemed no
better than the blood of beasts? What sort of expiation was made by his
death, if the purgations according to the Law be still retained? As soon
then as Christ came forth with the efficacious influence of his death,
all the typical observances must necessarily have ceased.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 9:13-17

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**13.** For if the blood of bulls and of
goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to
the purifying of the flesh:

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span>**13.** Si enim sanguis taurorum et
hircorum, et cinis vitulae aspersus eos qui communicant, sanctificat ad
carnis puritatem,

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span>**14.** How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Quanto magis sanguis Christi, qui
per Spiritum aueternum sepsum obtulit irreprehensibilem Deo, mundabit
conscientiam vestram a mortuis operibus ad serviendum Deo viventi?

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**15.** And for this cause he is the
mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions *that were* under the first testament,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span>**15.** Ac propterea testamenti novi
mediator est, ut morte intercedente in redemptionem transgressionum quae
sub priore testamento erant, qui vocati sunt promissionem accipiant
aeternae haeriditatis.

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span>**16.** For where a testament *is*, there
must also of necessity be the death of the testator.

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span>**16.** Nam ubi est testamentum, illic
necesse est mortem testatoris intercedere.

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>**17.** For a testament *is* of force after
men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator
liveth.

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span>**17.** Testamentum enim in mortuis firmum
est, quia nunquam validum est quandiu vivit testator.

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span><span id="xv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span>**13.** *For if the blood of bulls,* *etc.*
This passage has given to many all occasion to go astray, because they
did not consider that sacraments are spoken of, which had a spiritual
import. The cleansing of the flesh they leave explained of what avails
among men, as the heathens had their expiations to blot out the infamy
of crimes. But this explanation is indeed very heathenish; for wrong is
done to God’s promises, if we restrict the effect to civil matters only.
Often does this declaration occur in the writings of Moses, that
iniquity was expiated when a sacrifice was duly offered. This is no
doubt the spiritual teaching of faith. Besides, all the sacrifices were
destined for this end, that they might lead men to Christ; as the
eternal salvation of the soul is through Christ, so these were true
witnesses of this salvation.

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span>What then does the Apostle mean when he
speaks of the purgations of the flesh? He means what is symbolical or
sacramental, as follows, — If the blood of beasts was a true symbol of
purgation, so that it cleansed in a sacramental manner, how much more
shall Christ who is himself the truth, not only bear witness to a
purgation by an external rite, but also really perform this for
consciences? The argument then is from the signs to the thing signified;
for the effect by a long time preceded the reality of the signs.

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span><span id="xv.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span>**14.** *Who through the eternal Spirit,*
*etc.* He now clearly shows how Christ’s death is to be estimated, not
by the external act, but by the power of the Spirit. For Christ suffered
as man; but that death becomes saving to us through the efficacious
power of the Spirit; for a sacrifice, which was to be an eternal
expiation, was a work more than human. And he calls the Spirit *eternal*
for this reason, that we may know that the reconciliation, of which he
is the worker or effecter, is eternal.  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) By saying, *without spot,* or
unblamable, though he alludes to the victims under the Law, which were
not to have a blemish or defect, he yet means, that Christ alone was the
lawful victim and capable of appeasing God; for there was always in
others something that might be justly deemed wanting; and hence he said
before that the covenant of the Law was not ἀμεμπτον, blameless.

<span id="xv.iii-p21"></span>*From dead works,* *etc.* Understand by
these either such works as produce death, or such as are the fruits or
effects of death; for as the life of the soul is our union with God, so
they who are alienated from him through sin may be justly deemed to be
dead.

<span id="xv.iii-p22"></span>*To serve the living God.* This, we must
observe, is the end of our purgation; for we are not washed by Christ,
that we may plunge ourselves again into new filth, but that our purity
may serve to glorify God. Besides, he teaches us, that nothing can
proceed from us that can be pleasing to God until we are purified by the
blood of Christ; for as we are all enemies to God before our
reconciliation, so he regards as abominable all our works; hence the
beginning of acceptable service is reconciliation. And then, as no work
is so pure and so free from stains, that it can of itself please God, it
is necessary that the purgation through the blood of Christ should
intervene, which alone can efface all stains. And there is a striking
contrast between the living God and dead works.

<span id="xv.iii-p23"></span><span id="xv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p24"></span>**15.** *And for this cause he is Mediator
of the New Testament,* *etc.* He concludes that there is no more need of
another priest, for Christ fulfills the office under the New Testament;
for he claims not for Christ the honor of a Mediator, so that others may
at the same time remain as such with him; but he maintains that all
others were repudiated when Christ undertook the office. But that he
might more fully confirm this fact, he mentions how he commenced to
discharge his office of a Mediator; even through death intervening.
Since this is found alone in Christ, being wanting in all others, it
follows that he alone can be justly deemed a Mediator.  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150)

<span id="xv.iii-p28"></span>He further records the virtue and efficacy
of his death by saying that he paid the price for sins under the *first
covenant* or testament, which could not be blotted out by the blood of
beasts; by which words he was seeking draw away the Jews from the Law to
Christ. For, if the Law was so weak that all the remedies it applied for
expiating sins did by no means accomplish what they represented, who
could rest in it as in a safe harbor? This one thing, then, ought to
have been enough to stimulate them to seek for something better than the
law; for they could not but be in perpetual anxiety. On the other hand,
when we come to Christ, as we obtain in him a full redemption, there is
nothing which can any more distress us. Then, in these words he shows
that the Law is weak, that the Jews might no longer recumb on it; and he
teaches them to rely on Christ, for in him is found whatever can be
desired for pacifying consciences.

<span id="xv.iii-p29"></span>Now, if any one asks, whether sins under
the Law where remitted to the fathers, we must bear in mind the solution
already stated, — that they were remitted, but remitted through Christ.
Then notwithstanding their external expiations, they were always held
guilty. For this reason Paul says, that the Law was a handwriting
against us. (<span id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>.)
For when the sinner came forward and openly confessed that he was guilty
before God, and acknowledged by sacrificing an innocent animal that he
was worthy of eternal death, what did he obtain by his victim, except
that he sealed his own death as it were by this handwriting? In short,
even then they only reposed in the remission of sins, when they looked
to Christ. But if only a regard to Christ took away sins, they could
never have been freed from them, had they continued to rest in the Law.
David indeed declares, that blessed is the man to whom sins are not
imputed, (<span id="xv.iii-p29.2"></span>[Ps
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="xv.iii-p29.2"></span>;)
but that he might be a partaker of this blessedness, it was necessary
for him to leave the Law, and to have his eyes fixed on Christ; for if
he rested in the Law, he could never have been freed from guilt.

<span id="xv.iii-p30"></span>*They who are called,* *etc.* The object of
the divine covenant is, that having been adopted as children, we may at
length be made heirs of eternal life. The Apostle teaches us that we
obtain this by Christ. It is hence evident, that in him is the
fulfillment of the covenant. But the *promise of the inheritance* is to
be taken for the promised inheritance, as though he had said, “The
promise of eternal life is not otherwise made to us to be enjoined, than
through the death of Christ.” Life, indeed, was formerly promised to the
fathers, and the same has been the inheritance of God’s children from
the beginning, but we do not otherwise enter into the possession of it,
than through the blood of Christ previously shed.

<span id="xv.iii-p31"></span>But he speaks of the *called,* that he
might the more influence the Jews who were made partakers of this
calling; for it is a singular favor, when we have the gift of the
knowledge of Christ bestowed on us. We ought then to take the more heed,
lest we neglect so valuable a treasure, and our thoughts should wander
elsewhere. Some regard the *called* to be the elect, but incorrectly in
my judgment; for the Apostle teaches here the same thing as we find in
<span id="xv.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ro
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)<span id="xv.iii-p31.1"></span>,
that righteousness and salvation have been procured by the blood of
Christ, but that we become partakers of them by faith.

<span id="xv.iii-p32"></span><span id="xv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p33"></span>**16.** *For where a testament is,* *etc.*
Even this one passage is a sufficient proof, that this Epistle was not
written in Hebrew; for <span id="xv.iii-p33.2"></span>ברית means in
Hebrew a covenant, but not a testament; but in Greek, διαθήκη, includes
both ideas; and the Apostle, alluding to its secondary meaning, holds
that the promises should not have been otherwise ratified and valid, had
they not been sealed by the death of Christ. And this he proves by
referring to what is usually the case as to wills or testaments, the
effect of which is suspended until the death of those whose wills they
are.

<span id="xv.iii-p34"></span>The Apostle may yet seem to rest on too
weak an argument, so that what he says may be easily disproved. For it
may be said, that God made no testament or will under the Law; but it
was a covenant that he made with the ancient people. Thus, neither from
the fact nor from the name, can it be concluded that Christ’s death was
necessary. For if he infers from the fact, that Christ ought to have
died, because a testament is not ratified except by the death of the
testator, the answer may be this, that \|berit\|, the word ever used by
Moses, is a covenant made between those who are alive, and we cannot
think otherwise of the fact itself. Now, as to the word used, he simply
alluded, as I have already said, to the two meanings it has in Greek; he
therefore dwells chiefly on the thing in itself. Nor is it any objection
to say, that it was a covenant that God made with his people; for that
very covenant bore some likeness to a testament, for it was ratified by
blood.  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151)

<span id="xv.iii-p36"></span>We must ever hold this truth, that no
symbols have ever been adopted by God unnecessarily or unsuitably. And
God in establishing the covenant of the law made use of blood. Then it
was not such a contract, as they say, between the living, as did not
require death. Besides, what rightly belongs to a testament is, that it
begins to take effect after death. If we consider that the Apostle
reasons from the thing itself, and not from the word, and if we bear in
mind that he avowedly takes as granted what I have already stated, that
nothing has been instituted in vain by God, there will be no great
difficulty.

<span id="xv.iii-p37"></span>If anyone objects and says, that the
heathens ratified covenants according to the other meaning by
sacrifices; this indeed I admit to be true; but God did not borrow the
rite of sacrificing from the practice of the heathens; on the contrary,
all the heathen sacrifices were corruptions, which had derived their
origin from the institutions of God. We must then return to the same
point, that the covenant of God which was made with blood, may be fitly
compared to a testament, as it is of the same kind and character.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 9:18-23

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**18.** Whereupon neither the first
*testament* was dedicated without blood.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span>**18.** Inde neque primum illud sine sanguine
dedicatum fuit.

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span>**19.** For when Moses had spoken every
precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of
calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and
sprinkled both the book, and all the people,

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span>**19.** Nam postquam exposuisset Moses
secundum legem totum mandatum universo populo, accipiens sanguinem
vitulorum et hircorum, cum aqua et lana coccinea et hysopo, librum et
totum populum aspersit,

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>**20.** Saying, This *is* the blood of the
testament which God hath enjoined unto you.

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span>**20.** Dicens, Hic est sanguis testamenti
quod Deus mandavit vobis omnibus.

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span>**21.** Moreover he sprinkled with blood both
the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry.

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>**21.** Quin tabernaculum et omnia vasa
ministerii sanguine similiter aspersit.

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span>**22.** And almost all things are by the law
purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span>**22.** Et propemodum sanguine omnia
purgantur secundum legem, nec sine sanguinis effusione sit remissio.

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>**23.** *It was* therefore necessary that
the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but
the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span>**23.** Necesse igitur est exempla eorum
quae sunt in coelis istis purgari; ipsa vero coelestia melioribus quam
illae fuerint hostiis.

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span><span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span>**18.** *Whereupon neither the first,*
*etc.* It hence appears that the fact is what is mainly urged, and that
it is not a question about the word, though the Apostle turned to his
own purpose a word presented to his attention in that language in which
he wrote, as though one, while speaking of God’s covenant, which is
often called in Greek μαρτυρία, a testimony, were to recommend it among
other things under that title. And doubtless that is a testimony,
μαρτυρία, to which angels from heaven has borne witness, and of which
there have been so many illustrious witnesses on earth, even all the
holy Prophets, Apostles, and a vast number of martyrs, and of which at
last the Son of God himself became a surety. No one in such a discourse
would deem any such thing as unreasonable. And yet the Hebrew word,
<span id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>תעודה will admit of no such meaning as a
covenant; but as nothing is advanced but what is consistent with the
thing itself, no scrupulous regard is to be paid to the meaning of a
word.

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span>The Apostle then says, that the old
testament or covenant was *dedicated with blood.* He hence concludes,
that men were even then reminded, that it could not be valid and
efficacious except death intervened. For though the blood of beasts was
then shed, yet, he denies that it availed to confine an everlasting
covenant. That this may appear more clearly, we must notice the custom
of sprinkling which he quotes from Moses. He first teaches us that the
covenant was dedicated or consecrated, not that it had in itself
anything profane; but as there is nothing so holy that men by their
uncleanness will not defile, except God prevents it by making a renewal
of all things, therefore the dedication was made on account of men, who
alone wanted it.

<span id="xv.iv-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, that the *tabernacle and
all the vessels,* and also the very *book* of the law, were *sprinkled;*
by which rite the people were then taught, that God could not be sought
or looked to for salvation, nor rightly worshipped, except faith in
every case looked to an intervening blood. For the majesty of God is
justly to be dreaded by us, and the way to his presence is nothing to us
but a dangerous labyrinth, until we know that he is pacified towards us
through the blood of Christ, and that this blood affords to us a free
access. All kinds of worship are then faulty and impure until Christ
cleanses them by the sprinkling of his blood.  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)

<span id="xv.iv-p21"></span>For the tabernacle was a sort of visible
image of God; and as the *vessels* for ministering were destined for his
service, so they were symbols of true worship. But since none of these
were for salvation to the people, we hence reasonably conclude, that
where Christ does not appear with his blood, we have nothing to do with
God. So doctrine itself, however unchangeable may be the will of God,
cannot be efficacious for our benefit, unless it be dedicated by blood,
as is plainly set forth in this verse.

<span id="xv.iv-p22"></span>I know that others give a different
interpretation; for they consider the tabernacle to be the body of the
Church, and vessels the faithful, whose ministry God employs; but what I
have stated is much more appropriate. For whenever God was to be called
upon, they turned themselves to the sanctuary; and it was a common way
of speaking to say that they stood before the Lord when they appeared in
the temple.

<span id="xv.iv-p23"></span><span id="xv.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p24"></span>**20.** *Saying, This is the blood of the
testament,*  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) *etc.* If that was
the blood of the testament, then neither the testament was without blood
ratified, nor the blood without the testament available for expiation.
It is hence necessary that both should be united; and we see that before
the explanation of the Law, no symbol was added, for what would a
sacrament be except the word preceded it? Hence a symbol is a kind of
appendage to the word. And mark, this word was not whispered like a
magic incantation, but pronounced with a clear voice, as it was destined
for the people, according to what the words of the covenant express,
*which God hath enjoined unto you.*  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) Perverted, then, are the sacraments,
and it is a wicked corruption when there is no explanation of the
commandment given, which is as it were the very soul of the sacrament.
Hence the Papists, who take away the true understanding of things from
signs, retain only dead elements.

<span id="xv.iv-p27"></span>This passage reminds us that the promises of
God are then only profitable to us when they are confirmed by the blood
of Christ. For what Paul testifies in <span id="xv.iv-p27.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xv.iv-p27.1"></span>,
that all God’s promises are yea and amen in Christ — this happens when
his blood like a seal is engraven on our hearts, or when we not only
hear God speaking, but also see Christ offering himself as a pledge for
those things which are spoken. If this thought only came to our minds,
that what we read is not written so much with ink as with the blood of
Christ, that when the Gospel is preached, his sacred blood distills
together with the voice, there would be far greater attention as well as
reverence on our part. A symbol of this was the sprinkling mentioned by
Moses!

<span id="xv.iv-p28"></span>At the same time there is more stated here
than what is expressed by Moses; for he does not mention that the book
and the people were sprinkled, nor does he name the *goats*, nor the
*scarlet wool,* nor the *hyssop.* As to the book, that it was sprinkled
cannot be clearly shown, yet the probability is that it was, for Moses
is said to have produced it after he had sacrificed; and he did this
when he bound the people to God by a solemn compact. With regard to the
rest, the Apostle seems to have blended together various kinds of
expiations, the reason for which was the same. Nor indeed was there
anything unsuitable in this, since he was speaking of the general
subject Or purgation under the Old Testament, which was done by means of
blood. Now as to the sprinkling made by hyssop and scarlet wool, it is
evident that it represented the mystical sprinkling made by the Spirit.
We know that the hyssop possesses a singular power to cleanse and to
purify; so Christ employs his Spirit to sprinkle us in order to wash us
by his own blood when he leads us to true repentance, when he purifies
us from the depraved lusts of our flesh, when he imbues us with the
precious gift of his own righteousness. For it was not in vain that God
had instituted this rite. David also alluded to this when he said,

<span id="xv.iv-p29"></span>“Thou wilt sprinkle me, O Lord, with hyssop,
and I shall be cleansed.” (<span id="xv.iv-p29.1"></span>[Ps
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="xv.iv-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.iv-p30"></span>These remarks will be sufficient for those
who wish to be sober­minded in their speculations.

<span id="xv.iv-p31"></span><span id="xv.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p32"></span>**22.** *And almost all things,* *etc.* By
saying *almost* he seems to imply that some things were otherwise
purified. And doubtless they often washed themselves and other unclean
things with water. But even water itself derived its power to cleanse
from the sacrifices; so that the Apostle at length truly declares that
without blood there was no remission.  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) Then uncleanness was imputed until it
was expiated by a sacrifice. And as without Christ there is no purity
nor salvation, so nothing without blood can be either pure or saving;
for Christ is never to be separated from the sacrifice of his death. But
the Apostle meant only to say that this symbol was almost always made
use of. But if at any time the purgation was not so made, it was
nevertheless through blood, since all the rites derived their efficacy
in a manner from the general expiation. For the people were not each of
them sprinkled, (for how could so small a portion of blood be sufficient
for so large a multitude?) yet the purgation extended to all. Hence the
particle *almost* signifies the same as though he had said, that the use
of this rite was so common that they seldom omitted it in purgations.
For what Chrysostom says, that unfitness is thus denoted, because these
were only figures under the Law, is inconsistent with the Apostle’s
design.

<span id="xv.iv-p34"></span>*No remission,* *etc.* Thus men are
prevented from appearing before God; for as he is justly displeased with
them all, there is no ground for them to promise themselves any favor
until he is pacified. But there is but one way of pacification, and that
is by an expiation made by blood: hence no pardon of sins can be hoped
for unless we bring blood, and this is done when we flee by faith to the
death of Christ.

<span id="xv.iv-p35"></span><span id="xv.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p36"></span>**23.** *The patterns,* or *exemplars, etc.*
Lest any one should object and say that the blood by which the old
testament was dedicated was different from that of a testator, the
Apostle meets this objection, and says that it was no wonder that the
tabernacle which was earthly was consecrated by the sacrificing of
beasts; for there was an analogy and a likeness between the purification
and the things purified. But the heavenly pattern or exemplar of which
he now speaks was to be consecrated in a very different way; there was
here no need of goats or of calves. It hence follows that the death of
the testator was necessary.

<span id="xv.iv-p37"></span>The meaning then is this, — as under the Law
there were only earthly images of spiritual things, so the rite of
expiation was also, so to speak, carnal and figurative; but as the
heavenly pattern allows of nothing earthly, so it requires another blood
than that of beasts, such as may correspond with its excellency. Thus
the death of the testator is necessary, in order that the testament may
be really consecrated.

<span id="xv.iv-p38"></span>He calls the kingdom of Christ *heavenly
things,*  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) for it is spiritual
and possesses a full revelation of the truth. *Better sacrifices* he
mentions instead of “a better sacrifice,” for it was only one; but he
uses the plural number for the sake of the antithesis or contrast.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 9:24-28

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**24.** For Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, *which are* the figures of the true; but
into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us:

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span>**24.** Neque enim in manufacta sancta
ingressus est Christus, exempla verorum; sed in ipsum coelum, ut nunc
appareat coram facie Dei pro nobis:

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span>**25.** Nor yet that he should offer himself
often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with
blood of others;

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span>**25.** Neque ut saepe offerat seipsum,
quemadmodum pontifex ingeditur in sancta quotannis cum sanguine aliena;

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>**26.** For then must he often have suffered
since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end of the world
hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span>**26.** (Quando quidem oportuisset illum
saepius pati a creatione mundi:) nunc autem in consummatione seculorum,
semel in destructionem peccati per victimam sui ipsius apparuit.

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span>**27.** And as it is appointed unto men once
to die, but after this the judgment:

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span>**27.** Et quatenus constitutum est hominibus
semel mori, post hoc vero judicium;

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span>**28.** So Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the
second time without sin unto salvation.

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span>**28.** Ita et Christus semel oblatus, ut
multorum anferret peccata: secundo absque peccato conspicietur iis qui
eum expectant in salutem.

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p13"></span><span id="xv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p14"></span>**24.** *For Christ is not entered,* *etc.*
This is a confirmation of the former verse. He had spoken of the true
sanctuary, even the heavenly; he now adds that Christ entered there. It
hence follows that a suitable confirmation is required. *The holy
places* he takes for the sanctuary; he says that it is *not made with
hands,* because it ought not to be classed with the created things which
are subject to decay; for he does not mean here the *heaven* we see, and
in which the stars shine, but the glorious kingdom of God which is above
all the heavens. He calls the old sanctuary the ἀντίτυπον, the antitype
of the true, that is, of the spiritual; for all the external figures
represented as in a mirror what would have otherwise been above our
corporeal senses. Greek writers sometimes use the same word in speaking
of our sacraments, and wisely too and suitably, for every sacrament is a
visible image of what is invisible.

<span id="xv.v-p15"></span>*Now to appear,* *etc.* So formerly the
Levitical priest stood before God in the name of the people, but
typically; for in Christ is found the reality and the full
accomplishment of what was typified. The ark was indeed a symbol of the
divine presence; But it is Christ who really presents himself before
God, and stands there to obtain favor for us, so that now there is no
reason why we should flee from God’s tribunal, since we have so kind an
advocate, through whose faithfulness and protection we are made secure
and safe. Christ was indeed our advocate when he was on earth; but it
was a further concession made to our infirmity that he ascended into
heaven to undertake there the office of an advocate. So that whenever
mention is made of his ascension into heaven, this benefit ought ever to
come to our minds, that he appears there before God to defend us by his
advocacy. Foolishly, then, and unreasonably the question is asked by
some, has he not always appeared there? For the Apostle speaks here only
of his intercession, for the sake of which he entered the heavenly
sanctuary.

<span id="xv.v-p16"></span><span id="xv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p17"></span>**25.** *Nor yet that he should offer himself
often,* *etc.* How, then, is he a priest, one may say, if he offers no
sacrifices? To this I reply that it is not requited of a priest that he
should be continually sacrificing; for even under the Law there were
days appointed for the chief sacrifices every year; they had also their
hours daily morning and evening. But as that only true sacrifice which
Christ offered once for all is ever efficacious, and thus perpetual in
its effects, it is no wonder that on its virtue, which never fails,
Christ’s eternal priesthood should be sustained. And here again he shows
how and in what things Christ differs from the Levitical priest. Of the
sanctuary he had spoken before; but he notices one difference as to the
kind of sacrifice, for Christ offered himself and not an animal; and he
adds another; that he repeated not his sacrifice, as under the Law, for
the repetition there was frequent and even incessant.

<span id="xv.v-p18"></span><span id="xv.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p19"></span>**26.** *For then must he often have
suffered,* *etc.* He shows how great an absurdity follows, if we do not
count it enough that an expiation has been made by the one sacrifice of
Christ. For he hence concludes that he must have died often; for death
is connected with sacrifices. How this latter supposition is most
unreasonable; it then follows that the virtue of the one sacrifice is
eternal and extends to all ages. And he says *since the foundation of
the world,* or from the beginning of the world  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) for in all ages from the beginning
there were sins which needed expiation. Except then the sacrifice of
Christ was efficacious, no one of the fathers would have obtained
salvation; for as they were exposed to God’s wrath, a remedy for
deliverance would have failed them, had not Christ by suffering once
suffered so much as was necessary to reconcile men to God from the
beginning of the world even to the end. Except then we look for many
deaths, we must be satisfied with the one true sacrifice.

<span id="xv.v-p22"></span>And hence it is evident how frivolous is the
distinction, in the acuteness of which the Papists take so much delight;
for they say that the sacrifice of Christ on the cross was bloody, but
that the sacrifice of the mass which they pretend to offer daily to God,
is unbloody. Were this subtle evasion adopted, then the Spirit of God
would be accused of inadvertence, having not thought of such a thing;
for the Apostle assumes it here as an admitted truth, that there is no
sacrifice without death. I care nothing that ancient writers have spoken
thus; for it is not in the power of men to invent sacrifices as they
please. Here stands a truth declared by the Holy Spirit, that sins are
not expiated by a sacrifice except blood be shed. Therefore the notion,
that Christ is often offered, is a device of the devil.

<span id="xv.v-p23"></span>*But now once in the end of the world,*
*etc.* He calls that the end of the world or the consummation of the
ages, which Paul calls “the fullness of time,” (<span
id="xv.v-p23.1"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="xv.v-p23.1"></span>;) for it was the maturity of that time which God
had determined in his eternal purpose; and thus cut off is every
occasion for men’s curiosity, that they may not dare to inquire why it
was no sooner, or why in that age rather than in another. For it
behooves us to acquiesce in God’s secret purpose, the reason for which
appears clear to him, though it may not be evident to us. In short, the
Apostle intimates that Christ’s death was in due time, as he was sent
into the world for this end by the Father, in whose power is the lawful
right to regulate all things as well as time, and who ordains their
succession with consummate wisdom, though often hid from us

<span id="xv.v-p24"></span>This consummation is also set in opposition
to the imperfection of past time; for God so held his ancient people in
suspense, that it might have been easily concluded that things had not
yet reached a fixed state. Hence Paul declares that the end of the ages
had come upon us, (<span id="xv.v-p24.1"></span>[1Co
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="xv.v-p24.1"></span>;)
by which he means that the kingdom of Christ contained the
accomplishment of all things. But since it was the fullness of time when
Christ appeared to expiate sins, they are guilty of offering him an
atrocious insult, who seek to renew his sacrifice, as though all things
were not completed by his death. He then appeared once for all; for had
he done so once or twice, there must have been something defective in
the first oblation; but this is inconsistent with fullness.

<span id="xv.v-p25"></span>*To put away,* or *to destroy* *sin*, *etc.*
 <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) This agrees with Daniel’s
prophecy, in which the sealing up and the abolition of sins are
promised, and in which it is also declared that there would be an end to
sacrifices, (<span id="xv.v-p26.2"></span>[Da
9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)<span id="xv.v-p26.2"></span>;)
for to what purpose are expiations when sins are destroyed? But this
destruction is then only effected, when sins are not imputed to those
who flee to the sacrifice of Christ; for though pardon is to be sought
daily, as we daily provoke God’s wrath; yet as we are reconciled to God
in no other way than by the one death of Christ, sin is rightly said to
be put away or destroyed by it.

<span id="xv.v-p27"></span><span id="xv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p28"></span>**27.** *And as it is appointed,* *etc.* The
meaning is this: since we patiently wait after death for the day of
judgment, it being the common lot of nature which it is not right to
struggle against; why should there be less patience in waiting for the
second coming of Christ? For if a long interval of time does not
diminish, as to men, the hope of a happy resurrection, how unreasonable
would it be to render less honor to Christ? But less would it be, were
we to call upon him to undergo a second death, when he had once died.
Were any one to object and say, that some had died twice, such as
Lazarus, and not *once;* the answer would be this, — that the Apostle
speaks here of the ordinary lot of men; but they are to be excepted from
this condition, who shall by an instantaneous change put off corruption,
(<span id="xv.v-p28.1"></span>[1Co
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="xv.v-p28.1"></span>;)
for he includes none but those who wait for a long time in the dust for
the redemption of their bodies.

<span id="xv.v-p29"></span><span id="xv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p30"></span>**28.** *The second time without sin,* *etc.*
The Apostle urges this one thing, — that we ought not to be disquieted
by vain and impure longings for new kinds of expiations, for the death
of Christ is abundantly sufficient for us. Hence he says, that he once
appeared and made a sacrifice to abolish sins, and that at his second
coming he will make openly manifest the efficacy of his death, so that
sin will have no more power to hurt us.  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159)

<span id="xv.v-p32"></span>To *bear,* or, take away sins, is to free
from guilt by his satisfaction those who have sinned. He says the sins
of *many,* that is, of all, as in <span id="xv.v-p32.1"></span>[Ro
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)<span id="xv.v-p32.1"></span>. It
is yet certain that all receive no benefit from the death of Christ; but
this happens, because their unbelief prevents them. At the same time
this question is not to be discussed here, for the Apostle is not
speaking of the few or of the many to whom the death of Christ may be
available; but he simply means that he died for others and not for
himself; and therefore he opposes many to one.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)

<span id="xv.v-p34"></span>But what does he mean by saying that Christ
will *appear without sin?* Some say, without a propitiation or an
expiatory sacrifice for sin, as the word sin is taken in <span
id="xv.v-p34.1"></span>[Ro 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="xv.v-p34.1"></span>; <span id="xv.v-p34.2"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="xv.v-p34.2"></span>; and
in many places in the writings of Moses; but in my judgment he intended
to express something more suitable to his present purpose, namely, that
Christ at his coming will make it known how truly and really he had
taken away sins, so that there would be no need of any other sacrifice
to pacify God; as though he had said, “When we come to the tribunal of
Christ, we shall find that there was nothing wanting in his death.”
 <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="xv.v-p37"></span>And to the same effect is what he immediately
adds, *unto salvation to them who look,* or wait *for him.* Others
render the sentence differently, “To them who look for him unto
salvation;” But the other meaning is the most appropriate; for he means
that those shall find complete salvation who recumb with quiet minds on
the death of Christ; for this looking for or wanting has a reference to
the subject discussed. The Scripture indeed does elsewhere ascribe this
in common to believers, that they look for the coming of the Lord, in
order to distinguish them from the ungodly, by whom his coming is
dreaded, (<span id="xv.v-p37.1"></span>[1Th
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010)<span id="xv.v-p37.1"></span>;)
but as the Apostle now contends that we ought to acquiesce in the one
true sacrifice of Christ, he calls it the looking for Christ, when we
are satisfied with his redemption alone, and seek no other remedies or
helps.  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc44014.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xv.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span> Rather, “Yet even the first,” etc. It is
connected with the last verse of the preceding chapter; as though he had
said, — “Though the covenant is become antiquated, yet it had many
things divinely appointed connected with it.” Μὲν οὖν mean “yet,” or
however. See Art. 8:4. Macknight has “Now verily;” and Stuart,
“Moreover.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc44014.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span> It has since been discovered that it is not
found in many of the best MSS., and is dismissed from the text by
Griesbach and all modern critics. The noun understood is evidently
“covenant,” spoken of in the preceding chapter. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc44014.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xv.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span> Many, such as Grotius, Beza, etc., consider
that “ordinances” and “services” (not service) are distinct, and both in
the objective case, and render the words “rituals, services, and a
wordly sanctuary.” And if the sequel is duly examined, it will be found
that this is the right construction. The Apostle, according to the
manner of the prophet, reverses the order, and speaks distinctly of
these three particulars, — first, “the wordly sanctuary” — the
tabernacle in <span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>[Heb
9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>;
secondly, “the services” in <span id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>[Heb.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>; and
thirdly, “the rituals” in <span id="xv.i-p19.3"></span>[Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p19.3"></span>,
where the word “ordinances” again occur. There can therefore be hardly a
doubt as to the construction of the first verse. The sanctuary is called
worldly in contrast with what is heavenly or divine, not made with
hands: see <span id="xv.i-p19.4"></span>[Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p19.4"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc44014.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span> See Appendix F 2.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc44014.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span> This is evidently a mistake, for the altar
of incense was in the sanctuary — the first tabernacle. See <span
id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>[Ex 30:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>. The word is used in the Sept., for “censer,”
<span id="xv.i-p24.2"></span>[2Ch
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#019)<span id="xv.i-p24.2"></span>.
There were many censors made, as it is supposed, of brass; for they were
daily used in the sanctuary for incense; but this golden censor was
probably used only on the day of expiation, when the chief priest
entered the holiest place; and the probability is, though there is no
account of this in the Old Testament, that it was laid up or deposited,
as Stuart suggests, in the holy of holies. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc44014.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span> Stuart observes, “Our author is speaking of
the tabernacle, and not of the temple; still less of the second temple,
which must have lacked even the tables of testimony. The probability is,
that the ark, during its many removals, and in particular during its
captivity by the Philistines, was deprived of those sacred deposits; for
we hear no more concerning them.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc44014.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p22"></span> It is said that the high priest entered the
holiest place “once every year,” that is, on one day, the day of
expiation, every year; but on that day he went in at least three times.
See <span id="xv.ii-p22.1"></span>[Le
16:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#012)<span
id="xv.ii-p22.1"></span>; and probably four times, according to the
Jewish tradition; and one of the times, as supposed by Stuart, was for
the purpose of bringing out the golden censer.

<span id="xv.ii-p23"></span>The word rendered “errors,” literally means
“ignorances,” and so some render it “sins of ignorance;” but it is used
in the Apocrypha as designating sins in general; and Grotius refers to
<span id="xv.ii-p23.1"></span>[Tob.
3:3](../../../bib/apo/tob003.htm#003), [Jdt.
5:20](../../../bib/apo/jdt005.htm#020), [Sir.
23:2](../../../bib/apo/sir023.htm#002), [1 Macc.
13:39](../../../bib/apo/ma1013.htm#039)<span id="xv.ii-p23.1"></span>.
And that it means sins of all kinds is evident from the account given in
<span id="xv.ii-p23.2"></span>[Le
16:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p23.2"></span>
of the atonement made on the annual man, says Estius, “is ignorant; and
all sins proceed from error in judgement.” Hence it seems, sins were
called ignorances. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc44014.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xv.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p30"></span> Although the original text in the book
refers to <span id="xv.ii-p30.2"></span>[Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037)<span id="xv.ii-p30.2"></span>,
which warns of an ultimate rejection of Israel; it would seem that <span
id="xv.ii-p30.3"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="xv.ii-p30.3"></span> is
more appropriate in the current context of reformation. — *fj*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc44014.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xv.ii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p31"></span> See Appendix G 2.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc44014.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p35"></span> See commentary on Chapter 7 .

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc44014.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xv.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p37"></span> “Good things (or blessings) to come,” may
have a reference to the blessings promised in the Old Testament as the
blessings of the kingdom of Christ, included in “the eternal redemption”
mentioned in the next verse. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc44014.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xv.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p39"></span> There is no other view that is
satisfactory. The idea that has been by some suggested, that the “better
tabernacle” is the visible heaven through which he entered into the
heaven of heavens, has no evidence in its support. Some of the Ancients,
such as Ambrose, and also Doddridge and Scott consider heaven as
intended, as in <span id="xv.ii-p39.1"></span>[Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002)<span id="xv.ii-p39.1"></span>,
(but “tabernacle” in that passage means the whole structure, especially
the holy of holies.) According to this view διὰ is rendered in — “in a
greater and more perfect tabernacle.” But Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Grotius, Beza, etc., agree with Calvin in regarding Christ’s human
nature as signified by the “tabernacle;” and what confirms this
exposition is what we find in <span id="xv.ii-p39.2"></span>[Heb.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)<span id="xv.ii-p39.2"></span>.
“Not made with hands,” and “not of this creation,” for no objection; for
Christ’s body was supernaturally formed; and the contrast is with the
material tabernacle, a human structure, made by men and made of earthly
materials. It is, however, better to connect “tabernacle” with the
preceding than with the following words, —

<span id="xv.ii-p40"></span>But Christ, having come the high priest of
the good things to come by means of a better and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this creation, has
entered once for all into the holiest, not indeed with (or by) the blood
of goats and calves but (or by) his own blood, having obtained an
eternal redemption.

<span id="xv.ii-p41"></span>“Creation” here means the world; it was not
made of worldy materials. See <span id="xv.ii-p41.1"></span>[Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p41.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc44014.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span> Some as Grotius and Schleusner, take “the
eternal Spirit” as meaning the same thing as “endless life” in <span
id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>[Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)<span id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>, —
“who having (or in) an eternal spirit,” or life, etc.; they give the
sense of “in” to διὰ. The comparison they represent to be between
perishable victims and the sacrifice of Christ, who possesses a spirit
or life that is eternal.

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span>Others, as Junius and Beza, consider
Christ’s divine nature as signified by “the eternal Spirit.” Beza says,
that it was the Deity united to humanity that consecrated the whole
sacrifice and endued it with vivifying power. The view of Stuart can
hardly be comprehended.

<span id="xv.iii-p20"></span>But the explanation most commonly adopted
is that given here by Calvin that the Holy Spirit is meant, whose aid
and influence are often mentioned in connection with Christ; see <span
id="xv.iii-p20.1"></span>[Mt
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="xv.iii-p20.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.iii-p20.2"></span>[Acts
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002), [Acts
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span id="xv.iii-p20.2"></span>.
Some MSS and fathers have “holy” instead of “eternal,” but the greatest
number and the best have the last word. Dr. Owen, Doddridge and Scott
take this view. Why the Spirit is called “eternal” is not very evident.
It may have been for the purpose of showing that the Spirit mentioned
before in <span id="xv.iii-p20.3"></span>[Heb
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii-p20.3"></span> is
the same Spirit, he being eternal, and thus in order to prove that the
offering of Christ was according to the divine will. God is said to be
eternal in <span id="xv.iii-p20.4"></span>[Ro
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026)<span id="xv.iii-p20.4"></span>,
where a reference is made to the past and the present dispensation, with
the view, as it seems, to show that he is the author of both. But
perhaps the explanation of Calvin is the most suitable. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc44014.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p25"></span> Here begins a new subject, that the
covenant, or it may be viewed as the resumption of what is found in
<span id="xv.iii-p25.1"></span>[Heb.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007)<span id="xv.iii-p25.1"></span>.
“For this cause,” or for this reason, refers, as it seems, to what
follows, “in order that,” ὅπως, etc. —

<span id="xv.iii-p26"></span>And for this reason is he the Mediator of a
new covenant, in order that death being undergone for the redemption of
transgressions under the first covenant, they who were called might
receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.

<span id="xv.iii-p27"></span>As in <span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>[Rom.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>,
the reference is to the retrospective effect of Christ’s expiatory
sacrifice. Hence “are called” is not correct; and the participle is in
the past tense. To “receive the promise,” means to enjoy its
fulfillment. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc44014.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xv.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p35"></span> See Appendix H 2.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc44014.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p19"></span> It is worthy of notice that the Apostle
mentions here several things which are not particularly by Moses in
<span id="xv.iv-p19.1"></span>[Ex
24:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)<span id="xv.iv-p19.1"></span>,
where the account is given; and yet what is there stated sufficiently
warrants the particulars mentioned here. The blood of “goats” is not
mentioned, and yet burnt offerings are said to have been offered, and
goats were so offered; see <span id="xv.iv-p19.2"></span>[Le
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010)<span id="xv.iv-p19.2"></span>.
Moses says nothing of “scarlet wool and hyssop;” but he mentions
“sprinkling,” and this was commonly done thereby; see <span
id="xv.iv-p19.3"></span>[Le 14:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#051)<span
id="xv.iv-p19.3"></span>. “Blood” only is mentioned by Moses; but we
find that when sprinkled, “water” was often connected with it. See <span
id="xv.iv-p19.4"></span>[Le 14:52](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#052)<span
id="xv.iv-p19.4"></span>; <span id="xv.iv-p19.5"></span>[Nu
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018)<span id="xv.iv-p19.5"></span>
The main difficulty is respecting “the book” being sprinkled, which is
not stated by Moses. But as the altar was sprinkled, there was the same
reason for sprinkling the book, though that is not expressly mentioned.
However, it is evident that this was the general opinion among the Jews,
for otherwise the Apostle would not have mentioned it in an Epistle
especially addressed to them.

<span id="xv.iv-p20"></span>Then the “tabernacle,” it was not expressly
mentioned that it was sprinkled with blood when consecrated; and this
was some time after the covenant was made. The setting up of the
tabernacle is mentioned in <span id="xv.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ex
40:17-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017)<span
id="xv.iv-p20.1"></span>. In the previous verses, <span
id="xv.iv-p20.2"></span>[Exod. 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#010)<span id="xv.iv-p20.2"></span>,
there is a direction given to anoint the tabernacle, and all its
vessels, and also to hallow them and to anoint the alter, and to
sanctify it. The hallowing or sanctifying was no doubt done by
sprinkling them with blood. See as a proof of this <span
id="xv.iv-p20.3"></span>[Ex 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021)<span
id="xv.iv-p20.3"></span>. We hence perceive how well acquainted the
writer must have been with the Jewish rituals. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc44014.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p25"></span> Both Calvin and our verse retain the word
“testament” as derived from <span id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>[Heb
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017)<span id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>;
but as that verse and the preceding are to be viewed as parenthetic, the
word “covenant” is the term used by Moses. The latter is the word
adopted by Beza, Doddridge, Macknight, and Stuart, “This is the blood of
the covenant,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc44014.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xv.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p26"></span> The Apostle here follows neither the Hebrew
nor the Septuagint. The Hebrew is “which the Lord (Jehovah) hath made
with you;” and the Septuagint, “Which the Lord hath covenanted (διέθετο)
with you.” And instead of “Behold the blood of the covenant,” (the same
in both) we have here, “This is the blood of the covenant.” But though
the words are different, yet the meaning is essentially the same, — the
main things regarded by the Apostles in their quotations. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc44014.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xv.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p33"></span> Metals were purified by fire, and clothes
by being washed in water, (<span id="xv.iv-p33.1"></span>[Nu
31:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#022)<span
id="xv.iv-p33.1"></span>;) but these were purifications not accompanied
with remission of sins. So that what is said here is literally true. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc44014.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xv.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p39"></span> By making “heavenly things” to mean things
in heaven above, and not in the kingdom of heaven on earth, commentators
have been under the necessity of altering the sense of the word
“purified.” The tabernacle represented the whole kingdom of Christ, both
on earth and in heaven. The sanctuary and the court, where the alter of
burnt offering was, represented what Christ has done and is doing on
earth; and the holy of holies was a representation of Christ’s kingdom
in heaven. The victims were slain in the court without the vail; the
shedding of blood was the atonement, but its sprinkling was its
purifying and sanctifying effects. All the heavenly things in the Church
on earth require purifying by the sprinkling of the blood of the atoning
sacrifice once offered by Christ; and it is to this the reference is
made here. And having provided means for purification, he as the high
priest, by virtue of his sacrifice, entered into the holiest, heavenly
things on earth, for the Church here below, in order to prepare it for
the holiest above. “In the heavens” may probably refer to two parts of
Christ’s kingdom, the one in heaven and the other on earth; and latter,
as things which require a sacrifice; and then in the following verse the
former part is alluded to, the kingdom above, even heaven, represented
by the holy of holies. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc44014.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p20"></span> This sentence is not to be taken strictly in
its literal meaning; for the world was founded and all things were set
in due order before sin entered into it. The phrase is used in a similar
way in <span id="xv.v-p20.1"></span>[Lu
11:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#050)<span id="xv.v-p20.1"></span>. It
is a popular mode of speaking intelligible to common readers though not
suitable to over-nice and hair-splitting critics.

<span id="xv.v-p21"></span>The truth implied, as Beza observes, is, that
sins since the beginning of the world have alone have been expiated by
the blood of Christ, the virtue of which extends to all sins, past and
future. The effects of his sufferings being perpetual and the same as to
all ages, from the beginning to the end of the world, there was no
necessity of having them repeated. As to their retrospective influence,
see <span id="xv.v-p21.1"></span>[Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)<span id="xv.v-p21.1"></span>, and
<span id="xv.v-p21.2"></span>[Rom.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="xv.v-p21.2"></span> —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc44014.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p26"></span> Literally it is “for the abolishing of sin,”
as Doddridge renders it. The word occurs only in one other place, <span
id="xv.v-p26.1"></span>[Heb 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018)<span
id="xv.v-p26.1"></span>, and is rendered “disannulling;” and Macknight
gives it that meaning here, taking “sin” in the sense of sin-offering,
“He hath been manifested to abolish sin-offering by the sacrifice of
himself.” But this is inconsistent with the drift of the passage. To
remove or abolish sin is doubtless what is meant. To “take away sin,” is
the version of Beza; and “to remove the punishment due to sin,” is that
of Stuart. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc44014.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xv.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p31"></span> “Was once offered,” προσενεχθεὶς, — Grotius
regarded this participle as having a reflective sense, “having once for
all offered up himself;” and so does Stuart. The first aorist passive
has often this sense. “By whom was he offered?” asks Theophylact; he
answers, “by himself, he being a high priest.” This amounts to the same
thing. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc44014.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xv.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p33"></span> “We are told that οἱ πολλοὶ is often
equivalent to πάντες. It is not however quite certain that the Apostle
here meant to express πάντων; the verse concludes with the mention of
those who ‘wait for him’ i.e., who wait for Christ’s second coming in
humble hope of receiving their reward; and these manifestly are not the
whole human race.” — Bp. Middleton, quoted by Bloomfield. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc44014.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xv.v-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p35"></span> Schleusner and Stuart consider “without sin”
to mean “without sin-offering” without any sacrifice for sin. Doddridge
and Scott take its meaning to be “without being in the likeness of
sinful flesh,” or, without that humiliating form in which he atoned for
sin. Some have said, “without sin” being imputed to him. The
construction which the passage seems to afford is this, “without bearing
sin.” The previous clause is that, to bear or to suffer for, he having
made the first time a full and complete expiation.

<span id="xv.v-p36"></span>To “bear sins,” is not, as some say, to take
them away, in allusion to the scape goat, but to endure the punishment
due to them, to make an atonement for them. See <span
id="xv.v-p36.1"></span>[1Pe 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="xv.v-p36.1"></span>; where the same word to “bear,” in connection
with “sins,” is used; and where it clearly means to bear the penalty of
sin; the end of the verse is, “with whose stripes we are healed.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc44014.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xv.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p38"></span> Most commentators adopt the same view, as
conveyed in our version, connecting “salvation” with appearing, such as
Beza, Grotius, Doddridge, Scott and Stuart. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc44015)
