[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](life002)  [Next](life004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Christian Life*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

# <span id="iv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER II.

#### <span id="iv-p0.2"></span>A SUMMARY OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. OF SELF-DENIAL. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="iv-p1"></span>The divisions of the chapter are,—I. The rule
which permits us not to go astray in the study of righteousness,
requires two things, viz., that man, abandoning his own will, devote
himself entirely to the service of God; whence it follows, that we must
seek not our own things, but the things of God, sec. 1, 2. II. A
description of this renovation or Christian life taken from the Epistle
to Titus, and accurately explained under certain special heads, sec. 3
to end.

<span id="iv-p2"></span>1. ALTHOUGH the Law of God contains a perfect
rule of conduct admirably arranged, it has seemed proper to our divine
Master to train his people by a more accurate method, to the rule which
is enjoined in the Law; and the leading principle in the method is, that
it is the duty of believers to present their “bodies a living sacrifice,
holy and acceptable unto God, which is their reasonable service,” (<span
id="iv-p2.1"></span>[Rom. xii. 1.](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span
id="iv-p2.1"></span>) Hence he draws the exhortation: “Be not conformed
to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that
ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of
God.” The great point, then, is, that we are consecrated and dedicated
to God, and, therefore, should not henceforth think, speak, design, or
act, without a view to his glory. What he hath made sacred cannot,
without signal insult to him, be applied to profane use. But if we are
not our own, but the Lord’s, it is plain both what error is to be
shunned, and to what end the actions of our lives ought to be directed.
We are not our own; therefore, neither is our own reason or will to rule
our acts and counsels. We are not our own; therefore, let us not make it
our end to seek what may be agreeable to our carnal nature. We are not
our own; therefore, as far as possible, let us forget ourselves and the
things that are ours. On the other hand, we are God’s; let us,
therefore, live and die to him (<span id="iv-p2.2"></span>[Rom. xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008)<span id="iv-p2.2"></span>.) We are
God’s; therefore, let his wisdom and will preside over all our actions.
We are God’s; to him, then, as the only legitimate end, let every part
of our life be directed. O how great the proficiency of him who, taught
that he is not his own, has withdrawn the dominion and government of
himself from his own reason that he may give them to God! For as the
surest source of destruction to men is to obey themselves, so the only
haven of safety is to have no other will, no other wisdom, than to
follow the Lord wherever he leads. Let this, then be the first step, to
abandon ourselves, and devote the whole energy of our minds to the
service of God. By service, I mean not only that which consists in
verbal obedience, but that by which the mind, divested of its own carnal
feelings, implicitly obeys the call of the Spirit of God. This
transformation, (which Paul calls *the renewing of the mind*, <span
id="iv-p2.3"></span>[Rom. xii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span
id="iv-p2.3"></span>; <span id="iv-p2.4"></span>[Eph. iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span id="iv-p2.4"></span>.) though
it is the first entrance to life, was unknown to all the philosophers.
They give the government of man to reason alone, thinking that she alone
is to be listened to; in short, they assign to her the sole direction of
the conduct. But Christian philosophy bids her give place, and yield
complete submission to the Holy Spirit, so that the man himself no
longer lives, but Christ lives and reigns in him, (<span
id="iv-p2.5"></span>[Gal. ii. 20.](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="iv-p2.5"></span>)

<span id="iv-p3"></span>2. Hence follows the other principle, that we
are not to seek our own, but the Lord’s will, and act with a view to
promote his glory. Great is our proficiency, when, almost forgetting
ourselves, certainly postponing our own reason, we faithfully make it
our study to obey God and his commandments. For when Scripture enjoins
us to lay aside private regard to ourselves, it not only divests our
minds of an excessive longing for wealth, or power, or human favour, but
eradicates all ambition and thirst for worldly glory, and other more
secret pests. The Christian ought, indeed, to be so trained and disposed
as to consider, that during his whole life he has to do with God. For
this reason, as he will bring all things to the disposal and estimate of
God, so he will religiously direct his whole mind to him. For he who has
learned to look to God in everything he does, is at the same time
diverted from all vain thoughts. This is that self-denial which Christ
so strongly enforces on his disciples from the very outset, (<span
id="iv-p3.1"></span>[Matth. xvi.
24,](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span id="iv-p3.1"></span>) which,
as soon as it takes hold of the mind, leaves no place either, first, for
pride, show, and ostentation; or, secondly, for avarice, lust, luxury,
effeminacy, or other vices which are engendered by self love. On the
contrary, wherever it reigns not, the foulest vices are indulged in
without shame; or, if there is some appearance of virtue, it is vitiated
by a depraved longing for applause. Show me, if you can, an individual
who, unless he has renounced himself in obedience to the Lord’s command,
is disposed to do good for its own sake. Those who have not so renounced
themselves have followed virtue at least for the sake of praise. The
philosophers who have contended most strongly that virtue is to be
desired on her own account, were so inflated with arrogance as to make
it apparent that they sought virtue for no other reason than as a ground
for indulging in pride. So far, therefore, is God from being delighted
with these hunters after popular applause with their swollen breasts,
that he declares they have received their reward in this world, (<span
id="iv-p3.2"></span>[Matth. vi.
2,](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)<span id="iv-p3.2"></span>) and that
harlots and publicans are nearer the kingdom of heaven than they, (<span
id="iv-p3.3"></span>[Matth. xxi.
31.](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031)<span id="iv-p3.3"></span>) We have
not yet sufficiently explained how great and numerous are the obstacles
by which a man is impeded in the pursuit of rectitude, so long as he has
not renounced himself. The old saying is true, There is a world of
iniquity treasured up in the human soul. Nor can you find any other
remedy for this than to deny yourself, renounce your own reason, and
direct your whole mind to the pursuit of those things which the Lord
requires of you, and which you are to seek only because they are
pleasing to Him.

<span id="iv-p4"></span>3. In another passage, Paul gives a brief,
indeed, but more distinct account of each of the parts of a well-ordered
life: “The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all
men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God and our
Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works,” (<span id="iv-p4.1"></span>[Titus
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011)<span id="iv-p4.1"></span>)
After holding forth the grace of God to animate us, and pave the way for
His true worship, he removes the two greatest obstacles which stand in
the way, viz., ungodliness, to which we are by nature too prone, and
worldly lusts, which are of still greater extent. Under *ungodliness,*
he includes not merely superstition, but everything at variance with the
true fear of God. *Worldly lusts* are equivalent to the lusts of the
flesh. Thus he enjoins us, in regard to both tables of the Law, to lay
aside our own mind, and renounce whatever our own reason and will
dictate. Then he reduces all the actions of our lives to three branches,
sobriety, righteousness, and godliness. *Sobriety* undoubtedly denotes
as well chastity and temperance as the pure and frugal use of temporal
goods, and patient endurance of want. *Righteousness* comprehends all
the duties of equity, in every one his due. Next follows *godliness*,
which separates us from the pollutions of the world, and connects us
with God in true holiness. These, when connected together by an
indissoluble chain, constitute complete perfection. But as nothing is
more difficult than to bid adieu to the will of the flesh, subdue, nay,
abjure our lusts, devote ourselves to God and our brethren, and lead an
angelic life amid the pollutions of the world, Paul, to set our minds
free from all entanglements, recalls us to the hope of a blessed
immortality, justly urging us to contend, because as Christ has once
appeared as our Redeemer, so on his final advent he will give full
effect to the salvation obtained by him. And in this way he dispels all
the allurements which becloud our path, and prevent us from aspiring as
we ought to heavenly glory; nay, he tells us that we must be pilgrims in
the world, that we may not fail of obtaining the heavenly inheritance.

<span id="iv-p5"></span>4. Moreover, we see by these words that
self-denial has respect partly to men and partly (more especially) to
God, (sec. 8–10.) For when Scripture enjoins us, in regard to our fellow
men, to prefer them in honour to ourselves, and sincerely labour to
promote their advantages (<span id="iv-p5.1"></span>[Rom. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)<span id="iv-p5.1"></span>; <span
id="iv-p5.2"></span>[Phil. ii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003)<span
id="iv-p5.2"></span>,) he gives us commands which our mind is utterly
incapable of obeying until its natural feelings are suppressed. For so
blindly do we all rush in the direction of self-love, that every one
thinks he has a good reason for exalting himself and despising all
others in comparison. If God has bestowed on us something not to be
repented of, trusting to it, we immediately become elated, and not only
swell, but almost burst with pride. The vices with which we abound we
both carefully conceal from others, and flatteringly represent to
ourselves as minute and trivial, nay, sometimes hug them as virtues.
When the same qualities which we admire in ourselves are seen in others,
even though they should be superior, we, in order that we may not be
forced to yield to them, maliciously lower and carp at them; in like
manner, in the case of vices, not contented with severe and keen
animadversion, we studiously exaggerate them. Hence the insolence with
which each, as if exempted from the common lot, seeks to exalt himself
above his neighbour, confidently and proudly despising others, or at
least looking down upon them as his inferiors. The poor man yields to
the rich, the plebeian to the noble, the servant to the master, the
unlearned to the learned, and yet every one inwardly cherishes some idea
of his own superiority. Thus each flattering himself, sets up a kind of
kingdom in his breast; the arrogant, to satisfy themselves, pass censure
on the minds and manners of other men, and when contention arises, the
full venom is displayed. Many bear about with them some measure of
mildness so long as all things go smoothly and lovingly with them, but
how few are there who, when stung and irritated, preserve the same tenor
of moderation? For this there is no other remedy than to pluck up by the
roots those most noxious pests, self-love and love of victory. This the
doctrine of Scripture does. For it teaches us to remember, that the
endowments which God has bestowed upon us are not our own, but His free
gifts, and that those who plume themselves upon them betray their
ingratitude. “Who maketh thee to differ,” saith Paul, “and what hast
thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost
thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?” (<span
id="iv-p5.3"></span>[1 Cor. iv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span
id="iv-p5.3"></span>.) Then by a diligent examination of our faults let
us keep ourselves humble. Thus while nothing will remain to swell our
pride, there will be much to subdue it. Again, we are enjoined, whenever
we behold the gifts of God in others, so to reverence and respect the
gifts, as also to honour those in whom they reside. God having been
pleased to bestow honour upon them, it would ill become us to deprive
them of it. Then we are told to overlook their faults, not, indeed, to
encourage by flattering them, but not because of them to insult those
whom we ought to regard with honour and good will. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) In this way, with regard to all with whom we
have intercourse, our behaviour will be not only moderate and modest,
but courteous and friendly. The only way by which you can ever attain to
true meekness, is to have your heart imbued with a humble opinion of
yourself and respect for others.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>5. How difficult it is to perform the duty of
seeking the good of our neighbour! Unless you leave off all thought of
yourself and in a manner cease to be yourself, you will never accomplish
it. How can you exhibit those works of charity which Paul describes
unless you renounce yourself, and become wholly devoted to others?
“Charity (says he, <span id="iv-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="iv-p6.1"></span>) suffereth
long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is
not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is
not easily provoked &c. Were it the only thing required of us to seek
not our own, nature would not have the least power to comply: she so
inclines us to love ourselves only, that she will not easily allow us
carelessly to pass by ourselves and our own interests that we may watch
over the interests of others, nay, spontaneously to yield our own rights
and resign it to another. But Scripture, to conduct us to this, reminds
us, that whatever we obtain from the Lord is granted on the condition of
our employing it for the common good of the Church, and that, therefore,
the legitimate use of all our gifts is a kind and liberal communication
of them with others. There cannot be a surer rule, nor a stronger
exhortation to the observance of it, than when we are taught that all
the endowments which we possess are divine deposits entrusted to us for
the very purpose of being distributed for the good of our neighbour. But
Scripture proceeds still farther when it likens these endowments to the
different members of the body, (<span id="iv-p6.2"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="iv-p6.2"></span>.) No
member has its function for itself, or applies it for its own private
use, but transfers it to its fellow-members; nor does it derive any
other advantage from it than that which it receives in common with the
whole body. Thus, whatever the pious man can do, he is bound to do for
his brethren, not consulting his own interest in any other way than by
striving earnestly for the common edification of the Church. Let this,
then, be our method of showing good-will and kindness, considering that,
in regard to everything which God has bestowed upon us, and by which we
can aid our neighbour, we are his stewards, and are bound to give
account of our stewardship; moreover, that the only right mode of
administration is that which is regulated by love. In this way, we shall
not only unite the study of our neighbour’s advantage with a regard to
our own, but make the latter subordinate to the former. And lest we
should have omitted to perceive that this is the law for duly
administering every gift which we receive from God, he of old applied
that law to the minutest expressions of his own kindness. He commanded
the first-fruits to be offered to him as an attestation by the people
that it was impious to reap any advantage from goods not previously
consecrated to him, (<span id="iv-p6.3"></span>[Exod. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)<span id="iv-p6.3"></span>; <span
id="iv-p6.4"></span>[Exodus 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019)<span
id="iv-p6.4"></span>.) But if the gifts of God are not sanctified to us
until we have with our own hand dedicated them to the Giver, it must be
a gross abuse that does not give signs of such dedication. It is in vain
to contend that you cannot enrich the Lord by your offerings. Though, as
the Psalmist says “Thou art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not unto
thee,” yet you can extend it “to the saints that are in the earth,”
(<span id="iv-p6.5"></span>[Ps. 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)<span id="iv-p6.5"></span>;) and
therefore a comparison is drawn between sacred oblations and alms as now
corresponding to the offerings under the Law. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="iv-p7"></span>6. Moreover, that we may not weary in
well-doing, (as would otherwise forthwith and infallibly be the case,)
we must add the other quality in the Apostle’s enumeration, “Charity
suffiereth long, and is kind, is not easily provoked,” (<span
id="iv-p7.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="iv-p7.1"></span>.) The Lord
enjoins us to do good to all without exception, though the greater part,
if estimated by their own merit, are most unworthy of it. But Scripture
subjoins a most excellent reason, when it tells us that we are not to
look to what men in themselves deserve, but to attend to the image of
God, which exists in all, and to which we owe all honour and love. But
in those who are of the household of faith, the same rule is to be more
carefully observed, inasmuch as that image is renewed and restored in
them by the Spirit of Christ. Therefore, whoever be the man that is
presented to you as needing your assistance, you have no ground for
declining to give it to him. Say he is a stranger. The Lord has given
him a mark which ought to be familiar to you: for which reason he
forbids you to despise your own flesh, (<span id="iv-p7.2"></span>[Gal.
vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="iv-p7.2"></span>.) Say
he is mean and of no consideration. The Lord points him out as one whom
he has distinguished by the lustre of his own image, (<span
id="iv-p7.3"></span>[Isaiah lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="iv-p7.3"></span>.) Say that
you are bound to him by no ties of duty. The Lord has substituted him as
it were into his own place, that in him you may recognize the many great
obligations under which the Lord has laid you to himself. Say that he is
unworthy of your least exertion on his account; but the image of God, by
which he is recommended to you, is worthy of yourself and all your
exertions. But if he not only merits no good, but has provoked you by
injury and mischief, still this is no good reason why you should not
embrace him in love, and visit him with offices of love. He has deserved
very differently from me, you will say. But what has the Lord
deserved? <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Whatever injury he has done
you, when he enjoins you to forgive him, he certainly means that it
should be imputed to himself. In this way only we attain to what is not
to say difficult but altogether against nature, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) to love those that hate us, render good for
evil, and blessing for cursing, remembering that we are not to reflect
on the wickedness of men, but look to the image of God in them, an image
which, covering and obliterating their faults, should by its beauty and
dignity allure us to love and embrace them.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>7. We shall thus succeed in mortifying ourselves
if we fulfil all the duties of charity. Those duties, however, are not
fulfilled by the mere discharge of them, though none be omitted, unless
it is done from a pure feeling of love. For it may happen that one may
perform every one of these offices, in so far as the external act is
concerned, and be far from performing them aright. For you see some who
would be thought very liberal, and yet accompany every thing they give
with insult, by the haughtiness of their looks, or the violence of their
words. And to such a calamitous condition have we come in this unhappy
age, that the greater part of men never almost give alms without
contumely. Such conduct ought not to have been tolerated even among the
heathen; but from Christians something more is required than to carry
cheerfulness in their looks, and give attractiveness to the discharge of
their duties by courteous language. First, they should put themselves in
the place of him whom they see in need of their assistance, and pity his
misfortune as if they felt and bore it, so that a feeling of pity and
humanity should incline them to assist him just as they would
themselves. He who is thus minded will go and give assistance to his
brethren, and not only not taint his acts with arrogance or upbraiding
but will neither look down upon the brother to whom he does a kindness,
as one who needed his help, or keep him in subjection as under
obligation to him, just as we do not insult a diseased member when the
rest of the body labours for its recovery, nor think it under special
obligation to the other members, because it has required more exertion
than it has returned. A communication of offices between members is not
regarded as at all gratuitous, but rather as the payment of that which
being due by the law of nature it were monstrous to deny. For this
reason, he who has performed one kind of duty will not think himself
thereby discharged, as is usually the case when a rich man, after
contributing somewhat of his substance, delegates remaining burdens to
others as if he had nothing to do with them. Every one should rather
consider, that however great he is, he owes himself to his neighbours,
and that the only limit to his beneficence is the failure of his means.
The extent of these should regulate that of his charity.

<span id="iv-p9"></span>8. The principal part of self-denial, that which
as we have said has reference to God, let us again consider more fully.
Many things have already been said with regard to it which it were
superfluous to repeat; and, therefore, it will be sufficient to view it
as forming us to equanimity and endurance. First, then, in seeking the
convenience or tranquillity of the present life, Scripture calls us to
resign ourselves, and all we have, to the disposal of the Lord, to give
him up the affections of our heart, that he may tame and subdue them. We
have a frenzied desire, an infinite eagerness, to pursue wealth and
honour, intrigue for power, accumulate riches, and collect all those
frivolities which seem conducive to luxury and splendour. On the other
hand, we have a remarkable dread, a remarkable hatred of poverty, mean
birth, and a humble condition, and feel the strongest desire to guard
against them. Hence, in regard to those who frame their life after their
own counsel, we see how restless they are in mind, how many plans they
try, to what fatigues they submit, in order that they may gain what
avarice or ambition desires, or, on the other hand, escape poverty and
meanness. To avoid similar entanglements, the course which Christian men
must follow is this: first, they must not long for, or hope for, or
think of any kind of prosperity apart from the blessing of God; on it
they must cast themselves, and there safely and confidently recline.
For, however much the carnal mind may seem sufficient for itself when in
the pursuit of honour or wealth, it depends on its own industry and
zeal, or is aided by the favour of men, it is certain that all this is
nothing, and that neither intellect nor labour will be of the least
avail, except in so far as the Lord prospers both. On the contrary, his
blessing alone makes a way through all obstacles, and brings every thing
to a joyful and favourable issue. Secondly, though without this blessing
we may be able to acquire some degree of fame and opulence, (as we daily
see wicked men loaded with honours and riches,) yet since those on whom
the curse of God lies do not enjoy the least particle of true happiness,
whatever we obtain without his blessing must turn out ill. But surely
men ought not to desire what adds to their misery.

<span id="iv-p10"></span>9. Therefore, if we believe that all prosperous
and desirable success depends entirely on the blessing of God, and that
when it is wanting all kinds of misery and calamity await us, it follows
that we should not eagerly contend for riches and honours, trusting to
our own dexterity and assiduity, or leaning on the favour of men, or
confiding in any empty imagination of fortune; but should always have
respect to the Lord, that under his auspices we may be conducted to
whatever lot he has provided for us. First, the result will be, that
instead of rushing on regardless of right and wrong, by wiles and wicked
arts, and with injury to our neighbours, to catch at wealth and seize
upon honours, we will only follow such fortune as we may enjoy with
innocence. Who can hope for the aid of the divine blessing amid fraud,
rapine, and other iniquitous arts? As this blessing attends him only who
thinks purely and acts uprightly, so it calls off all who long for it
from sinister designs and evil actions. Secondly, a curb will be laid
upon us, restraining a too eager desire of becoming rich, or an
ambitious striving after honour. How can any one have the effrontery to
expect that God will aid him in accomplishing desires at variance with
his word? What God with his own lips pronounces cursed, never can be
prosecuted with his blessing. Lastly, if our success is not equal to our
wish and hope, we shall, however, be kept from impatience and
detestation of our condition, whatever it be, knowing that so to feel
were to murmur against God, at whose pleasure riches and poverty,
contempt and honours, are dispensed. In shorts he who leans on the
divine blessing in the way which has been described, will not, in the
pursuit of those things which men are wont most eagerly to desire,
employ wicked arts which he knows would avail him nothing; nor when any
thing prosperous befalls him will he impute it to himself and his own
diligence, or industry, or fortune, instead of ascribing it to God as
its author. If, while the affairs of others flourish, his make little
progress, or even retrograde, he will bear his humble lot with greater
equanimity and moderation than any irreligious man does the moderate
success which only falls short of what he wished; for he has a solace in
which he can rest more tranquilly than at the very summit of wealth or
power, because he considers that his affairs are ordered by the Lord in
the manner most conducive to his salvation. This, we see, is the way in
which David was affected, who, while he follows God and gives up himself
to his guidance, declares, “Neither do I exercise myself in great
matters, or in things too high for me. Surely I have behaved and quieted
myself as a child that is weaned of his mother,” (<span
id="iv-p10.1"></span>[Ps. 131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#002)<span id="iv-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv-p11"></span>10. Nor is it in this respect only that pious
minds ought to manifest this tranquillity and endurance; it must be
extended to all the accidents to which this present life is liable. He
alone, therefore, has properly denied himself, who has resigned himself
entirely to the Lord, placing all the course of his life entirely at his
disposal. Happen what may, he whose mind is thus composed will neither
deem himself wretched nor murmur against God because of his lot. How
necessary this disposition is will appear, if you consider the many
accidents to which we are liable. Various diseases ever and anon attack
us: at one time pestilence rages; at another we are involved in all the
calamities of war. Frost and hail, destroying the promise of the year,
cause sterility, which reduces us to penury; wife, parents, children,
relatives, are carried off by death; our house is destroyed by fire.
These are the events which make men curse their life, detest the day of
their birth, execrate the light of heaven, even censure God, and (as
they are eloquent in blasphemy) charge him with cruelty and injustice.
The believer must in these things also contemplate the mercy and truly
paternal indulgence of God. Accordingly, should he see his house by the
removal of kindred reduced to solitude even then he will not cease to
bless the Lord; his thought will be, Still the grace of the Lord, which
dwells within my house, will not leave it desolate. If his crops are
blasted, mildewed, or cut off by frost, or struck down by hail, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) and he sees famine before him, he will not
however despond or murmur against God, but maintain his confidence in
him; “We thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for
ever,” (<span id="iv-p11.3"></span>[Ps. lxxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)<span id="iv-p11.3"></span>;) he
will supply me with food, even in the extreme of sterility. If he is
afflicted with disease, the sharpness of the pain will not so overcome
him, as to make him break out with impatience, and expostulate with God;
but, recognising justice and lenity in the rod, will patiently endure.
In short, whatever happens, knowing that it is ordered by the Lord, he
will receive it with a placid and grateful mind, and will not
contumaciously resist the government of him, at whose disposal he has
placed himself and all that he has. Especially let the Christian breast
eschew that foolish and most miserable consolation of the heathen, who,
to strengthen their mind against adversity, imputed it to fortune, at
which they deemed it absurd to feel indignant, as she was aimless and
rash, and blindly wounded the good equally with the bad. On the
contrary, the rule of piety is, that the hand of God is the ruler and
arbiter of the fortunes of all, and, instead of rushing on with
thoughtless violence, dispenses good and evil with perfect regularity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](life003.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iv-p0.3"></span>On this and the three following chapters, which
contain the second part of the Treatise on the Christian Life, see
Augustine, De Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and Calvin de Scandalis.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](life003.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iv-p5.4"></span>Calvin. de Sacerdotiis Eccles. Papal. in fine.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](life003.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iv-p6.6"></span><span id="iv-p6.7"></span>[Heb. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span id="iv-p6.7"></span>; <span
id="iv-p6.8"></span>[2 Cor.ix.
12.](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012)<span id="iv-p6.8"></span>

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](life003.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iv-p7.4"></span>French, “<span id="iv-p7.5"></span>Car si nous
disons qu’il n’a merité que mal de nous; Dieu nous pourra demander quel
mal il nous a fait, lui dont nous tenons tout notre bien;’—For if we say
that he has deserved nothing of us but evil, God may ask us what evil he
has done us, he of whom we hold our every blessing.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](life003.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iv-p7.6"></span><span id="iv-p7.7"></span>[Matthew
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="iv-p7.7"></span>; <span
id="iv-p7.8"></span>[Matthew 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span
id="iv-p7.8"></span>; <span id="iv-p7.9"></span>[Matthew
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#035)<span id="iv-p7.9"></span>; <span
id="iv-p7.10"></span>[Luke xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003)<span id="iv-p7.10"></span>.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](life003.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iv-p11.1"></span>The French is, “<span id="iv-p11.2"></span>Soit que
ses bleds et vignes soyent gastées et destruites par gelée, gresle, ou
autre tempeste;”—whether his corn and vines are hurt and destroyed by
frost, hail, or other tempest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of Bearing the CrossOne Branch of
Self-Denial.](life004)
