[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](life000)  [Next](life002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Christian Life*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

# <span id="ii-p0.1"></span>ON THE CHRISTIAN LIFE

## <span id="ii-p0.2"></span>CHAPTER I.

#### <span id="ii-p0.3"></span>THE LIFE OF A CHRISTIAN MAN. SCRIPTURAL ARGUMENTS EXHORTING TO IT.

Connection between this chapter and the doctrine of Regeneration.
Necessity of the doctrine concerning the Christian Life. The brevity of
this treatise. The method of it. Plainness and unadorned simplicity of
the Scripture system of morals.

Two divisions. First, Personal holiness. 1. Because God is holy. 2.
Because of our communion with his saints.

Second division, relating to our Redemption. Admirable moral system of
Scripture. Five special inducements or exhortations to a Christian Life.

False Christians who are opposed to this life censured 1. They have not
truly learned Christ. 2. The Gospel not the guide of their words or
actions. 3. They do not imitate Christ the Master. 4. They would
separate the Spirit from his word.

Christians ought not to despond: Provided 1. They take the word of God
for their guide. 2. Sincerely cultivate righteousness. 3. Walk,
according to their capacity, in the ways of the Lord. 4. Make some
progress. 5. Persevere.

## <span id="ii-p0.10"></span>CHAPTER II.

#### <span id="ii-p0.11"></span>II. A SUMMARY OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. OF SELF-DENIAL.

Consideration of the second general division in regard to the Christian
life. Its beginning and sum. A twofold respect. 1. We are not our own.
Respect to both the fruit and the use. Unknown to philosophers, who have
placed reason on the throne of the Holy Spirit.

Since we are not our own, we must seek the glory of God, and obey his
will. Self-denial recommended to the disciples of Christ. He who
neglects it, deceived either by pride or hypocrisy, rushes on
destruction.

Three things to be followed, and two to be shunned in life. Impiety and
worldly lusts to be shunned. Sobriety, justice, and piety, to be
followed. An inducement to right conduct.

Self-denial the sum of Paul's doctrine. Its difficulty. Qualities in us
which make it difficult. Cures for these qualities. 1. Ambition to be
suppressed. 2. Humility to be embraced. 3. Candour to be esteemed. 4.
Mutual charity to be preserved. 5. Modesty to be sincerely cultivated.

The advantage of our neighbour to be promoted. Here self-denial most
necessary, and yet most difficult. Here a double remedy. 1. The benefits
bestowed upon us are for the common benefit of the Church. 2. We ought
to do all we can for our neighbour. This illustrated by analogy from the
members of the human body. This duty of charity founded on the divine
command.

Charity ought to have for its attendants patience and kindness. We
should consider the image of God in our neighbours, and especially in
those who are of the household of faith. Hence a fourfold consideration
which refutes all objections. A common objection refuted.

Christian life cannot exist without charity. Remedies for the vices
opposed to charity. 1. Mercy. 2. Humility. 3. Modesty. 4. Diligence. 5.
Perseverance.

Self-denial, in respect of God, should lead to equanimity and tolerance.
1. We are always subject to God. 2. We should shun avarice and ambition.
3. We should expect all prosperity from the blessing of God, and
entirely depend on him.

We ought not to desire wealth or honours without the divine blessing,
nor follow the arts of the wicked. We ought to cast all our care upon
God, and never envy the prosperity of others.

We ought to commit ourselves entirely to God. The necessity of this
doctrine. Various uses of affliction. Heathen abuse and corruption.

## <span id="ii-p0.23"></span>CHAPTER III.

#### <span id="ii-p0.24"></span>OF BEARING THE CROSS—ONE BRANCH OF SELF-DENIAL.

What the cross is. By whom, and on whom, and for what cause imposed. Its
necessity and dignity.

The cross necessary. 1. To humble our pride. 2. To make us apply to God
for aid. Example of David. 3. To give us experience of God's presence.

Manifold uses of the cross. 1. Produces patience, hope, and firm
confidence in God, gives us victory and perseverance. Faith invincible.

2\. Frames us to obedience. Example of Abraham. This training how
useful.

The cross necessary to subdue the wantonness of the flesh. This
portrayed by an apposite simile. Various forms of the cross.

3\. God permits our infirmities, and corrects past faults, that he may
keep us in obedience. This confirmed by a passage from Solomon and an
Apostle.

Singular consolation under the cross, when we suffer persecution for
righteousness. Some parts of this consolation.

This form of the cross most appropriate to believers, and should be
borne willingly and cheerfully. This cheerfulness is not unfeeling
hilarity, but, while groaning under the burden, waits patiently for the
Lord.

A description of this conflict. Opposed to the vanity of the Stoics.
Illustrated by the authority and example of Christ.

Proved by the testimony and uniform experience of the elect. Also by the
special example of the Apostle Peter. The nature of the patience
required of us.

Distinction between the patience of Christians and philosophers. The
latter pretend a necessity which cannot be resisted. The former hold
forth the justice of God and his care of our safety. A full exposition
of this difference.

## <span id="ii-p0.37"></span>CHAPTER IV.

#### <span id="ii-p0.38"></span>OF MEDITATING ON THE FUTURE LIFE.

The design of God in afflicting his people. 1. To accustom us to despise
the present life. Our infatuated love of it. Afflictions employed as the
cure. 2. To lead us to aspire to heaven.

Excessive love of the present life prevents us from duly aspiring to the
other. Hence the disadvantages of prosperity. Blindness of the human
judgment. Our philosophizing on the vanity of life only of momentary
influence. The necessity of the cross.

The present life an evidence of the divine favour to his people; and
therefore, not to be detested. On the contrary, should call forth
thanksgiving. The crown of victory in heaven after the contest on earth.

Weariness of the present life how to be tempered. The believer's
estimate of life. Comparison of the present and the future life. How far
the present life should be hated.

Christians should not tremble at the fear of death. Two reasons.
Objection. Answer. Other reasons.

Reasons continued. Conclusion.

## <span id="ii-p0.46"></span>CHAPTER V.

#### <span id="ii-p0.47"></span>HOW TO USE THE PRESENT LIFE, AND THE COMFORTS OF IT.

Necessity of this doctrine. Use of the goods of the present life.
Extremes to be avoided. 1. Excessive austerity. 2. Carnal intemperance
and lasciviousness.

God, by creating so many mercies, consulted not only for our
necessities, but also for our comfort and delight. Confirmation from a
passage in the Psalms, and from experience.

Excessive austerity, therefore, to be avoided. So also must the
wantonness of the flesh. 1. The creatures invite us to know, love, and
honour the Creator. 2. This not done by the wicked, who only abuse these
temporal mercies.

All earthly blessings to be despised in comparison of the heavenly life.
Aspiration after this life destroyed by an excessive love of created
objects. First, Intemperance.

Second, Impatience and immoderate desire. Remedy of these evils. The
creatures assigned to our use. Man still accountable for the use he
makes of them.

God requires us in all our actions to look to his calling. Use of this
doctrine. It is full of comfort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Life of a Christian Man. Scriptural Arguments
Exhorting to it.](life002)
