[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](life003)  [Next](life005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Christian Life*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

# <span id="v-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER III.

#### <span id="v-p0.2"></span>OF BEARING THE CROSS—ONE BRANCH OF SELF-DENIAL.

<span id="v-p1"></span>The four divisions of this chapter are,—I. The
nature of the cross, its necessity and dignity, sec. 1, 2. II. The
manifold advantages of the cross described, sec. 3–6. III. The form of
the cross the most excellent of all, and yet it by no means removes all
sense of pain, sec. 7, 8. IV. A description of warfare under the cross,
and of true patience, (not that of philosophers,) after the example of
Christ, sec. 9–11.

<span id="v-p2"></span>1. THE pious mind must ascend still higher,
namely, whither Christ calls his disciples when he says, that every one
of them must “take up his cross,” (<span id="v-p2.1"></span>[Matth. xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span id="v-p2.1"></span>.) Those
whom the Lord has chosen and honoured with his intercourse must prepare
for a hard, laborious, troubled life, a life full of many and various
kinds of evils; it being the will of our heavenly Father to exercise his
people in this way while putting them to the proof. Having begun this
course with Christ the first-born, he continues it towards all his
children. For though that Son was dear to him above others, the Son in
whom he was “well pleased,” yet we see, that far from being treated
gently and indulgently, we may say, that not only was he subjected to a
perpetual cross while he dwelt on earth, but his whole life was nothing
else than a kind of perpetual cross. The Apostle assigns the reason,
“Though he was a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered,” (<span id="v-p2.2"></span>[Heb. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)<span id="v-p2.2"></span>.) Why then
should we exempt ourselves from that condition to which Christ our Head
behoved to submit; especially since he submitted on our account, that he
might in his own person exhibit a model of patience? Wherefore, the
Apostle declares, that all the children of God are destined to be
conformed to him. Hence it affords us great consolation in hard and
difficult circumstances, which men deem evil and adverse, to think that
we are holding fellowship with the sufferings of Christ; that as he
passed to celestial glory through a labyrinth of many woes, so we too
are conducted thither through various tribulations. For, in another
passage, Paul himself thus speaks, “we must through much tribulation
enter the kingdom of God,” (<span id="v-p2.3"></span>[Acts xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022)<span id="v-p2.3"></span>;) and
again, “that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death,”
(<span id="v-p2.4"></span>[Rom viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="v-p2.4"></span>.) How
powerfully should it soften the bitterness of the cross, to think that
the more we are afflicted with adversity, the surer we are made of our
fellowship with Christ; by communion with whom our sufferings are not
only blessed to us, but tend greatly to the furtherance of our
salvation.

<span id="v-p3"></span>2. We may add, that the only thing which made it
necessary for our Lord to undertake to bear the cross, was to testify
and prove his obedience to the Father; whereas there are many reasons
which make it necessary for us to live constantly under the cross.
Feeble as we are by nature, and prone to ascribe all perfection to our
flesh, unless we receive as it were ocular demonstration of our
weakness, we readily estimate our virtue above its proper worth, and
doubt not that, whatever happens, it will stand unimpaired and
invincible against all difficulties. Hence we indulge a stupid and empty
confidence in the flesh, and then trusting to it wax proud against the
Lord himself; as if our own faculties were sufficient without his grace.
This arrogance cannot be better repressed than when He proves to us by
experience, not only how great our weakness, but also our frailty is.
Therefore, he visits us with disgrace, or poverty, or bereavement, or
disease, or other afflictions. Feeling altogether unable to support
them, we forthwith, in so far as regards ourselves, give way, and thus
humbled learn to invoke his strength, which alone can enable us to bear
up under a weight of affliction. Nay, even the holiest of men, however
well aware that they stand not in their own strength, but by the grace
of God, would feel too secure in their own fortitude and constancy, were
they not brought to a more thorough knowledge of themselves by the trial
of the cross. This feeling gained even upon David, “In my prosperity I
Said, I shall never be moved. Lord, by thy favour thou hast made my
mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled,”
(<span id="v-p3.1"></span>[Ps. 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)<span id="v-p3.1"></span>.) He
confesses that in prosperity his feelings were dulled and blunted, so
that, neglecting the grace of God, on which alone he ought to have
depended, he leant to himself, and promised himself perpetuity. If it so
happened to this great prophet, who of us should not fear and study
caution? Though in tranquillity they flatter themselves with the idea of
greater constancy and patience, yet, humbled by adversity, they learn
the deception. Believers, I say, warned by such proofs of their
diseases, make progress in humility, and, divesting themselves of a
depraved confidence in the flesh, betake themselves to the grace of God,
and, when they have so betaken themselves, experience the presence of
the divine power, in which is ample protection.

<span id="v-p4"></span>3. This Paul teaches when he says that
tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience. God having
promised that he will be with believers in tribulation, they feel the
truth of the promise; while supported by his hand, they endure
patiently. This they could never do by their own strength. Patience,
therefore, gives the saints an experimental proof that God in reality
furnishes the aid which he has promised whenever there is need. Hence
also their faith is confirmed, for it were very ungrateful not to expect
that in future the truth of God will be, as they have already found it,
firm and constant. We now see how many advantages are at once produced
by the cross. Overturning the overweening opinion we form of our own
virtue, and detecting the hypocrisy in which we delight, it removes our
pernicious carnal confidence, teaching us, when thus humbled, to recline
on God alone, so that we neither are oppressed nor despond. Then victory
is followed by hope, inasmuch as the Lord, by performing what he has
promised, establishes his truth in regard to the future. Were these the
only reasons, it is surely plain how necessary it is for us to bear the
cross. It is of no little importance to be rid of your self-love, and
made fully conscious of your weakness; so impressed with a sense of your
weakness as to learn to distrust yourself—to distrust yourself so as to
transfer your confidence to God, reclining on him with such heartfelt
confidence as to trust in his aid, and continue invincible to the end,
standing by his grace so as to perceive that he is true to his promises,
and so assured of the certainty of his promises as to be strong in hope.

<span id="v-p5"></span>4. Another end which the Lord has in afflicting
his people is to try their patience, and train them to obedience—not
that they can yield obedience to him except in so far as he enables
them; but he is pleased thus to attest and display striking proofs of
the graces which he has conferred upon his saints, lest they should
remain within unseen and unemployed. Accordingly, by bringing forward
openly the strength and constancy of endurance with which he has
provided his servants, he is said to try their patience. Hence the
expressions that God tempted Abraham, (<span id="v-p5.1"></span>[Gen.
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span id="v-p5.1"></span>,) and
made proof of his piety by not declining to sacrifice his only son.
Hence, too, Peter tells us that our faith is proved by tribulation, just
as gold is tried in a furnace of fire. But who will say it is not
expedient that the most excellent gift of patience which the believer
has received from his God should be applied to uses by being made sure
and manifest? Otherwise men would never value it according to its worth.
But if God himself, to prevent the virtues which he has conferred upon
believers from lurking in obscurity, nay, lying useless and perishing,
does aright in supplying materials for calling them forth, there is the
best reason for the afflictions of the saints, since without them their
patience could not exist. I say, that by the cross they are also trained
to obedience, because they are thus taught to live not according to
their own wish, but at the disposal of God. Indeed, did all things
proceed as they wish, they would not know what it is to follow God.
Seneca mentions (De Vit. Beata, cap. xv.) that there was an old proverb
when any one was exhorted to endure adversity, “Follow God;\#8221;
thereby intimating, that men truly submitted to the yoke of God only
when they gave their back and hand to his rod. But if it is most right
that we should in all things prove our obedience to our heavenly Father,
certainly we ought not to decline any method by which he trains us to
obedience.

<span id="v-p6"></span>5. Still, however, we see not how necessary that
obedience is, unless we at the same time consider how prone our carnal
nature is to shake off the yoke of God whenever it has been treated with
some degree of gentleness and indulgence. It just happens to it as with
refractory horses, which, if kept idle for a few days at hack and
manger, become ungovernable, and no longer recognize the rider, whose
command before they implicitly obeyed. And we invariably become what God
complains of in the people of Israel—waxing gross and fat, we kick
against him who reared and nursed us, (<span id="v-p6.1"></span>[Deut.
xxxii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="v-p6.1"></span>.)
The kindness of God should allure us to ponder and love his goodness;
but since such is our malignity, that we are invariably corrupted by his
indulgence, it is more than necessary for us to be restrained by
discipline from breaking forth into such petulance. Thus, lest we become
emboldened by an over-abundance of wealth; lest elated with honour, we
grow proud; lest inflated with other advantages of body, or mind, or
fortune, we grow insolent, the Lord himself interferes as he sees to be
expedient by means of the cross, subduing and curbing the arrogance of
our flesh, and that in various ways, as the advantage of each requires.
For as we do not all equally labour under the same disease, so we do not
all need the same difficult cure. Hence we see that all are not
exercised with the same kind of cross. While the heavenly Physician
treats some more gently, in the case of others he employs harsher
remedies, his purpose being to provide a cure for all. Still none is
left free and untouched, because he knows that all, without a single
exception, are diseased.

<span id="v-p7"></span>6. We may add, that our most merciful Father
requires not only to prevent our weakness, but often to correct our past
faults, that he may keep us in due obedience. Therefore, whenever we are
afflicted we ought immediately to call to mind our past life. In this
way we will find that the faults which we have committed are deserving
of such castigation. And yet the exhortation to patience is not to be
founded chiefly on the acknowledgment of sin. For Scripture supplies a
far better consideration when it says, that in adversity “we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world,”
(<span id="v-p7.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span id="v-p7.1"></span>.)
Therefore, in the very bitterness of tribulation we ought to recognise
the kindness and mercy of our Father, since even then he ceases not to
further our salvation. For he afflicts, not that he may ruin or destroy
but rather that he may deliver us from the condemnation of the world.
Let this thought lead us to what Scripture elsewhere teaches: “My son,
despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his
correction: For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the
son in whom he delighteth,” (<span id="v-p7.2"></span>[Prov.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="v-p7.2"></span>.) When we
perceive our Father’s rod, is it not our part to behave as obedient
docile sons rather than rebelliously imitate desperate men, who are
hardened in wickedness? God dooms us to destruction, if he does not, by
correction, call us back when we have fallen off from him, so that it is
truly said, “If ye be without chastisement,” “then are ye bastards, and
not sons,” (<span id="v-p7.3"></span>[Heb. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#008)<span id="v-p7.3"></span>.) We are
most perverse then if we cannot bear him while he is manifesting his
good-will to us, and the care which he takes of our salvation. Scripture
states the difference between believers and unbelievers to be, that the
latter, as the slaves of inveterate and deep-seated iniquity, only
become worse and more obstinate under the lash; whereas the former, like
free-born sons turn to repentance. Now, therefore, choose your class.
But as I have already spoken of this subject, it is sufficient to have
here briefly adverted to it.

<span id="v-p8"></span>7. There is singular consolation, moreover, when
we are persecuted for righteousness’ sake. For our thought should then
be, How high the honour which God bestows upon us in distinguishing us
by the special badge of his soldiers. By suffering persecution for
righteousness’ sake, I mean not only striving for the defence of the
Gospel, but for the defence of righteousness in any way. Whether,
therefore, in maintaining the truth of God against the lies of Satan, or
defending the good and innocent against the injuries of the bad, we are
obliged to incur the offence and hatred of the world, so as to endanger
life, fortune, or honour, let us not grieve or decline so far to spend
ourselves for God; let us not think ourselves wretched in those things
in which he with his own lips has pronounced us blessed, (<span
id="v-p8.1"></span>[Matth. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span
id="v-p8.1"></span>.) Poverty, indeed considered in itself, is misery;
so are exile, contempt, imprisonment, ignominy: in fine, death itself is
the last of all calamities. But when the favour of God breathes upon is,
there is none of these things which may not turn out to our happiness.
Let us then be contented with the testimony of Christ rather than with
the false estimate of the flesh, and then, after the example of the
Apostles, we will rejoice in being “counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name,” (<span id="v-p8.2"></span>[Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="v-p8.2"></span>.) For why?
If, while conscious of our innocence, we are deprived of our substance
by the wickedness of man, we are, no doubt, humanly speaking, reduced to
poverty; but in truth our riches in heaven are increased: if driven from
our homes we have a more welcome reception into the family of God; if
vexed and despised, we are more firmly rooted in Christ; if stigmatised
by disgrace and ignominy, we have a higher place in the kingdom of God;
and if we are slain, entrance is thereby given us to eternal life. The
Lord having set such a price upon us, let us be ashamed to estimate
ourselves at less than the shadowy and evanescent allurements of the
present life.

<span id="v-p9"></span>8. Since by these, and similar considerations,
Scripture abundantly solaces us for the ignominy or calamities which we
endure in defence of righteousness, we are very ungrateful if we do not
willingly and cheerfully receive them at the hand of the Lord,
especially since this form of the cross is the most appropriate to
believers, being that by which Christ desires to be glorified in us, as
Peter also declares, (<span id="v-p9.1"></span>[1 Pet.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014)<span id="v-p9.1"></span>.) But as
to ingenuous natures, it is more bitter to suffer disgrace than a
hundred deaths, Paul expressly reminds us that not only persecution, but
also disgrace awaits us, “because we trust in the living God,” (<span
id="v-p9.2"></span>[1 Tim. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010)<span
id="v-p9.2"></span>.) So in another passage he bids us, after his
example, walk “by evil report and good report,” (<span
id="v-p9.3"></span>[2 Cor. vi. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span
id="v-p9.3"></span>.) The cheerfulness required, however, does not imply
a total insensibility to pain. The saints could show no patience under
the cross if they were not both tortured with pain and grievously
molested. Were there no hardship in poverty, no pain in disease, no
sting in ignominy, no fear in death, where would be the fortitude and
moderation in enduring them? But while every one of these, by its
inherent bitterness, naturally vexes the mind, the believer in this
displays his fortitude, that though fully sensible of the bitterness and
labouring grievously, he still withstands and struggles boldly; in this
displays his patience, that though sharply stung, he is however curbed
by the fear of God from breaking forth into any excess; in this displays
his alacrity, that though pressed with sorrow and sadness, he rests
satisfied with spiritual consolation from God.

<span id="v-p10"></span>9. This conflict which believers maintain
against the natural feeling of pain, while they study moderation and
patience, Paul elegantly describes in these words: “We are troubled on
every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed,” (<span
id="v-p10.1"></span>[2 Cor. 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)<span id="v-p10.1"></span>.) You see
that to bear the cross patiently is not to have your feelings altogether
blunted, and to be absolutely insensible to pain, according to the
absurd description which the Stoics of old gave of their hero as one
who, divested of humanity, was affected in the same way by adversity and
prosperity, grief and joy; or rather, like a stone, was not affected by
anything. And what did they gain by that sublime wisdom? they exhibited
a shadow of patience, which never did, and never can, exist among men.
Nay, rather by aiming at a too exact and rigid patience, they banished
it altogether from human life. Now also we have among Christians a new
kind of Stoics, who hold it vicious not only to groan and weep, but even
to be sad and anxious. These paradoxes are usually started by indolent
men who, employing themselves more in speculation than in action, can do
nothing else for us than beget such paradoxes. But we have nothing to do
with that iron philosophy which our Lord and Master condemned—not only
in word, but also by his own example. For he both grieved and shed tears
for his own and others’ woes. Nor did he teach his disciples
differently: “Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice,”
(<span id="v-p10.2"></span>[John xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020)<span id="v-p10.2"></span>.) And
lest any one should regard this as vicious, he expressly declares,
“Blessed are they that mourn,” (<span id="v-p10.3"></span>[Matth. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="v-p10.3"></span>.) And no
wonder. If all tears are condemned, what shall we think of our Lord
himself, whose "sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down
to the ground?” (<span id="v-p10.4"></span>[Luke xxii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044)<span id="v-p10.4"></span>; <span
id="v-p10.5"></span>[Matth. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="v-p10.5"></span>.) If
every kind of fear is a mark of unbelief, what place shall we assign to
the dread which, it is said, in no slight degree amazed him; if all
sadness is condemned, how shall we justify him when he confesses, “My
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death?”

<span id="v-p11"></span>10. I wished to make these observations to keep
pious minds from despair, lest, from feeling it impossible to divest
themselves of the natural feeling of grief, they might altogether
abandon the study of patience. This must necessarily be the result with
those who convert patience into stupor, and a brave and firm man into a
block. Scripture gives saints the praise of endurance when, though
afflicted by the hardships they endure, they are not crushed; though
they feel bitterly, they are at the same time filled with spiritual joy;
though pressed with anxiety, breathe exhilarated by the consolation of
God. Still there is a certain degree of repugnance in their hearts,
because natural sense shuns and dreads what is adverse to it, while
pious affection, even through these difficulties, tries to obey the
divine will. This repugnance the Lord expressed when he thus addressed
Peter: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou
girdedst thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldst; but when thou shalt
be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee;
and carry thee whither thou wouldest not,” (<span
id="v-p11.1"></span>[John xxi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018)<span
id="v-p11.1"></span>.) It is not probable, indeed, that when it became
necessary to glorify God by death he was driven to it unwilling and
resisting; had it been so, little praise would have been due to his
martyrdom. But though he obeyed the divine ordination with the greatest
alacrity of heart, yet, as he had not divested himself of humanity, he
was distracted by a double will. When he thought of the bloody death
which he was to die, struck with horror, he would willingly have avoided
it: on the other hand, when he considered that it was God who called him
to it, his fear was vanquished and suppressed, and he met death
cheerfully. It must therefore be our study, if we would be disciples of
Christ, to imbue our minds with such reverence and obedience to God as
may tame and subjugate all affections contrary to his appointment. In
this way, whatever be the kind of cross to which we are subjected, we
shall in the greatest straits firmly maintain our patience. Adversity
will have its bitterness, and sting us. When afflicted with disease, we
shall groan and be disquieted, and long for health; pressed with
poverty, we shall feel the stings of anxiety and sadness, feel the pain
of ignominy, contempt, and injury, and pay the tears due to nature at
the death of our friends: but our conclusion will always be, The Lord so
willed it, therefore let us follow his will. Nay, amid the pungency of
grief, among groans and tears this thought will necessarily suggest
itself and incline us cheerfully to endure the things for which we are
so afflicted.

<span id="v-p12"></span>11. But since the chief reason for enduring the
cross has been derived from a consideration of the divine will, we must
in few words explain wherein lies the difference between philosophical
and Christian patience. Indeed, very few of the philosophers advanced so
far as to perceive that the hand of God tries us by means of affliction,
and that we ought in this matter to obey God. The only reason which they
adduce is, that so it must be. But is not this just to say, that we must
yield to God, because it is in vain to contend against him? For if we
obey God only because it is necessary, provided we can escape, we shall
cease to obey him. But what Scripture calls us to consider in the will
of God is very different, namely, first justice and equity, and then a
regard to our own salvation. Hence Christian exhortations to patience
are of this nature, Whether poverty, or exile, or imprisonment, or
contumely, or disease, or bereavement, or any such evil affects us, we
must think that none of them happens except by the will and providence
of God; moreover, that every thing he does is in the most perfect order.
What! do not our numberless daily faults deserve to be chastised, more
severely, and with a heavier rod than his mercy lays upon us? Is it not
most right that our flesh should be subdued, and be, as it were,
accustomed to the yoke, so as not to rage and wanton as it lists? Are
not the justice and the truth of God worthy of our suffering on their
account? <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) But if the equity of God
is undoubtedly displayed in affliction, we cannot murmur or struggle
against them without iniquity. We no longer hear the frigid cant, Yield,
because it is necessary; but a living and energetic precept, Obey,
because it is unlawful to resist; bear patiently, because impatience is
rebellion against the justice of God. Then as that only seems to us
attractive which we perceive to be for our own safety and advantage,
here also our heavenly Father consoles us, by the assurance, that in the
very cross with which he afflicts us he provides for our salvation. But
if it is clear that tribulations are salutary to us, why should we not
receive them with calm and grateful minds? In bearing them patiently we
are not submitting to necessity but resting satisfied with our own good.
The effect of these thoughts is, that to whatever extent our minds are
contracted by the bitterness which we naturally feel under the cross, to
the same extent will they be expanded with spiritual joy. Hence arises
thanksgiving, which cannot exist unless joy be felt. But if the praise
of the Lord and thanksgiving can emanate only from a cheerful and
gladdened breasts and there is nothing which ought to interrupt these
feelings in us, it is clear how necessary it is to temper the bitterness
of the cross with spiritual joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](life004.htm#fr_10) <span
id="v-p12.1"></span>See end of sec. 4, and sec. 5, 7, 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Of Meditating on the Future Life.](life005)
