[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc14019)  [Next](cc14021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 32

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
32:1-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001.md)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Behold, a king shall reign in
righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgement.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ecce in justitia regnabit rex, et
principes in judicio præerunt.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And a man shall be as an hiding place
from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a
dry place; as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et erit ille vir velut latibulum a
vento, receptus ab imbre, rivi aquarum in terra arida, umbra magnæ rupis
in terra laboriosa.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the eyes of them that see shall
not be dim; and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tunc non oblinentur oculi videntium,
et aures audientium auscultabunt.

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**4.** The heart also of the rash shall
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to
speak plainly.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et cor stultorum intentum erit ad
scientiam, et lingua balborum expedita erit ad loquendum diserte.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**5.** The vile person shall be no more
called liberal, nor the churl said *to be* bountiful.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Non vocabitur amplius sordidus
liberalis, neque parcus dicetur largus.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**6.** For the vile person will speak
villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, and to
utter error against the Lord, to make empty the soul of the hungry; and
he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quoniam sordidus loquetur sordes, et
cor ejus machinabitur iniquitatem, ad designandam pravitatem, ut
proferat subsannationem contra Iehovam, exinaniat animam famelicam, et
potum sitienti subtrahat.

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**7.** The instruments also of the churl
*are* evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying
words, even when the needy speaketh right.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Avari arma sunt mala (*vel, mensurœ
sunt malœ*) ipse pravitates excogitat, ut circumveniat simplices verbis
mendacibus, et loquatur contra pauperem in judicio.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**8.** But the liberal deviseth liberal
things; and by liberal things shall he stand.

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>**8.** At liberalis liberalia agitabit, et
liberaliter agendo progredietur.

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Rise up, ye women that are at ease;
hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech.

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Mulieres quitæ, surgite; audite vocem
meam, filiæ confidentes; auscultate sermonem meum.

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>**10.** Many days and years shall ye be
troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering
shall not come.

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Dies super annum expavescetis,
confidentes; quia deficiet vindemia, et collectio non veniet.

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Tremble, ye women that are at ease;
be troubled, ye careless ones; strip you, and make you bare, and gird
*sackcloth* upon *your* loins.

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Contremiscite, quietæ; trepidate,
confidentes; spoliate, nudate, accingite lumbos.

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>**12.** They shall lament for the teats, for
the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Super ubera plangentes, super agros
desideratos, super vitem frugiferam.

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>**13.** Upon the land of my people shall
come up thorns *and* briars; yea, upon all the houses of joy *in* the
joyous city:

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Super terram populi mei ascendet
spina et vepris; etiam super omnes domos lætitæ in urbe exultationis.

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Because the palaces shall be
forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers
shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Quoniam palatium desertum, strepitus
urbis relictus, turris et propugnaculum redigentur in speluncas in
perpetuum, ubi gaudeant onagri, et pascantur greges.

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>**15.** Until the Spirit be poured upon us
from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful
field be counted for a forest.

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Donec super nos effundatur Spiritus
ex alto, et ponatur desertum in agrum cultum, et ager cultus instar
sylvæ reputetur.

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>**16.** Then judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field.

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et habitabit in deserto judicium, et
justitia in agro culto sedebit.

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the work of righteousness shall
be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for
ever.

<span id="xxi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et erit opus justitæ pax; effectus,
inquam, justitæ, securitas et quies in perpetuum.

<span id="xxi.i-p36"></span>**18.** And my people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet restingplaces.

<span id="xxi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et sedebit populus meus in
tabernaculo pacis, et in mansionibus securis, et in refrigeriis quieis.

<span id="xxi.i-p38"></span>**19.** When it shall hail, coming down on
the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

<span id="xxi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et grando in sylvam descensu
divertet, et in loco humili considet civitas.

<span id="xxi.i-p40"></span>**20.** Blessed *are* ye that sow beside all
waters, that send forth *thither* the feet of the ox and the ass.

<span id="xxi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Beati vos qui seritis super omnes
aquas, qui immittitis pedem bovis et asini.

<span id="xxi.i-p42"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p43"></span><span id="xxi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p44"></span>**1.** *Behold, a King shall reign.* He
means that God will still be gracious to his Church, so as to restore
her entirely; and the best method of restoring her is, when good
government is maintained, and when the whole administration of it is
conducted with propriety, and with good order. This prediction
undoubtedly relates to Hezekiah and his reign, under which the Church
was reformed and restored to its former splendor; for formerly it was in
a wretched and ruinous condition. Ahaz, who was a wicked and disgraceful
hypocrite, had corrupted everything according to his own wicked
dispositions, and had overturned the whole condition of civil government
and of religion. (<span id="xxi.i-p44.1"></span>[2 Kings
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003)<span id="xxi.i-p44.1"></span>..md) He
therefore promises another king, namely, Hezekiah, whose power and
righteousness shall restore the state of affairs which is thus wretched
and desperate. In a word, he presents to us in this passage a lively
picture of the prosperous condition of the Church; and as this cannot be
attained without Christ, this description undoubtedly refers to Christ,
of whom Hezekiah was a type, and whose kingdom he foreshadowed.

<span id="xxi.i-p45"></span>*In righteousness and judgment.* Here he
follows the ordinary usage of Scripture, which employs those expressions
to denote good government; for by righteousness is meant equity and good
government, and by judgment is meant that part of equity which upholds
good men, and defends them from the assaults of the wicked. It is
undoubtedly true that the duty of a good prince embraces a wider extent
than “righteousness and judgment;” for his great aim ought to be to
defend the honor of God and religion. But the ordinary usage of
Scripture is, to describe the whole observation of the law by the works
of the second table; for, if we refrain from acts of injustice, if we
aid, as far as lies in our power, those who are oppressed by others,
and, in a word, if we maintain brotherly kindness, we give evidence of
the fear of God, from which such fruits spring and grow. From a part,
therefore, the Prophet has described the whole.

<span id="xxi.i-p46"></span>*And princes shall rule.* It is not without
good reason that he likewise mentions nobles;  <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) for it would not be enough to be a
good prince, if he were not supported by upright ministers and
counselors. Frequently has the condition of the people, under good
princes, been very bad; as we read of Nerva,  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) under whose reign every kind of
conduct was tolerated, so that many persons were far less favourably
situated under his reign than under Nero; for the carelessness and
indolence of a single individual gave freedom of action to many wicked
men. It is therefore necessary that a king shall have good governors,
who shall supply the place of eyes and hands, and aid him in the
righteous exercise of his authority. If this be not the case, a good
king cannot advance a step without being more or less retarded by other
men; and unless rulers move with a harmony resembling that which we find
in musical instruments, the government of a state cannot be carried on
with advantage.

<span id="xxi.i-p67"></span>On this subject, men ought to listen to the
advice of Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, to unite with him

<span id="xxi.i-p68"></span>“able men fearing God, men of truth, and
hating covetousness, and to appoint such men to be rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p68.1"></span>[Ex 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p68.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p69"></span>But at the present day, those who aid, or
pander to their lusts, and who favor and flatter them, are promoted by
kings to honors and high rank, which are bestowed on them as the just
reward of their flattery or base servility. Nor ought we to wonder if we
see, almost throughout the whole world, states thrown into confusion,
ranks overturned, and all good government despised and set aside; for
this is the just punishment of our iniquities, and we deserve to have
such governors, since we do not allow God to rule over us. How shall
this extraordinary kindness of God be enjoyed by men who are openly
rebellious and profane, or by wicked hypocrites who cast God behind
them, and cannot bear the yoke of Christ, through whom this prosperity
and restoration of a declining Church is promised?

<span id="xxi.i-p70"></span><span id="xxi.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p71"></span>**2.** *And that man shall be.* How great is
the importance of well-regulated government the Prophet shews plainly by
these words, when he calls that king *a hiding-place from the wind, and
a covert from the rain*; for mankind can never be so happy as when every
one voluntarily abstains from every kind of violence and injustice, and
when they conduct themselves peaceably and without restraint. Since,
therefore, most men are urged and driven by their furious passions to
acts of injustice, men would be embroiled in incessant quarreling if a
remedy were not provided in the laws and courts of justice; but as many
rulers, by a tyrannical exercise of power, raise more troubles than they
allay, it is not without good reason that the good king is honored by
this peculiar commendation. If this was said with truth concerning
Hezekiah, much more may it be said concerning Christ, in whom we have
our best, or rather, our only refuge in those storms by which we must be
tossed about as long as we dwell in this world. Whenever, therefore, we
are scorched by oppressive heat, let us learn to retire under his
shadow; whenever we are tossed about by tempests, and think that we are
overwhelmed by the violence of the waves, let us learn to betake
ourselves to him as our safest harbour; he will speedily bring every
storm to a calm, and will completely restore what was ruined and
decayed.

<span id="xxi.i-p72"></span><span id="xxi.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p73"></span>**3.** and **4.** *Then the eyes of them
that see.* Hence we see more clearly that, while the Prophet describes
the reign of Hezekiah, he intends to lead us farther; for here he
discourses concerning the restoration of the Church, which indeed was
shadowed out by Hezekiah, but has been actually fulfilled in Christ. We
know that the Church is never in a healthy condition, unless she be
internally ruled by righteous and wise governors. Now, this cannot be,
unless Christ reign; and here, therefore, Christ and his reign are
specially recommended to us. This promise is contrasted with the
dreadful threatening which he had uttered in a former chapter, (<span
id="xxi.i-p73.1"></span>[Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010)<span id="xxi.i-p73.1"></span>,.md)
that he would blind the Jews; for here, on the other hand, he promises
the true light, that they who were formerly blind may be enlightened,
that “the deaf may begin to hear, that fools may understand, and that
stammerers may speak.”

<span id="xxi.i-p74"></span>He calls them *seeing* and *hearing* who
ought to have seen and heard when the word of God was exhibited to them;
but they chose to be blind and deaf, and turned away their thoughts and
hearts from doctrine. The Lord promises that he will restore to these
persons eyes, ears, a tongue, and understanding. Now, it is certain that
nothing is here promised which does not proceed from the grace of God;
for he does not merely declare what men will do, but what God himself
will do in men. These are extraordinary gifts of God; as, on the
contrary, when he blinds, when he takes away understanding and the right
use of speech, when he suffers ignorance and barbarism to prevail, these
are dreadful punishments by which he takes vengeance on men for their
ingratitude and for their contempt of the word. He promises that, at
length, in compassion towards his people, the Lord will restore what he
had justly taken away from them; and it must have been through the
kindness of Christ that a tongue to speak, a mind to understand, and
ears to hear, are restored to us; for formerly we were dull of
apprehension, and were struck with frightful stupidity.

<span id="xxi.i-p75"></span>Let us therefore know that out of Christ
there is no spiritual life in the world, because here they are declared
to be destitute of sight, hearing, sound understanding, and the proper
use of speech,

<span id="xxi.i-p76"></span>“till they be united in one body, of which
he is the head.”  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) (<span
id="xxi.i-p77.1"></span>[Eph. 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016)<span id="xxi.i-p77.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p78"></span>Hence it follows that, when the kingdom of
Christ is overthrown, these blessings are also taken away. It ought also
to be observed, that the blessings which are here recommended are above
all others excellent and desirable; for riches, and possessions, and
everything else in which men commonly judge the happiness of life to
consist, ought to be reckoned of no value in comparison of these
blessings. Amidst the abundance of all things we shall be miserable,
unless the Lord restore those spiritual blessings of which the Prophet
speaks in this passage; and therefore, when they are taken away, let us
know that Christ also is at a distance from us, and that we are
strangers to him, seeing that it is from him alone, as Paul informs us,
that all spiritual blessings flow. (<span id="xxi.i-p78.1"></span>[Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span id="xxi.i-p78.1"></span>..md)
When we see that those blessings which had been taken away for a long
period are now restored to us, let us be ashamed of our ingratitude in
not rendering to Christ that glory which was due to him, and in not
employing the understanding which he gave to us in spreading his kingdom
and promoting his worship; for we plainly shew that he has no dominion
over us.

<span id="xxi.i-p79"></span>*And the heart of fools.*  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) As fools are commonly hasty and rash,
so the Hebrew writers take the word *haste*  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md) as denoting *folly*; for wise men are
usually cautious.

<span id="xxi.i-p82"></span><span id="xxi.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p83"></span>**5.** *No longer shall the base person be
called.* The Prophet means that everything will be restored to good
order, so that vices will not, as formerly, be reckoned virtues; for,
when the public government is wicked, covetous persons are in power, and
are honored and esteemed, because men judge of virtue by wealth and
power; a poor man is everywhere despised, though he be truly upright and
bountiful to the full extent of his ability; and, in a word, in such a
state of things there is nothing but disorder and confusion. But good
government quickly detects such pretences and masks; for, where virtue
is esteemed, vices are immediately exposed. Good men also have greater
freedom allowed them in restraining the wantonness of those who formerly
trod under their feet all that is just and lawful.

<span id="xxi.i-p84"></span>When the Prophet speaks here about the
condition and reformation of the Church, which is a spiritual
government, we ought to raise our minds somewhat higher, so as to view
all this as relating to Christ, to whom it specially and peculiarly
belongs to expose hidden vices, and to remove those vails and coverings
by which the appearance of vices is changed, so that they are praised as
if they were virtues. He does this by means of the gospel, by which he
drags into light the disgraceful actions which were formerly concealed,
and openly shews what they really are, so that no man, unless he choose
it, can be deceived by their outward appearance. And this is the reason
why the gospel is so much hated by the world; for no man can patiently
endure to have his “hidden thoughts” and concealed baseness “revealed.”
(<span id="xxi.i-p84.1"></span>[Lu
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)<span id="xxi.i-p84.1"></span>..md)
Philosophers indeed reason admirably about covetousness and liberality,
and in some degree explain what is the difference between them; but they
never penetrate into the hearts, so as to search them and actually
distinguish between the covetous man and the bountiful. This can only be
done by Christ’s light, when he shines by means of the gospel, and, by
exploring the deepest corners of the human heart, brings us to spiritual
and inward obedience. In this passage, therefore, we are brought to the
judgment-seat of Christ, who alone, by exposing hypocrisy, reveals
whether we are covetous or bountiful.

<span id="xxi.i-p85"></span><span id="xxi.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p86"></span>**6.** *For the vile person will speak
vileness.* We might also render it, “The wicked man will speak
wickedly;” for <span id="xxi.i-p86.1"></span>נבלה (*nĕbālāh*) denotes
“baseness” or any wickedness, such as is meant by the French word <span
id="xxi.i-p86.2"></span>*lascheté*, or by the English words, “lewdness”
or “baseness.” It might also be rendered, “The fool will speak
wickedly;” and thus there would be an allusion to the words <span
id="xxi.i-p86.3"></span>נבל (*nābāl*) and <span
id="xxi.i-p86.4"></span>נבלה, (*nĕbālāh*,)  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) though the meaning would be
considerably different; but, since he employed this word in the former
verse, when speaking of “vile” persons, I willingly adopt that
interpretation.

<span id="xxi.i-p88"></span>*And his heart will contrive iniquity.* I
consider <span id="xxi.i-p88.1"></span>און (ā*vĕn*) to denote
“wickedness;” for he speaks of giving themselves up continually to sin
and do wickedly, as is plainly shewn by what follows; for his earnest
remonstrances are directed against wicked men, who abandon themselves to
all that is vile, and are not moved by any feeling of conscience, who
laugh at all warnings, and ridicule God and his servants. Christ also
drags them into the light, and exposes what lay concealed under
coverings; for to him, as we have said, it peculiarly belongs to

<span id="xxi.i-p89"></span>“pierce, by the sword of the gospel, the
hidden feelings of the heart, that they may answer to the judgment of
God.” (<span id="xxi.i-p89.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="xxi.i-p89.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p90"></span>Isaiah therefore continues the same subject
which he had formerly begun to explain.

<span id="xxi.i-p91"></span>Others explain it differently, but, as I
think, in an unsuitable manner; for they think that it is a kind of
proverbial saying, and render it in the present tense, “The vile person
speaketh vileness.” But I think that the Prophet means something higher,
namely, that Christ is the Judge of the world, and therefore, when he
shall ascend the judgment-seat, he will shew what is the disposition of
every person; for, so long as he does not exercise the office of a
judge, everything remains in confusion, the wicked are applauded,
because they have the appearance of piety, and the most excellent men
are despised. But Christ will openly display the life of every person,
so that what formerly, under some pretense, bore a fair reputation, will
be manifested to be wickedness; and on this account he is said to

<span id="xxi.i-p92"></span>“have in his hand a sieve for separating the
wheat from the chaff.” (<span id="xxi.i-p92.1"></span>[Mt
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="xxi.i-p92.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p93"></span>Now, this sieve is the gospel, by which, as
a Judge, he brings malefactors to trial, and draws forth, in spite of
their efforts, the exposure of their transgressions and crimes.

<span id="xxi.i-p94"></span>We have the experience of this more and more
every day, when an exposure is made of that wickedness which had been
concealed under the mask of Popery and the strange folds of
superstitions. Who would ever have thought, amidst that darkness, that
there were concealed in the hearts of men such dreadful monsters as are
brought forward at the present day? To such a height has the contempt of
God arisen, that many discover themselves to be more like beasts than
men. Yet the Papists slander us, as if by our doctrine we gave loose
reins to men, and exhorted them to despise God and follow wickedness
without fear or shame. But let them listen to Isaiah, who replies that,
when the truth of God shall be made known, vile persons will speak
vileness, and wicked persons will speak baseness and wickedness; and,
indeed, Christ would not be a spiritual judge if he did not

<span id="xxi.i-p95"></span>“reveal the secret thoughts of the heart,
and bring every hidden thing to light.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p95.1"></span>[Lu 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p95.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p96"></span>*To make empty the hungry soul.* In addition
to those mockeries which the reprobate cast against God, cruelty is next
mentioned. The Prophet thus gives an exact enumeration of those actions
which are contrary to the second table. Wicked men begin with despising
God, then rush to outward crimes, and practice cruelty of every sort
against their neighbors. Now, the worst and most flagrant of all cruelty
is, to “snatch food from the hungry soul and drink from the thirsty;”
for mere natural feeling prompts us to mercy and (<span
id="xxi.i-p96.1"></span>συμπάθειαν)  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) compassion. When men are so brutalized
that they are not affected by the misery of others, and lay aside every
feeling of humanity, they must be worse than the beasts themselves, who
have some sort of pity for the wants of their own kind.

<span id="xxi.i-p98"></span><span id="xxi.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p99"></span>**7.** *The instruments of the covetous man
are evil.* We must always keep by the future tense; for he does not
inquire what wicked men are, but declares that they shall be revealed
under the reign of Christ, that they may no longer deceive or impose
upon any one. He speaks of the heavenly light which would arise, as we
have already said, to expose hidden wickedness. Christ therefore shews
what covetous men are, and how destructive are the means which they
employ. If it be thought better that <span id="xxi.i-p99.1"></span>כלי
(*kĕlē*) should be translated “measures,” I have no objection; but the
word “instrument” is more appropriate and extensive, for it includes
“instruments” of every description. It means therefore every kind of
means, tricks, and cunning devices, by which “covetous men” put simple
persons off their guard, and draw them into their nets.

<span id="xxi.i-p100"></span>*To deceive the simple by lying words.* He
now assigns the reason. It is, because they do not cease to contrive
some injury.  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) It is certain that
this is a description of the practices of bad men, who think of nothing
but their own convenience and gain, and are always bent on cheating and
“deceiving.” Christ brings to light those persons, and their tricks and
contrivances.

<span id="xxi.i-p102"></span>*To speak against the poor in judgment.*
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) Various circumstances are
brought forward, to present in a more striking light the shamefulness of
this wickedness. First, “to deceive the simple,” who cannot take care of
themselves, is more shameful and flagrant than to deceive sharpers and
veterans in crime. It is shameful, secondly, to make use of deceitful
blandishments under the pretense of friendship; thirdly, to deceive “the
poor,” whose poverty we ought rather to have relieved; fourthly, to lay
snares in the very court of justice. This is more highly criminal than
if a man were attacked by open violence; for the court of justice ought
to be a refuge for the poor, and what shall become of them, if it be a
den of robbers or thieves? If the roads are beset by robbers, and if
snares are laid, there may be some way of avoiding them; but there is no
possibility of guarding against the frauds committed in courts of
justice. These circumstances, therefore, ought to be carefully remarked.

<span id="xxi.i-p104"></span><span id="xxi.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p105"></span>**8.** *But the liberal shall devise
liberal things.* We have already said that these statements of the
Prophet have a deeper meaning than is commonly supposed; for he does not
speak in the ordinary sense of the words, but treats of the reformation
of the Church. This relates therefore to the regenerate, over whom
Christ reigns; for, although all are called by the voice of the gospel,
yet there are few who suffer themselves to be placed under his yoke. The
Lord makes them truly kind and bountiful, so that they no longer seek
their own convenience, but are ready to give assistance to the poor, and
not only do this once or oftener, but every day advance more and more in
kindness and generosity.

<span id="xxi.i-p106"></span>*In acting liberally he shall make
progress.* This passage is commonly explained in a different manner,
namely, that the liberal advance themselves, and become great by doing
good; because God rewards them, and bestows on them greater blessings.
This view pleases at first sight; but the Prophet, on the contrary,
shews that the liberal will never cease to perform acts of generosity,
for they will daily make greater progress, and will pursue the same
designs and adhere firmly to their intention, as it is said by the
Psalmist,

<span id="xxi.i-p107"></span>“He hath dispersed, he hath given to the
poor; his righteousness endureth for ever.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p107.1"></span>[Ps
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009.md)<span id="xxi.i-p107.1"></span>;
<span id="xxi.i-p107.2"></span>[2Co
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009)<span id="xxi.i-p107.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p108"></span> This is added, because it is easy to
counterfeit liberality for a time; many even think that they are
sincerely bountiful because they have performed an act of beneficence,
but quickly cease and change their purpose. But true liberality is not
momentary or of short duration. They who possess that virtue persevere
steadily, and do not exhaust themselves in a sudden and feeble flame, of
which they quickly afterwards repent.

<span id="xxi.i-p109"></span>This is what the Prophet intended to
express by the word <span id="xxi.i-p109.1"></span>קום, (*kūm*,) which
signifies to “arise” and “grow.” There are indeed many occurrences which
retard the progress of our liberality. We find in men strange
ingratitude, so that what we give appears to be ill bestowed. Many are
too greedy, and, like horse-leeches, suck the blood of others. But let
us remember this saying, and listen to Paul’s exhortation “not to be
weary in well-doing;” for the Lord exhorts us not to momentary
liberality, but to that which shall endure during the whole course of
our life. (<span id="xxi.i-p109.2"></span>[Ga
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="xxi.i-p109.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p110"></span><span id="xxi.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p111"></span>**9.** *Ye women at ease, arise.* These
words appear not to be connected with what goes before; for formerly he
spoke about restoring the Church, but now he threatens that the judgment
of God is ready to strike a people carelessly reposing amidst riches and
pleasures; and therefore it is probable that here Isaiah begins a new
and distinct subject. Yet there will be no absurdity in connecting this
with the former prediction, for the Prophets commonly observe this
order. After having promised the grace of God to believers, they next
direct their discourse to hypocrites, to declare that the mercy which
the Lord promises to believers will be of no avail to hypocrites, and
that notwithstanding they shall be punished for their sins.

<span id="xxi.i-p112"></span>As to *women* being chiefly addressed, the
Hebrew commentators, agreeably to the frequent usage of their language,
suppose “cities”  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) to be meant;
but I think that the language here is not figurative, and I rather
adhere to the simple meaning of the words. He addresses “women” rather
than men, in order to shew the extent of that calamity; for in ordinary
circumstances women and children are spared, because they are unfit for
war, and have no power to defend themselves. He says that the
destruction will be so cruel that none shall be spared.

<span id="xxi.i-p114"></span>He expressly addresses them also as “women
*at ease*,” who are usually more delicate than others, and, enjoying the
advantages of wealth, have some means of providing for their safety and
of rescuing themselves from calamities, even when persons of ordinary
rank are suffering grievous hardships. But to them especially Isaiah
makes the intimation, that they must “arise” and “tremble;” and he
contrasts this trembling with the ease and luxury which they peacefully
enjoyed. He bids them *arise*, that they may know that this is not the
time for repose, and that the Lord will arouse them from their ease and
indifference.

<span id="xxi.i-p115"></span>*Hear my voice, ye careless daughters.*
 <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) In the same manner as before,
the word daughters is interpreted by the rabbins to mean “villages” or
“smaller cities;” but I think, as I have already said, that it ought to
be taken in its literal meaning. He shews them whence shall arise this
terror, whence shall arise that violence which shall compel them to
“arise” and “tremble.” It is from the judgment of God. But he mentions
“a voice,” that they may know that this prophecy shall not fail of its
accomplishment; because he proclaims war against them by the command of
God. “How efficacious this speech shall be, and what power it shall have
to arouse you, one day you shall actually feel.” So frequently does he
reproach them for indolence, carelessness, and luxury, not only because
it is harder for those who live at ease to be harshly aroused, but
because the corruption and depravity of human nature make it scarcely
possible for the world to enjoy ease and prosperity without becoming
indolent. Next, falling gradually into slothfulness, it will deceive
itself by a false imagination, and drive far away from it all fear, and,
relying on this confidence, will insolently rise up against God.

<span id="xxi.i-p117"></span><span id="xxi.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p118"></span>**10.** *Days above a year.*  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) By these words he declares that the
calamity will be of long duration; for it is no slight consolation in
adversity, when the distresses which must otherwise have been endured by
us with grief and sorrow pass quickly away. But when no end and no
mitigation of sorrows, no comfort or hope of deliverance is held out to
us, what can be left but despair? He therefore threatens not only that
they shall endure them for one year, but that afterwards they must look
for new afflictions.

<span id="xxi.i-p120"></span>*You shall tremble.* By this word he
indirectly stings their slothfulness, by declaring that they who grudged
to listen to calm instruction shall be dragged forth with trembling and
alarm. As the Jews were excessively anxious about earthly blessings and
perishing food, he addresses their senses by threatening a scarcity of
wine and wheat. If they had been more thoroughly purified from
grovelling desires, he would rather have threatened what Jeremiah
deplores in his Lamentations, that

<span id="xxi.i-p121"></span>“the sacrifices and festivals had ceased,
and that the holy assemblies were discontinued.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p121.1"></span>[La 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p121.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p122"></span>But, because they were sunk in their
pleasures, and had not made such proficiency as to know the value of
spiritual blessings, the Prophet accommodates himself to their
ignorance, and addresses their bellies rather than their understandings.
He speaks of the desolation of the fields, which would be the necessary
consequence of that calamity; for abundance and plenty commonly give
rise to ease and indifference. “The Lord will therefore,” says he,
“deprive you of all food, and shake off your slothfulness, and take away
all ground of confidence.” Accordingly, we are here reminded that we
ought not to sleep in the midst of prosperity, nor imagine that we are
safe, as if we could expect uninterrupted prosperity in the world. But
we ought to use with moderation the gifts of God, if we do not wish to
be suddenly aroused, and to be overwhelmed when we are off our guard,
and to feel the heavier distress because we did not look for a change of
our affairs.

<span id="xxi.i-p123"></span><span id="xxi.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p124"></span>**11.** *Tremble.* This repetition is not
unnecessary, but states more fully what he formerly said; for when men
are asleep, they are not easily aroused by the voice of the prophets,
and therefore it is needful to cry aloud and reprove them continually.
And thus, by adding one threatening to another, or by repeating the same
threatenings, he shews how great is the stupidity of men, when they have
once been blinded by prosperity; for they can scarcely endure any longer
to hear the warnings which God addresses to them. Men are undoubtedly
more in danger from prosperity than from adversity; for when matters go
smoothly with them, they flatter themselves, and are intoxicated by
their success; and therefore it was necessary to deal more sharply with
the Jews, in order to shake off that slothfulness. This exhortation of
the Prophet ought to be explained in the future tense; as if he had
said, “You shall at length tremble, for the rest which you now enjoy
will not be perpetual.”

<span id="xxi.i-p125"></span>By bidding them *make themselves bare, and
gird sackcloth on their loins,* he describes the manner and dress of
mourners. Whenever they were visited by deep adversity, they put on
sackcloth, made bare the other parts of their body, and by dress, and
attitude, and every method, manifested their grief. He desires women to
put on sackcloth and other expressions of mourning, instead of the
luxuries and pleasures in which they eagerly indulged.

<span id="xxi.i-p126"></span><span id="xxi.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p127"></span>**12.** *Mourning over the breasts.* This
verse is explained in various ways. Some understand it to mean simply,
that there will be so great a scarcity of provisions, that women will
lose their milk, and thus the children will “mourn over dry breasts;”
which we see sometimes happen, when a very great scarcity of provisions
occasions leanness. But the more generally received and more appropriate
interpretation is, to view the word “breasts” as figuratively denoting
fields and vineyards, as the Prophet himself declares; for they are
justly compared to the breasts of mothers, because, by deriving
nourishment from them, we suck the milk or blood of the earth. He
therefore means that there will be a want of food and nourishment,
because the Lord will curse the earth, so that it shall yield no fruits.
Thus shall men sigh over that scarcity, as if over their mother’s
“breasts,” from which they formerly received delicious nourishment. This
appears to me to be a more natural meaning, and to agree best with the
context; for it serves to explain what afterwards follows, about “rich
fields and the fruitful vine.”  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p129"></span><span id="xxi.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p130"></span>**13.** *There shall grow up the brier and
the thorn.* He confirms the former verse, and explains the cause of
barrenness and famine, which is, that the fields, which formerly used to
be fat and fertile, will be uncultivated, desolate, and barren. This was
a frightful change of affairs; for we know that that country yielded
corn and fruits more plentifully than other countries, not so much by
nature as by the blessing of God; for he had said, “I will give you a
land flowing with milk and honey.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p130.1"></span>[Exod. 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008.md),
[Exod. 17:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#000.md), [Exod.
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005.md), [Exod.
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003)<span id="xxi.i-p130.1"></span>..md)
This was the cause of the abundance and fertility.

<span id="xxi.i-p131"></span>*On the land of my people*. By giving it
this name, he meets an objection which they might otherwise have
brought, that there was no reason to fear that the land which God had
chosen would not produce fruits every year; because, although the
kindness of God extends to all mankind, yet he was in a peculiar manner
the Father and supporter of that nation. It was therefore incredible
that this land, which had been set apart for the children of God, would
be covered with “briers and thorns;” and thus the Prophet reproves the
Jews more sharply, because they not only made void the blessing of God
by their wickedness, but drew down his wrath, so as to spoil and deface
the beauty of the land.

<span id="xxi.i-p132"></span>*Even on all the houses of joy.* The
particle <span id="xxi.i-p132.1"></span>כי (*ki*) signifies *even*,
though some think that it means “for” or “because,” “Because there is
joy in their houses.”  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) But that
interpretation cannot be admitted, because <span
id="xxi.i-p133.1"></span>בתי (*bāttē*,) “houses of,” is in the construct
state. This appears to me therefore to be an enlargement of what he had
now said, and to mean that this desolation will be, not only in the
utmost corners of the land, but “*even* in the houses of joy,” that is,
in the splendid and magnificent houses, which formerly were the abodes
of the most refined luxury. When the Prophet said this, he was
undoubtedly ridiculed by the men of that age; men certainly did not
listen to him amidst those luxuries by which they were blinded. Besides,
they grew insolent on account of the promises of God, and thought that
they would never be in want of anything. Yet all that Isaiah foretold
came to pass. From this example let us learn to be moderate in our use
of prosperity, and to depend on the blessing of God, so as to obey his
word with a good conscience.

<span id="xxi.i-p134"></span><span id="xxi.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p135"></span>**14.** *For the palace shall be forsaken.*
Here also he describes more fully the desolation of the country; for,
having mentioned in the former verse magnificent houses, he now likewise
adds palaces and cities, so as to shew that there is nothing, however
splendid and illustrious, that is exempted from that calamity. We see
that men are dazzled by their own splendor, till they lift up their eyes
to heaven; and the consequence is, that they are soothed to sleep in the
midst of their wealth, and dread nothing. He therefore declares that all
that was splendid, magnificent, and lofty, in Judea, cities, palaces,
bulwarks, fortresses, all will be brought to nothing. When he says *for
ever*, he again gives warning, as he formerly did, that this calamity
will not last only for a single day, but that, as they had been long
hardened in their vices, so it will be of long duration; for, if they
had been punished only for a short time, being obstinate and
intractable, they would quickly have relapsed into their natural
disposition.

<span id="xxi.i-p136"></span><span id="xxi.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p137"></span>**15.** *Till the Spirit be poured out upon
you.* Because the Prophet speaks of the Jews among whom God had
determined to plant his Church, it was therefore necessary to leave to
them some hope of salvation, that they might not faint amidst so great
afflictions; for, while the Lord is severe towards wicked men who
falsely shelter themselves under his name, yet in some manner he
preserves his Church. The Prophet therefore adds this promise, that they
might know that, whatever be the severity with which he punishes his
people, still he is always mindful of his covenant; for he never
threatens in such a manner as not to leave some ground for consolation,
so as to cheer and comfort the hearts of believers, even when their
affairs are utterly desperate. Besides, in order that they may fully
enjoy the comfort which is offered to them, he raises their eyes to the
very Author of life; and indeed we see that, when a favorable change
takes place, the greater part of men fill themselves to excess with
bread and wine, and, when they are pressed by famine, they neglect God
and solicit the earth.

<span id="xxi.i-p138"></span>With good reason, therefore, does Isaiah
say that “the Spirit” will come *from on high* to refresh and fertilize
the earth; and he alludes, I have no doubt, to that saying of David,

<span id="xxi.i-p139"></span>“Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be
created, and thou wilt renew the face of the earth.”  
(<span id="xxi.i-p139.2"></span>[Ps
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p139.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p140"></span>Holding out this as an evidence that God is
reconciled, he at the same time declares that the restoration of the
Church proceeds solely from the grace of God, who can remove its
barrenness as soon as he has imparted strength from heaven; for he who
created all things out of nothing, as if they had formerly existed, is
able to renew it in a moment.

<span id="xxi.i-p141"></span>*And the wilderness become a Carmel.*
 <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) In explaining this comparison
of “the wilderness” to “Carmel,” commentators are sadly at a loss; but,
as I remarked on a former passage, (<span id="xxi.i-p142.2"></span>[Isa
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017)<span id="xxi.i-p142.2"></span>,.md)
where a similar phrase occurred,  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) the Prophet merely, in my opinion,
points out the happy effect of that restoration, namely, that the
abundance and plenty of all things will prove that God is actually
reconciled to his people. He says that places which formerly were
“wildernesses” shall be like “Carmel,” which was a rich and fertile
spot, and on that account receives its name; and that “Carmel” shall be
like “a wilderness,” that is, it shall be so fertile, that if we compare
what it now is with what it shall afterwards be, it may seem like “a
wilderness.” It is an enlarged representation of that unwonted
fertility. “Fields now barren and uncultivated shall be fertile, and
cultivated and fertile fields shall yield such abundant fruit that their
present fertility is poverty and barrenness, in comparison of the large
produce which they shall afterwards yield;” just as if we should compare
the fields of Savoy with those of Sicily and Calabria, and pronounce
them to be a “wilderness.” In a word, he describes unparalleled
fertility, which believers shall enjoy, when they have been reconciled
to God, in order that they may know his favor by his acts of kindness.

<span id="xxi.i-p144"></span>While Isaiah thus prophesies concerning the
reign of Hezekiah, all this is declared by him to relate to the kingdom
of Christ as its end and accomplishment; and therefore, when we come to
Christ, we must explain all this spiritually, so as to understand that
we are renewed as soon as the Lord has sent down the Spirit from heaven,
that we who were “wildernesses” may become cultivated and fertile
fields. Ere the Spirit of God has breathed into us, we are justly
compared to wildernesses or a dry soil; for we produce nothing but
“thorns and briers,” and are by nature unfit for yielding fruits.
Accordingly, they who were barren and unfruitful, when they have been
renewed by the Spirit of God, begin to yield plentiful fruits; and they
whose natural dispositions had some appearance of goodness, being
renewed by the same Spirit, will afterwards be so fruitful, that they
will appear as if they had formerly been a “wilderness;” for all that
men possess is but a wild forest, till they have been renewed by Christ.
Whenever, therefore, the Church is afflicted, and when her condition
appears to be desperate, let us raise our eyes to heaven, and depend
fully on these promises.

<span id="xxi.i-p145"></span><span id="xxi.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p146"></span>**16.** *And judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness.* The Prophet shews what is the actual condition of the
Church, that is, when justice and judgment prevail; for men ought not to
be like cattle, which seek nothing but plenty of food and abundance of
outward things. And hence it is plain enough that the Jews were not
confined to transitory enjoyments, so as to have their hope fixed
exclusively on earthly blessings, as some fanatics imagine. They were
enjoined to attend to that which was of the greatest importance, that
justice and judgment should prevail; and undoubtedly they knew that true
happiness consists in it. It is therefore our duty to look chiefly to
this, that we should not, like hogs in a sty, judge of the happiness of
life by abundance of bread and wine; for this is the end of all the
blessings which the Lord bestows upon us, this is the object of our
deliverance, “that we should serve him,” as Zacharias says, “in holiness
and righteousness.” (<span id="xxi.i-p146.1"></span>[Luke
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074.md),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="xxi.i-p146.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p147"></span>Under the terms “justice” and “judgment,”
as we have already seen, he includes all that belongs to uprightness;
for although these two words relate strictly to that equity which ought
to be mutually cultivated among us, yet, since it is customary to
describe the observation of the whole law by the duties of the second
table, here the Prophet, by a figure of speech in which a part is taken
for the whole, embraces also piety and the worship of God. The Prophets
are accustomed to notice the chief duties of brotherly kindness, and
those which belong to the second table, because by these, more than by
any others, we manifest the real state of our feelings towards God.

<span id="xxi.i-p148"></span>When he declares that justice and judgment
have their abode in the wilderness, as well as in the cultivated fields,
this shews more clearly that the abundance of blessings promised a
little before was so great that, when men saw it, they would consider
that those fields which they formerly looked upon as very excellent had
been comparatively barren.

<span id="xxi.i-p149"></span><span id="xxi.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p150"></span>**17.** *And the work of righteousness
shall be peace.* A little before, he censured severely that peace which
made the Jews drowsy and slothful; he now promises a different kind of
repose, which will be a striking proof of the love of God, who has
received them into favor, and will faithfully guard them. We ought
therefore to observe the implied contrast between that brutal repose
which the reprobate think that they obtain by their presumption in
committing every kind of wickedness, and in which they also fall asleep,
and that different kind of repose, on the other hand, which the children
of God obtain by a religious and holy life, and which Isaiah exhorts us
to desire, shewing that we ought fearlessly to believe that a blessed
and joyful peace awaits us when we have been reconciled to God.

<span id="xxi.i-p151"></span>In this way he recommends to them to follow
uprightness, that they may obtain assured peace; for, as Peter declares,
there is no better way of procuring favor, that no man may do us injury,
than to abstain from all evil-doing. (<span
id="xxi.i-p151.1"></span>[1Pe
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)<span id="xxi.i-p151.1"></span>..md)
But the Prophet leads them higher, to aim at a religious and holy life
by the grace of God; for nothing is more unreasonable than that wicked
men should desire to have peace, while they are continually fighting
against God. That wish is indeed common; for hardly one person in a
hundred shall be found who does not loudly extol peace, while at the
same time every man raises up enemies to himself in the earth, and all
in vast crowds disturb heaven and earth by their crimes. Now, the latter
repose, being perpetual, is compared by him to the former, which is
slight and momentary.

<span id="xxi.i-p152"></span>*The effect of righteousness.* When peace
receives this designation, let us learn that, as wars proceed from the
wrath of God, which we provoke by our wickedness, so peace springs from
his blessing. When, therefore, we see enemies enraged to battle, and
rising furiously against us, let us seek no other remedy than
repentance; for the Lord will easily allay commotions when we have
returned to him. He it is, as the Psalmist says, who

<span id="xxi.i-p153"></span>“maketh wars to cease to the ends of the
earth, who breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in pieces, and
burneth the chariots in the fire.” (<span id="xxi.i-p153.1"></span>[Ps
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)<span id="xxi.i-p153.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p154"></span>We have already said that these things do
not relate exclusively to Hezekiah, but must be referred to Christ.

<span id="xxi.i-p155"></span><span id="xxi.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p156"></span>**18.** *And my people shall dwell.* As we
have said that spiritual righteousness is that which has its seat in the
hearts of men, we must say the same thing about peace, which is the
fruit of it. Accordingly, when *quiet habitations* and *resting-places*
are here mentioned, let us remember the saying of Paul, “justified by
faith, we have peace with God.” (<span id="xxi.i-p156.1"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p156.1"></span>..md)
When Christ says that he “leaves” this peace to the disciples, (<span
id="xxi.i-p156.2"></span>[Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="xxi.i-p156.2"></span>,.md)
he affirms that “it cannot be given by the world;” and we ought not to
wonder at this, for, as the same Apostle Paul informs us in another
passage, “this peace surpasses all understanding.” (<span
id="xxi.i-p156.3"></span>[Php 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p156.3"></span>.) Having obtained this righteousness, we are
no longer restless or alarmed within, as when we feel in the gnawings of
conscience the wrath of God. A bad conscience is always alarmed, and
harassed by wretched uneasiness.

<span id="xxi.i-p157"></span>Wicked men must therefore be uneasy, and
distressed by a variety of terrors; for where righteousness is banished
that peace cannot be found; and where Christ reigns, there alone do we
find true peace. Assured peace, therefore, is enjoyed by none but
believers, who appeal to the heavenly tribunal, not only by their piety,
but by their reliance on the mercy of God. Hence we infer that Christ
does not yet reign where consciences are uneasy, and tossed by the
various waves of doubts, as must be the case with Papists and all others
who are not built on the sacrifice of Christ and the atonement obtained
through him.

<span id="xxi.i-p158"></span><span id="xxi.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p159"></span>**19.** *And the hail.* We have already
said that the prophets are accustomed frequently to describe under
figures the reign of Christ; for they borrow their metaphors from an
earthly kingdom, because our ignorance would make it almost impossible
for us to comprehend, in any other way, the unspeakable treasure of
blessings. The meaning is, “The Lord will remove from his people
distresses and annoyances, and will make them fall on others;” because
here we are liable to various storms and tempests, and must endure rain,
hail, showers, winds, and tempests. He says that God, by his wonderful
providence, will prevent all distresses from doing any injury to
believers, because he will drive their violence in another direction.

<span id="xxi.i-p160"></span>By *forests* he means unfrequented and
desert places, where there are no crowds of men. Hence we learn that,
when we are under the guardianship of Christ, we are protected from
inconveniences and dangers, but that, at the same time, various storms
and tempests are ready to burst on our heads. But the Lord is our
deliverer, who turns away in another direction the evils that are
approaching, or rescues us when we are in danger.

<span id="xxi.i-p161"></span>*And the city shall be situated to a low
place.*  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) In order to confirm
what he had said about peace, he says, that “cities,” which shall be
situated on level ground, will be out of danger; for at that time it was
customary to build on high and elevated places, that the access to them
might be more difficult. “Such,” says he, “will be God’s protection of
his people, that they will not need the ordinary fortifications, because
the city may be safely set down in valleys; and even although it be
liable to the attacks of enemies, it will sustain no inconvenience, for
the hand of the Lord will protect it.” We must not therefore seek safety
by relying on our defences, lest we be immediately driven from our nest;
but since our heavenly Father deigns to provide for our safety, let us
be satisfied with having him for our protector and guardian.  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p164"></span><span id="xxi.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p165"></span>**20.** *Blessed are ye.* He shews how
great will be the change, when Christ shall begin to reign; for he had
formerly said that so great would be the desolation, that “thorns and
briers” would overspread the holy land, costly houses would be thrown
down, and cities and palaces would be levelled with the earth. This
would happen, when the incessant attacks of enemies should lay that
country desolate. But now he says that they shall be *blessed*, because
God will give them abundant produce of all fruits. That fertility which
might have been described in simple language, he illustrates by figures,
that they shall “sow in marshes,” and shall “send forth their cattle”
into the fields without dread of losing them.

<span id="xxi.i-p166"></span>By *waters* some understand a rich and
fertile soil; but the universal particle <span
id="xxi.i-p166.1"></span>כל, (*chōl*,) *all*, leads me to take a
different view; as if he had said, “Places which were overrun with
waters shall be fit for sowing, and there will be no reason to fear that
the water shall spoil our fields.” We are accustomed also to drive away
oxen, and asses, and other animals, from fields, and especially from
sown fields, that they may not eat the corn. But here he says that the
corn will grow so thick and plentifully, that it shall be necessary to
send oxen and asses to crop the early blade, as is commonly done when
the corn is luxuriant.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p168"></span>He calls them *blessed*, in accordance with
the usage of the Hebrew language, because their labor will never be
unprofitable. If it be objected that, under the reign of Christ, such
fertility has never been seen, I acknowledge that, even when God has
shewn the highest kindness to his people, still there have always been
visible marks of the curse, which was entailed on mankind by the fall
and revolt of Adam. (<span id="xxi.i-p168.1"></span>[Ge
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)<span id="xxi.i-p168.1"></span>..md)
But since Christ has restored to believers the inheritance of the world,
with good reason do the prophets assert that he would renew the earth,
so as to remove its filthiness and restore that beauty which it had
lost. They who complain that it is not yet fulfilled, ought to consider
whether or not they themselves are purified from every stain of sin. And
if they are still at a great distance from spiritual righteousness, let
them be satisfied with enjoying the blessing of God according to the
measure of regeneration, the full enjoyment of which we must not expect
to obtain, till, freed from the pollution of the flesh, we shall bear
the perfect image of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc14020.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p47"></span> In our Author’s version, from which the
heading of this paragraph is taken, he makes use of the word <span
id="xxi.i-p47.1"></span>*principes*, which commonly means “rulers,” but
sometimes also (as in the phrases, “<span id="xxi.i-p47.2"></span>facile
princeps, femina princeps,”) denotes persons of high rank, or those who
in any respect are highly distinguished. But here he employs the word
<span id="xxi.i-p47.3"></span>*proceres*, “nobles;” and he does so
evidently for the purpose of removing ambiguity, and of stating clearly
that view which is contained in the conclusion of this sentence. — *Ed*.

<span id="xxi.i-p48"></span> FT585 The singular mildness of the Roman
Emperor Nerva, which made him personally beloved, was carried to such an
excess as to impair the efficiency of his government, and compelled him
to resign the throne to the able and excellent Trajan. On the other
hand, Nero, whose name cannot be mentioned without awakening the
remberance of his monstrous cruelty, held the reins with a firmer hand,
and prevented the repetition of many disorders which had been committed
under the reign of his amiable predecessor Nerva. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p49"></span> FT586 “<span id="xxi.i-p49.1"></span>Duquel
il soit le chef.”

<span id="xxi.i-p50"></span> FT587 “The heart also of the rash. (Heb.
hasty.)” — Eng.Ver. “The heart also of the hasty.” — *Stock*

<span id="xxi.i-p51"></span> FT588 This observation is founded on the
Hebrew word <span id="xxi.i-p51.1"></span>נמהרים, (*nimharim*,) which
our Author translates Fools, and which literally means Hasty. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p52"></span> FT589 The allusion would be better brought
out by rendering it, “The fool will speak folly.” — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p53"></span> FT590 <span
id="xxi.i-p53.1"></span>Συμπάθεια, a more extensive term than the
English word “sympathy,” literally denotes “fellow-feeling,” and is
frequently employed by our Author to express that kind of feeling which
every man ought to cherish towards his fellow-men. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p54"></span> FT591 “<span
id="xxi.i-p54.1"></span>Quelque trahison;” — “Some treachery.”

<span id="xxi.i-p55"></span> FT592 “Even when the needy speaketh right;”
or, “when he speaketh against the poor in judgment.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p56"></span> FT593 “Ye provinces that dwell at ease.” —
*Jarchi*

<span id="xxi.i-p57"></span> FT594 “Ye cities that dwell carelessly.” —
*Jarchi*. In this, as well as in the former case, he refers to
Jonathan’s Targum. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p58"></span> FT595 “Many days and years; (Heb. days
above a year.)” — Eng. Ver. “In a year and more.” — *Alexander*.
“Shortly after a year; Heb. days upon a year: that is, the time will
soon come after the expiration of one year, when ye shall be troubled
with a dearth.” — *Stock*

<span id="xxi.i-p59"></span> FT596 “It may be better translated,
striking your breasts, because of the pleasant fields and fruitful
vines, which should be destroyed by the Assyrians. It was a common
gesture used on all mournful occasions, to strike the breasts; though
others think teats may be taken metaphorically for the pleasant fields
and fruitful vine by which they subsisted, as infants by the mother’s
paps.” — *Samuel White*

<span id="xxi.i-p60"></span> FT597 “For all that desolation shall be on
all joyful houses.” — *Jarchi*

<span id="xxi.i-p61"></span> FT598 “And the wilderness become a fruitful
field.” Such is the Author’s own translation of the clause, which
corresponds to our authorized version. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p62"></span> FT599 See our Author’s Commentary on that
passage. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p63"></span> FT600 “And the city shall be low in a low
place;” or, “And the city shall be utterly abased.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p64"></span> FT601 “Some by the Forest understand
Nineveh, some Babylon, some Jerusalem, and some the Assyrian army; but
Gataker, and Vatablus before him, think the words may be rendered, he
shall hail with hail on the forest, and cities shall be built in low
places; as if he had said, God shall preserve the fruits of the earth
from the injuries of unseasonable weather, and, when he sends a storm of
hail, cause it to fall on the woods and deserts; and he shall give them
so great security, that for the future they shall build their cities in
low grounds, to shew that they are under no apprehension of being
overrun any more by an enemy.” — *White*

<span id="xxi.i-p65"></span> FT602 “Happy ye who shall enjoy as great
fertility as if all your lands lay on the side of a running stream. Your
corn shall grow so thick and fast that ye shall be forced to let your
cattle crop the luxuriant ears; a practice still in use among our
husbandmen.” — *White*

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc14020.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p66"></span>

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc14020.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p77"></span>

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc14020.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p80"></span>

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc14020.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p81"></span>

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc14020.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p86.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p87"></span>

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc14020.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p97"></span>

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc14020.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p101"></span>

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc14020.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p103"></span>

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc14020.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p113"></span>

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc14020.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p116"></span>

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc14020.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p119"></span>

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc14020.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p128"></span>

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc14020.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p132.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p133"></span>

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc14020.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p142"></span>

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc14020.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p142.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p143"></span>

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc14020.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p162"></span>

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc14020.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p163"></span>

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc14020.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p166.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p167"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Isaiah](cc14021.md)
