[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc14005)  [Next](cc14007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 18:1-7

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Woe to the land shadowing with wings,
which *is* beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Heus terra inumbrans alis, quæ est
trans flumina Æthiopiæ.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2**. That sendeth ambassadors by the sea,
even in vessels of bulrushes upon the water, *saying*, Go, ye swift
messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from
their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose
land the rivers have spoiled!

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Mittens per mare legatos, in vasis
junceis super aquas. Ite nuntii celeres ad gentem distractam et
expilatam, ad populum formidabilem ab eo et deinceps, gentem undique
conculcatam, cujus terram flumina diripuerunt.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**3**. All ye inhabitants of the world, and
dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the
mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Omnes habitatores orbis, et incolæ
terræ, cum signum sustulerit in montibus, videbitis; cum tuba clanxerit,
audietis.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**4**. For so the Lord said unto me, I will
take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling-place like a clear heat
upon herbs, *and* like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Porro sic mihi dixit Iehova, Quiescam,
et videbo in tabernaculo meo, sicut calor siccans pluviam, et sicut
nubes roscida in calore messis.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**5**. For afore the harvest, when the bud
is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both
cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks, and take away *and* cut down the
branches.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quia dum adfuerit messis, perfectum
erit germen, et ex flore fructus erit maturescens; tum amputabit ipsos
palmites falcibus, et propagines auferendo exscindet.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**6**. They shall be left together unto the
fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls
shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter
upon them.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Derelinquentur pariter volatili
montium et animalibus terræ. Æstivabit super illud volatile, et omnia
animalia terræ hyemabunt.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**7**. In that time shall the present be
brought unto the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and
from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out
and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place
of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>**7**. Tempore illo adducetur Iehovæ
exercituum munus, populus laceratus et expilatus, et de populo
terribili, ex quo esse coepit et deinceps; gente undique conculcata,
cujus terram flumina diripuerunt, ad locum nominis Iehovæ exercituum, ad
montem Sion.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**1.** *Woe to the land.* I cannot determine
with certainty what is the nation of which Isaiah speaks, though he
shews plainly that it bordered on *Ethiopia.* Some consider it to refer
to the whole of Egypt; but this is a mistake, for in the next chapter he
treats of Egypt separately, from which it is evident that the people
here meant were distinct from the Egyptians. Some think that the
Troglodytes are here meant, which does not appear to me to be probable,
for they had no intercourse with other nations, because their language,
as geographers tell us, was hissing and not speech;  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) but those who are mentioned evidently had
intercourse and leagues with other nations.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>Still it is uncertain whether they leagued
against the Jews or joined with the Egyptians in driving out the
Assyrians. If they were avowed enemies to the Jews, Isaiah threatens
punishment; but if they deceived them by false promises, he shews that
nothing is to be expected from them, because by idle messages they will
only protract the time. However that may be, from the neighboring
nations to be mentioned in the next chapter, we may in part ascertain
where they were situated, that is, not far from Egypt and Ethiopia: yet
some may be disposed to view it as a description of that part of
Ethiopia which lay on the sea-coast; for we shall afterwards see that
the Assyrians were at war with the king of the Ethiopians. (<span
id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>[Isa 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>When he says that that *land shadows with
wings,* we learn from it that its sea was well supplied with harbours,
so that it had many vessels sailing to it and was wealthy; for small and
poor states could not maintain intercourse or traffic with foreign
countries. He therefore means that they performed many voyages.

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span><span id="vii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>**2.** *Sending ambassadors by the sea.*
This relates strictly to the state of those times. It would appear that
this nation solicited the Egyptians or Syrians to harass the Jews, or
that the Assyrians employed them for the purpose of harassing the Jews,
or that they had formed an alliance with the Egyptians, in order that,
by their united force, they might prevent the power of the Assyrians
from increasing beyond bounds; for nothing more than conjectures can be
offered, because we have no histories that give any account of it, and
where historical evidence is wanting, we must resort to probable
conjectures. These voyages, there is reason to believe, were not made to
any place near at hand, but to a distant country.

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>*In ships of reeds.*  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) We ought not to think it strange that he
calls them *ships of reeds,* for it is evident from the ancient
histories that these were commonly used by the Egyptians, because the
channel of the Nile is in some places very steep and dangerous to
navigators on account of the cataracts, which the Greeks call <span
id="vii.i-p38.1"></span>Κατάδουπα, so that ships of wood cannot be used
at those places without being broken and dashed to pieces on the rocks;
and therefore it is necessary to employ ships of pliant materials. That
the ships might not admit water and thus be sunk, historians tell us
that they were daubed within with pitch.

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>*Go, ye swift messengers.* This passage is
obscure, but I shall follow what I consider to be probable. The Prophet
shews the design of his prediction, or the reason why he foretold the
destruction of that nation. If we believe them to have been the avowed
enemies of the Jews, the design was to afford some consolation to
believers who were wretchedly broken up and scattered, that having
received this message they might rejoice and give thanks to God. But if
we rather think that the Jews were led by this nation into an unlawful
league, we must then consider that this exhortation is ironical, and
that the Prophet intended to reprove the folly of the chosen people, in
forsaking God and relying on useless aid. Some think that these words
were spoken by God, as if he commanded those nations who inhabited the
sea-coast to destroy the Jews; but I am not at all of that opinion.

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>*To a nation scattered and plundered.*
 <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) I do not agree with those who
think that these words describe the destruction of that unknown and
obscure nation; for by “a plundered nation” he means the Jews who were
to be grievously harassed and scattered, so that no part of them escaped
injury.

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>*To a people terrible from their beginning
hitherto.* He calls it *terrible,* because so great calamities would
disfigure it in such a manner that all who beheld it would be struck
with terror. I cannot approve of the exposition given by some, that this
relates to the signs and miracles which the Lord performed amongst them,
so as to render them an object of dread to all men; for the allusion is
rather to that passage in the writings of Moses, “The Lord will make
thee an astonishment and a terror.” <span id="vii.i-p42.2"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.i-p42.2"></span> In
like manner it is said elsewhere, “for the shaking of the head and
mockery.” (<span id="vii.i-p42.3"></span>[Jer.
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016.md), [Jer.
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#008.md), [Jer.
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018)<span id="vii.i-p42.3"></span>..md) He
therefore means that they are a nation so dreadful to behold as to fill
all men with astonishment, and we know that this was foretold and that
it also happened to the Jews.

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span>*A nation trodden down on every side.*
 <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) <span id="vii.i-p44.1"></span>קו
קו, (*kav-kav,*) that is, *on every side,* as if one drew lines and
joined them so closely that no space was left between them, or as if one
drew furrows in a field so as to break every clod; for in this manner
was the nation thrown down and trampled under foot.  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span>*Whose land the rivers have spoiled.* By
*the rivers* he means the vast army of the enemies, that is, of the
Assyrians. He alludes to what he had formerly said, that the nation, not
satisfied with its own little stream, longed for rapid and boisterous
rivers. (<span id="vii.i-p46.1"></span>[Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)<span id="vii.i-p46.1"></span>..md)
After having applied to them for assistance, they were overwhelmed by
them as by a deluge; and the reason of the whole evil was this, that
they were not satisfied with the promises of God, and sought assistance
in another quarter. Now, if this command is understood to be given to
the *swift* *messengers* in the name of God, we infer from it that he
does not immediately assist his own people, but delays his aid till they
are brought to a state of despair. He does not send to them a cheerful
and prosperous message while they are still uninjured, or when they have
received a light stroke, but he sends a message to a nation altogether
trodden down and trampled under foot. Yet when he commands them to make
haste, he means that the judgment will be sudden and unexpected, so that
light will suddenly burst forth amidst the darkness.

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span><span id="vii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span>**3.** *All ye inhabitants of the world.* He
shews that this work of God will be so manifestly excellent as to draw
the attention not only of the Jews but of all nations.

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span>*When he shall lift up an ensign on the
mountains, you will see it.*  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) These
words, which are in the future tense, are rendered by some, agreeably to
the custom of Scripture, in the imperative mood;  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) but it is better to view them as denoting
what is future. It is as if he had said that the most distant nations
will be witnesses of this destruction, because not only will the
*ensign* be beheld by all, but the sound of the trumpets will be heard
throughout the whole world. This will plainly shew that the war did not
originate with men, but with God himself, who will prove himself to be
the author of it by remarkable tokens. When wars are carried on, every
one sees clearly what is done; but the greater part of men ascribe the
beginning and end of them to chance. On the other hand, Isaiah shews
that all these things ought to be ascribed to God, because he will
display his power in a new and extraordinary manner; for sometimes he
works so as to conceal his hand and to prevent his work from being
perceived by men, but sometimes he displays his hand in such a manner
that all are constrained to acknowledge it; and that is what the Prophet
meant.

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span><span id="vii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>**4.** *But thus said Jehovah unto me.*
After having threatened a slaughter of the Ethiopians or their
neighbors, and at the same time shewn that comfort will arise from it to
the Jews, or ironically reproved the foolish confidence with which the
Jews had been deceived, he now adds that God will regulate these
confused changes in such a manner as to gather to him at length his
chosen people. The particle <span id="vii.i-p53.1"></span>כי, (*ki*,)
which I have translated *but*, sometimes means *for* and sometimes
*but*. The latter meaning appears to be more appropriate in this
passage, for the Prophet replies to a doubt which otherwise might
grievously perplex weak minds; because when confusion arises, there may
be said to be a veil which conceals from us the providence of God. Such
also was the state of that nation whose destruction he foretells, that
this prediction might be reckoned fabulous and worthy of ridicule; for,
as we may gather from it, there was no danger or change to be dreaded.

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>*I will rest.* Some consider this as
referring to the person of Isaiah, as if, relying on what God had
revealed, he *rested,* that is, was in a state of composure, as we ought
to be when we have heard the word of God, and fully expect what has been
foretold. In like manner Habakkuk also says, *On my watch-tower will I
stand*. (<span id="vii.i-p54.1"></span>[Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p54.1"></span>..md)
But unquestionably he relates what the Lord had foretold to him, and the
Lord himself, by the mouth of the Prophet, makes this declaration, *I*
*will rest,* that is, I will remain unemployed.

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span>*And I will look in my tabernacle.*  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) The phrase, *I will look,* has the same
import with the former; for a spectator takes no part in doing, but
rests satisfied with *looking*. Such is likewise the force of the term
*tabernacle*, as if the Lord betook himself to rest under a roof; while,
on the contrary, he says that he ascends the judgment-seat, when he
avenges the transgressions of the wicked; for these modes of expression
are adapted to our capacity. But perhaps it may be thought more probable
that the Prophet alludes to the sanctuary; because, although the majesty
of God will remain concealed for a time among an afflicted people, yet
his rest will not be without effect. It amounts to this, that though
everything be turned upside down, so as to awaken a suspicion that God
takes no further concern in the government of the world, yet he *rests*
for an express purpose, as if he shut himself up unemployed in a
chamber, and the effect of this rest will in due time appear.

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span>*As the heat that drieth up the rain.*
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) By this beautiful metaphor the
Prophet expresses more fully what he had formerly said. Yet there are
two ways in which it may be shewn to agree with the Prophet’s meaning;
either that God, aroused, as it were, from his rest, will shew a smiling
countenance to gladden believers, or will water them by a refreshing
shower; and in this way the Prophet would describe their varied success.
Or there is an implied contrast, by which he reminds us that, while God
appears to remain unemployed and to look at what is going on, still he
can execute his judgments as if it were in sport. And yet, as the two
following verses are closely connected with this verse, Isaiah appears
to mean, that though God does not act in a bustling manner like men, or
proceed with undue eagerness and haste, still he has in his power
concealed methods of executing his judgments without moving a finger.
Perhaps also he intended to shew, that in destroying this nation, God
will act in an extraordinary manner. But we ought to be satisfied with
what I lately suggested, that when men carelessly resign themselves to
sleep in the midst of prosperity, and, intoxicated by their pleasures,
imagine that they have nothing to do with God, “sudden destruction is at
hand,” because God, by a look, frustrates all the designs or
preparations of the world. (<span id="vii.i-p58.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p58.1"></span>..md) He
therefore declares that he will be like a clear and calm sky,  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) and *like the heat that drieth up the
rain.*

<span id="vii.i-p60"></span>*And as a cloud of dew in the heat of
harvest.*  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) Now we know that this
rain is exceedingly adapted to ripen the fruits, and likewise that the
heat which follows the rain penetrates the fruits with its force, and
drives the moisture more inward, by which it hastens their maturity and
renders them more productive. Now the Prophet meant, that though
calamities and distresses await the reprobate, still everything proceeds
so much to their wish, that they appear to be supremely happy, as if the
Lord intended to load them with every kind of blessings; but that they
are fattened like oxen destined for slaughter, for when they appear to
have reached the highest happiness, they suddenly perish.

<span id="vii.i-p62"></span>Hence it follows, that we ought not to form
an estimate of the judgments of God according to outward appearances;
for when men imagine themselves to be exceedingly safe, they are not far
from destruction and from utter ruin. Thus he speedily comforts
believers, that they may not suppose that it fares better with the
reprobate so long as God forbears to strike; for though he appears to
cherish in his bosom those whom he sustains, he will quickly reduce them
to nothing. These statements ought to be applied to those wretched and
disastrous times when the tyrants who oppress the Church are the only
persons that are prosperous, and abound in all kinds of wealth, and
contrive in such a manner as if everything were in their power, because
they surpass other men in power, and skill, and cunning. But let us know
that all these things are done by the appointment of God, who promotes
their endeavors and renders them successful, that he may at length slay
and destroy them in a moment. I am aware that a widely different meaning
is given by some to these words of the Prophet; but any one who takes a
judicious view of the whole passage will have little difficulty, I
trust, in assenting to my interpretation.

<span id="vii.i-p63"></span><span id="vii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p64"></span>**5.** *For when the harvest shall be at
hand.* Literally it is, “in presence of the harvest;” but we must soften
the harshness of the expressions; and it cannot be doubted that the
meaning of the Prophet is, that when the harvest is close at hand, and
when the grapes are nearly ripe, the whole produce, in the expectation
of which wicked men had rejoiced, will suddenly be snatched from them.
The Prophet continues the same subject, and confirms by these metaphors
what he had formerly uttered, that the wicked are not immediately cut
off, but flourish for a time, and the Lord spares them; but that when
the harvest shall be at hand, when the vines shall put forth their buds
and blossoms, so that the *sour grapes* make their appearance, the
branches themselves shall be cut down. Thus when the wicked shall be
nearly ripe, not only will they be deprived of their fruit, but they and
their offspring shall be rooted out. Such is the end which the Lord will
make to the wicked, after having permitted them for a time to enjoy
prosperity; for they shall be rooted out, so that they cannot revive or
spring up again in any way.

<span id="vii.i-p65"></span>Hence we obtain this great consolation, that
when God conceals himself, he tries our faith, and does not suffer
everything to be carried along by the blind violence of fortune, as
heathens imagine; for God is in heaven, as in his tabernacle, dwelling
in his Church as in a mean habitation; but at the proper season he will
come forth. Let us thus enter into our consciences, and ponder
everything, that we may sustain our minds by such a promise as this,
which alone will enable us to overcome and subdue temptations. Let us
also consider that the Lord declares that he advances and promotes the
happiness of wicked men, which tends to exhibit and to display more
illustriously the mercy of God. If he instantly cut down and took them
away like a sprouting blade of corn, his power would not be so manifest,
nor would his goodness be so fully ascertained as when he permits them
to grow to a vast height, to swell and blossom, that they may afterwards
fall by their own weight, or, like large and fat ears of corn, cuts them
down with pruning-knives.

<span id="vii.i-p66"></span><span id="vii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p67"></span>**6.** *They shall be left together.*  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) He means that they will be cast aside as
a thing of no value, as John the Baptist also compares them to chaff,
which is thrown on the dunghill. (<span id="vii.i-p68.1"></span>[Mt
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.i-p68.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p68.2"></span>[Lu
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#017)<span id="vii.i-p68.2"></span>..md)
Thus Isaiah shews that they will be exposed to the wild beasts and to
the fowls, so that the fowls will nestle in them in summer, and the wild
beasts will make their lairs in them in winter; as if he had said, that
not only men, but the wild beasts themselves will disdain them. Such
therefore is the end of wicked men, who, situated in a lofty place, and
thinking that they are beyond all danger, despise every one but
themselves. The fowls and the beasts of prey will make use of them for
nests and for food. They will be thrown down, I say, not only beneath
all men, but even beneath the beasts themselves, and, being exposed to
every kind of insult and dishonor, they will be a proof of the wonderful
providence of God.  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md)

<span id="vii.i-p70"></span><span id="vii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p71"></span>**7.** *In that time.* The Prophet again
shews why he threatened the destruction of a heathen nation; for when
almost all the nations had leagued together against the Church, it
appeared as if the Church were utterly ruined, and therefore Jehovah
declares that in due time he will render assistance. Had he not opposed
such designs, and seasonably restrained the attacks of enemies, the Jews
would have despaired; and on this account he shews that he takes care of
the Church, and that though he determines to chastise it, still he comes
forward at the proper season to hinder it from perishing, and displays
his power in opposition to tyrants and other enemies, that they may not
overthrow it or succeed in accomplishing what they imagined to be in
their power. In order therefore to excite them to patience, he not only
distinguishes them from the Ethiopians, but likewise reminds them that
God mitigates his judgments for their preservation.

<span id="vii.i-p72"></span>*A present shall be brought.* He alludes to
the second verse of this chapter, \[<span id="vii.i-p72.1"></span>[Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.i-p72.1"></span>,\]
in which we have seen the same names and descriptions applied to the
Jewish nation, and he employs the word *brought* because they would
first of all be led into captivity, so that it would not be more
practicable for them than for foreign nations to go up into the temple.

<span id="vii.i-p73"></span>*From a people.* This expression deserves
notice, for <span id="vii.i-p73.1"></span>מעם, (*mĕgnăm,*) means that it
will not be an entire nation; as if he had said, though you must be
reduced to a small number, so as to be a feeble remnant, yet those few
who are left will be offered in sacrifice to God. Hence we ought to
learn a doctrine highly useful and exceedingly adapted to our times, for
at the present day the Church is not far from despair, being plundered,
scattered, and every where crushed and trodden under foot. What must be
done in straits so numerous and so distressing? We ought to lay hold of
these promises, so as to believe that still God will preserve the
Church. To whatever extent the body may be torn, shivered into fragments
and scattered, still by his Spirit he will easily unite the members, and
will never allow the remembering and the calling on his name to perish.
Out of those fragments which are now broken and scattered, the Lord will
unite and assemble the people. Those whom he joins together in one
spirit, though widely separated from each other, he can easily collect
into one body. Although therefore we see the nation diminished in
numbers, and some of its members cut off, yet some present will be
offered by it to the Lord.

<span id="vii.i-p74"></span>*To the place of the name.* This mode of
expression is customary with the prophets. When they speak of the
worship of God they describe it by outward acts, such as altars,
sacrifices, washings, and such like; and, indeed, the worship of God
being within the soul, there is no way in which it can be described but
by outward signs, by which men declare that they worship and adore God.
But he chiefly calls it *Mount* *Zion,* because that place was
consecrated to God, and God commanded that sacrifices should be offered
there. The chief honor which he bestowed upon it was when he caused the
doctrine of his word (<span id="vii.i-p74.1"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p74.1"></span>.md) to
go forth from it, as we have formerly seen;  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) so that the name of *Mount Zion* may be
properly understood to denote the pure and uncorrupted worship of God.
In short, the prophets do not describe the worship of God as it would be
after the coming of Christ, but as it was in their own time, because
they found it necessary to accommodate themselves to the people to whom
they ministered. Hence it ought to be inferred that there is no other
way in which we can belong to the Church than by being offered to God in
sacrifice. Let every one therefore who wishes to belong to God present
himself for such an oblation, and let him no longer live to himself, but
be wholly dedicated to God. (<span id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p75.2"></span>[2Co
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p75.2"></span>..md)
Now we know that it is by this sword of the word, that is, by the
gospel, that Paul boasts of offering and sacrificing men to God. (<span
id="vii.i-p75.3"></span>[Ro 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.i-p75.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p76"></span>By *the place of the name of the Lord,* he
does not mean that his essence, of which we ought not to form any gross
or earthly conception, is confined to it, as if God were limited to a
place, but because it was a place in which the Lord commanded that his
power should be acknowledged, and that men should worship and call upon
him where he manifested his presence by his benefits and by his power,
and that on account of the ignorance of the people, who could not
otherwise comprehend his majesty. Yet it ought to be observed, that we
cannot become acceptable to God without being united in one and the same
faith, that is, without being members of the Church; for it is not
necessary for us to run to Jerusalem, or to *Mount Zion,* because in the
present day *Zion* is as wide and extensive as the whole world, which is
entirely devoted to God. All that is necessary therefore is, that the
same faith dwell in us, and that we be joined together by the bond of
love. If this be wanting, every thing about us is heathen, and we have
nothing that is sacred or holy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc14006.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span> “The Ethiopian Troglodytes,” says Herodotus
“are the swiftest of foot of all men of whom we have received any
accounts. The Troglodytes feed on serpents, and lizards, and reptiles of
that sort, and the language which they have adopted has no resemblance
to any other, but they screech like bats. — *Herod.* 4:183.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span> FT270 “In vessels of bulrushes.” — Eng.
Ver.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span> FT271 “Scattered and peeled, or, outspread
and polished.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span> FT272 “A nation meted out and trodden
down.” Heb. “A nation of line, and line, and treading under foot.” —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span> FT273 “A nation *meted out by line,* that
is, utterly subdued. Heb. *Put under line and line,* to decide what part
of them should be destroyed, and what saved by the conquerors. In this
manner David is described, (<span id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>[2Sa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>,.md) as
having dealt with the children of Moab. See <span
id="vii.i-p23.2"></span>[La 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.i-p23.2"></span>. Such a nation might well deserve to be called
*drawn out and pilled,* that is drawn through the fingers (or an
instrument) like a willow, in order to be peeled and made fit for wicker
work.” — *Stock.*

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span> FT274 “<span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>Videbitis.” “<span id="vii.i-p24.2"></span>Vous
le verrez.”

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span> FT275 “See ye.” “Hear ye.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span> FT276 “And I will consider in my
dwelling-place.” — Eng. Ver. “I will rest, and look round in my
dwelling-place.” — *Stock.*

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span> FT277 “Like a clear heat upon herbs,” or
“after rain” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span> FT278 *Like the clear heat at the coming of
daylight.* The resting of Jehovah, hovering over the enemy till they are
ripe for destruction, is here beautifully compared to the condensed
gloom before daylight, which is wont to usher in a hot summer’s day, and
to the sheet of dew that appears to hang over the ground in harvest time
presently after sunset. <span id="vii.i-p28.1"></span>עלי, (ă*lē,*) is
here used for near the time of, as we say, against such a time. <span
id="vii.i-p28.2"></span>עלי אור, (ă*lēōr,*) <span
id="vii.i-p28.3"></span>prope lucem, adventante luce. — *Stock.*

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span> FT279 Rosenmüller takes notice of another
reading supported by the Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate, <span
id="vii.i-p29.1"></span>ביום קציר, (*bĕyōm* *kātzīr,*) “*at* the time of
harvest,” instead of, <span id="vii.i-p29.2"></span>בהם קציר, (*bĕhōm*
*kātzīr,*) “in the heat of harvest,” but justly remarks that it makes no
difference to the meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span> FT280 “That is, their dead bodies.” —
*Jarchi.*

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span> FT281 “To quit the metaphor, the
flourishing leaders of a people, devoted by Jehovah to destruction,
shall be cut off and trampled on. The people here spoken of are the
Assyrians under Sennacherib.” — *Stock.*

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span> FT282 See vol. 1 p. 96

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc14006.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="vii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc14006.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="vii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc14006.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="vii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span>

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc14006.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="vii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc14006.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="vii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc14006.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="vii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span>

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc14006.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="vii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span>

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc14006.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="vii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p58"></span>

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc14006.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="vii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p59"></span>

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc14006.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="vii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p61"></span>

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc14006.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="vii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p68"></span>

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc14006.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="vii.i-p68.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p69"></span>

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc14006.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="vii.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p75"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc14007.md)
