[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14014)  [Next](cc14016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 27

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
27:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** In that day the Lord, with his sore,
and great, and strong sword, shall punish leviathan the piercing
serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the
dragon that *is* in the sea.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** In die illa visitabit Iehova gladio
suo duro, et magno et forti, super Leviathan serpentem penetrem, et
super Leviathan serpentem flexuosum, et occidet draconem qui est in
mari.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** In that day sing ye unto her, A
vineyard of red wine.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** In die illa vineæ ruboris canite.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** I the Lord do keep it; I will water it
every moment: lest *any* hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ego Iehova custodio eam, singulis
momentis irragabo eam; ne visitet eam (*hostis*,) noctu et interdiu
custodiam ipsam.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Fury *is* not in me: who would set the
briers *and* thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I
would burn them together.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Furor non est mihi. Quis me committat
cum vepre et spina (*aut, veprem spinœ*)? Gradiar hostiliter per eam,
incendam penitus.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** Or let him take hold of my strength,
*that* he may make peace with me; *and* he shall make peace with me.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** An apprehendet robur meum, ut faciat
mecum pacem, mecum, inquam, pacem faciat?

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** He shall cause them that come of
Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of
the world with fruit.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** In posterum radices mittet Iacob;
pullulabit et florebit Israel, et implebuntur facies orbis fructu.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Hath he smitten him, as he smote
those that smote him? *or* is he slain according to the slaughter of
them that are slain by him?

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** An juxta plagam percutientis eum
percussit eum? An juxta cædem cædentium eum cæsus est.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** In measure, when it shooteth forth,
thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the
east wind.

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** In mensura in emissione ejus
disceptabis cum ea, etiam cum flaverit vento suo violento in die Euri.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** By this therefore shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged; and this *is* all the fruit to take away his sin;
when he maketh all the stones of the alter as chalk-stones that are
beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Itaque hoc modo expiabitur iniquitas
Iacob; et hic omnis fructos, ablatio peccati ejus; cum posuerit cunctos
lapides altaris sicut lapides calcis confractos, ut non resurgant luci
et imagines.

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** Yet the defenced city *shall be*
desolate, *and* the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness:
there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the
branches thereof.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Civitas tamen munita erit solitaria;
locus habitatus erit desertus, ac derelictus quasi solitudo. Ibi
pascetur vitulus, et ibi accubabit et absumet summitates ejus.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** When the boughs thereof are
withered, they shall be broken off: the women come, *and* set them on
fire; for it *is* a people of no understanding: therefore he that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them
no favour.

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Dum arescet messis ejus, frangent
(*vel, secabunt*) eam, mulieres venientes accendent eam; quia non est
populus intelligens; propterea non miserebitur ejus factor ejus, et
fictor ejus non erit illi propitius.

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto
the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children
of Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Accidet tamen in die illa, ut
excutiat Iehova ab alveo fluminis ad fluvium Ægypti; et vos
congregabimini unus ad unum, filii Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which
were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the
land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at
Jerusalem.

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Accidet etiam die illa, ut clangatur
tuba magna; et venient qui perierant in terra Assur, et qui dissipati
erant in terra Ægypti; et adorabunt Iehovam in monte sancto, in
Ierusalem.

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span><span id="xvi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span>**1.** *In that day.* Here the Prophet
speaks in general of the judgment of God, and thus includes the whole of
Satan’s kingdom. Having formerly spoken of the vengeance of God to be
displayed against tyrants and wicked men who have shed innocent blood,
he now proceeds farther, and publishes the proclamation of this
vengeance.

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span>*On leviathan.* The word “leviathan” is
variously interpreted; but in general it simply denotes either a large
serpent, or whales and sea-fishes, which approach to the character of
monsters on account of their huge size.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) A1though this description applies to
the king of Egypt, yet under one class he intended also to include the
other enemies of the Church. For my own part, I have no doubt that he
speaks allegorically of Satan and of his whole kingdom, describing him
under the figure of some monstrous animal, and at the same time glancing
at the crafty wiles by which he glosses over his mischievous designs. In
this manner he intended to meet many doubts by which we are continually
assailed, when God declares that he will assist us, and when we
experience, on the other hand, the strength, craft, and deceitfulness of
Satan. Wonderful are the stratagems with which he comes prepared for
doing mischief, and dreadful the cruelty which he exercises against the
children of God. But the Prophet shews that all this will not prevent
the Lord from destroying and overthrowing this kingdom. It is indeed
certain that this passage does not relate to Satan himself, but to his
agents or instruments,  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) by which
he governs his kingdom and annoys the Church of God. Now, though this
kingdom is defended by innumerable cunning devices, and is astonishingly
powerful, yet the Lord will destroy it.

<span id="xvi.i-p95"></span>To convince us of this, the Prophet
contrasts with it *the Lord’s sword, hard, and great, and strong,* by
which he will easily slay an enemy that is both strong and crafty. It
ought therefore to be observed, that we have continually to do with
Satan as with some wild beast, and that the world is the sea in which we
sail. We are beset by various wild beasts, which endeavor to upset our
ship and sink us to the bottom; and we have no means of defending
ourselves and resisting them, if the Lord do not aid us. Accordingly, by
this description the Prophet intended to describe the greatness of the
danger which threatens us from enemies so powerful and so full of rage
and of cunning devices. We should quickly be reduced to the lowest
extremity, and should be utterly ruined, did not God oppose and meet
them with his invincible power; for by his sword alone can this
pernicious kingdom of Satan be destroyed.

<span id="xvi.i-p96"></span>But we must observe what he says in the
beginning of the verse, *In* *that day*. It means that Satan is
permitted, for some time, to strengthen and defend his kingdom, but that
it will at length be destroyed; as Paul also declares, “God will quickly
bruise Satan under your feet.” (<span id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>[Ro
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>.)
By this promise he shews that the time for war is not yet ended, and
that we must fight bravely till that enemy be subdued, who, though he
has been a hundred times vanquished, ceases not to renew the warfare. We
must therefore fight with him continually, and must resist the violent
attacks which he makes upon us; but, in order that we may not be
discouraged, we must keep our eye on that day when his strong arm shall
be broken.

<span id="xvi.i-p97"></span>*On leviathan the piercing serpent, and on
leviathan the crooked serpent.* The epithets applied to “leviathan”
describe, on the one hand, his tricks and wiles, and, on the other hand,
his open violence; but at the same time intimate that he is endued with
invincible power. Since <span id="xvi.i-p97.1"></span>בריח (*bārīăch*)
signifies a crowbar, that word denotes metaphorically the power of
piercing, either on account of venomous bites or on account of open
violence. The second name, <span id="xvi.i-p97.2"></span>עקלתון,
(*gnăkāllāthōn*,) is derived from the verb <span
id="xvi.i-p97.3"></span>עקל, (*gnākăl*,) *to bend*; and hence it comes
to be applied to crooked and tortuous foldings.

<span id="xvi.i-p98"></span><span id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p99"></span>**2.** *Sing to the vineyard of redness.*
 <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) He now shews that all this will
promote the salvation of the Church; for the Lord attends to the
interests of his people, whom he has taken under his guardianship and
protection. In order, therefore, that the Church may be restored, Satan
and all his kingdom shall be utterly destroyed. The object of all the
vengeance which God takes on his enemies is to shew that he takes care
of the Church; and although in this passage the Prophet does not name
the Church, he shews plainly enough that he addresses her in this
congratulation.

<span id="xvi.i-p101"></span>This figure conveys the meaning even more
strongly than if he had spoken expressly of the people of Israel; for
since the whole excellence of a vineyard depends partly on the soil in
which it is planted, and partly on diligent cultivation, if the Church
of God is a vineyard, we infer that its excellence is owing to nothing
else than the undeserved favor of God and the uninterrupted continuance
of his kindness. The same metaphor expresses also God’s astonishing love
towards the Church, of which we spoke largely under the fifth chapter.
 <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)

<span id="xvi.i-p103"></span>He calls it *a vineyard of redness*, that
is, very excellent; for in Scripture, if we compare various passages,
“red wine” denotes excellence. He says that this song may at that time
be sung in the Church, and foretells that, though it would in the mean
time be reduced to fearful ruin, and would lie desolate and waste, yet
that afterwards it will be restored in such a manner as to yield fruit
plentifully, and that this will furnish abundant materials for singing.

<span id="xvi.i-p104"></span><span id="xvi.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p105"></span>**3.** *I Jehovah keep it.* Here the Lord
asserts his care and diligence in dressing and guarding the vine, as if
he had said, that he left nothing undone that belonged to the duty of a
provident and industrious householder. Not only does he testify what he
will do, when the time for gladness and congratulation shall arrive, but
he relates the blessings which the Jews had already received, that their
hope for the future may be increased. Yet we must supply an implied
contrast with the intermediate period, during which God appeared to have
laid aside all care of it, so that at that time it differed little from
a wilderness. This then is the reason why the Lord’s vineyard was
plundered and laid waste; it was because the Lord forsook it, and gave
it up as a prey to the enemy. Hence we infer that our condition will be
ruined as soon as the Lord has departed from us; and if he assist,
everything will go well.

<span id="xvi.i-p106"></span>*I will water it every moment.* He next
mentions two instances of his diligence, that he “will water it every
moment,” and will defend it against the attacks of robbers and cattle
and other annoyances. These are the two things chiefly required in
preserving a vineyard, cultivation and protection. Under the word
*water* he includes all that is necessary for cultivation, and promises
that he will neglect nothing that can carry it forward. But protection
must likewise be added; for it will be to no purpose to have cultivated
a vineyard with vast toil, if robbers and cattle break in and destroy
it. The Lord, therefore, promises that he will grant protection, and
will not permit it to suffer damage, that the fruits may ripen well, and
may be gathered in due season. Though the vine may suffer many attacks,
and though enemies and wild beasts may assail it with great violence,
God declares that he will interpose to preserve it unhurt and free from
all danger. Moreover, since he names a fixed day for singing this song,
let us remember that, if at any time he cease to assist us, we ought not
entirely to cast away hope; and therefore, if he permit us to be
harassed and plundered for a time, still he will at length shew that he
has not cast away all care of us.

<span id="xvi.i-p107"></span><span id="xvi.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p108"></span>**4.** *Fury is not in me.* This verse
contains excellent consolation; for it expresses the incredible warmth
of love which the Lord bears towards his people, though they are of a
wicked and rebellious disposition. God assumes, as we shall see, the
character of a father who is grievously offended, and who, while he is
offended at his son, still more pities him, and is naturally inclined to
exercise compassion, because the warmth of his love rises above his
anger. In short, he shews that he cannot hate his elect so as not to
bear fatherly kindness towards them, even while he visits them with very
severe punishments.

<span id="xvi.i-p109"></span>Scripture represents God to us in various
ways. Sometimes it exhibits him as burning with indignation, and having
a terrific aspect, and sometimes as shewing nothing but gentleness and
mercy; and the reason of this diversity is, that we are not all capable
of enjoying his goodness. Thus he is constrained to be perverse towards
the perverse, and holy towards the holy, as David describes him. (<span
id="xvi.i-p109.1"></span>[Ps
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)<span id="xvi.i-p109.1"></span>.)
He shews himself to us what we suffer him to be, for by our
rebelliousness we drive him to severity.

<span id="xvi.i-p110"></span>Yet here the Prophet does not speak of all
indiscriminately, but only of the Church, whose transgressions he
chastises, and whose iniquities he punishes, in such a manner as not to
lay aside a father’s affection. This statement must therefore be limited
to the Church, so as to denote the relation between God and his chosen
people, to whom he cannot manifest himself otherwise than as a Father,
while he burns with rage against the reprobate. Thus we see how great is
the consolation that is here given; for if we know that God has called
us, we may justly conclude that he is not angry with us, and that,
having embraced us with a firm and enduring regard, it is impossible
that he shall ever deprive us of it. It is indeed certain that at that
time God hated many persons who belonged to that nation; but, with
respect to their adoption, he declares that he loved them. Now, the more
kindly and tenderly that God loved them, so much the more they who
provoked his anger by their wickedness were without excuse. This
circumstance is undoubtedly intended to aggravate their guilt, that
their wickedness constrains him, in some measure, to change his
disposition towards them; for, having formerly spoken of his gentleness,
he suddenly exclaims, —

<span id="xvi.i-p111"></span>*“Who shall engage me in battle with the
brier and thorn?”* or, as some render it, “Who shall set me as a brier
and thorn?” Yet it might not be amiss also to read, “Who shall bring
against me a brier, that I may meet it as a thorn?” for there is no
copulative conjunction between those two words. Yet I willingly adhere
to the former opinion, that God wishes to have to deal with thistles or
thorns, which he will quickly consume by the fire of his wrath. If any
one choose rather to view it as a reproof of those doubts which often
arise in us in consequence of unbelief, when we think that God is
inflamed with wrath against us, as if he had said, “You are mistaken in
comparing me to the brier and thorn,” that is, “You ascribe to me a
harsh and cruel disposition,” let him enjoy his opinion, though I think
that it is different from what the Prophet means.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192)

<span id="xvi.i-p113"></span>Others think that God assumes the character
of a man who is provoking himself to rage; as if he had said, “I do not
choose to be any longer so indulgent, or to exercise such forbearance as
I have formerly manifested;” but this is so forced, that it does not
need a lengthened refutation. It is true, indeed, that since God is
gentle and merciful in his nature, and there is nothing that is more
foreign to him than harshness or cruelty, he may be said to borrow a
nature that does not belong to him.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) But the interpretation which I have
given will of itself be sufficient to refute others, namely, that God
complains bitterly that he will as soon fight with thorns as with his
vineyard, for when he considers that it is his inheritances he is
compelled to spare it.

<span id="xvi.i-p115"></span>*I will pass through them in a hostile
manner, and utterly consume them.* These words confirm my former
exposition; for the burning relates to “briers and thorns,” and he
declares that, if he had to deal with them, he would burn them all up,
but that he acts more gently, because it is his vineyard. Hence we infer
that, if God is not enraged against us, this must be attributed, not to
any merits of men, but to his election, which is of free grace. By these
words, <span id="xvi.i-p115.1"></span>מי יתנני, (*mi yittĕnēnī*,) “Who
shall give me?” he plainly shews that he has just cause for contending
with us, and even for destroying us in a hostile manner, were he not
restrained by compassion towards his Church; for we would be as thorns
and briers, and would be like wicked men, if the Lord did not separate
us from them, that we might not perish along with them. If the phrase
<span id="xvi.i-p115.2"></span>במלחמה, (*bămmilhāmāh*,) *in battle*,
which we have translated “in a hostile manner,” be connected with the
question, “Who shall set me?” it will not ill agree with the meaning.
 <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="xvi.i-p117"></span><span id="xvi.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p118"></span>**5.** *Will she take hold of my strength?*
<span id="xvi.i-p118.1"></span>או (ō,) is frequently a disjunctive
conjunction,  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) and therefore this
passage is explained as if the particle had been twice used, “*Either*
let her take hold of my strength, *or* let her make peace with me;” that
is, “If she do not enter into favor with me, she will feel my strength
to her great loss.” Others explain it somewhat differently, “Who shall
take hold of my strength?” that is, “Who shall restrain me?” But I pass
by this interpretation, because I consider it to be too far-fetched. I
return to that which is more generally received.

<span id="xvi.i-p120"></span>It is supposed that God threatens the Jews
in order to try all the ways and methods by which they may be brought
back to the right path; for God is laid under a necessity to urge us in
various ways, because we are accustomed to abuse his forbearance and
goodness. On this account he frequently threatens to punish us for our
ingratitude, as Isaiah appears to do in this passage, “If they do not
choose to avail themselves of my kindness, and repent, that they may
return to favor with me, they shall feel my strength,  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) which I have hitherto restrained.” Yet
another meaning equally appropriate might perhaps be drawn from it, as
if God exhorted his people to acknowledge his power, which leads them to
seek reconciliation; for whence comes that brutish indifference which
makes us view without alarm the wrath of God, but because we do not
think of his power with due reverence?

<span id="xvi.i-p122"></span>But I prefer to view it as a question, as
in other passages also it frequently has this meaning.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) “Will he take hold of my strength, so
as to enter into peace with me?” As if a father, anxious and perplexed
about his son, were to groan and complain, “Will not this scoundrel
 <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) allow himself to receive
benefit? for I know not how I ought to treat him; he cannot endure
severity, and he abuses my goodness. What shall I do? I will banish him
till he repent, and then he will feel how great is that fatherly power
by which I have hitherto preserved him. Since he does not permit me to
exercise forbearance, he must be treated with the utmost rigour of the
law. Will he not then perceive how great my power is, that he may come
into a state of favor with me?” We shall understand this better, if we
consider that the source of all our distresses is, that we are not
affected with a sense of the divine goodness; for if we should take into
consideration the greatness of the blessings which we have received from
God, we should quickly be drawn aside from our iniquities and
transgressions, and should desire to return into a state of favor with
him.

<span id="xvi.i-p125"></span>Here we see what care about our salvation
is manifested by our Heavenly Father, who wishes us to take hold of his
power and goodness, that we may know how great it is, and may partake of
it more and more abundantly; for he would wish to deal with us on the
same familiar terms as with his children, if we did not prevent him by
our wickedness. Since, therefore, we are incapable of enjoying his
fatherly tenderness, he must display his strength and majesty, that,
being awed by it, and affected by the anticipation of the judgment, we
may humbly entreat him, and sincerely implore peace and pardon. Now,
this is done when we are truly  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199)
converted to him; for, so long as we please ourselves, and flatter our
vices, we cannot but displease him; and, on the other hand, if we enter
into peace with him, we must make war against Satan and sin.

<span id="xvi.i-p127"></span>How earnestly God desires to be reconciled
to us appears still more clearly from the repetition of the words. He
might have said, in a single word, that he is merciful and ready to
bestow pardon; and therefore, when he twice repeats the words, *that he
may make peace with me,* he declares that willingly and most earnestly
he hastens to blot out all our offenses.

<span id="xvi.i-p128"></span><span id="xvi.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p129"></span>**6.** *Afterwards*  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) *shall Jacob put forth roots.* He now
gives actual proof of that love of which he formerly spoke. In order to
understand it better, we must consider the condition of that ancient
people; for it was the heritage of God, not through its own merits, but
by the blessing of adoption. The Lord might justly have been offended at
that nation to such an extent as to destroy it utterly, and blot out its
name; but he refrained from exercising such severity, because he had to
deal with his vineyard and heritage. He aimed at nothing more than that
the people should acknowledge their guilt and return to his favor; and
therefore he followed up the former statement with this promise, lest
the people, struck with excessive terror at that power which exhibits
the judgments of God and his chastisements and stripes, should grow
disheartened; for the contemplation of the judgment of God might throw
us into despair, if we did not entertain some hope of being restored.
Accordingly, he says —

<span id="xvi.i-p131"></span>*Jacob shall again put forth roots.*
“Though I shall lessen my Church, and reduce it to a very small number,
yet it shall be restored to its ancient and flourishing condition, so as
to fill the whole world; for, after having once been reconciled, it will
be more and more increased.” This metaphor borrowed from *roots* is
highly elegant; for by the wrath of the Lord we are as it were cut off,
so that we appear to be completely slain and dead; but to whatever
extent the Lord afflicts his Church, he never allows the roots to die,
but they are concealed for a time, and at length bring forth their
fruit.

<span id="xvi.i-p132"></span>*And the face of the world shall be filled
with fruit.* What he now says, that “the world shall be filled with the
fruit” of those roots, was accomplished at the coming of Christ, who
collected and multiplied the people of God by the gospel; and Israel was
united with the Gentiles in one body, so that the distinction which
formerly existed between them was removed. (<span
id="xvi.i-p132.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p132.1"></span>.)
Now, we know that the gospel, and all the fruit that sprung from it,
proceeded from the Jews. (<span id="xvi.i-p132.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p132.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p132.3"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="xvi.i-p132.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p133"></span><span id="xvi.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p134"></span>**7.** *Hath he smitten him?*  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) He confirms the former statement, and
shews that, even in chastisements, there are certain and manifest proofs
of the goodness and mercy of God; for while the Lord chastises his
people, he moderates the severity in such a manner as always to leave
some room for compassion. There are various ways of explaining this
verse. Some interpret it thus: “Did I smite Israel as his enemies smote
him? The Assyrians did not at all spare him: they acted towards him with
the utmost cruelty. But I laid a restraint on my wrath, and did not
smite as if I wished to destroy him; and thus I gave abundant evidence
that I am not his enemy.” But I prefer another and commonly received
interpretation, which leads us to understand that a difference between
believers and the reprobate is here declared; for God punishes both
indiscriminately, but not in the same manner. When he takes vengeance on
the reprobate, he gives loose reins to his anger; because he has no
other object in view than to destroy them; for they are “vessels of
wrath, appointed to destruction,” (<span id="xvi.i-p135.1"></span>[Ro
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)<span id="xvi.i-p135.1"></span>,)
and have no experience of the goodness of God. But when he chastises the
godly, he restrains his wrath, and has another and totally different
object in view; for he wishes to bring them back to the right path, and
to draw them to himself, that provision may be made for their future
happiness.

<span id="xvi.i-p136"></span>But it may be asked, Why does the Prophet
employ a circuitous mode of expression, and say, “according to the
stroke of him that smote him?” I answer, he did so, because the Lord
often employs the agency of wicked men in chastising us, in order to
depress and humble us the more. It is often a very sore temptation to
us, when the Lord permits us to be oppressed by the tyranny of wicked
men; for we have doubts whether it is because he favors them, or because
he deprives us of his assistance, as if he hated us. To meet this doubt,
he says that he does indeed permit wicked men to afflict his people, and
to exercise their cruelty upon them for a time, but that he will at
length punish them for their wickedness more sharply than they punished
the godly persons. Yet, if any one choose to adopt the former
interpretation, namely, that the Lord will not deal with us as with
enemies, I have no objection. Hence arises also that saying, that “it is
better to fall into the hands of God than into the hands of men;” for
the Lord can never forget his covenant, that he will deal in a gentle
and fatherly manner with his Church. (<span
id="xvi.i-p136.1"></span>[2Sa
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p136.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p136.2"></span>[1Ch
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p136.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p137"></span><span id="xvi.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p138"></span>**8.** *In measure.* This is the second
proof of the divine compassion towards all the elect, whom he chastises
for this purpose, that they may not perish; and, by mitigating the
punishments which he inflicts upon them, he pays such regard to their
weakness that he never permits them to be oppressed beyond measure. As
to the word <span id="xvi.i-p138.1"></span>בסאסאה, (*bĕsăssĕāh*,) *in
measure*, all interpreters agree that it denotes moderation; for
otherwise we could not bear the hand of the Lord, and would be
overwhelmed by it; but he keeps it back, and “is faithful,” as Paul
says,

<span id="xvi.i-p139"></span>“not to suffer us to be tempted beyond what
we are able to bear.”  
(<span id="xvi.i-p139.2"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p139.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p140"></span>Thus also Jeremiah prays to the Lord to
“chastise him in judgment,” that is, with moderation, accommodating the
stripes to his weakness. (<span id="xvi.i-p140.1"></span>[Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="xvi.i-p140.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p141"></span>*In her shooting forth,* <span
id="xvi.i-p141.1"></span>בשלחה, (*bĕshāllĕchāch*.) Interpreters are not
agreed as to the meaning of this word. Some think that it means, “by
engaging them in internal wars with each other,” and others, “that God
will punish their sins by that sword which they have drawn and put into
his hand.” But as I cannot approve of either of those interpretations, I
pass them by. I approve more highly of those who interpret it, “in her
shootings forth,” that is, in plants; so as to mean, that in inflicting
punishment, the Lord attacks not only their outward circumstances, but
also their persons. We know that the Lord’s chastisements are various.
The more light and moderate are those by which he takes from us only
external blessings, which are called “the good things of fortune.” So
then God punishes believers in such a manner as not only to afflict
their persons, but to take from them what is necessary for the support
of life, such as corn, wine, oil, and other things of that kind which
the earth produces; for <span id="xvi.i-p141.2"></span> שלח(*shālăch*)
signifies to “shoot forth,” and to “produce.”

<span id="xvi.i-p142"></span>But I have another exposition which comes
nearer to the Prophet’s meaning, that *in shooting forth* God contends
with the Church, because, though he cuts down the branches and even the
trunk, yet his wrath does not extend to the roots, so as to prevent the
tree from again shooting forth; for there is always some remaining vigor
in the roots, which he never permits to die. And this agrees with what
goes before, when he promised (<span id="xvi.i-p142.1"></span>[Isa
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006)<span id="xvi.i-p142.1"></span>)
that Israel would bring forth “fruit.” This explains what he formerly
said, *in measure*; namely, that he will not pull up the root; for the
Lord cuts down what appears outwardly, such as branches and leaves, but
defends the root and preserves it safe. But, on the other hand, he tears
up the reprobate by the roots, and cuts them down in such a manner that
they can never rise again.

<span id="xvi.i-p143"></span>*Though he blow with his violent wind.*
Some translate it, “he blew with his wind,” but I think that the meaning
is made more clear by saying, “though he blow.” He continues the
metaphor, by which he had alluded to herbs and plants, which a violent
wind causes to wither, but only in appearance; for the root is always
safe. Thus though the Lord attacks believers with great violence, and
takes away all their beauty and comeliness, so that they appear to be
entirely slain, yet he usually preserves in them some internal vigor.

<span id="xvi.i-p144"></span>*In the day of the east wind.* When the
Prophet spoke of “the day of the east wind,” he had his eye on the
situation of Judea, to which, as we learn from other passages, that
easterly wind was injurious. We know that each country has its own
particular wind that is injurious to it; for in some countries the north
wind, in others the south wind, and in others the east or equinoctial
wind, occasions great damage, throwing down the corn, scorching or
spoiling all the fruits, blasting the trees, and scarcely leaving
anything in the fields uninjured. By “the east wind” in this passage, is
supposed to be meant “the equinoctial wind,” which in many countries is
very destructive.

<span id="xvi.i-p145"></span><span id="xvi.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p146"></span>**9.** *Therefore in this manner shall the
iniquity of Jacob be expiated.* After having spoken of the chastisement
of the people, he begins to state more clearly that the Lord promotes
the interests of his people by these chastisements, so that they derive
benefit from them. He had mentioned this formerly, but now he explains
it more fully, that all the chastisements which God inflicts will tend
to wash away the sins of his people, that thus they may be reconciled to
God.

<span id="xvi.i-p147"></span>A question arises, Are our sins expiated by
the stripes with which God chastises us? For if it be so, it follows
that we must satisfy God for our sins, as the Papists teach. These two
things are closely connected. If God punish us for our sins in order to
expiate them, when punishments are not inflicted, satisfactions must
come in their room. But this difficulty will be easily removed, if we
consider that here the Prophet does not handle the question, whether we
deserve the forgiveness of sins on account of our works, or whether the
punishments which God inflicts on us may be regarded as making amends
for them. He simply shews that chastisements are the remedies by which
God cures our diseases, because we are wont to abuse his goodness and
patience. God must therefore bring us to acknowledgment of our sins, and
to patience; and thus the punishments which he inflicts as chastisements
for our sins are remedies, because our desires may be said to be
consumed by them as by fire,  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) to
which also Scripture frequently compares them. (<span
id="xvi.i-p148.1"></span>[Ps. 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010),
[Ps. 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046)<span
id="xvi.i-p148.1"></span>.) In no respect can they yield satisfaction,
but men are prepared by them for repentance. Hence he shews, therefore,
that the godly have no reason for exclaiming against God’s
chastisements, and that they ought to acknowledge, on the contrary, that
their salvation is thus promoted, because otherwise they would not
acknowledge the grace of God. If any person wish to have a short reply,
we may state it in a single word, that chastisements expiate our
offenses indirectly, but not directly, because they lead us to
repentance, which again, in its turn, brings us to obtain the
forgiveness of sins.

<span id="xvi.i-p149"></span>*And this is all the fruit, the taking away
of his sin.* Some render it in the genitive case, “the fruit *of* the
taking away of his sin;” but I prefer to read it in the nominative case.
<span id="xvi.i-p149.1"></span>כל, (*chōl*,) *all*, frequently means,
“great and abundant;” and therefore it denotes the plentiful fruit by
which the chastisements will be followed. In a word, he intends to
commend to us God’s chastisements on the ground of their usefulness,
that the godly may bear them with calmness and moderation, when they
know that by means of them they are purged and prepared for salvation.
 <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) And immediately afterwards the
Prophet explains his meaning more clearly by speaking of abolishing
superstitions. So long as the people of Israel enjoyed prosperity, they
did not think of repentance; for it is natural to men that prosperity
should make them insolent and harden them more and more. He therefore
shews how, in chastising his people, God also takes away their sin,
because, having formerly indulged in wickedness and proceeded to greater
lengths in sinning in consequence of his goodness and forbearance, they
shall now know that they were justly punished, and shall change their
life and conduct.

<span id="xvi.i-p151"></span>*When he shall have made all the stones of
the altar.* Here Isaiah, by a figure of speech, exhibits a single class,
so as to explain the whole by means of a part, and describes in general
terms the removal of idolatry and superstitions; for he does not speak
of the *altar* which was consecrated to God, but of that which they had
erected to their idols. Thus, when the stones of it shall have been
broken, and the idols thrown down and destroyed, so that no trace of
superstition shall be seen, the iniquity of the people shall at the same
time be removed.

<span id="xvi.i-p152"></span>Hence it ought to be remarked, first, that
we ought not to expect pardon from the Lord, unless we likewise repent
of our sins; for whosoever flatters himself must be the object of the
anger of God,  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) whom he does not
cease to provoke, and our iniquity is taken away only when we are moved
by a true feeling of repentance. Secondly, it ought to be observed, that
though repentance is an inward feeling of the heart, yet it brings forth
its fruits before men. In vain do we profess that we fear God, if we do
not give evidence of it by outward works; for the root cannot be
separated from its fruits. Thirdly, it ought to be inferred, that
idolatry is chiefly mentioned here, because it is the source of all
evils. So long as the pure worship of God and the true religion are
maintained, there is also room for the duties of brotherly kindness,
which necessarily flow from it; but when we forsake God, he permits us
also to fall into every kind of vices. And this is the reason why, under
the name of idolatry, he includes likewise other acts of wickedness.
Besides, we see that he condemns not only statues and images, but
everything that had been invented by the Jews contrary to the injunction
of the law; and hence it follows that he sets aside every kind of false
worship.

<span id="xvi.i-p154"></span>*That groves and images may never rise
again.* By adding this, he shews how strongly God abhors idolatry, the
remembrance of which he wishes to be completely blotted out, so that not
even a trace of it shall henceforth be seen. Yet the Prophet intended to
express something more, namely, that our repentance ought to be of such
a kind that we shall steadfastly persevere in it; for we will not say
that it is true repentance, if any one, through a sudden impulse of
feeling, shall put down superstitions, and afterwards shall gradually
allow them to spring up and bud forth; as we see to be the case with
many who at first burn with some appearance of zeal, and afterwards grow
cold. But here the Prophet describes such steadfastness that they who
have once laid aside their filth and pollution maintain their purity to
the end.

<span id="xvi.i-p155"></span><span id="xvi.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p156"></span>**10.** *Yet the defenced city shall be
desolate* Here the copulative <span id="xvi.i-p156.2"></span>ו (*vau*)
is generally supposed to mean *for*, and some take it for *otherwise*.
There will thus be a twofold interpretation; for if we translate it
*because*, the Prophet will assign a reason for the former statement,
but that exposition is rejected by the context, and is altogether
absurd. With greater plausibility it is taken for *otherwise*; for this
threatening might be appropriately introduced, “If you do not repent,
you see what awaits you, the defenced city shall be like a wilderness.”
But I consider that exposition to be a departure from the natural
meaning, and therefore I choose rather to take it as signifying
*nevertheless* or *yet*

<span id="xvi.i-p157"></span>The Prophet means that Jerusalem and the
other cities of Judea must “nevertheless” be destroyed, and that,
although the Lord wishes to spare his people, it is impossible for them
to be preserved. Godly men would have grown disheartened, when they saw
that holy city overthrown and the temple demolished; but from these
predictions they learned that God would have abundance of methods for
preserving the Church, and were supported by that consolation. So then
the Prophet intended to meet this very sore temptation; and hence also
we learn that we ought never to lose courage, though we suffer every
hardship, and though the Lord treat us with the utmost severity.
Although this threatening extends to the whole of Judea, yet I think it
probable that it relates chiefly to Jerusalem, which was the metropolis
of the nation.

<span id="xvi.i-p158"></span>*There shall the calf feed.* This metaphor
is frequently employed by the prophets when they speak of the desolation
of any city; for they immediately add, that it will be a place for
pasture. Here we ought to take into account the judgment of God, which
places *calves* and brute beasts in the room of the Jews who had
profaned the land by their crimes. Having been adopted by God to be his
children, with good reason ought they to have obeyed so kind a Father;
but since they had shaken off the yoke and given themselves up to
wickedness, it was the just reward of their ingratitude, that the land
should be possessed by better inhabitants, taken not from the human race
but from brute beasts.

<span id="xvi.i-p159"></span>*And shall browse on its tops.*  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) What he says about the “tops” tends to
shew more strongly the desolation; as if he had said that there will be
such abundance of grass that the calves will crop none but the tender
parts. <span id="xvi.i-p160.1"></span>סעף (*sāīph*) signifies also
*branch*; but as branches naturally rise high, I take it here for
*summit* or *top*. It might also be thought that there is an allusion to
the beauty of the city, and that as its houses formerly were lofty and
magnificent, when these have been thrown down, nothing will be seen in
it but herbs and leaves, the “tops” of which the calves which enjoy
abundant pasture will eat in disdain.

<span id="xvi.i-p161"></span><span id="xvi.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p162"></span>**11.** *When its harvest shall wither.*
 <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) Some think that the Prophet has
in his eye the metaphor of a vineyard, which he employed at the
beginning of the chapter, and therefore they translate <span
id="xvi.i-p163.1"></span>קציר (*kātzīr*,) *branches*. The word is
certainly ambiguous; but as <span id="xvi.i-p163.2"></span>קציר
(*kātzīr*) means also a *harvest*, and as the metaphor of a *harvest* is
more appropriate, I prefer to take it in that sense. Nor do I translate
it, “When the harvest shall be withered,” but “When the harvest shall
wither.” In this passage *wither* means nothing else than to approach to
maturity. Before the harvest of the land is ripe, it shall be cut down;
as if he had said, “The Lord will take away from thee the produce which
thou thoughest to be already prepared for thee and to be in thy hand.”

<span id="xvi.i-p164"></span>*The women coming shall burn it.* When he
says that “women shall come,” he means that God will have no need of
robust soldiers to execute his judgment, and that he will only make use
of the agency of women. This exhibits in a still stronger light the
disgracefulness of the punishment, for he threatens that the calamity
shall also be accompanied by disgrace; because it is more shameful and
humiliating to be plundered by “women,” who are unused to war, than by
men.

<span id="xvi.i-p165"></span>*For it is a people of no understanding.*
At length he assigns the reason of so heavy a calamity. At first sight
it might appear to be excessively harsh that the Lord should permit the
people whom he had chosen to be wretchedly tormented and scattered, and
not to render them any assistance; for it is inconsistent with his
kindness and fatherly love which he bears towards them. But the Prophet
shews that God had good reason for punishing the Jews with such
severity; for they were destitute of knowledge and sound
“understanding.”

<span id="xvi.i-p166"></span>Nor is it without reason that he pronounces
ignorance to have been the source of all evils; for since “the fear of
God is the beginning of wisdom,” (<span id="xvi.i-p166.1"></span>[Pr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="xvi.i-p166.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p166.2"></span>[Ps
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.i-p166.2"></span>,) they who despise God and obey the wicked
passions of their flesh are justly condemned by the Spirit of God as
blind and mad. And yet such ignorance does not at all excuse us or
lessen the guilt of our wickedness; for they who sin are conscious of
their sinfulness, though they are blinded by their lust. Wickedness and
ignorance are therefore closely connected, but the connection is of such
a nature that ignorance proceeds from the sinful disposition of the
mind. Hence it comes that “ignorance,” or “ignorances,” is the general
name given by the Hebrew writers to every kind of sin, and hence also
that saying of Moses,

<span id="xvi.i-p167"></span>“O that they were wise and understood!”  
(<span id="xvi.i-p167.2"></span>[De
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029)<span id="xvi.i-p167.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p168"></span>Any man will easily perceive this, if he
consider how great is the power of evil passions to trouble us; for when
we have been deprived of the light of doctrine, and are void of
understanding, the devil drives us as it were to madness, so that we do
not dread the arm of God, and have no respect for his holy word.

<span id="xvi.i-p169"></span>*Therefore their Maker will not have
compassion on them.* For the purpose of still heightening their terror,
he at length takes away all hope of pardon; for even if a remnant was
preserved, the wrath of God did not on that account cease to rage
against the multitude at large. The Prophet here calls God the *Maker*
and *Creator* of Israel, not in the same manner that he is called the
Creator of heaven and earth, (<span id="xvi.i-p169.1"></span>[Ge
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p169.1"></span>,)
but inasmuch as he has formed his Church by the Spirit of regeneration.
In like manner Paul also declares, that in that sense we are <span
id="xvi.i-p169.3"></span>αὐτοῦ ποίημα, *his workmanship*, (<span
id="xvi.i-p169.4"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xvi.i-p169.4"></span>,)
as we have already stated in the exposition of another passage.  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) (<span id="xvi.i-p170.1"></span>[Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025)<span id="xvi.i-p170.1"></span>.)
Isaiah made this statement, in order to exhibit more strongly the
ingratitude of the people, and to shew how justly they deserve to be
punished, since, after having been formed and preserved by God, they
treated him with dishonor and contempt.

<span id="xvi.i-p171"></span><span id="xvi.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p172"></span>**12.** *And yet it shall come to pass on
that day.* He softens the harshness of the former statement; for it was
a dreadful judgment of God, that the people were deprived of all hope of
mercy and favor. The particle <span id="xvi.i-p172.1"></span>ו (*vau*)
must therefore be explained as in the tenth verse, “*Nevertheless*, or,
*and yet* it shall come to pass on that day.”

<span id="xvi.i-p173"></span>*That Jehovah shall thrash.* The Prophet
speaks metaphorically; for he compares the gathering of the Church to
the “thrashing” of wheat, by which the grain is separated from the
chaff. The meaning of the metaphor is, that the people were so
completely overwhelmed by that captivity that they appeared to be
nothing else than grain concealed or scattered here and there under the
chaff. It was necessary that the Lord should “thrash,” as with a fan,
what was concealed amidst the confused mass; so that this gathering was
justly compared to “thrashing.”

<span id="xvi.i-p174"></span>*From the channel of the river to the river
of Egypt.* By this he means Euphrates and the Nile; for the people were
banished, partly into Chaldea or Assyria, and partly into Egypt. Many
fled into Egypt, while others were carried captive into Babylon. He
therefore foretells that the Lord will gather his people, not only from
Chaldea, and from the whole of Mesopotamia, but also from Egypt.

<span id="xvi.i-p175"></span>*And you shall be gathered one by one.*
<span id="xvi.i-p175.1"></span>לאחד אחד, (*lĕăhăd* ĕ*hād*,) which we
have translated “one by one,” is translated by others “each out of each
place;” but this is an excessively forced exposition, and the exposition
which I have stated appears to me more simple. Yet there are two senses
which the words will bear; either, “I will gather you into one body,” or
“I will gather you, not in companies nor in great numbers, but one after
another,” as usually happens when men who had wandered and been
scattered are gathered; for they do not all assemble suddenly, but
approach to each other by degrees. The Jews were scattered and dispersed
in such a manner that they could not easily be gathered together and
formed into one body; and therefore he shews that this dispersion will
not prevent them from being restored to a flourishing condition. This
was afterwards fulfilled; for the Jews were gathered and brought back,
not by a multitude of horsemen or chariots, not by human forces, or
swords, or arms, as Hosea states, but solely by the power of God. (<span
id="xvi.i-p175.2"></span>[Ho 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p175.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p176"></span><span id="xvi.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p177"></span>**13.** *It shall also come to pass in that
day.* This is the explanation of the former verse. He speaks
metaphorically, and shews that so great will be the power of God, that
he will easily bring back his people. As kings assemble large armies by
the sound of a trumpet, so he shews that it will be easy for the Lord to
gather his people, on whom prophecy had not less efficacy than the
trumpet by which soldiers are mustered.

<span id="xvi.i-p178"></span>*And they shall come who were perishing.*
He calls them *perishing*, because they were miserably scattered, and
appeared to be very near destruction, without any hope of being
restored. The enemies, while their monarchy lasted, would never have
permitted their captives to return, nor had they led them into
banishment in a distant country with any other design than that of
gradually casting into oblivion the name of Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p179"></span>*And who had been scattered in the land of
Egypt.* What he adds about Egypt contains a more remarkable testimony of
pardon, namely, that those who fled into Egypt, though they did not
deserve this favor, shall be gathered. They had offended God in two
respects, as Jeremiah plainly shews; first, because they were obstinate
and rebellious; and, secondly, because they had refused to obey the
revelation, (<span id="xvi.i-p179.1"></span>[Jer.
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p179.1"></span>;)
for they ought to have submitted to the yoke of the Babylonians rather
than flee into Egypt in opposition to the command of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p180"></span>*And shall worship Jehovah in the holy
mountain.* At length, he describes the result of their deliverance, that
the Jews, having returned from captivity into their country, may again
worship God their deliverer in a pure and lawful manner. By the
*mountain* he means the temple and sacrifices. This was indeed
accomplished under Darius, but the Prophet undoubtedly intended to
extend this prophecy farther; for that restoration was a kind of dark
foreshadowing of the deliverance which they obtained through Christ, at
whose coming the sound of the spiritual trumpet, that is, of the gospel,
was heard, not only in Assyria or Egypt, but in the most distant parts
of the world. Then were the people of God gathered, to flow together to
Mount Zion, that is, to the Church. We know that this mode of expression
is frequently employed by the prophets when they intend to denote the
true worship of God, and harmony in religion and godliness; for they
accommodated themselves to the usages of the people that they might be
better understood. We know also that the gospel proceeded out of Zion;
but on this subject we have spoken fully at the second chapter.  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc14015.htm#fr_188) <span
id="xvi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span> “The word *leviathan*, which, from its
etymology, appears to mean *contorted*, *coiled*, is sometimes used to
denote particular species, (*e.g.*, the crocodile,) and sometimes as a
generic term for huge aquatic animals, or the larger kind of serpents,
in which sense the corresponding term! <span
id="xvi.i-p32.1"></span>תנין (*tănnīn*) is also used. They both appear
to be employed in this case to express the indefinite idea of a
formidable monster, which is in fact the sense now commonly attached to
the word *dragon*.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xvi.i-p33"></span> FT447 <span id="xvi.i-p33.1"></span>Ses
organes et instrumens

<span id="xvi.i-p34"></span> FT448 “<span
id="xvi.i-p34.1"></span>Chantez à la vigne rouge;” — “Sing to the red
vineyard.”

<span id="xvi.i-p35"></span> Ft449 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
162

<span id="xvi.i-p36"></span> FT450 “<span id="xvi.i-p36.1"></span>Si
quelqu’un est de cet advis, je n’empesche point qu’il ne le suive;” —
“If any one is of that opinion, I do not hinder him from following it.”

<span id="xvi.i-p37"></span> FT451 “<span
id="xvi.i-p37.1"></span>Tellement qu’il est constraint comme l’emprunter
d’ailleurs quand il se courrouce;” — “So that he is compelled, as it
were, to borrow it from another quarter when he is enraged.”

<span id="xvi.i-p38"></span> FT452 That is, instead of making it the
beginning of the following sentence, “in battle (or, in a hostile
manner) I will pass through them,” it might be read as the conclusion of
the question, “Who shall engage me with briers and thorns in battle?”
And this concluding suggestion accords with our English version. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p39"></span> FT453 “Of the various senses ascribed to
<span id="xvi.i-p39.1"></span>או, (ō,) such as *unless, oh that if*,
etc., the only one justified by usage is the disjunctive sense of *or*.”
— *Alexander*

<span id="xvi.i-p40"></span> FT454 “<span id="xvi.i-p40.1"></span>Ils
sentiront la pesanteur de ma main;” — “They shall feel the weight of my
hand.”

<span id="xvi.i-p41"></span> FT455 That is, our Author is of opinion
that <span id="xvi.i-p41.1"></span>או (ō) frequently has the same force
as the Latin interrogative particle *An*. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p42"></span> FT456 “<span id="xvi.i-p42.1"></span>Ce
vaut-neant-ci;” — “This good-for-nothing.”

<span id="xvi.i-p43"></span> FT457 “<span id="xvi.i-p43.1"></span>Sans
feintise;” — “Without hypocrisy.”

<span id="xvi.i-p44"></span> FT458 Such is Calvin’s translation of <span
id="xvi.i-p44.1"></span>באים, *(bāīm,) coming*, which, occupying a
somewhat anomalous position at the beginning of the verse, has perplexed
the critics. The usual and best defended supplement is <span
id="xvi.i-p44.2"></span>ימים, (*yāmīm*,) *days*, and thus the
construction is supposed to be, “In coming days.” The French version
takes <span id="xvi.i-p44.3"></span>*ci-apres*, “hereafter;” the Italian
has <span id="xvi.i-p44.4"></span>*Ne’* *giorni a venire*, “In the days
to come;” Luther’s version has <span id="xvi.i-p44.5"></span>*As mirb
bennoch bazu fummen*, “Yet it will *come* to this.” Our English version
connects the word with “Jacob,” and makes it to signify “Them that come
of Jacob,” which is countenanced by the Septuagint, <span
id="xvi.i-p44.6"></span>οἱ ἐρχόμενοι τέκνα Ιακὼβ, “They that come, the
children of Jacob,” but does not appear to have the support of any
modern critic or version. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p45"></span> FT459 “Hath he smitten him as he smote
(Heb., according to the stroke of) those that smote him?” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p46"></span> FT460 “<span id="xvi.i-p46.1"></span>Ne
plus ne moins que si le feu y avoit passé;” — “In exactly the same
manner as if fire had passed on them.”

<span id="xvi.i-p47"></span> FT461 “<span id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>Et mis
en chemin de salut;” — “And led into the way of salvation.”

<span id="xvi.i-p48"></span> FT462 “<span
id="xvi.i-p48.1"></span>Quiconque se flatte en son ordure, il attirera
sur sa teste infalliblement l’ire de Dieu;” — “Whosoever flatters
himself in his pollution will infallibly draw down on his head the wrath
of God.”

<span id="xvi.i-p49"></span> FT463 “And consume the branches thereof.” —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p50"></span> FT464 “When the boughs thereof are
withered.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p51"></span> FT465 See p. 83

<span id="xvi.i-p52"></span> FT466 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
96

<span id="xvi.i-p53"></span> FT467 “Whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p54"></span> FT468 “Woe to Samaria, the proud chaplet of
the drunkards of Ephraim, which stands at the head of a rich valley
belonging to a race of sots! ‘Sebaste, the ancient Samaria, is situated
on a long mount of an oval figure, having first a fruitful valley, and
then a ring of hills running round about it.’ — *Maundrell*, p. 58.
Hence it is likened to a chaplet, or wreath of flowers, worn upon the
head by Jews, as well as Greeks and Romans, at their banquets, as may be
seen, <span id="xvi.i-p54.1"></span>[Wis.
2:7](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#008)<span id="xvi.i-p54.1"></span>.” —
*Stock*

<span id="xvi.i-p55"></span> FT469 “<span id="xvi.i-p55.1"></span>De la
vallee grasse;” — “Of the fat valley.”

<span id="xvi.i-p56"></span> FT470 “<span id="xvi.i-p56.1"></span>Tyran
de Sicile;” — “Tyrant of Sicily.”

<span id="xvi.i-p57"></span> FT471 Justin, in a rapid sketch of that
tyrant, informs us that, “after having defeated his rivals, he abandoned
himself to indolence and gluttony, which brought on such weakness of
sight that he could not bear day-light; that the consciousness of being
despised on account of his blindness made him more cruel than before,
and led him to fill the city with murders as much as his father had
filled the jails with prisoners, so that he became universally hated and
despised.” — *Justin*, Hist. 1. 21, c. 11. The appalling facts are
confirmed by other historians. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p58"></span> FT472 “<span id="xvi.i-p58.1"></span>Puis
donc qu’ils sont coulpables d’une mesme ingratitude;” — “Since they are
guilty of the same ingratitude.”

<span id="xvi.i-p59"></span> FT473 “<span id="xvi.i-p59.1"></span>Aux
despens de leurs freres;” — “At the expense of their brethren.”

<span id="xvi.i-p60"></span> FT474 “<span id="xvi.i-p60.1"></span>Que
nous regimbons contre l’esperon;” — “That we kick against the spur.”

<span id="xvi.i-p61"></span> FT475 “<span id="xvi.i-p61.1"></span>A des
petis enfans n’agueres sevrez;” — “To young infants hardly weaned.”

<span id="xvi.i-p62"></span> FT476 “<span id="xvi.i-p62.1"></span>Que
tous apportent du ventre de la mere;” — “Which all bring from their
mother’s womb.”

<span id="xvi.i-p63"></span> FT477 “<span id="xvi.i-p63.1"></span>Afin
de ne fascher les oreilles des lecteurs.”

<span id="xvi.i-p64"></span> FT478 “Line upon line.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p65"></span> FT479 “<span id="xvi.i-p65.1"></span>De
toutes parts, ou, ligne apres ligne;” — “On all sides, or, line after
line.”

<span id="xvi.i-p66"></span> FT480 The reader may consult the Author’s
exposition, and the Translator’s notes *Commentary on the Book of
Psalms*, vol. 1, pp. 312, 313. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p67"></span> FT481 “For with stammering lips. (Heb.
Stammerings of lips.)” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p68"></span> FT482 “But since this patience has been
lost upon them, a stronger way shall be taken to force their attention.
God will thunder in their ears, what to them will appear jargon, the
language of a foreign nation, by whom they shall be carried into
captivity.” — *Stock*

<span id="xvi.i-p69"></span> FT483 “<span id="xvi.i-p69.1"></span>De ce
que la parole est au milieu de nous;” — “Because the word is in the
midst of us.”

<span id="xvi.i-p70"></span> FT484 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
282

<span id="xvi.i-p71"></span> FT485 From which the noun <span
id="xvi.i-p71.1"></span>לצון (*lātzōn*) is derived. The phrase <span
id="xvi.i-p71.2"></span>אנשי לצון (ă*nshēlatzon*) literally signifies
“men of scorn,” and is so rendered by Stock and others; but the force of
the Hebrew idiom is fully brought out by the word “scoffers,” as in
Lowth, or by “scornful men,” as in the English Version. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p72"></span> FT486 “<span id="xvi.i-p72.1"></span>Ces
moqueurs;” — “Those mockers.”

<span id="xvi.i-p73"></span> FT487 <span id="xvi.i-p73.1"></span>חזה
(*chōzĕh*) is properly a participle (*seeing*) often used as a noun to
denote a *seer* or prophet. Here the connection seems distinctly to
require the sense of league or covenant. That there is no error in the
text may be inferred from the substitution of the cognate form <span
id="xvi.i-p73.2"></span>חזות (*chŭzūth*) in <span
id="xvi.i-p73.3"></span>[Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p73.3"></span>.
Hitzig accounts for the transfer of meanings by the supposition that in
making treaties it was usual to consult the *seer* or prophet. Ewald
supposes an allusion to the practice of necromantic art or divination as
a safeguard against death, and translates the word <span
id="xvi.i-p73.4"></span>*orafel*, (*oracle*.) The more common
explanation of the usage traces it to the idea of an *interview* or
*meeting*, and the act of looking one another in the face, from which
the transition is by no means difficult to that of mutual understanding
or agreement.” — *Alexander*. Buxtorf renders it “a seer, or prophet,”
and, by a transferred meaning, “provision,” or “foresight,” “We have
made provision, we have looked forward, we have acted with foresight;”
and adds, that the Chaldee version renders it <span
id="xvi.i-p73.5"></span>שלמא, (*shĕlūmā*,) *peace*. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p74"></span> FT488 “<span id="xvi.i-p74.1"></span>Car
c’eust esté une chose trop ridicule et dont les petits enfans se fussent
moquez;” “For it would have been too absurd, and even young children
would have laughed at it.”

<span id="xvi.i-p75"></span> FT489 Lucian is often alluded to by our
Author as the type of daring and scornful infidels. See *Commentary on a
Harmony of the* *Evangelists*, vol. 2, p. 283, n. 1. — *Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p76"></span> FT490 Commonly called the Septuagint. —
*Ed*

<span id="xvi.i-p77"></span> FT491 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
280

<span id="xvi.i-p78"></span> FT492 “<span id="xvi.i-p78.1"></span>Voire
en despit de leurs dents;” — “Even in spite of their teeth.”

<span id="xvi.i-p79"></span> FT493 “<span id="xvi.i-p79.1"></span>Qu’il
leur pend une horrible calamité sur leurs testes, laquelle ils ne voyent
point;” — “That there hangs over their heads a dreadful calamity which
they do not see.”

<span id="xvi.i-p80"></span> FT494 “And it shall be a vexation only to
understand the report. Or, when he shall make you to understand
doctrine.” — (Eng. Ver.) “And even the report alone shall cause terror.”
— *Lowth*. “And it shall be terror merely to hear the report of it.” —
*Stock*. “And only vexation (or distress) shall be the understanding of
the thing heard.” — *Alexander*. “<span id="xvi.i-p80.1"></span>E’l
sentirne il grido non produrrà altro che commovimento;” — “And to hear
the cry of it will produce nothing but distress.” — (Ital. Ver.)

<span id="xvi.i-p81"></span> FT495 “There are three interpretations of
the last clause, one of which supposes it to mean, that the mere report
of the approaching scourge should fill them with distress; another, that
the effect of the report should be universal distress; a third, that
nothing but a painful experience would enable them to understand the
lesson which the Prophet was commissioned to teach them. <span
id="xvi.i-p81.1"></span>שמועה (*shĕmūgnāh*) meaning simply what is
heard, may of course denote either rumor or revelation. The latter seems
to be the meaning in <span id="xvi.i-p81.2"></span>[Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p81.2"></span>,
where the noun stands connected with the same verb as here. Whether this
verb ever means simply to perceive or hear, may be considered doubtful;
if not, the preference is due to the third interpretation above given,
viz., that nothing but distress or suffering could make them understand
or even attend to the message from Jehovah.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xvi.i-p82"></span> FT496 “<span id="xvi.i-p82.1"></span>La sua
opera strana, la sua operazione straordinaria;” — “His strange work, his
extraordinary act.” — Ital. Ver.

<span id="xvi.i-p83"></span> FT497 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
360

<span id="xvi.i-p84"></span> FT498 “<span id="xvi.i-p84.1"></span>Avec
mesme raison et equité;” — “With the same reason and justice.”

<span id="xvi.i-p85"></span> FT499 “The common version, ‘all day,’
though it seems to be a literal translation, does not convey the sense
of the original expression, which is used both here and elsewhere to
mean ‘all the time,’ or ‘always.’” — *Alexander*

<span id="xvi.i-p86"></span> FT500 “<span id="xvi.i-p86.1"></span>Et les
fideles sont sujets à beaucoup de miseres, voire plus que ne sont pas
les reprouvez;” — “And believers are liable to many afflictions, even
more than the reprobate are.”

<span id="xvi.i-p87"></span> FT501 “Will the ploughman never sow, but
always cut the earth by spades and instruments for ploughing?” —
*Jarchi*

<span id="xvi.i-p88"></span> FT502 “This apposite simile from the
various methods used by the husbandman in preparing his land, and in
managing the crop after it is gathered, is addressed to those who might
question divine providence, because sentence against the wicked is not
executed speedily. God, who teacheth the farmer the proper time and
manner of treating his crop, knoweth best when and how to punish
sinners: he reduceth them not to dust at once, any more than corn is
suffered to lie under pressure till it is rendered unserviceable, but
chastiseth in mercy, in order to reclaim them.” — *Stock*

<span id="xvi.i-p89"></span> FT503 “The principle wheat and the
appointed barley. Or, wheat in the appointed place, and barley in the
appointed place.” — Eng. Ver. “The choice wheat and the picked barley.”
— *Stock*. “The wheat in due measure.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xvi.i-p90"></span> FT504 “The words <span
id="xvi.i-p90.1"></span>שורה (*sōrāh*) and <span
id="xvi.i-p90.2"></span>נמסן (*nĭmsān*) are by some explained as
epithets of the grain; principal wheat, appointed or sealed barley.
Ewald makes them descriptive of the soil; wheat in the best ground,
barley in the rough ground. But the explanation best sustained by usage
and analogy is that of Gesenius, who takes <span
id="xvi.i-p90.3"></span>נמסן (*nĭmsān*) in the sense of appointed,
designated, and <span id="xvi.i-p90.4"></span>שורה (*sōrāh*) in that of
a row or series.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xvi.i-p91"></span> FT505 “<span id="xvi.i-p91.1"></span>Car en
France on n’escout point le bled sinon avec le fleau, excepté en
Provence;” — “For in France corn is not thrashed in any way but with the
flail, except in Provence.”

<span id="xvi.i-p92"></span> FT506 “<span id="xvi.i-p92.1"></span>Et
comme faire passer la charue et la herse sur les peuples;” — “And, as it
were, to pass the waggon and the harrow over the nations.”

<span id="xvi.i-p93"></span> FT507 “<span id="xvi.i-p93.1"></span>Comme
si les meschans avoyent la bride sur le col;” — “As if the wicked had
the bridle on their neck.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc14015.htm#fr_189) <span
id="xvi.i-p93.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p94"></span>

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc14015.htm#fr_190) <span
id="xvi.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p100"></span>

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc14015.htm#fr_191) <span
id="xvi.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p102"></span>

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc14015.htm#fr_192) <span
id="xvi.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p112"></span>

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc14015.htm#fr_193) <span
id="xvi.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p114"></span>

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc14015.htm#fr_194) <span
id="xvi.i-p115.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p116"></span>

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc14015.htm#fr_195) <span
id="xvi.i-p118.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p119"></span>

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc14015.htm#fr_196) <span
id="xvi.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p121"></span>

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc14015.htm#fr_197) <span
id="xvi.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p123"></span>

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc14015.htm#fr_198) <span
id="xvi.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p124"></span>

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc14015.htm#fr_199) <span
id="xvi.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p126"></span>

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc14015.htm#fr_200) <span
id="xvi.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p130"></span>

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc14015.htm#fr_201) <span
id="xvi.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p135"></span>

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc14015.htm#fr_202) <span
id="xvi.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p148"></span>

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc14015.htm#fr_203) <span
id="xvi.i-p149.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p150"></span>

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc14015.htm#fr_204) <span
id="xvi.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p153"></span>

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc14015.htm#fr_205) <span
id="xvi.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p160"></span>

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc14015.htm#fr_206) <span
id="xvi.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p163"></span>

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc14015.htm#fr_207) <span
id="xvi.i-p169.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p170"></span>

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc14015.htm#fr_208) <span
id="xvi.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p181"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](cc14016)
