[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14004)  [Next](cc14006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 17:1-14

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. The burden of Damascus. Behold,
Damascus is taken away from *being* a city, and it shall be a ruinous
heap.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Onus Damasci. Ecce Damascus ablata est,
ne sit civitas; nam erit acervus ruinæ.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2**. The Cities of Aroer *are* forsaken;
they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make
*them* afraid.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Derelictæ sunt urbes Aroer, in caulus
vertentur; accubabunt, nec erit qui exterreat.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3**. The fortress also shall cease from
Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they
shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the Lord of
hosts.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et cessabit præsidium ab Ephraim, et
regnum a Damasco. Et reliquiæ Syriæ, quasi gloriæ filiorum Israel erunt,
dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4**. And in that day it shall come to pass,
*that* the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his
flesh shall wax lean.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Et erit in die illa, attenuabitur
gloria Iacob, et pinguedo carnis ejus macrescet.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5**. And it shall be, as when the
harvest-man gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and
it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Et erit sicut qui colligit messem
segitis, qui brachio suo spicas metit; similiter ut quis colligit spicas
in valle Rephaim.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6**. Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in
it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two *or* three berries in the top
of the uppermost bough, four *or* five in the outmost fruitful branches
therof, saith the Lord God of Israel.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6**. Et relinquetur in ea racematio, sicut
excussio oleæ; duæ illic aut tres baccæ restant in cacumine altioris
rami, quatuor aut quinque in expansis ramis fructus ejus, dicit Iehova
Deus Israel.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7**. At that day shall a man look to his
Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7**. In die illa respiciet homo ad factorem
suum, et oculi ejus ad sanctum Israelis intuebuntur.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**8**. And he shall not look to the altars,
the work of his hands, neither shall respect *that* which his fingers
have made, either the groves or the images.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**8**. Nec respiciet ad altaria opus manuum
suarum, non aspiciet quæ fecerunt digiti ejus, nec lucos, nec
simulachra.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>**9**. In that day shall his strong cities be
as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which they left because of
the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**9**. In die illa erunt urbes fortitudinis
ejus, quasi derelictio virgulti et frondis, quemadmodum reliquerunt
coram filiis Israel; et erit desolatio.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>**10**. Because thou hast forgotten the God
of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the Rock of thy strength,
therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with
strange slips:

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>**10**. Quoniam oblita es Dei salutis tuæ,
nec memor fuisti Dei fortitudinis; idcirco plantabis plantas amoenas, et
palmitem alienum conseres.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**11**. In the day shalt thou make thy plant
to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish; *but*
the harvest *shall be* a heap in the day of grief and of desperate
sorrow

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**11**. Die plantationis tuæ crescere facies
eam, et mane germinare facies semen tuum; sed recedet messis in die
fruendi, et erit dolor desperatus.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>**12**. Woe to the multitude of many people,
*which* make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of
nations, *that* make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**12**. Hei multitudo populorum multorum;
instar sonitus maris sonabunt, et strepitus nationum; instar strepitus
aquarum ingentium tumultuabuntur.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span>**13**. The nations shall rush like the
rushing of many waters: but *God* shall rebuke them, and they shall flee
far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the
wind; and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>**13**. Strepent populi instar strepitus
aquarum ingentium, et increpabit eum, et fugiet procul; fugabitur quasi
stipula montium coram vento, et quasi globus coram turbine.

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span>**14**. And behold at evening-tide trouble;
*and* before the morning he *is* not. This *is* the portion of them that
spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span>**14**. Tempore vespertino ecce turbatio;
antequam sit mane, nusquam erit. Hæc est pars conculcantium nos, et sors
eorum qui nos diripiunt.

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span><span id="vi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>**1.** *The burden of Damascus.* Here he
prophesies against the kingdom of Syria, and mentions the chief city in
which the seat of the kingdom lay. It was proper that this calamity,
like others which came before it, should be described, that the
righteous might confidently believe that God would one day assist them,
and would not always permit them to be oppressed by the wicked without
end. The king of Syria had formed an alliance with Israel against Judah,
as we saw formerly in the seventh chapter; and as the Jews were not able
to contend with him, and were deprived of other aids, they might also
entertain doubts about God’s assistance, as if he had utterly abandoned
them. To free them, therefore, from these doubts, he threatens the
destruction of that kingdom, from which they would readily conclude that
God fought in defense of his people.

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>It is uncertain at what time Isaiah uttered
this prophecy, for, as I have already remarked, he does not follow the
order of time in threatening against each nation the punishment which it
deserved. But, as far as I am able to conjecture, he foretold those
events at the time when those two kings, that is, the kings of Israel
and Syria, invaded Judea, and entered into a league to destroy it and
the whole Church, (<span id="vi.i-p33.1"></span>[Isa.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p33.1"></span>;) for,
by joining together the Israelites and the Syrians, he summons them to a
mutual judgment, in order to show that the only advantage which they had
derived from the wicked and disgraceful conspiracy was, to be involved
in the same destruction. In this manner Isaiah intended to comfort godly
persons who were of the tribe of Judah; for he has his eye chiefly on
them, that they may not be discouraged, and not on the Syrians, or even
the Israelites, whose destruction he foretells.

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>*Behold, Damascus is taken away.* The
demonstrative particle, *Behold,* seals the certainty of the prophecy.
When he expressly mentions *Damascus,* it does not follow from this that
the other parts of the kingdom are exempted, but it was customary with
the prophets to take a part for the whole, so as to include under the
destruction of the metropolis the fate of the whole nation; for what
must ordinary towns expect when the citadel of the kingdom has been
stormed? Yet there is another reason why the Prophets pronounce heavier
threatenings on the chief and royal cities, and especially direct their
discourse against them. It is, because a polluted flood of crimes
overflows from them into the whole country.

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span><span id="vi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>**2.** *The cities of Aroer are forsaken.* It
is not probable that *Aroer* here denotes the city which is mentioned
elsewhere, (<span id="vi.i-p36.1"></span>[Num.
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034), [Deut.
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036), [Deut.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012), [Deut.
4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048)<span id="vi.i-p36.1"></span>;)
but it is rather the name of a country. He draws the picture of a
country which has been ruined; for he shews that those places in which
cities had been built will be devoted to pasture, and that no habitation
will be left there but huts and shepherds’ tents; for if any inhabitants
remained, the shepherds would drive their flocks to some other place.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span><span id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>**3.** *The fortress shall cease.*  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) He points out the reason why the Lord
determines to cut off the kingdom of Syria. Amos (<span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>[Am 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>) enumerates additional reasons, but the most
important was that which the Prophet mentions, namely, that they had
drawn the kingdom of Israel to their side for the purpose of making war
against the Jews. The Israelites were undoubtedly allured, by the
blandishments of the Syrians, to form an alliance with them against
their brethren. It was a pretext exceedingly fitted to impose upon them,
that the Syrians would aid them against all their enemies; and hence
also the Israelites placed confidence in the forces and power of the
Syrians to such an extent, that they reckoned themselves able to oppose
any adversary. All Israel is here, as in many other passages, denoted by
the name *Ephraim,* which was the chief tribe of that people. Now, “the
assistance and kingdom” are said to “cease” from any place, when its
strength is broken and its rank is thrown down.

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span>*And the remnant of Syria.* That is, both of
these nations, the Syrians and the Israelites, shall be brought to
nothing; and, for the purpose of giving additional weight to the
prophecy, he states that it is God who declares it; for he immediately
adds these words, *saith Jehovah of hosts* Now, when the Lord punished
so severely those two kingdoms, he unquestionably promoted in this way
the benefit of his Church, delivering it by the destruction of its
enemies. And, indeed, in destroying both nations, he employed as his
agents the Assyrians, to whom even the Jews had applied; and although in
this respect they had heinously sinned, yet their offense did not hinder
the Lord from promoting the benefit of his Church, or from delivering it
by bringing its enemies into conflict with each other. Hence we perceive
how great is the care which God exercises over us, since he does not
spare even the greatest kingdoms in order to preserve us. We ought also
to observe, that though all the wicked enter into a league, and join
hands to destroy us, yet the Lord will easily rescue us from their jaws.
Besides, we ought to remark that it is advantageous to us to be deprived
of earthly aids, on which it is in vain for us to rely in opposition to
God; for when we are blinded by our prosperity, we flatter ourselves,
and cannot hear the voice of God. It therefore becomes necessary to
remove these obstructions, that we may perceive our helplessness, as was
the case with the Israelites, who were bereft of their aid after Syria
had been destroyed.

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span><span id="vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span>**4.** *The glory of Jacob shall be
diminished.*  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) Although he had
undertaken to speak of Syria and Damascus, he takes occasion to join
Israel with the Syrians, because they were bound by a mutual league, and
were united in the same cause. The Syrians, indeed, whom Isaiah chiefly
addresses, were like a torch to inflame the Israelites, as we have
already said. But the Israelites themselves were equally in fault, and
therefore they were justly drawn, by what might be called a mutual bond,
to endure the same punishment.

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span>It is not easy to say whether under the name
*Jacob* he speaks of the whole elect people, so as to include also the
tribe of Judah. But it is probable that he refers only to the ten
tribes, who laid claim to the name of the nation, and that it is in
mockery that he describes them as *glorious,* because, being puffed up
with their power and multitude and allies, they despised the Jews their
brethren.

<span id="vi.i-p52"></span>*And the fatness of his flesh shall wax
lean.* When he next threatens them with *leanness,* his object is to
reprove their indolence, as the Prophets frequently reprove them for
their fatness (<span id="vi.i-p52.1"></span>[Jer.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028), [Jer.
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011)<span id="vi.i-p52.1"></span>.)
On account of their prosperity and of the fertility of the country, they
became proud, as horses that are fat and excessively pampered grow
restive. Hence also they are elsewhere called “fat cows” (<span
id="vi.i-p52.2"></span>[Am 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001)<span
id="vi.i-p52.2"></span>). But however fierce and stubborn they might be,
God threatens that he will take away their fatness with which they were
puffed up.

<span id="vi.i-p53"></span><span id="vi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p54"></span>**5.** *And it shall be as when the
harvest-man gathereth the corn.* He shews by a comparison how great will
be the desolation. “As the reapers,” he says, “gather the corn in
armfuls, so this multitude, though large and extended, will be mowed
down by the enemies.” Now that he may not leave a remainder, he adds
that at the conclusion of the harvest *the ears will be gleaned,* as if
he had said, that when the multitude shall have been destroyed and the
country laid bare like a field which has been reaped, even the shaken
and scattered ears will not be left. Besides, he employs the metaphor of
a harvest because the people, trusting to their great number, dreaded
nothing; but as the reapers are not terrified by the large quantity of
the corn, so he declares that their vast number will not prevent God
from utterly destroying them. This may also refer to the Assyrians, but
the meaning will be the same, for they were God’s servants in executing
this vengeance.

<span id="vi.i-p55"></span>We need not spend much time in explaining the
word *gather,* for it means nothing else than that the slaughter will
resemble a harvest, the conclusion of which has been followed by the
gleaning of the ears. When the ten tribes had been carried away, the
Assyrians, having learned that they were meditating a revolution,
destroyed them also (<span id="vi.i-p55.1"></span>[2Ki
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p55.1"></span>). He
especially mentions *the valley of Rephaim,* because its fertility was
well known to the Israelites.

<span id="vi.i-p56"></span><span id="vi.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p57"></span>**6.** *Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in
it.* This metaphor has a different meaning from the former; for as if
the name of the nation were to be entirely blotted out, he had expressly
foretold that nothing would be left after the slaughter. He now adds a
consolation, and thus abates the severity of the destruction; for he
declares that, although the enemies had resolved to consume and destroy
everything, still some remnant would be left. In like manner the
gleaning of grapes is never made so completely as not to allow some
grapes or even clusters to remain, which were concealed under the
leaves, and the olive tree is never so thoroughly shaken as not to leave
at least some olives on the tops of the trees. Consequently, to whatever
extent the enemies may rage, and even the vengeance of God may be
kindled, still he foretells that the Judge, notwithstanding his
severity, will reserve for himself a small number, and will not allow
the attacks of enemies to fall upon his own elect.

<span id="vi.i-p58"></span>Hence it follows, that amidst the heaviest
vengeance there will still be room for mercy. The present discourse
relates to the posterity of Abraham; and though they had revolted from
God so as to deserve to be cast off, yet the goodness of God rose above
their wickedness. They had indeed rendered themselves unworthy of such
goodness, but the covenant of God must remain firm and impregnable, and
a proof of that firmness must be given by him in some remnant, though
the nation entirely set it aside as far as lay in their power. This
ought to be carefully observed, so that when we perceive no traces of
the Church, and when the godly appear to be destroyed, still we may not
think that the Church has perished; for the promise of the Lord stands,
that it will continue for ever (<span id="vi.i-p58.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p58.1"></span>).
Some remnant, therefore, will always remain, though frequently it is not
visible to our eyes.

<span id="vi.i-p59"></span><span id="vi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p60"></span>**7.** *At that day shall a man look to his
Maker.* He now shews the fruit of this chastisement, and this is the
second consolation with which the godly ought to fortify themselves
amidst their afflictions. Although they perceive nothing but the wrath
of God, yet they ought to reflect that the Lord, who never forgets
himself, will continually preserve his Church, and not only so, but that
the chastisements will be advantageous to them. After having spoken,
therefore, about the continual existence of the Church, he next adds,
that *men will look to God* This is the most desirable of all, for when
men betake themselves to God, the world, which was formerly disordered,
is restored to its proper order; but when we have been estranged from
him, no one repents of his own accord, and therefore there is no other
way in which we can be brought back than to be driven by the scourge of
chastisements. We are thus reminded that we ought not to be so impatient
in enduring chastisements, which cure us of the fearfully dangerous
disease of apostasy.

<span id="vi.i-p61"></span>*To look to God* means nothing else than
that, when we have turned away, we return to a state of favor with him,
betake ourselves and are converted to him. For how comes it that men
abandon themselves to every kind of wickedness but because they forget
God? Where the knowledge of God exists, there reverence dwells; where
forgetfulness of God is found, there contempt of him also prevails. Yet
this relates properly to faith, as if he had said, “When chastisements
so severe shall have tamed the Israelites, they will then perceive that
there is no help for them but in God.” For this reason he immediately
adds the expression, *To his* *Maker*. It was indeed a proof of
abominable indolence that they did not rely on God alone, who had
bestowed on them so many precious gifts. The Prophet therefore says,
that when they had been subdued by distresses and afflictions, they
would afterwards return to a sound mind, so as to begin to hope in him
who had bound them to himself by so many acts of kindness. And indeed he
calls God their *Maker,* not as having created the whole human race, but
in the same sense in which he likewise calls him *The Holy One of
Israel*. Although therefore all men were created after the image of God,
(<span id="vi.i-p61.2"></span>[Ge
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="vi.i-p61.2"></span>),
yet Israel was peculiarly his workmanship, because he was his heritage,
and his holy and chosen people (<span id="vi.i-p61.3"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p61.3"></span>).
This repetition, in accordance with the ordinary custom of the Hebrew
language, is employed to denote the same thing. He therefore calls God
*Holy,* not only as viewed in himself, but from the effect produced,
because he has sanctified or separated to himself the children of
Abraham. Hence it follows, that the creation which he speaks of must be
understood to relate to spiritual reformation, in reference to which he
is especially called *the Maker of Israel* (<span
id="vi.i-p61.4"></span>[Isa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)<span
id="vi.i-p61.4"></span>; <span id="vi.i-p61.5"></span>[Ho
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p61.5"></span>).

<span id="vi.i-p62"></span><span id="vi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p63"></span>**8.** *And he shall not look to the altars.*
This contrast shews more clearly that the *looking* which he spoke of in
the former verse relates strictly to hope and confidence, for he says
that every kind of sinful confidence will vanish away when men have
learned to hope in God; and indeed in no other manner can any one obtain
clear views of God than by driving far from him all superstitions. We
are thus taught that obstacles of this kind ought to be removed if we
wish to approach to God. It is vain to think of making a union between
God and idols, as the Papists do, and as the Jews formerly did; for that
vice is not peculiar to our age, but has prevailed in all ages. Every
obstruction ought therefore to be removed, that we may look to God with
such earnestness as to have just and clear views of him, and to put our
trust in him.

<span id="vi.i-p64"></span>*The work of his hands.* It is for the
purpose of exciting abhorrence that he calls the false gods *the work of
their hands,* that the Israelites, being ashamed of their folly, may
shake off and drive away from them such a disgraceful reproach. On this
vice, however, he dwells the more largely, because they were more
chargeable with it than with any other, and because none can be more
abominable in the sight of God. There were innumerable superstitions
among them, and in places without number they had set up both idols and
altars, so that Isaiah had good reason for reproving and expostulating
with them at great length on account of these crimes.

<span id="vi.i-p65"></span>It might be objected that the altar at
Jerusalem was also built by men, and therefore they ought to forsake it
in order to approach to God. (<span id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>[Ex
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>). I
reply, that altar was widely different from others, for although it
consisted of stone and mortar, silver and gold, and was made like others
by the agency of men, yet we ought not to look at the materials or the
workmanship, but at God himself who was the maker, for by his command it
was built. We ought therefore to consider the essential form, so to
speak, which it received from the word of God; other matters ought not
to be taken into view, since God alone is the architect. (<span
id="vi.i-p65.2"></span>[Exod. 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025)<span id="vi.i-p65.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p65.3"></span>[Deut.
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p65.3"></span>).
Other altars, though they bore some resemblance to it, should be
abhorred, because they had not the authority of the word. Such is the
estimate which we ought to form of every kind of false worship, whatever
appearance of sanctity it may assume; for God cannot approve of anything
that is not supported by his word.

<span id="vi.i-p66"></span><span id="vi.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p67"></span>**9.** *In that day shall his strong cities
be as a forsaken bough.* He follows out what he had begun to say about
driving out the inhabitants of the country; and as the Israelites,
trusting to their fortified cities and to their bulwarks, thought that
they were in safety, he threatens that they will be of no more use than
if enemies were marching through desert places. The view entertained by
some, that <span id="vi.i-p67.1"></span>חורש (*chōrĕsh*) and <span
id="vi.i-p67.2"></span>עזובת (ă*zūbăth*)  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) are proper names of towns, is a forced
interpretation. I understand them rather to denote unpleasant and
disagreeable places, or that the walls and ditches will contribute no
more to their defense than if the Israelites dwelt amidst thickets and
bushes.

<span id="vi.i-p69"></span>*As they left.*  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Here the particle <span
id="vi.i-p70.1"></span>אשר, (*asher,*) I have no doubt, denotes
comparison; and therefore I have rendered it *in like* *manner as,*
which makes the statement of the Prophet to be, in connection with what
had been already said, that the people would tremble and flee and be
scattered, in the same manner as God had formerly driven out the ancient
inhabitants. Those who think that <span id="vi.i-p70.2"></span>אשר,
(*asher,*) is a relative are constrained to supply something, and to
break up the thread of the discourse. But it simply brings to their
remembrance an ancient example, that the Israelites may perceive how
vain and deceitful is every kind of defense that is opposed to the arm
of God. It is a severe reproach; for the Israelites did not consider
that the Lord gave to them that land, as it were, by hereditary right,
in order that they might worship him, and that he drove out their
enemies to put them in possession of it. And now, by their ingratitude,
they rendered themselves unworthy of so great a benefit; and,
consequently, when they had been deprived of it, there was good reason
why they should feel distresses which were the reverse of their former
blessings.

<span id="vi.i-p71"></span>This passage will be made more plain by the
writings of Moses, whom the prophets follow; for in the promises he
employs this mode of expression, “One of you shall chase a thousand,”
(<span id="vi.i-p71.1"></span>[Le
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p71.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p71.2"></span>[Jos
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p71.2"></span>),
and in the threatenings, on the other hand, he says, “One shall chase a
thousand of you.” (<span id="vi.i-p71.3"></span>[De
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)<span id="vi.i-p71.3"></span>.)
Accordingly, as he struck such terror into the Canaanites, that at the
sight of the Israelites they immediately fled, so he punished the
ingratitude of the people in such a manner that they had no power to
resist. Thus the Lord gave a display of his power in two ways, both in
driving out the Canaanites and in punishing his people. The Prophet,
therefore, by mentioning that ancient kindness, reproaches the people
with ingratitude, forgetfulness, and treachery, that they may
acknowledge that they are justly punished, and may perceive that it
proceeds from the Lord, that they are thus chased by the enemies to whom
they were formerly a terror.

<span id="vi.i-p72"></span><span id="vi.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p73"></span>**10.** *Because thou hast forgotten the God
of thy salvation.* He shews the reason why the Lord exercises such
severity against the Ten Tribes, that they may not complain of being
unjustly afflicted or too harshly treated. The sum of what is stated is,
that all those evils come to them because they have wickedly despised
God. It was excessively base and altogether inexcusable ingratitude,
after having received so many favors, to prostitute their hopes to
heathen nations and to idols, as if they had never in any respect
experienced the love of God. Indeed, no unbelievers, when they are
called to account, will vindicate themselves from the charge of offering
an insult to God by wandering after creatures. But the argument was
applicable, in a special manner, to the people of Israel, to whom God
had revealed himself in such a manner that they ought to have left off
all the impostures of the world and relied on his grace alone. They are
therefore justly accused of ingratitude, for having buried in
forgetfulness the object of true faith; and indeed, when God has once
allowed us to taste the delight of his goodness, if it gain a place in
our hearts, we shall never be drawn away from it to anything else. Hence
it follows that they are convicted of ingratitude who, not being
satisfied with the true God, are unsteady and driven about in all
directions; for in this manner they despise his invaluable grace.

<span id="vi.i-p74"></span>Accordingly, the Prophet expressly calls him
*the God of salvation* and the *God* or *Rock of strength* <span
id="vi.i-p74.1"></span>צור (*tsūr*) has both significations; for it was
a monstrous thing that they were not kept in fidelity to God, who had so
often preserved them, and, as it were, with an outstretched hand. When
he adds that they *had not been mindful,* this is an amplification; for
he indirectly charges them with base slothfulness in not considering in
how many ways they had formerly been made to know the kindness of God.

<span id="vi.i-p75"></span>*Therefore thou shalt plant.* Next follows
the punishment, that they might not think that this ingratitude would
remain unpunished. That is, because they forsook the fountain of all
good, though they labor to obtain food, yet they will be consumed by
famine and hunger; for all that shall be obtained with great labor the
enemy will either carry away or destroy. This passage is taken from
Moses; for it is a curse pronounced amidst other curses.

<span id="vi.i-p76"></span>“The fruit of thy land, and all thy labors,
shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up.” (<span
id="vi.i-p76.1"></span>[De 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033)<span
id="vi.i-p76.1"></span>).

<span id="vi.i-p77"></span>Hence we see what I have often mentioned
before, that the prophets borrow many things from Moses, and are the
true interpreters of the law. He speaks of choice vines and branches
taken from them; because the greatness of the loss aggravates the
sorrow.

<span id="vi.i-p78"></span><span id="vi.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p79"></span>**11.** *In the day.* This denotes the
incessant labor which is bestowed on plants and seeds. Yet we might
understand by it the fruit which is yielded, as if a vine newly planted
would immediately produce wine. And this agrees with the next clause, in
which *the morning* is put for *the day.* This appears to denote sudden
maturity, unless perhaps this also be supposed to denote carefulness,
because from the very earliest dawn they will devote themselves to
labor.

<span id="vi.i-p80"></span>The words are somewhat ambiguous; for some
render them, “the removing of the branch on the day of affliction.” But
as <span id="vi.i-p80.1"></span>נחלח (*năchălāh*) means “an
inheritance,” here, in my opinion, it literally denotes produce. It is
not derived from <span id="vi.i-p80.2"></span>חלה (*chālāh,*) and I do
not see how the word “Branch” agrees with it. I grant, indeed, that as
vines are mentioned, the word *Harvest* is employed (<span
id="vi.i-p80.3"></span>καταχρηστικῶς) differently from its natural
meaning.

<span id="vi.i-p81"></span>It might also be rendered a Collector; and
yet I do not choose to dispute keenly about those two significations,
for the meaning will be the same, provided that <span
id="vi.i-p81.1"></span>נחלח (*nāchălāh*) be understood to denote “the
gathering of the fruits.” In this way the passage will flow easily
enough. “Though you labor hard in dressing the vines, and though you
begin your toil at the earliest dawn, you will gain nothing; for by the
mere shaking of the branches the fruit will fall off of its own accord,
or your vines will be plundered.” Thus, by a figure of speech in which a
part is taken for the whole, the word *plant* denotes that unwearied
toil which husbandmen and vine-dressers are wont to bestow on plants and
vines.

<span id="vi.i-p82"></span>This is a very severe punishment, and
undoubtedly proceeds from the curse of God; for if he who has no
possession be driven out and banished from a country, he will not be
rendered so uneasy as the man who has well cultivated fields, and
particularly if he has bestowed his labor on them for a long time. In
this manner the Lord determined to punish the Israelites, because they
abused the fertility of the country and grew wanton amidst their
abundance. A similar punishment is also threatened against the wicked in
general terms, that “in vain do they rise early, and vex themselves with
unremitted toil;” for they gain nothing by it. (<span
id="vi.i-p82.1"></span>[Ps 127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span
id="vi.i-p82.1"></span>). On the other hand, it is declared that they
who trust in the Lord will undoubtedly receive the reward of their toil,
for the blessing of God will accompany their labors. (<span
id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>[Ps. 128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>).

<span id="vi.i-p83"></span><span id="vi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p84"></span>**12.** *Alas*  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) *for the multitude!* Some render <span
id="vi.i-p85.1"></span>Woe, making it to denote execration. Sometimes,
as we have seen elsewhere, it is employed in calling to a person; but on
the present occasion I rather think that it betokens sorrow,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) for he groans on account of the calamity
which he foresees will befall Israel, and he does so either out of
brotherly affection, or in order that the prophecy may make a more
powerful impression on the minds of a sluggish and indolent people. It
is certain, that the prophets regarded with greater horror than other
men the vengeance of God, of which they were the heralds; and although,
in sustaining the character assigned to them, they threatened severely,
still they never laid aside human feelings, so as not to have compassion
on those who perished. But the chief reason was a consideration of the
covenant which God had made with the seed of Abraham; and we see that
Paul also had this feeling to such an extent, that he “wished to be
accursed for his brethren.” (<span id="vi.i-p86.1"></span>[Ro
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vi.i-p86.1"></span>).
When therefore Isaiah brings the fact before his mind, he cannot but be
deeply affected with grief; and yet, as I have hinted, it tends to make
the fact more certain, when he places it before his eyes as if he
actually saw it.

<span id="vi.i-p87"></span>The word *multitude* is here employed,
because the army had been collected out of many and various nations, of
which the Assyrian monarchy was composed. The metaphors which he adds
are intended for no other purpose than to exhibit more forcibly what has
been already stated; for he compares them to a sea or a deluge, which
overflows a whole country.

<span id="vi.i-p88"></span><span id="vi.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p89"></span>**13.** *The nations shall rush.* Although he
appears to follow out that threatening, which he formerly uttered, yet
he begins to comfort believers by repeating the same statement, as if we
should say, “They who were unmindful of God must be punished for their
wicked revolt, and must be, as it were, overwhelmed by a deluge; but the
Lord will restrain this savage disposition of the enemies, for, when
they have exercised their cruelty, he shall find a method of casting
them out and driving them away.” This is a remarkable consolation, by
which he intended to support the remnant of the godly. Nor does he speak
of the Jews only, as is commonly supposed, for hitherto he has addressed
his discourse to the ten tribes, and it is certain that there were still
left in Israel some who actually feared God, and who would have
despaired if they had not been upheld by some promise.

<span id="vi.i-p90"></span>By these metaphors he describes dreadful
storms and tempests. When the Holy Spirit intends to bring comfort to
the godly, he holds out those objects which are wont to terrify and
discourage the minds of men, that we may learn that God will easily
allay all tempests, however violent and dreadful. As the winds and seas
and storms are at his command, so it is easy for him to restrain enemies
and their violence; and therefore immediately afterwards he compares the
Assyrians to *chaff.*

<span id="vi.i-p91"></span>*As the chaff of the mountains before the
wind.* Although with regard to the Israelites their attack was terrible,
yet he shews that before God they will be like *chaff,* for without any
effort he will scatter all their forces. Hence it follows that we ought
not to judge of their resources and strength by our senses. Whenever
therefore we see the restraints laid on the wicked withdrawn,  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) that they may rush forward for our
destruction, let us indeed consider that, so far as lies in ourselves,
we are ruined, but that God can easily frustrate their attacks. <span
id="vi.i-p92.1"></span>גלגל (*galgal*) means *a rolling thing,*  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) which is easily driven by the wind.

<span id="vi.i-p94"></span><span id="vi.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p95"></span>**14.** *And, behold, at evening tide
trouble.* The meaning is, “As when a storm has been raised in the
*evening,* and soon afterwards allayed, no trace of it is found in the
*morning,* so will cheerful prosperity suddenly arise, contrary to
expectation.” The Prophet intended to state two things — first, that the
attack of the enemy will be sudden; and secondly, that the ravages which
they shall commit will not be of long duration. As the Assyrians rose
suddenly against the Israelites, so their fall was sudden.

<span id="vi.i-p96"></span>From this passage all the godly ought to draw
wonderful consolation, whenever they see that everything is in disorder,
and when dreadful changes are at hand; for what is it but a sudden storm
which the Lord will allay? Tyrants rush upon us like storms and
whirlwinds, but the Lord will easily dispel their rage. Let us therefore
patiently wait for his assistance; for though he permit us to be tossed
about, yet through the midst of the tempests he will at length conduct
us “to the haven.” (<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>[Ps
107:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#030)<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>.)
And if the Prophet comforted a small remnant, who appeared to be almost
none at all, this promise undoubtedly belongs to us also. True, we are
almost none, and a wretched church is concealed in a few corners; but if
we look at the condition of the kingdom of Israel, how few were the
servants of God in it! And these hardly ventured to mutter, such was the
universal hatred of religion and godliness. Although therefore the Lord
destroy the multitude of the wicked, yet to the small number of the
godly, who may be said to be tossed about in the same ship with them, he
will hold out a plank to rescue them from shipwreck, and will guide them
safely and comfortably into the harbour.

<span id="vi.i-p97"></span>*This is the portion.* He addresses the
believers who were concealed in the kingdom of Israel, and joins them
with the Church, although, as is frequently the case with the children
of God, the members were scattered in every direction. We see here what
will be the end of the wicked who have persecuted us. Though we are
exposed to their rage, so that they tear and plunder and trample upon
us, and inflict on us every kind of insult, yet they will be like storms
which are subdued by their own violence and quickly disappear. We ought
to expect that this will be the lot of all the tyrants who at the
present day wretchedly harass the Church, and treat cruelly the children
of God. Let this consolation be engraved on our minds, that we may know
that the same thing will happen to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc14005.htm#fr_3) <span
id="vi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p39.1"></span>Le secours
venant d’Ephraim cessara;” — “The assistance coming from Ephraim shall
cease.”

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span> FT262 “<span id="vi.i-p40.1"></span>Sera
diminué;” — “Shall be made thin.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span> FT263 “‘Like the leaving of the ploughed
field, or on the topmost bough.’ I adopt with pleasure the
interpretation of this disputed passage proposed in the excellent
Lexicon of Parkhurst, v.<span id="vi.i-p41.1"></span>חרש as being most
natural, and in strict conformity with the Jewish law, <span
id="vi.i-p41.2"></span>[Lev. 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p41.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p41.3"></span>[De
24:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)<span id="vi.i-p41.3"></span>;
which commanded ‘a leaving of the ploughman, and of the branches of the
vine and olive,’ to be given up to the use of the poor in harvest.
Avarice would be apt to make these leavings very scanty.” — *Bishop*
*Stock.*

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span> FT264 *Whom they left.* — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span> FT265 *Woe to the multitude.* — Eng. Ver.

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span> FT266 “<span id="vi.i-p44.1"></span>Mais il
me semble plustost qu’il se prend ici pour Helas.” — “But I rather think
that here it stands for *Alas!”*

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span> FT267 “<span id="vi.i-p45.1"></span>Toutes
les fois donc que nous voyous les merchans avoir la bride sur le col
pour nous ruiner.” “Whenever then we see the wicked have the bridle on
their neck to ruin us.”

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span> FT268 “And like the gossamer before the
whirlwind.” — *Lowth.* “And like thistle-down before the storm.” —
*Stock.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc14005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc14005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="vi.i-p67.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p68"></span>

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc14005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="vi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p70"></span>

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc14005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="vi.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p85"></span>

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc14005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="vi.i-p85.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p86"></span>

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc14005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="vi.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p92"></span>

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc14005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="vi.i-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p93"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc14006)
