[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14015)  [Next](cc14017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 28

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
28:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to the crown of pride, to the
drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty *is* a fading flower, which
*are* on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with
wine!

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Væ coronæ superbiæ temulentorum
Ephraim; quia decor gloriæ ejus erit flos deciduus, quæ est super caput
vallis pinguium, oppresorum a vino.

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and
strong one, *which,* as a tempest of hail, *and* a destroying storm, as
a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with
the hand.

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ecce durus et fortis Domino, sicut
inundatio grandinis, turbo subvertens; sicut impetus aquarum vehementium
inundantium, dejiciens in manu ad terram.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** The crown of pride, the drunkards of
Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet:

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Pedibus conculabitur corona superbiæ
temultorum Ephraim.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the glorious beauty, which *is*
on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, *and* as the
hasty fruit before the summer; which *when* he that looketh upon it
seeth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et erit flos deciduus decor gloriæ
ejus, quæ est super caput vallis pinguium, quasi fructus præcox ante
æstivos, quem qui viderit, aspiciens eum dum adhuc in manu est, devorat.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** In that day shall the Lord of hosts
be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of
his people.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** In illa die Iehova exercituum in
corona gloriæ, et diadema decoris reliquiis populi sui,

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And for spirit of judgement to him
that sitteth in judgement, and for strength to them that turn the battle
to the gate.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et in spiritum judicii sedenti super
tribunal, et in fortitudinem propulsantibus prœlium ad portam.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**7.** But they also have erred through
wine, and through strong drink are out of the way: the priest and the
prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine,
they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they
stumble *in* judgment.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** At isti quoque præ vino errarunt,
præ sicera hallucinati sunt. Sacerdos et propheta errarunt præ sicera,
absorpti sunt a vino; hallucinati sunt præ sicera, errarunt in visione,
impegerunt in judicio.

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span>**8.** For all tables are full of vomit
*and* filthiness, *so that there is* no place *clean*

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quoniam omnes mensæ plenæ sunt
vomitu stercoreo, ut locus non vacet.

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Whom shall he teach knowledge? and
whom shall he make to understand doctrine? *them that are* weaned from
the milk, *and* drawn from the breasts.

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Quem docebit scientiam, et quem
intelliegere faciet doctrinam? Abductos a lacte, abstractos ab uberibus?

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>**10.** For precept *must be* upon precept,
precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little,
*and* there a little.

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Quoniam præceptum ad præceptum,
præceptum ad præceptum; instructio ad instructionem, instructio ad
instructionem; paululum ibi, paululum ibi.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span>**11.** For with stammering lips, and
another tongue, will he speak to this people.

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Quoniam balbis labiis et lingua
exotica loquetur ad populum istum.

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span>**12.** To whom he said, This *is* the rest
*wherewith* ye may cause the weary to rest; and this *is* the
refreshing: yet they would not hear.

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam illis dixit, Hæc est
requies; requiescere facite lassum, et hoc refrigerium; et noluerunt
audire.

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span>**13.** But the word of the Lord was unto
them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line
upon line; here a little, *and* there a little; that they might go, and
fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Erit igitur illis verbum Iehovæ
regula ad regulam, regula ad regulam; instructio ad instructonem,
instructio ad instructionem; paululum ibi, paululum ibi; propterea
ibunt, et corruent retrorsum, conterentur, irretientur et capientur.

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Wherefore hear the word of the
Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which *is* in Jerusalem.

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Propterea audite verbum Iehovæ,
viri illusores, qui dominamini populo huic, qui est in Ierusalem.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Because ye have said, We have made
a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for
we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quia dixitis, Percussimus fœdus cum
morte, et cum inferno fecimus pactum; flagellum inundans cum transierit,
non veniet ad nos; quia posuimus mendacium refugium nostrum, et sub
vanitate sumus absconditi.

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Therefore thus saith the Lord God,
Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner*-stone*, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not
make haste.

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Quare sic dicit Donminus Iehova:
Ecce ego ponam in Sion lapidem, lapidem probationis, angulum pretiosum,
fundamentum solidum. Qui credit non festinabit.

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Judgement also will I lay to the
line, and righteouseness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away
the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et ponam judicium ad regulam, et
justitiam ad mensuram (*vel, trutinam.*) Everret grando fiduciam
mendacii, et latibulum aquæ inundabunt.

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And your covenant with death shall
be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by
it.

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et abolebitur pactum cum morte;
visio vestra cum inferno non stabit, flagellum inundans cum transierit,
tunc eritis ei in conculcationem.

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span>**19.** From the time that it goeth forth
it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and
by night; and it shall be a vexation only *to* understand the report.

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ex quo transierit, rapiet vos
utique mane quotidie, transibit interdiu et noctu. Et erit ut terror
(*vel commotio*) duntaxat intelligere faciat auditum.

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span>**20.** For the bed is shorter than that *a
man* can stretch himself *on it*; and the covering narrower that that he
can wrap himself *in it*

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Quoniam contractus est lectus, ut
non sufficiat; angusta erit stragula colligendo.

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span>**21.** For the Lord shall rise up as *in*
mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as *in* the valley of Gibeon, that he
may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his
strange act.

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Quoniam sicut in monte Perazim
stabit Iehova, et sicut in valle Gibeon, irascetur (*vel,
tumultuabitur*) ad faciendum opus suum, alienum opus suum; ad
designandum facinus suum, alienum facinus suum.

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Now therefore be ye not mockers,
lest your bands be made strong; for I have heard from the Lord God of
hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Nunc itaque ne sitis illusores; ne
forte constringantur vincula vestra. Quoniam consumptionem et finitionem
audivi a Domino Iehova exercituum super universam terram.

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span>**23.** Give ye ear, and hear my voice;
hearken, and hear my speech.

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Auscultate, et audite vocem meam;
advertite et audite sermonem meum.

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span>**24.** Doth the plowman plow all day to
sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground?

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span>**24.** An quotidie arat arator, ut
seminet? aperit et confringit glebas agri sui?

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span>**25.** When he hath made plain the face
thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin,
and cast in the principal wheat, and the appointed barley, and the rye,
in their place?

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Annon cum æquaverit faciem ejus,
tunc sparget viciam, seret cyminum, et ponet triticum in mensura,
hordeum demensum, et speltam suo modo?

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span>**26.** For his God doth instruct him to
discretion, *and* doth teach him.

<span id="xvii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Docet eum rectitudinem Deus suus,
et instituit eum.

<span id="xvii.i-p54"></span>**27.** For the fitches are not thrashed
with a thrashing-instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon
the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin
with a rod.

<span id="xvii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Certe non triturabitur vicia tabula
dentata, nec rota plaustri super cyminum circumferetur; quia baculo
excutitur vicia, et cyminum virga.

<span id="xvii.i-p56"></span>**28.** Bread*-corn* is bruised; because he
will not ever be thrashing it, nor break *it with* the wheel of his
cart, nor bruise it *with* his horsemen.

<span id="xvii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Triticum licet trituretur, non in
perpetuum triturat ipsum, nec rotam plaustri sui perpetuo strepere
facit, ne dentibus suis conterat ipsum.

<span id="xvii.i-p58"></span>**29.** This also cometh forth from the
Lord of hosts, *which* is wonderful in counsel, *and* excellent in
working.

<span id="xvii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Etiam hoc ab Iehova exercituum
egressum est, qui mirificus est, consilio et magnificus opere.

<span id="xvii.i-p60"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p61"></span><span id="xvii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p62"></span>**1.** *Woe to the crown of pride.* Isaiah
now enters on another and different subject from that which goes before
it; for this discourse must be separated from the former one. He shews
that the anger of the Lord will quickly overtake, first, Israel, and
afterwards the Jews; for it is probable that the kingdom of Israel was
still entire when the Prophet uttered these predictions, though nothing
more can be affirmed with certainty than that there is good reason to
believe that the ten tribes had not at that time been led into
captivity.

<span id="xvii.i-p63"></span>Accordingly, the Prophet follows this
order. First, he shews that the vengeance of God is not far from Israel,
because various sins and corruption of every kind prevailed in it; for
they were swelled with pride and insolence, had plunged into their
luxuries and given way to every kind of licentiousness, and,
consequently, had broken out into open contempt of God, as is usually
the case when men take excessive liberties; for they quickly forget God.
Secondly, he shews that God in some measure restrains his anger by
sparing the tribe of Judah; for when the ten tribes, with the half tribe
of Benjamin, had been carried into captivity, the Jews still remained
entire and uninjured. Isaiah extols this compassion which God
manifested, in not permitting his Church to perish, but preserving some
remnant. At the same time he shews that the Jews are so depraved and
corrupted that they do not permit God to exercise this compassion, and
that, in consequence of the wickedness which prevailed among them, not
less than in Israel, they too must feel the avenging hand of God. This
order ought to be carefully observed; for many persons blunder in the
exposition of this passage, because the Prophet has not expressly
mentioned the name of Israel, though it is sufficiently known that
*Ephraim* includes the ten tribes.

<span id="xvii.i-p64"></span>As to the words, since the particle <span
id="xvii.i-p64.1"></span>הוי (*hōī*) very frequently denotes “wishing
evil on a person,” I was unwilling to depart from the ordinary opinion
of commentators, more especially because the Prophet openly threatens in
this passage; yet if the translation, *Alas the* *crown!* be preferred,
I have no objection.

<span id="xvii.i-p65"></span>*For the excellence of its glory shall be a
fading flower*  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) The copulative
<span id="xvii.i-p66.1"></span>ו (*vau*) signifies *for* or *because*.
He compares the “glory” and “excellence” of Israel to “a fading flower,”
as will afterwards be stated. In general, he pronounces a curse on the
wealth of the Israelites; for by the word “Crown” he means nothing else
than the wicked confidence with which they were puffed up, and which
proceeded from the excess of their riches. These vices are almost always
joined together, because abundance and fullness produce cruelty and
pride; for we are elated by prosperity, and do not know how to use it
with moderation. They inhabited a rich and fertile country, and on this
account Amos (<span id="xvii.i-p66.2"></span>[Am
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p66.2"></span>)
calls them “fat cows,” which feed on the mountain of Samaria. Thus,
being puffed up by their wealth, they despised both God and men. The
Prophet calls them “drunkards,” because, being intoxicated by
prosperity, they dreaded no adversity, and thought that they were beyond
the reach of all danger, and that they were not even subject to God
himself.

<span id="xvii.i-p67"></span>*A fading flower.* He alludes, I doubt not,
to the crowns or chaplets  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) which
were used at banquets, and which are still used in many places in the
present day. The Israelites indulged in gluttony and drunkenness, and
the fertility of the soil undoubtedly gave occasion to their
intemperance. By calling it “a fading flower” he follows out his
comparison, elegantly alluding to flowers which suddenly wither.

<span id="xvii.i-p69"></span>*Which is on the head of the valley of
fatness.*  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) He says that that
glory is “on the head of the valley of fatness,” because they saw under
their feet their pastures, the fertility of which still more inflamed
their pride. <span id="xvii.i-p70.1"></span>שמנים (*shĕmānīm*) is
translated by some “of ointments;” but that is inapplicable, for it
denotes abundance and fullness, which led them to neglect godliness and
to despise God. By the word “head” or “top,” he alludes to the position
of the country, because the Israelites chiefly inhabited rich valleys.
He places on it a crown, which surrounds the whole kingdom; because it
was flourishing and abounded in every kind of wealth. This denotes
riches, from which arose sluggishness, presumption, rashness,
intemperance, and cruelty. This doctrine relates to us also; for the
example of these men reminds us that we ought to use prosperity with
moderation, otherwise we shall be very unhappy, for the Lord will curse
all our riches and abundance.

<span id="xvii.i-p71"></span><span id="xvii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p72"></span>**2.** *Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and
strong one.* This may refer to the Assyrians, as if he had said, that
they will be ready at God’s command to fight under his authority, as
soon as they shall be called. Yet I prefer to take it without a
substantive, to mean either “a staff,” or some other instrument, by
which the Lord will cast them down from this lofty pride.

<span id="xvii.i-p73"></span>*As a deluge of hail.* He compares it to “a
deluge” or to “hail,” by which both herbs and flowers are thrown down,
and all the beauty of the earth is marred. Thus he continues the
metaphor of the “fading flower,” which he had introduced at the
beginning of the chapter; for nothing can be more destructive to flowers
than a heavy shower or “hail.” He makes use of the demonstrative
particle <span id="xvii.i-p73.1"></span>הנה, (*hinnēh*,) *behold*;
because wicked men are not moved by any threatenings, and therefore he
shews that he does not speak of what is doubtful, or conjecture at
random, but foretells those things which will immediately take place.

<span id="xvii.i-p74"></span>*Casting them down with the hand to the
earth.* <span id="xvii.i-p74.1"></span>ביד, (*bĕyād*,) which I have
translated “with the hand,” is translated by Jerome, “a spacious
country,” which does not agree with the words. Others take it for
“strength,” so as to mean a violent casting down. But the plain meaning
appears to me to be, that the glory and splendor of the Israelites will
be laid low, as if one threw down a drunk man “with the hand.” The same
statement is confirmed by him in the third verse.

<span id="xvii.i-p75"></span><span id="xvii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p76"></span>**4.** *And the excellence of its glory.*
He repeats nearly the same words; for we know how difficult it is to
terrify and humble those who have been blinded by prosperity, and whose
eyes success covers in the same manner that fatness would. As Dionysius
the Second,  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) in consequence of
gorging himself at unseasonable banquets, was seized with such blindness
that he constantly stumbled, so pleasures and luxuries blind the minds
of men in such a manner that they no longer know either God or
themselves. The Prophet therefore inculcates the same truth frequently
on the minds of men who were stupid and amazed, that they might
understand what would otherwise have appeared to them to be incredible.
 <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213)

<span id="xvii.i-p79"></span>*As the hasty fruit before the summer.* He
now illustrates the subject by another metaphor exceedingly beautiful
and appropriate; for the first-ripe fruits are indeed highly commended,
because they go before others, and hold out the expectation of the rest
of the produce; but they last but a short time, and cannot be preserved,
for they are quickly eaten up either by pregnant women, or by children,
or by men who do not make a proper selection of their food. He says that
the happiness of the Israelites will be of that sort, because their
flourishing prosperity will not be of long duration, but will be
swallowed up in a moment. What Isaiah declared about the kingdom of
Israel, applies also to the whole world. By their ingratitude men
prevent all the goodness which the Lord has bestowed on them from
reaching maturity; for we abuse his blessings and corrupt them by our
wickedness. The consequence is, that hasty and short-lived fruits are
produced, which could not yield to us continual nourishment.

<span id="xvii.i-p80"></span><span id="xvii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p81"></span>**5.** *In that day shall the Lord of
hosts.* After having spoken of the kingdom of Israel, he passes to the
tribe of Judah, and shews that, amidst this severe vengeance of God,
there will still be room for compassion, and that, although ten tribes
perished, yet the Lord will preserve some *remnant*, which he will
consecrate to himself; so that there will be in it *a crown of glory and
diadem of excellence,* that is, that the Church is never disfigured in
such a manner that the Lord does not adorn it with beauty and splendor.

<span id="xvii.i-p82"></span>Yet I do not extend this prophecy
indiscriminately to all the Jews, but to the elect who were wonderfully
rescued from death; for although he calls the tribe and half-tribe *a
remnant*, as compared with the other ten tribes, yet, as we advance, we
shall see that he makes a distinction between the tribe of Judah itself
and the others. Nor ought we to wonder that the Prophet speaks
differently about the same people, directing his discourse, sometimes to
a body corrupted by crimes, and sometimes to the elect. Certainly, as
compared with the ten tribes, which had revolted from the worship of God
and from the unity of faith, he justly calls the Jews a *remnant* of the
people; but when he leaves out of view this comparison, and considers
what they are in themselves, he remonstrates with equal justice against
their corruptions.

<span id="xvii.i-p83"></span>I am aware that some expound it
differently, on account of what is said immediately afterwards about
*wine and strong drink*, (<span id="xvii.i-p83.1"></span>[Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007)<span id="xvii.i-p83.1"></span>,)
and think that this statement ought to be viewed in connection with the
beginning of the chapter. Yet perhaps the Lord spares the Jews. But how
would he spare them? They are in no respect better than the others; for
they are equally in fault,  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) and
must also be exposed to the same punishments. But those commentators do
not consider that the Prophet holds out an instance of the extraordinary
kindness of God, in not exercising his vengeance at the same time
against the whole family of Abraham, but, after having overthrown the
kingdom of Israel, granting a truce to the Jews, to see if they would in
any degree repent. Neither do they consider that, by the same means, he
employs the circumstance which he had stated for placing in a stronger
light the ingratitude of the people, that is, that they ought to have
been instructed by the example of their brethren;  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) for the calamity of Israel ought to
have aroused and excited them to repentance, but it produced no
impression on them, and did not make them better. Although therefore
they were unworthy of so great benefits, yet the Lord was pleased to
preserve his Church in the midst of them; for this is the reason why he
rescued the tribe of Judah, and the half-tribe of Benjamin, from that
calamity.

<span id="xvii.i-p86"></span>Now, since the tribe of Judah was a small
portion of the nation, and therefore was despised by the haughty
Israelites, the Prophet declares that in God alone there is enough of
riches and of glory to supply all earthly defects. And hence he shews
what is the true method of our salvation, namely, if we place our
happiness in God; for as soon as we come down to the world, we gather
fading flowers, which immediately wither and decay. This madness reigns
everywhere, and more than it ought to be among ourselves, that we wish
to be happy without God, that is, without happiness itself. Besides,
Isaiah shews that no calamities, however grievous, can prevent God from
adorning his Church; for when it shall appear that everything is on the
eve of destruction, God will still be a crown of glory to his people. It
is also worthy of observation, that Isaiah promises new splendor to the
Church only when the multitude shall be diminished, that believers may
not lose courage on account of that dreadful calamity which was at hand.

<span id="xvii.i-p87"></span><span id="xvii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p88"></span>**6.** *And for a spirit of judgment.* He
explains the manner in which the Lord will adorn that “remnant” with
additional splendor; for he holds out instances of the true art of civil
government, which mainly contributes to the upholding of nations. It
consists chiefly of two things, *counsel* and *strength*. The internal
administration must be conducted by counsel and wisdom, and “strength”
and force are needed against enemies who are without. Since therefore it
is by these two defences that kingdoms and commonwealths defend and
uphold their rank, he promises to his people the spirit of “wisdom” and
“strength.” At the same time he shews that it is God who gives both, and
that they ought not to be expected from any other; for magistrates will
not be able to rule and to administer justice in a city, and military
generals will not be able to repel enemies, unless the Lord shall direct
them.

<span id="xvii.i-p89"></span><span id="xvii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p90"></span>**7.** *But they also have erred through
wine.* He returns to the irreligious despisers of God, who were Jews in
name only, and proves their ingratitude to be highly aggravated,
because, though they had before their eyes a striking proof of the anger
of God, when they saw their brethren severely chastised, and not
withstanding experienced God’s forbearance towards themselves, yet
neither that example of severity, nor the conviction of the divine
goodness, could bring them back into the right path, or make them in any
respect better, although the Lord spared them. Here he speaks of “wine
and strong drink” metaphorically; for I do not understand it to relate
to ordinary drunkenness, against which he remonstrated at the beginning
of the chapter, but, on the contrary, he says that they were like drunk
men, because they wanted knowledge and sound understanding. If the word
*as* be supplied before the words “through wine and through strong
drink,” the meaning will be more easily understood. I do acknowledge
that by continued drunkenness men become, as it were, brutalized, and I
have no doubt that drunkenness and excessive eating and drinking
contributed also to stupefy the minds of the Jews; but if we examine the
whole of the context, it will be easy to see that the madness which he
condemns is metaphorical.

<span id="xvii.i-p91"></span>*The priest and the prophet have erred.* He
proceeds still farther to exhibit their aggravated guilt, and says that
not only the common people were drunk, but the priests themselves, who
ought to have held out the light and pointed out the path to others;
for, as Christ declares, they may be regarded as “the salt of the
earth.” (<span id="xvii.i-p91.1"></span>[Mt
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="xvii.i-p91.1"></span>.)
If they are mad, what shall the common people be? “If the eye is blind,”
what shall become of the other parts of the body? (<span
id="xvii.i-p91.2"></span>[Mt 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.i-p91.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p92"></span>*They have erred in vision.* The most
grievous thing of all is, when he says that they err not only in the
more flagrant transgressions of life, but in *vision* and *judgment*.
Hence we ought to infer how desperate was the condition of the Jewish
Church, and here, as in a mirror, we may behold our transgressions. It
is indeed something monstrous that, after so many chastisements which
God has employed for cleansing it, the Church is so deeply corrupted;
but such is our wickedness that we fight against his strokes,  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) and though he continually restrains
us, and uses unceasing efforts to purify us from our sins, we not only
render all his remedies useless, but bring upon ourselves new diseases.
We ought not therefore to wonder that in the present day, after the
numerous scourges and afflictions with which the Church has been
chastised, men appear to be obstinate, and even become worse, when
Isaiah testifies that the same thing took place in the ancient Church.
True, indeed, the goodness of the Lord rose above the base and shameful
wickedness of that nation, and still preserved the Church; but this was
accomplished by his secret power, contrary to the expectation of all;
for it would be of no advantage to us, if he employed ordinary remedies.

<span id="xvii.i-p94"></span>Hence also it is evident how silly and
childish is the boasting of the Papists, who always have in their mouth
“The Church,” and use as a pretext the names of priests, bishops, and
pontiffs, and wish to fortify themselves by their authority against the
word of God, as if that order could never err or mistake. They think
that they have the Holy Spirit confined within their brains, and that
they represent the Church, which God never forsakes. But we see what the
Prophet declares concerning the priests, whose order was more splendid
and illustrious. If ever there was a Church, there certainly was one at
that time among the Jews; and that order derived from the word of God
support to which they have no claim. And yet he shews that not only were
they corrupt in morals, but erred “in vision and judgment,” and that the
prophets, whom we know that God added to the priests, out of the
ordinary course, on account of the carelessness of the priests, were
nevertheless blind in that sacred office of teaching and in revelations.
Nothing therefore is more idle than, under the pretext of an office
which bears a splendid title, to hold out as exempt from the danger of
erring those who, having forsaken God, and not only cast away all regard
to religion, but even trodden shame under their feet, defend their
tyranny by every means in their power.

<span id="xvii.i-p95"></span><span id="xvii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p96"></span>**8.** *For all tables are full of
vomiting.* He pursues the same metaphor, and draws, as it were, a
picture of what usually happens to men who are given up to drunkenness;
for they forget shame, and not only debase themselves like beasts, but
shrink from nothing that is disgraceful. It is certainly an ugly and
revolting sight to see “tables covered with vomiting;” and, accordingly,
under this figure Isaiah describes the whole life of the people as
shameful beyond endurance. There can be no doubt that the Prophet
intended to express by a single word, that no sincerity or uprightness
was left among the Jews. If we approach their tables, we can find
nothing but foul drunkenness; if we look at their life, no part of it is
pure or free from crimes and enormities. Doctrine itself is so corrupt
that it stinks as if it were polluted by vomiting and filth. In
expounding allegories, I have no intention to enter, as some do, into
ingenious disquisitions.

<span id="xvii.i-p97"></span><span id="xvii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p98"></span>**9.** *Whom shall he teach knowledge?*
Here the Prophet shews by an expression of amazement, that the disease
of the people is incurable, and that God has no other remedies adapted
to cure them, for he has tried every method without effect. When he
calls wanderers to return to the right path, and unceasingly warns those
who are thoughtlessly going astray, this undoubtedly is an extraordinary
remedy; and if it do no good, the salvation of those who refuse to
accept of any aid from a physician is utterly hopeless.

<span id="xvii.i-p99"></span>*Those who are weaned from the milk.* The
Prophet complains that the stupidity of the people may be said to hinder
God from attempting to cure them of their vices; and therefore he
compares the Jews to very young infants,  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) or who are but beginning to prattle,
and whom it would be a waste of time to attempt to teach. Justly indeed
does Peter exhort believers to draw near, “like infants newly born, to
suck the milk of pure doctrine;” for no man will ever shew himself to be
willing to be taught until he has laid aside that obstinacy which is the
natural disposition of all.  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)
(<span id="xvii.i-p101.1"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)<span id="xvii.i-p101.1"></span>.)
But now the Prophet condemns another kind of infancy, in which men who
are stupefied by their vices pay no more regard to heavenly doctrine
than if they had no understanding whatsoever. It is therefore a mistake
to connect this statement of the Prophet with that passage in the
Apostle Peter, as if Isaiah represented God as desirous to obtain
disciples who had divested themselves of all pride, and were like
infants lately weaned; for the Prophet, on the contrary, loudly
complains, that to “teach doctrine” is useless, and merely provokes
ridicule among stupid and senseless persons, who are “children, not in
malice, but in understanding,” as Paul speaks. (<span
id="xvii.i-p101.2"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span
id="xvii.i-p101.2"></span>.) From what follows it will more clearly
appear that, since they were unfit for receiving doctrine, God cannot be
accused of undue severity if he reject them, and if he resolve not to
bestow useless labor by thundering in their ears any longer.

<span id="xvii.i-p102"></span><span id="xvii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p103"></span>**10.** *For precept must be on precept.*
This shews plainly that the Lord complains of spending his labor to no
purpose in instructing this unteachable people, just as if one were to
teach children, who must have elementary instructions repeated to them
over and over again, and quickly forget them, and when the master has
spent a whole day in teaching them a single letter, yet on the following
day and afterwards, the same labor must be renewed, and though he leave
nothing untried that care or diligence can do, still they will make no
progress under him. Those who change the words of this verse, in order
to avoid offending the ears of the readers,  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) obscure the Prophet’s meaning through
a foolish affectation of copiousness of language, and even destroy the
elegance of the style; for, by using the same words, he intended to
express a repetition which is constant and unceasing, and full of
annoyance. The metaphor, as I have already said, is taken from children,
to whom teachers do not venture to give long lessons, because they are
incapable of them, but give them, as it were, in little drops. Thus,
they convey the same instructions a second and third time, and oftener;
and, in short, they continue to receive elementary instructions till
they acquire reason and judgment. By a witty imitation he repeats the
words, “here a little, there a little.”

<span id="xvii.i-p105"></span>*Instruction upon instruction.*  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) The word <span
id="xvii.i-p106.1"></span>קו (*kăv*) is improperly, in my opinion,
translated by some interpreters *line*, as if the Prophet alluded to the
slow progress of a building, which rises gradually by “lines.” That
would be a harsh and far-fetched metaphor, for this passage relates to
elementary instruction conveyed to children. I acknowledge that the same
Hebrew word is used in the eighteenth chapter, where we have translated
it “Line by line,”  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) and in many
other passages; but here the connection demands a different meaning, as
is also the case in <span id="xvii.i-p107.1"></span>[Ps
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="xvii.i-p107.1"></span>,
where, however, the word *line*  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)
or *dimension* could be admitted with greater propriety than in this
verse. Yet I admit that it is taken metaphorically for an instruction or
rule; for as in buildings <span id="xvii.i-p108.1"></span>קו (*kăv*)
denotes the “rule” or “plumb-line,” as we shall see that it means in a
later portion of this chapter, we need not wonder that it is applied to
other rules.

<span id="xvii.i-p109"></span><span id="xvii.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p110"></span>**11.** *For with stammering lips.*  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) Some supply, that “it is as if one
should say;” but that is superfluous. I therefore view these words as
relating to God, who became, as the Prophet tells us, a barbarian  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) to a people without understanding.
This reproof must have wounded them to the quick, because by their own
fault they made God, who formed our tongues, to appear to be “a
stammerer.” He does not as yet threaten them, but lays the blame on
their indolence, that they rendered the proclamation of heavenly
doctrine a confused noise, because of their own accord they shut their
eyes, and thus derived no advantage from it. Their infatuation, in not
hearing God speaking to them, is compared by the Prophet to a prodigy.

<span id="xvii.i-p113"></span><span id="xvii.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p114"></span>**12.** *For he said to them.* Some
explain it by circumlocution in this manner: “If one should say to them,
This is the rest, they refuse to hear.” But this is a feeble exposition,
and does not connect the various parts of the passage in a proper
manner. On the contrary, the Prophet assigns the reason why God appears
to the Jews to be a barbarian: it is, because they had not ears. Words
were spoken to the deaf. It was to no purpose that the Lord offered to
them rest. This deafness arose from obstinacy, for they wickedly and
rebelliously rejected doctrine. Their wickedness was doubly inexcusable
in refusing rest which was offered to them, and which all men naturally
desire. It was in itself intolerable baseness to be deaf to the voice of
God speaking, but it was still more foul ingratitude deliberately to
reject a blessing which was in the highest degree desirable.
Accordingly, he points out the benefit which they might have derived
from the obedience of faith, and of which they deprived themselves by
their own wickedness. He therefore reproaches them with this ignorance
and blindness; for it springs from their own stubbornness in maliciously
turning away their eyes from the light which was offered to them, and
choosing rather to remain in darkness than to be enlightened.

<span id="xvii.i-p115"></span>Hence it follows that unbelievers, as soon
as God has exhibited to them his word, voluntarily draw down on
themselves wretched uneasiness; for he invites all men to a blessed
rest, and clearly points out the object by which, if we shape the course
of our life, true happiness awaits us; for no man who has heard heavenly
doctrine can go astray except knowingly and willingly. We learn from it
how lovely in our eyes heavenly doctrine ought to be, for it brings to
us the invaluable blessing of enjoying peace of conscience and true
happiness. All confess loudly that there is nothing better than to find
a place of security; and yet, when rest is offered, many despise it, and
the greater part of men even refuse it, as if all men expressly desired
to have wretched perplexity and continual trembling: and yet no man has
a right to complain that he errs through ignorance; for nothing is
clearer or plainer than the doctrine of God, so that it is vain for men
to plead any excuse. In short, nothing can be more unreasonable than to
throw the blame on God, as if he spoke obscurely, or taught in a
confused manner. Now, as God testifies in this passage that he points
out to us in his word assured rest, so, on the other hand, he warns all
unbelievers that they suffer the just reward of their wickedness when
they are harassed by continual uneasiness.

<span id="xvii.i-p116"></span>*Cause the weary to rest*. Some explain it
thus, that God demands the duties of brotherly kindness, in order that
he may be reconciled to us, and that those duties are here included, a
part being taken for the whole. But I think that the Prophet’s meaning
is different, namely, that God points out to us that rest by which our
weariness may be relieved, and that consequently we are convicted of
deeper ingratitude, if even necessity, which is a very sharp spur, does
not quicken us to seek a remedy. This saying of the Prophet corresponds
nearly to the words of Christ,

<span id="xvii.i-p117"></span>“Come to me, all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p117.1"></span>[Mt
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span
id="xvii.i-p117.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p118"></span>In a word, Isaiah informs the Jews that
they have this choice, “Do they prefer to be refreshed and relieved, or
to sink under the burden and be overwhelmed?” This confirms a passing
remark which I made a little before, that God does not in vain exhort
those who seek repose to come to him, as we shall elsewhere see,

<span id="xvii.i-p119"></span>“I have not in vain said to the house of
Jacob, Seek me.” (<span id="xvii.i-p119.1"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span
id="xvii.i-p119.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p120"></span>Since, therefore, if we do not stand in
the way, we shall be taught by his word, we may safely rely on the
doctrine which is contained in it; for he does not intend to weary us
out by vain curiosity, as men often draw down upon themselves much
distress and anguish by idle pursuits.

<span id="xvii.i-p121"></span>Besides, when he shews that this rest is
prepared for the weary who groan under the burden, let us at least be
taught by the distresses which harass us to betake ourselves to the word
of God, that we may obtain peace. We shall thus find that the word of
God is undoubtedly fitted to soothe our uneasy feelings, and to give
peace to our perplexed and trembling consciences. All who seek “rest” in
any other way, and run beyond the limits of the word, must always be
subjected to torture or wretched uncertainty, because they attempt to be
wise and happy without God. We see that this is the condition of the
Papists, who, having despised this peace of God, are wretchedly
tormented during their whole life; for Satan tosses and drives them
about in such a manner that they are tormented with dreadful uneasiness,
and never find a place of rest.

<span id="xvii.i-p122"></span><span id="xvii.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p123"></span>**13.** *The word of the Lord shall
therefore be to them.* Although the Prophet repeats the same words, yet
the meaning is somewhat different; for, having formerly spoken of
voluntary stupidity, he now threatens the punishment of it, namely, that
God will strike them with such bewilderment, that they shall be totally
deprived of the benefit of saving doctrine, and shall perceive in it
nothing but an empty sound. In short, he concludes, from what goes
before, that since they had not profited by the word of God, the Jews
shall be justly punished for their ingratitude; not that the word shall
be taken from them, but that they shall be deprived of sound judgment
and understanding, and shall be blind amidst the clearest light. Thus
God blinds and hardens the reprobate more and more on account of their
disobedience.

<span id="xvii.i-p124"></span>Paul quotes this passage (<span
id="xvii.i-p124.1"></span>[1Co
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)<span id="xvii.i-p124.1"></span>)
when he reproves the Corinthians for foolish affectation, in consequence
of their being so much under the influence of ambition, that they
regarded with the highest admiration those who spoke in a foreign
tongue, as the common people are accustomed to stare at everything that
is unknown and uncommon. This passage in the writings of Paul has been
misunderstood, because these words of the Prophet have not been duly
weighed. Now, Paul applies these words most appropriately to his object;
for he shews that the Corinthians are under the influence of a foolish
and absurd admiration, and that they improperly aspire to those things
from which they can derive no advantage; in short, that they are “like
children, not in malice, but in knowledge and understanding;” that thus
they voluntarily draw down on themselves the curse which the Prophet
here threatens; and that the word of God becomes to them precept on
precept, and they receive no more instruction from it than if a person
were to bawl out to them in an unknown tongue. It is the height of
madness to bring upon themselves, by idle affectation, that blindness
and stupidity which the Lord threatens against obstinate and rebellious
men. Paul therefore explains and renders more intelligible this
statement made by the Prophet, for he shews that they who abuse the
doctrine of salvation do not deserve to make progress in it in any way
whatever.

<span id="xvii.i-p125"></span>We have seen a passage closely resembling
it in which the Prophet compared his doctrine to “sealed letters.”
(<span id="xvii.i-p125.1"></span>[Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span id="xvii.i-p125.1"></span>)
Afterwards we shall find that the Prophet compares it to a book that is
“shut.” (<span id="xvii.i-p125.2"></span>[Isa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011)<span
id="xvii.i-p125.2"></span>.) This takes place when, on account of the
ingratitude of men, God takes from them judgment and sound
understanding; so that, “seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not
hear,” and thus are most justly punished. (<span
id="xvii.i-p125.3"></span>[Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="xvii.i-p125.3"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p125.4"></span>[Mr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012)<span id="xvii.i-p125.4"></span>.)
This ought to be carefully observed; for frequently we think that all is
well with us, and are highly delighted with ourselves, because we
continue to enjoy the word.  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) But
of what avail will it be to us, if it do not enlighten our understanding
and regulate our hearts? We thus draw down upon ourselves a heavier
judgment, and therefore we need a twofold grace; first, that God would
shine on us by his word; and secondly, that he would open our
understandings and dispose our hearts to obedience, otherwise we shall
derive no more aid from the brilliancy of the gospel than blind men
derive from the brightness of the sun. By this punishment, therefore, we
are reminded that we must not abuse the word of God, but must look
directly to the object which the Lord holds out to us in the word.

<span id="xvii.i-p127"></span>*They shall fall backward, and be broken
and snared.* At length he describes the destruction of those who are
blind to this brightness of the word; for nothing remains for them but
to be thrown down headlong, because they have departed from the right
path, and therefore they must stumble and fall. He means that the fall
will not be slight, for they shall be *bruised* by it. By the word
*snared* he employs another metaphor, namely, that for all unbelievers
“snares” are prepared, by which they shall be entangled and drawn to
destruction. We had a similar sentiment on a former occasion, (<span
id="xvii.i-p127.1"></span>[Isa
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015)<span id="xvii.i-p127.1"></span>,)
and expressed in nearly the same words;  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) for there the Prophet speaks on the
same subject, the blinding of the people, who by their obstinacy had
provoked the wrath of God. He shews that they who go astray, in
opposition to the word of God, are always very near destruction. Either
they shall meet with stumbling blocks on which they shall “stumble,” or
with snares by which they shall be “ensnared.” In short, it will be
impossible that evil shall not befall those who do not keep the path
which God has pointed out; for either they shall openly “fall and be
bruised,” or through concealed traps they shall fall into a “snare.”

<span id="xvii.i-p129"></span><span id="xvii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p130"></span>**14.** *Wherefore hear ye the word of the
Lord.* He goes on to address to them still stronger reproof, and at the
same time mingles with it a consolation in order to encourage the hearts
of the godly. While he threatens utter destruction against the wicked,
he leaves for believers ground of consolation, by declaring that their
salvation is dear and precious in the sight of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p131"></span>*Ye scornful men.* By this term he means
men who are addicted to sophistry and deceit, who think that by jeers
and cunning they can escape the judgment of God; for <span
id="xvii.i-p131.1"></span>לוץ (*lūtz*)  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) signifies to *jeer* or *scorn*. Now,
he addresses not ordinary men, but rulers and governors, who, in
governing the people, thought that they surpassed other men in sharpness
and dexterity, but turned their acuteness to cunning, by which they
acted hypocritically towards God himself, and therefore, in keen irony,
he calls them “scorners;” as if he had said,

<span id="xvii.i-p133"></span>“You think that you have enough of
craftiness to mock God,  
but you will not succeed in mocking him.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p133.2"></span>[Ga 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007)<span
id="xvii.i-p133.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p134"></span>The Prophet’s chief and severest contest
was with the nobles; for although all ranks were exceedingly corrupted,
yet the nobles, being puffed up with a false belief of their own wisdom,
were more obstinate than the rest. It has commonly been found, in almost
every age, that the common people, though they are distinguished by
unrestrained fierceness and violence, do not proceed to such a pitch of
wickedness as nobles or courtiers, or other crafty men, who think that
they excel others in ability and wisdom. The ministers of the word ought
chiefly, therefore, to arm themselves against ingenious adversaries.
None can be more destructive; for they not only of themselves do injury,
but excite others to the same kind of scorn and wickedness, and
frequently, through the estimation in which they are held, and the
splendor of their reputation, they dazzle the common people who are less
clear-sighted. It is a dreadful and monstrous thing when the governors
of the Church not only are themselves blinded, but even blind others,
and excite them to despise God, and ridicule godly doctrine, and taunt
it by their jeers, and, in short, employ their utmost ingenuity for
overturning religion; but in opposition to such persons we ought to
encourage our hearts by the example of the Prophet, that we may not sink
or lose heart in this contest. He shews us also the way in which we
ought to treat such persons.  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) We
ought not to spend much time in teaching them, (for instruction would be
of little use,) but must threaten them severely, and terrify them by the
judgment of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p136"></span>*This people which is in Jerusalem.* Their
guilt is highly aggravated by the consideration that they inhabit the
very sanctuary of God, and infect with their pollution God’s chosen
people.

<span id="xvii.i-p137"></span><span id="xvii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p138"></span>**15.** *Because ye have said.* The
Prophet next assigns the reason why he called them “scorners;” it was
because they had thrown off all fear of God. He likewise describes the
manner in which they acted, by saying that they promised to themselves
that they would escape punishment amidst all their crimes and
enormities, and became the more daring, and, as if they had obtained
greater liberty to pursue wicked courses, rushed forward without dread
wherever their unruly passions carried them.

<span id="xvii.i-p139"></span>*We have struck a league with death, and
with hell have we made a compact.* This is what he means by the league
into which they had entered with death and the grave; for by despising
and boldly ridiculing all God’s threatenings and chastisements, they
thought that they were out of all danger. <span
id="xvii.i-p139.1"></span>חזה (*chōzĕh*) means what he had formerly
expressed by <span id="xvii.i-p139.2"></span>ברית, (*bērīth*,) for it is
a repetition of the same statement. Literally it signifies *seeing*,
 <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) and denotes what is conveyed by
the French phrase, <span id="xvii.i-p140.1"></span>*avoir intelligence*,
or by the English phrase, “to have a mutual understanding.” There
appears to be also an implied contrast between prophetic visions and
that deceitful craftiness on which veterans in wicked arts value
themselves.

<span id="xvii.i-p141"></span>*We have made lies our refuge.* It is
certain that those cunning men never broke out into such boasting as to
utter those offensive words, for that would have been childish and
absurd.  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) Besides, though they
despised God and set at nought all his admonitions, they undoubtedly
wished to be held in some estimation by the people, and would never have
confessed that they “made lies their refuge;” but the Prophet looked at
their feelings and aims, and not at their pretexts, and took into
account their actions and dispositions, and not their words. Whoever,
then, flatters himself and his vices, and fearlessly despises God’s
threatenings, declares that he has “entered into a league with death,”
which he does not at all dread, notwithstanding the Lord’s threatenings.

<span id="xvii.i-p143"></span>The Prophet, therefore, reproves in
general that carnal presumption by which men are led to forgetfulness of
the judgment of God, and willingly deceive themselves, as if they could
escape the arm of God: but chiefly he attacks Lucianists  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) and censorious men, who place their
wisdom in nothing else than in irreligious contempt of God; and the more
eager they are to conceal their dishonor, the more earnestly does the
Prophet expose them, as if he had dragged forth to the light, from a
deep concealment, their cunning wiles, and as if he had said, “This is
the dexterity, skill, and cunning of the wise men of this world, who are
exposed on every hand to troubles and afflictions, and yet imagine that
they are concealed and safe. They unquestionably deserve to seek
salvation from falsehood, for they disregard God’s salvation, and
despise and ridicule him.” Their tricks, and cunning, and imposture, are
indeed concealed by them under plausible names, and they do not think
that they are falsehoods; but the Prophet calls them by their proper
names.

<span id="xvii.i-p145"></span>*When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through.* As to “the overflowing scourge,” the Prophet here includes two
metaphors; for he compares the calamities and afflictions by which God
chastises the transgressions of the world to a “scourge,” and then says,
that they are so rapid and violent that they resemble a “flood.” Against
those calamities, however severe and distressing, wicked men of this
description think that they are fortified by lying and deceit, and hope
that they shall be able to escape them, though they overflow far and
wide over the whole world. They perceive the judgments of God, and the
calamities to which men are exposed; but, because they do not observe
the hand and providence of God, and ascribe everything that happens to
fortune, they therefore seek to obtain such defences and safeguards as
may drive such “scourges” away from them.

<span id="xvii.i-p146"></span><span id="xvii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p147"></span>**16.** *Therefore thus saith the Lord
God.* Isaiah now comforts the godly, and threatens against the wicked
such punishment as they deserved. In the first instance, he brings
forward consolation, because the godly were a laughingstock to those
crafty men, as we see at the present day that irreligious men laugh at
our simplicity, and reckon us to be fools, because amidst such deep
adversity and sore afflictions we still hope that it will turn out to
our advantage. In opposition to this insolence of the reprobate, the
Prophet encourages and supports the hearts of the godly to pass by with
indifference, and reckon of no account their jeers and reproaches, and
to believe firmly that their hope will not be confounded or vain.

<span id="xvii.i-p148"></span>*Behold, I lay in Zion a stone, a stone of
trial.* The demonstrative particle *behold* expresses certainty; as if
he had said, “Though wicked men despise my words, and refuse to believe
them, yet I will perform what I have promised.” The pronoun *I* is
emphatic, that the prophecy may be more firmly believed. As to the
words, the genitive <span id="xvii.i-p148.1"></span>בחן, (*bōchăn*,) *of
trial*, which is used instead of an adjective along with *stone*, may be
taken both in an active and in a passive sense, either for a stone by
which the whole building is “tried,” or examined as by a standard, or
for a “tried stone.” The former meaning appears to me to be more
appropriate, and undoubtedly the usage of the Hebrew language requires
us to interpret it rather in an active sense. He calls it therefore a
trying stone, or a trier, on account of the effect produced; because by
this stone the whole building must be squared and adjusted, otherwise it
must unavoidably totter and fall.

<span id="xvii.i-p149"></span>*A precious corner-stone, a sure
foundation.* He calls it a corner-stone, because it supports the whole
weight of the building, and by this name, which is also given to it in
<span id="xvii.i-p149.1"></span>[Ps
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span
id="xvii.i-p149.1"></span>, he commends its force and strength. Lastly,
he calls it a “foundation,” and, so to speak, a “fundamental
foundation,” proceeding gradually in the commendation of it; for he
shews that it is not an ordinary stone, or one of many which contribute
to the building, but that it is a highly valuable stone, on which the
whole weight of the building exclusively rests. It is a stone, but a
stone which fills the whole corner; it is a corner-stone, but the whole
house is founded on it. As “another foundation cannot be laid,” so on it
alone must the whole Church, and every part of it, rest and be built.
(<span id="xvii.i-p149.2"></span>[1Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p149.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p150"></span>*He that believeth shall not make haste.*
This clause is interpreted by some as an exhortation, “He that
believeth, let him not make haste.” But I prefer to take it in the
future tense, both because that meaning agrees best with the context,
and because it is supported by the authority of the Apostle Paul. I do
acknowledge that the Apostles followed the Greek translation,  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) and used such liberty, that while they
were satisfied with giving the meaning, they did not quote the exact
words. Yet they never changed the meaning, but, taking care to have it
properly applied, they gave the true and genuine interpretation.
Whenever, therefore, they quote any passage from the Old Testament, they
adhere closely to its object and design.

<span id="xvii.i-p152"></span>Now, Paul, when he quotes this prophecy,
adopts the Greek version, “He that believeth shall not be ashamed.”
(<span id="xvii.i-p152.1"></span>[Rom.
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033), [Rom.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)<span
id="xvii.i-p152.1"></span>.) And certainly the design of the Prophet is
to shew, that they who believe will have peace and serenity of mind, so
that they shall not desire anything more, and shall not wander in
uncertainty, or hasten to seek other remedies, but shall be fully
satisfied with this alone. That is not a departure from the meaning, for
the word signifying *to make* *haste* conveys the idea of eagerness or
trembling. In short, the design of the Prophet is, to extol faith on
account of this invaluable result, that by means of it we enjoy settled
peace and composure. Hence it follows that, till we possess faith, we
must have continual perplexity and distress; for there is but one
harbour on which we can safely rely, namely, the truth of the Lord,
which alone will give us peace and serenity of mind.

<span id="xvii.i-p153"></span>This fruit of faith is elsewhere described
by the same Apostle Paul, when he says that, “being justified by faith,
we obtain peace with God.” (<span id="xvii.i-p153.1"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p153.1"></span>.)
The Apostles and evangelists shew that this “stone” is Christ, because
the Church was actually settled and founded at the time when he was
presented to the view of the world. (<span id="xvii.i-p153.2"></span>[Mt
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)<span id="xvii.i-p153.2"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p153.3"></span>[Ac
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p153.3"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p153.4"></span>[Ro
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span id="xvii.i-p153.4"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p153.5"></span>[1Pe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006)<span id="xvii.i-p153.5"></span>.)
First, in him the promises have their firmness; secondly, the salvation
of men rests on him alone, and therefore if Christ be taken away, the
Church will fall down and be ruined. The state of the fact therefore
shews, that these statements must undoubtedly be referred to Christ,
without whom there is no certainty of salvation; and therefore at every
moment ruin is at hand. Next, we have the authority of evangelists and
Apostles; and indeed the Holy Spirit conveys that instruction by their
mouth.

<span id="xvii.i-p154"></span>But it will be proper to examine it more
closely, that we may see in what manner these things are applied to
Christ. First, it is not without good reason that Isaiah represents God
as speaking, whose peculiar work it is to found the Church, as we have
already seen elsewhere, and as the Prophet will afterwards declare; and
this statement occurs very frequently in the Psalms. For if all men
devote their labor to it, they will not be able to lay the least stone.
It is God alone, therefore, who founds and builds his Church, though he
employs for this purpose the labors and services of men. Now, by whom
was Christ given, but by the Father? So then it was the heavenly Father
who did and accomplished these things, and who appointed Christ to be
the only foundation on which our salvation rests.

<span id="xvii.i-p155"></span>But was not this stone laid before? Did
not the Church always rest on this foundation? I acknowledge that it
did, but only in hope; for Christ had not yet been revealed, and had not
fulfilled the office of a Redeemer. On this account the Prophet speaks
of it as a future event, that believers may be fully persuaded that the
Church, which they saw not only tottering and falling, but grievously
shaken and almost laid in ruins, will yet be made firm by a new support,
when it shall rest on a stone laid by the hand of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p156"></span>*I lay in Zion.* He says that it is “in
Zion;” because Christ must come out of it, which contributes greatly to
confirm our faith, when we see that he came out of that place which was
appointed for this purpose so long before. Now, at the present day,
“Mount Zion” is everywhere; for the Church has spread to the ends of the
world.

<span id="xvii.i-p157"></span>Christ is truly “the stone of trial,” for
by him must the whole building be regulated, and we cannot be the
building of God, if we are not adapted to him. Hence also Paul exhorts
us to

<span id="xvii.i-p158"></span>“grow in him who is the head, from whom
the whole body must be joined and united.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p158.1"></span>[Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span id="xvii.i-p158.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p159"></span>Our faith must be wholly applied to
Christ, that he may be our rule. He is also the “corner-stone,” on which
rests not only one part of the building, but its whole weight, and the
foundation itself.

<span id="xvii.i-p160"></span>“No man,” as Paul says, “can lay any other
foundation than Jesus Christ.”  
(<span id="xvii.i-p160.2"></span>[1Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p160.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p161"></span>This is the reason why, when the Lord
promises by the mouth of Isaiah the restoration of his Church, he
reminds us of the foundation; for it was wasted in such a manner that it
resembled a ruin, and there was no way in which it could be restored but
by Christ. As to Christ being called also the “stone of stumbling,” this
is accidental; for the fault lies on ungrateful men, who, having
rejected him, find him to be altogether different from what he would
have been to them. But on this subject we have spoken at <span
id="xvii.i-p161.1"></span>[Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="xvii.i-p161.1"></span>.
 <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)

<span id="xvii.i-p163"></span><span id="xvii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p164"></span>**17.** *And I will lay judgment to the
line.* The ruinous condition of the Church being such that believers
hardly ventured to hope that it would be improved, he shews that God has
in his hand the ready means of forming the Church entirely anew. As he
lately mentioned a building, so now, by a different metaphor, he shews
that there is no reason to fear that God will not at length finish the
work of building which has been begun. Yet indirectly he reproves the
pride and insolence of those who wished to be accounted pillars of the
Church, while they were endeavoring, as far as lay in their power, to
raze it to the foundation. Although, in consequence of an almost total
extinction of the light of faith, and a frightful corruption of the
worship of God, the state of the people was hideous, yet they boasted of
their royal priesthood, in the same manner as we see the Papists at the
present day shamelessly utter similar boasting, though lamentable
confusion cries aloud that the form of the Church has utterly perished
among them. For this reason the Prophet describes what will be the
reformation of the Church.

<span id="xvii.i-p165"></span>*Judgment to the line, and righteousness
to the measure or plummet.* It is probable that <span
id="xvii.i-p165.1"></span>קו, (*kāv*,) *a line*, and <span
id="xvii.i-p165.2"></span>משקלת, (*mĭshkōlĕth*,) *a plummet*, mean the
same thing, as may be inferred with greater certainty from another
passage:

<span id="xvii.i-p166"></span>“I will stretch over Jerusalem the rope or
line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p166.1"></span>[2Ki
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013)<span
id="xvii.i-p166.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p167"></span>Yet I do not deny that he alludes to the
examination of weights; but both metaphors are taken from buildings, in
which the master-builders and masons try everything by a rule, in order
to preserve a due proportion in every part. Thus it is said that the
Lord administers equal judgment, when he restores the Church, in which
otherwise everything is disordered and confused, as in a hideous ruin,
when the ungodly are exalted and enjoy prosperity, while the godly are
despised and sorrowful.

<span id="xvii.i-p168"></span>He makes the same statement concerning
“righteousness,” that he will measure or try it by his weights, and will
regulate everything by a rule; for by *righteousness* and *judgment* he
means a proper and lawful administration of the Church, as contrasting
with the masks and disguises boasted of by those who fear the title of
Bishops. The meaning is, that this foundation is laid, not only that the
Church may be commenced, but that it may be perfectly restored, to use a
common phrase, “from top to bottom” (<span id="xvii.i-p168.1"></span>De
fonds en comble.)

<span id="xvii.i-p169"></span>*The hail shall sweep away the reliance of
falsehood.* This second part of the metaphor denotes also a very exact
equality. Nothing then will be wanting to the building, if Christ be
laid for the foundation; and, on the other hand, if he be not there, all
will be vanity and confusion. Now since there was no room for “judgment
and righteousness,” but by sweeping away the false confidences, he
declares that they shall be all swept away, because the violence of
God’s anger shall cast down all loftiness, and the flood shall penetrate
all the hiding-places of thoughtless indifference. He therefore
threatens that hypocrites, with all their boasting, shall nevertheless
perish, even though the Lord preserve the Church; for he does not speak
of chastisements, as if the wicked would be corrected by them, because,
on the contrary, they become hardened and more obstinate. The cleansing,
therefore, he shews, will be such as to drag them forth from their
hiding-places and strip them of false and empty confidence; for wicked
men think that they are so thoroughly concealed by their falsehood and
deceit, that they shall never feel strokes, and therefore they please
and flatter themselves amidst their iniquities and crimes; but the
*waters* will easily reach them; that is, the wrath of God, which shall
rush down upon them like a deluge, will easily break through their
lurking-places.

<span id="xvii.i-p170"></span><span id="xvii.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p171"></span>**18.** *And your covenant with death
shall be disannulled.* Formerly he directed his reproof against
hypocrites, who obstinately mocked at God and all his threatenings; and
he checked their thoughts in imagining that “they had made a covenant
with death,” (<span id="xvii.i-p171.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span
id="xvii.i-p171.1"></span>,) that is, in promising to themselves that
all their transgressions would pass unpunished; as if by jeers and
laughter they could escape the arm of God. He now threatens that, when
they shall be fully aware that they must render an account to God, they
shall be struck with fear and dread, whether they will or not;  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) for that state of ease and
indifference into which they are sunk, arises from a kind of lethargy or
drunkenness, which hinders them from perceiving the alarming nature of
their disease; but the Lord will arouse them from their sleep, however
profound, and will annul their imaginary compacts.

<span id="xvii.i-p173"></span>In short, he means that that peace which
the wicked enjoy, while they slumber in their sins, will not be
perpetual; for they shall be compelled, even against their will, to
acknowledge that God is their judge, and, when they shall wish to enjoy
repose, and while they are careless and unprepared, they shall be
suddenly seized and agitated by strange terrors and anguish of mind.
Their case is similar to that of malefactors, who, if they have broken
out of prison and escaped, mock their judges, and utter reproachful and
forward and insolent language against them, but, when they see the
officers of justice close at their heels, suddenly tremble, and find
that all their joy is turned into mourning, and that their condition is
far worse than if they had not broken out of prison. Thus the wicked
enjoy some momentary gladness, which they obtain by forgetfulness of
their guilt; but the Lord immediately lays his hand on them, and
terrifies their consciences in such a manner that they can find no rest.

<span id="xvii.i-p174"></span><span id="xvii.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p175"></span>**19.** *From the time that it shall
pass.* He expresses more in this verse than in the preceding one; for he
declares that the destruction of the reprobate is close at hand, though
they promise to themselves everlasting happiness. Wicked men indeed
perceive that they are liable to many calamities, but yet they flatter
and stupefy themselves, and imagine that in this way they can ward off
their calamities. They have in their mouth proverbs of this sort, “Let
us not distress ourselves before the time: Let us enjoy the season while
it lasts: Let us be cheerful, and not give ourselves uneasiness when we
can avoid it.” But he threatens that there hangs over their heads a
hidden destruction,  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) and adds:

<span id="xvii.i-p177"></span>*It shall seize you every morning, and
shall pass every day by day and night.* By “every morning” is meant
“quickly and continually;” for it is only when they feel distress that
wicked men are touched with the fear of God. Frequently indeed they are
afraid when there is no danger; but it is a blind terror, for they do
not understand whence their alarm proceeds. While God threatens, they
are unconcerned, because they do not acknowledge him to be their judge,
and thus they have no serious thoughts about God till they feel his
hand. When he again repeats “in the morning,” and afterwards adds, “by
day and by night,” he means, as I have said, that the scourge will be
constant and daily; that they may not persuade themselves that it will
be a light calamity, or deceive themselves by the hope of any
mitigation; for, while the wrath of God against believers is momentary,
against unbelievers it is eternal, for it never ceases to pursue them to
the end.

<span id="xvii.i-p178"></span>*Terror alone shall cause them to
understand the report.*  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) Here
commentators differ. Jerome’s translation is, “Terror shall give
understanding to the report.” But they come nearer to the meaning of the
Prophet who give this interpretation, “The report alone shall make you
understand,” that is, “The men to whom the messenger shall come will be
rendered obedient to God by the report alone.” For my own part, I adopt
a simpler view, though I do not choose to refute the expositions given
by others. “It will come to pass that terror alone shall enable you to
understand doctrine.” As if he had said, “Hitherto I have not succeeded
in my exhortations to you, but the Lord will find out a new method of
instructing you, that is, chastisements and calamities, by which he will
terrify you in such a manner that you shall know with whom you have to
do.” It is as if a grieved and sorrowful father were thus to remonstrate
with a disobedient and incorrigible son, “Since you despise my advices,
you must one day be taught by the executioner.”  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)

<span id="xvii.i-p181"></span>Thus Isaiah threatens wicked men, who
mocked at all his threatenings, and tells them that they do not care for
the assistance of prophets, but that one day they will actually know
with what sincerity and truth they addressed them, and yet that it will
be of no advantage to them, because knowledge so late will leave no room
for repentance. We must “seek the Lord while there is time.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p181.1"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span id="xvii.i-p181.1"></span>.)
Pharaoh was made no better by the chastisements which he received,
(<span id="xvii.i-p181.2"></span>[Ex
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015)<span id="xvii.i-p181.2"></span>,)
and Esau gained nothing by his tears, when he saw that he had been
stripped of his birthright, (<span id="xvii.i-p181.3"></span>[Ge
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#038)<span id="xvii.i-p181.3"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p181.4"></span>[Heb
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017)<span
id="xvii.i-p181.4"></span>;) for they were not followed by any
repentance or any amendment of life. By the word “terror” he shews how
“dreadful it is to fall into the hands of the living God,” (<span
id="xvii.i-p181.5"></span>[Heb
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span
id="xvii.i-p181.5"></span>,) and that they who despise his word are
never allowed to pass unpunished. He employs the word <span
id="xvii.i-p181.6"></span>שמועה (*shĕmūgnāh*) to denote what is heard,
that is, doctrine.

<span id="xvii.i-p182"></span><span id="xvii.i-p182.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p183"></span>**20.** *For the bed shall be short.* By
this metaphor he adorns the former statement; for he compares the
reprobate, who are pressed down by the hand of God, to those who have
concealed themselves in a “short and narrow bed,” in which they can
scarcely stretch their limbs or lift their head, and where, in short,
instead of rest, they feel sharp pains. He means that the Jews will be
shut up in such a manner that they shall be overwhelmed with the
severity of their distresses, and that the “bed,” which is given to man
for rest, will be an instrument of torture.

<span id="xvii.i-p184"></span>If they seek a “covering,” he says that
“it will be too short to wrap themselves in it,” and that it is an
addition to their former distress, that amidst those heavy calamities
they will want all necessary comforts. He chose to express this by the
metaphor of a “narrow covering,” that they may know that their condition
will be in the highest degree wretched; because the vengeance of God
will pursue them on all sides, both above and below, so that they shall
have no abatement or mitigation, and shall find no relief. The Lord
employs these metaphors, in order to accommodate himself to our
weakness; because otherwise we cannot understand how dreadful is the
judgment of God. Hence therefore we learn how dreadful are the terrors
which shake and confine wicked men, when the Lord pursues them; they
search eagerly for places of concealment, and would willingly hide
themselves in the center of the earth; but the Lord drags them forth to
light, and confines and hems them in, so that they cannot move.

<span id="xvii.i-p185"></span><span id="xvii.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p186"></span>**21.** *For as in Mount Perazim.* Since
he speaks here of the reprobate, the Prophet holds out nothing but
terrors and cruel punishment; for while the Lord deals kindly and gently
with his children, he shews that he will be an object of terror to the
reprobate. For this purpose he produces examples, in which the Lord
displayed his arm in defense of his people, as when he routed the
Philistines in the valley of Perazim, when David pursued them, (<span
id="xvii.i-p186.1"></span>[2Sa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020)<span id="xvii.i-p186.1"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p186.2"></span>[1Ch
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#011)<span
id="xvii.i-p186.2"></span>,) and at another time, when the Amorites and
other enemies were slain by the Israelites in the valley of Gibeon, with
Joshua as their leader, to whom the Lord granted that the “sun and moon
should stand still,” that they might more easily pursue their enemies.
(<span id="xvii.i-p186.3"></span>[Jos
10:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010)<span
id="xvii.i-p186.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p187"></span>*Shall Jehovah rise up.* By the word “rise
up” he points out the power of God, because we think that he is lazy and
indolent, when he does not punish the reprobate. It is therefore said
that he “rises up” or stands erect, when he openly exhibits to us proofs
of his power, and such as especially manifest the great care which he
takes of his Church. Although the manner was different, (for in ancient
times he “rose up” in defense of his chosen people against foreigners,
but now he threatens war against the Jews,) yet Isaiah skillfully
applies these examples; for by driving out internal enemies God will
promote the advantage of his Church not less than if he directed his
strength and arms against foreigners. He would thus reckon them in the
number of enemies, though they falsely boasted that they were his
people.

<span id="xvii.i-p188"></span>*His strange work.*  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) Some think that this “work” is called
“strange,” because nothing corresponds better to the nature of God than
to be merciful and to pardon our sins; and that when he is angry, he
acts against his will, and assumes a character that is foreign to him
and that is contrary to his nature. By nature he is gentle,
compassionate, patient, kind, slow to anger, as Scripture declares by
many words and by a variety of expressions his infinite compassion.
(<span id="xvii.i-p189.1"></span>[Ex
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span id="xvii.i-p189.1"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p189.2"></span>[Ps
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008)<span
id="xvii.i-p189.2"></span>.) Others explain it to mean that the “work”
is “strange,” because formerly he was wont to defend his people, and
that it is monstrous that he now proceeds to attack and exterminate
them, as if they were enemies.

<span id="xvii.i-p190"></span>For my own part, I consider “strange” to
mean simply what is uncommon or wonderful; for this appellation is given
to what is rare and unusual among men, and we know that they almost
always view with astonishment whatever is new. It is as if he had said,
“The Lord will punish you, and that not in a common or ordinary way, but
in a way so amazing that at the sight or hearing of it, all shall be
struck with horror.” It is certain that all the works of God are so many
proofs of his power, so that they ought justly to excite our admiration;
but because, through constant habit and looking at them, they are
despised by us, we think that he does nothing unless he adopt some
extraordinary methods. On this account Isaiah quotes ancient examples,
in order that we may know that, though to men this vengeance be new and
amazing, yet to God it is far from being new, since for a long period he
has given proofs of his power and ability not less remarkable than
these. Yet I willingly admit that the Prophet contrasts the wicked
Israelites with the Philistines and Canaanites, as if he had said, “The
Lord formerly performed miracles when he wished to save his people; he
will now perform them in order to destroy that people; for since the
Israelites have degenerated, they shall feel the hand of God for their
destruction which their fathers felt for their salvation.”

<span id="xvii.i-p191"></span><span id="xvii.i-p191.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p192"></span>**22.** *Now therefore.* He again reminds
those wicked men, whom he had formerly called “scorners,” (<span
id="xvii.i-p192.1"></span>[Isa
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#014)<span
id="xvii.i-p192.1"></span>,) that their cunning, and contempt, and
jeers, and mockery, will avail them nothing, because all their ingenuity
will be thwarted; and he exhorts them to repentance, if there still be
any of them that are capable of being cured. For this reason he repeats
the same threatenings, in order to arouse them.

<span id="xvii.i-p193"></span>*Lest your chains be more firmly
fastened.* He says that all that they will gain by resistance will be to
draw themselves more firmly into their nets. Instead of “chains,” there
are some who render <span id="xvii.i-p193.1"></span>מוסרים (*mōsĕrīm*)
“chastisements;” but this does not agree with the context. The metaphor
of “chains” is highly appropriate in this passage; for, as the fox which
has fallen into a snare, fastens the knot more firmly by his attempts to
extricate himself and escape, so wicked men by their disobedience
entangle and fasten themselves more and more. They desire to escape the
hand of God, and kick against the spur, like an unruly horse which bends
all its strength to shake of its rider; but all that they accomplish by
their obstinacy and stubbornness is to receive heavier and severer
blows.

<span id="xvii.i-p194"></span>*Be ye not mockers.* This shews us how we
ought to deal with wicked men, when we see that they are altogether
destitute of the fear of God. All that remains for us to do is, to warn
them that their jeers and scorn will be attended by no success in
resisting the vengeance of God which hangs over them. We are also
reminded that we ought not to sport with God, since we see, as in a
mirror, what has been the end of those who despised the warnings and
threatenings of the prophets since the beginning of the world.

<span id="xvii.i-p195"></span>*For I have heard a consumption.* That his
prediction may be firmly believed, he declares that he brings nothing
forward which God did not reveal. <span id="xvii.i-p195.1"></span>כלה
(*chālāh*) sometimes signifies “perfection,” and sometimes
“consumption,” as we formerly stated  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) (<span id="xvii.i-p196.1"></span>[Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.i-p196.1"></span>.) Here it must denote “consumption,” for the
Prophet means nothing else than that God has determined speedily to
destroy the whole earth by a general slaughter. This includes two
things; first, that dreadful and grievous destruction is about to
overtake the world, (unless it be thought better to limit the word
“earth” to Judea, to which I do not object,) and, secondly, that the day
is fixed and is not distant. The word *hearing* is here used to denote
Revelation. He says that it has been made known to him; for, as the Lord
determined to make use of the ministry of the prophets, so he revealed
to them his secrets, that they might be, as it were, interpreters of
them.

<span id="xvii.i-p197"></span>*Upon the whole earth.* As if he had said,
“The whole world abounds with shocking impiety, reprobate men have grown
wanton in their wickedness, as if there would be no judgment of God; but
throughout the whole world, or in every part of Judea, God will shew
that he is judge and avenger, and not a corner of the earth will be
exempted from troubles and calamities, because they have despised the
word.” Now, although these things were revealed in the age of Isaiah,
yet they belong not less to other times, in which God shews that he is
always like himself, and is wont to execute his judgments by the same
method and rule.  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)

<span id="xvii.i-p199"></span><span id="xvii.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p200"></span>**23.** *Give ear and hear my voice.*
Isaiah makes use of a preface, as if he were about to speak of something
important and very weighty; for we are not wont to demand attention from
our hearers, unless when we are about to say what is very important. And
yet he seems here to speak of common and ordinary subjects, as for
example, about agriculture, sowing, thrashing, and such like operations.
But the Prophet intended to direct the minds of his hearers to higher
matters; for when he discourses about the judgments of God, and shews
with what wisdom God governs the world, though wicked men think that
everything moves by chance and at random, he intended to lay down and
explain a difficult subject, in a plain style, by metaphors drawn from
objects which are well known and understood. We often complain that God
winks too much at the crimes of wicked men, because he does not
immediately punish them agreeably to our wish; but the Prophet shews
that God appoints nothing but what is just and proper.

<span id="xvii.i-p201"></span>The design of this preface therefore is,
that men may perceive their stupidity in carping at the judgments of
God, and putting an unfavourable construction on them, while even in the
ordinary course of nature they have a very bright mirror, in which they
may see them plainly. There is an implied expostulation with men who
shut their eyes amidst so clear light. He shews that they are dull and
stupid in not understanding the works of God which are so manifest, and
yet are so rash and daring that they presume to judge and censure what
is hidden. In like manner Paul also, when speaking of the resurrection,
pronounces that those who do not perceive the power of God in the seeds
which are thrown into the earth are madmen.

<span id="xvii.i-p202"></span>“Thou fool, that which thou sowest does
not grow or vegetate till it has rotted.”  
(<span id="xvii.i-p202.2"></span>[1Co
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span
id="xvii.i-p202.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p203"></span>Thus Isaiah here declares that those who
do not see the wisdom of God in things so obvious are stupid, and, in
short, that men are blind and dull in beholding the works of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p204"></span><span id="xvii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p205"></span>**24.** *Doth the ploughman plough every
day*  <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) *to sow?* This passage is
commonly explained as if the Lord reproached his people for ingratitude,
because he had cultivated the field as a husbandman, and had spent on it
all his care and industry, and yet did not reap such fruit as it ought
to have yielded. Such is the interpretation given by the Jews, who have
been followed also by the Greek and Latin commentators; but Isaiah’s
meaning was quite different. He connects this doctrine with his former
statement, that the destruction of Judea, or of the whole world, had
been revealed to him; and therefore he adds, that still God does not
always display his hand, or constantly punish the wickedness of men; for
he often appears as if he did not see it, and delays the punishment of
it for a time. The Lord’s forbearance and slowness to punish, which is
thus manifested, is abused by wicked men for leading them to greater
lengths in wickedness, as Solomon remarks that men are encouraged to
commit wickedness by observing that

<span id="xvii.i-p207"></span>“all things happen alike to the good and
to the bad,” (<span id="xvii.i-p207.1"></span>[Ec
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014)<span id="xvii.i-p207.1"></span>,)

<span id="xvii.i-p208"></span>that all the worst and basest men enjoy
prosperity, while the godly are liable to distresses not less and even
greater than those of other men.  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)

<span id="xvii.i-p210"></span>In short, when the wicked perceive no
difference in outward matters, they think either that there is no God,
or that everything is governed by the blind violence of fortune. To such
thoughts therefore Isaiah replies, “Do you not know that God has his
seasons, and that he knows what he ought to do at the proper time?” If
ploughmen do not “every day” cleave the earth or break the clods, this
ought not to be attributed to their want of skill; for, on the contrary,
their skill requires them to desist.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) What would they gain by continually
turning over the soil, but to weary themselves to no purpose, and
prevent it from yielding any fruit? Thus God does not act with bustle or
confusion, but knows the times and seasons for doing his work.  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244)

<span id="xvii.i-p213"></span><span id="xvii.i-p213.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p214"></span>**25.** *When he hath levelled its
surface.* He now speaks about sowing. The sower will not put into the
earth as much as he can, nor will he throw it in at random, but will
measure the ground, and give to it as much as is necessary; for
otherwise the superfluous mass would rot, and not a single grain would
take root.

<span id="xvii.i-p215"></span>*Wheat in measure, and barley measured.*
 <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) He will not mix various seeds,
but will allot one part of the field for “wheat,” another for “vetches,”
and another for “cummin.” He will do this in measure, for that I
consider to be the proper interpretation of <span
id="xvii.i-p216.1"></span>שורה (*sōrāh*.)  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) It does not mean excellent or good;
for he is speaking about measurement. Similar statements are made about
reaping and thrashing; for all kinds of grain are not thrashed in the
same manner. Wheat is thrashed with the wheel of a cart or wagon,
vetches with a staff, and cummin with a thicker rod. He speaks according
to the custom of the country. This mode of thrashing is unknown in any
part of France, except Provence.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) In short, he means that the manner of
thrashing which is suitable to the grain does not apply equally to all.
Besides, the husbandman is not constantly or incessantly employed in
thrashing, but exercises moderation, that he may not bruise the grain.

<span id="xvii.i-p219"></span><span id="xvii.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p220"></span>**26.** *His God instructeth and teacheth
him what is right.* From whom did the husbandman learn these things but
from God? If they are so well educated and taught in the smallest
matters, what ought we to think of so great a teacher and instructor?
Does he not know how to apply a fixed measure and equity to his works?
Does he not see the time for executing his judgment; when he ought to
cut down the people, and, as we may say, to harrow  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) them; when he ought to thrash; what
strokes, what kind of chastisements he ought to inflict; in short, what
is most suitable to each time and to each person? Will not he who
appointed the universal order of nature regulate these things also by a
just proportion? Are men so headstrong that they will venture to
remonstrate with him, or to impugn his wisdom? The general meaning is,
that we ought not to judge rashly, if God does not immediately punish
the wickedness of men.

<span id="xvii.i-p222"></span>This shews that we ought to restrain the
presumption of men, who, even in the smallest matters, often fall into
mistakes. If a person ignorant of agriculture should see a husbandman
cutting fields with a plough, making furrows, breaking clods, driving
oxen up and down and following their footsteps, he would perhaps laugh
at it, imagining that it was childish sport; but that man would be
justly blamed by the husbandman, and convicted of ignorance and
rashness; for every person of great modesty will think that those things
are not done idly or at random, though he does not know the reason. When
the seed is committed to the ground, does it not appear to be lost? If
ignorant men find fault with these things, as ignorance is often rash
and presumptuous in judging, will not intelligent men justly blame and
pronounce them to have been in the wrong? If this be the case, how shall
the Lord deal with us, if we dare to find fault with his works which we
do not understand?

<span id="xvii.i-p223"></span>Let us therefore learn from this how
carefully we ought to avoid this rashness, and with what modesty we
ought to restrain ourselves from such thoughts. If we ought to act
modestly towards men, and not to condemn rashly what exceeds our
understanding or capacity, we ought to exercise much greater modesty
towards God. When we consider therefore the various calamities with
which the Church is afflicted, let us not complain that loose reins are
given to the wicked,  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) and that
consequently she is abandoned to her fate, or that all is over with her;
but let us believe firmly, that the Lord will apply remedies at the
proper time, and let us embrace with our whole heart his righteous
judgments.

<span id="xvii.i-p225"></span>If any person carefully examining those
words shall infer from them that some are punished more speedily and
others more slowly, and shall pronounce the meaning to be, that
punishment is delayed, such a view is not merely probable, but is fully
expressed by the Prophet. We draw from it a delightful consolation, that
the Lord regulates his thrashing in such a manner that he does not crush
or bruise his people. The wicked are indeed reduced by him to nothing
and destroyed; but he chastises his own people, in order that, having
been subdued and cleansed, they may be gathered into the barn.

<span id="xvii.i-p226"></span><span id="xvii.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p227"></span>**29.** *This also hath proceeded from
Jehovah of hosts.* This passage is explained by some, as if The Prophet
had said that the science of agriculture proceeded from the Lord; but I
consider it to be the application of what goes before. Having pointed
out the wisdom of God, even in the smallest matters, he bids us, in like
manner, raise our eyes to higher subjects, that we may learn to behold
with greater reverence his wonderful and hidden judgments. A passing
observation on the 26th verse may be made, and indeed ought to be made,
that not only agriculture, but likewise all the arts which contribute to
the advantage of mankind, are the gifts of God, and that all that
belongs to skillful invention has been imparted by him to the minds of
men. Men have no right to be proud on this account, or to arrogate to
themselves the praise of invention, as we see that the ancients did,
who, out of their ingratitude to God, ranked in the number of the gods
those whom they considered to be the authors of any ingenious
contrivance. Hence arose deification and that prodigious multitude of
gods which the heathens framed in their own fancy. Hence arose the great
Ceres, and Triptolemus, and Mercury, and innumerable others, celebrated
by human tongues and by human writings. The Prophet shews that such arts
ought to be ascribed to God, from whom they have been received, who
alone is the inventor and teacher of them. If we ought to form such an
opinion about agriculture and mechanical arts, what shall we think of
the learned and exalted sciences, such as Medicine, Jurisprudence,
Astronomy, Geometry, Logic, and such like? Shall we not much more
consider them to have proceeded from God? Shall we not in them also
behold and acknowledge his goodness, that his praise and glory may be
celebrated both in the smallest and in the greatest affairs?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc14016.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xvii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p66"></span>

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc14016.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xvii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p68"></span>

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc14016.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xvii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p70"></span>

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc14016.htm#fr_212) <span
id="xvii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p77"></span>

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc14016.htm#fr_213) <span
id="xvii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p78"></span>

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc14016.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xvii.i-p83.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p84"></span>

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc14016.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xvii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p85"></span>

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc14016.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xvii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p93"></span>

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc14016.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xvii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p100"></span>

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc14016.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xvii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p101"></span>

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc14016.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xvii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p104"></span>

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc14016.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xvii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p106"></span>

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc14016.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xvii.i-p106.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p107"></span>

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc14016.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xvii.i-p107.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p108"></span>

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc14016.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xvii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p111"></span>

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc14016.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xvii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p112"></span>

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc14016.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xvii.i-p125.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p126"></span>

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc14016.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xvii.i-p127.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p128"></span>

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc14016.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xvii.i-p131.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p132"></span>

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc14016.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xvii.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p135"></span>

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc14016.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xvii.i-p139.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p140"></span>

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc14016.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xvii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p142"></span>

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc14016.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xvii.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p144"></span>

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc14016.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xvii.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p151"></span>

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc14016.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xvii.i-p161.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p162"></span>

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc14016.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xvii.i-p171.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p172"></span>

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc14016.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xvii.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p176"></span>

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc14016.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xvii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p179"></span>

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc14016.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xvii.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p180"></span>

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc14016.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xvii.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p189"></span>

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc14016.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xvii.i-p195.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p196"></span>

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc14016.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xvii.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p198"></span>

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc14016.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xvii.i-p205.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p206"></span>

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc14016.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xvii.i-p208.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p209"></span>

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc14016.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xvii.i-p210.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p211"></span>

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc14016.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xvii.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p212"></span>

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc14016.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xvii.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p216"></span>

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc14016.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xvii.i-p216.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p217"></span>

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc14016.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xvii.i-p217.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p218"></span>

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc14016.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xvii.i-p220.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p221"></span>

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc14016.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xvii.i-p223.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p224"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](cc14017)
