[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc14003)  [Next](cc14005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>THE FRENCH TRANSLATOR’S

<span id="v-p2"></span>PREFATORY ADDRESS

<span id="v-p3"></span>TO THE READERS.

<span id="v-p4"></span>It is upwards of twenty years, my dear Readers,
since the Lessons of Mr. John Calvin, having been collected by *Mr.
Nicolas Des Gallars*, were published under the title of a Commentary,
and dedicated to that illustrious Prince, of blessed memory, Edward VI.,
King of England. Long afterwards, the Author himself, revising that
collection printed in Latin and in French, was not satisfied with merely
revising it, so as to elucidate what might be obscure on account of its
brevity, and to arrange better what was confused, but labored so
diligently and so successfully, that he enlarged it in Latin, by more
than a third, with excellent and necessary matter for understanding the
text, putting everything so completely in its proper order, that if any
person will take the trouble of comparing the first Commentary, or
Collection of Lessons, with this second edition, he will find that what
we have said is true.

<span id="v-p5"></span>What is more, it was not in the school that this
Commentary was collected for the second time, but it was written in the
house, and word for word, under the eye of the Author, who has so
skillfully arranged and digested the whole, that when you read it, you
will perceive that in this book, as in others which have already come
forth from him, he did much good service to the Church of God, and
faithfully pointed out the road to those who wish to make progress in
the study of theology, especially by these Commentaries, which, when
they are read attentively, will not only be very useful for explaining
the true meaning of the prophet Isaiah, but will not less contribute to
throw light on many passages of the other books of the Holy Scripture.
This has induced me to translate them anew into French, in order that
those of you who do not understand the Latin tongue may not be deprived
of such an advantage. Read, and profit in the fear of the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](cc14005.md)
