[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc14010)  [Next](cc14012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 23

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 23:1-18

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1**. The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of
Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering
in: from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Onus Tyri. Ululate, naves Tharsis;
quia devastatio facta est, ut non sit domus, non sit commeatus e terra
Cittim. Revelatum est hoc eis.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Be still, ye inhabitatnts of the isle;
thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have
replenished.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Tacete incolæ insularum: negotiator
Sidonis, trajicientes mare, qui te replebant.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3**. And by great waters the seed of Sihor,
the harvest of the river, *is* her revenue; and she is a mart of
nations.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3**. In aquis multis semen Nili, messis
fluminis fruges ejus; et fuit emporium gentium.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4**. Be thou ashamed, O Zidon; for the sea
hath spoken, *even* the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor
bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, *nor* bring up
virgins.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Erubesce, Sidon; quia dixit mare,
fortitudo maris, dicens, Non parturivi, neque peperi, neque educavi
adolescentes, neque extuli virgines.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5**. As at the report concerning Egypt,
*so* shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Simul atque rumor pervenerit ad
Ægyptios, dolebunt secundum rumorem Tyri.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6**. Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye
inhabitants of the isle.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Transite in Tharsis; ululate,
habitatores insularum.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7** *Is* this your joyous *city*, whose
antiquity *is* of ancient days? Her own feet shall carry her afar off to
sojourn.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7**. An hæc vobis exultans? a diebus
antiquis vetustas ejus. Ducent eam pedes ejus, ut peregrinetur in terram
longinquam.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8**. Who hath taken this counsel against
Tyre, the crowning *city*, whose merchants *are* princes, whose
traffickers *are* the honourable of the earth?

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8**. Quis cosultavit hoc super Tyrum
coronantem? cujus negotiatores sunt Principes, cujus institores nobiles
terræ?

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9**. The Lord of hosts hath purposed it,
to stain the pride of all glory, *and* to bring into contempt all the
honourable of the earth.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9**. Iehova exercituum ita decrevit ad
profanandam superbiam omnium magnificorum, ut vilipendat omnes gloriosos
terræ.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10**. Pass through thy land as a river, O
daughter of Tarshish: *there is* no more strength.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10**. Transi instar fluminis e terra tua
ad filiam Tharsis, quia non amplius cingulum.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11**. He stretched out his hand over the
sea; he shook the kingdoms: the Lord hath given a commandment against
the merchant-*city*, to destroy the strongholds thereof.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11**. Manum suam posuit super mare,
concussit regna. Iehova mandavit super Canaan ut enervet robur ejus.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12**. And he said, Thou shalt no more
rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to
Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12**. Et ait, Non adjicies ultra ut
exultes, ubi oppressa fueris, virgo filia Sidon. Surge, ut transeas in
Cittim. Atqui etiam illic non erit tibi requies.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13**. Behold the land of the Chaldeans:
this people was not, *till* the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell
in the wilderness: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the
palaces thereof; *and* he brought it to ruin.

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13**. Ecce terra Chaldæorum, hic non fuit
populus, Assur fundavit eam deserti incolis; erexerunt arces ejus;
excitarunt palatia ejus; redegit eam in vastitatem.

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14**. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your
strength is laid waste.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14**. Ululate, naves Tharsis; quia vastata
est fortitudo vestra.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15**. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days
of one king: after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an
harlot.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15**. Accidet in die illa, ut sit in
oblivione Tyrus septuaginta annis, secundum dies regis unius; a fine
septuaginta annorum erit Tyro quasi canticum meretricis.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>**16**. Take an harp, go about the city,
thou harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many
songs, that thou mayest be remembered.

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>**16**. Sume citharam, circui urbem,
meretrix oblivioni tradita, suavem fac melodiam, multiplica carmen, ut
in memoriam revoceris.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**17**. And it shall come to pass, after the
end of seventy years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn
to her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the
world upon the face of the earth.

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**17**. Erit ergo a fine septuaginta
annorum, ut visitet Iehova Tyrum; et tunc redibit ad mercedem suam,
fornicabiturque cum omnibus regnis terræ quæ sunt super terram.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>**18**. And her merchandise and her hire
shall be holiness to the Lord: it shall not be treasured nor laid up;
for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat
sufficiently, and for durable clothing.

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>**18**. Sed (tandem) erit negotiatio ejus et
merces ejus sancta Iehovæ; non reponetur neque recondetur; sed
negotiatio ejus (addicta) erit iis qui habitabant coram Iehovæ, ut
comedant ad satietatem, et habeant densum operimentum.

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span><span id="xii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**1.** *The burden of Tyre.* *Tyre* was very
wealthy, and highly celebrated, both on account of the variety and
extent of its commercial intercourse with all nations, and on account of
the flourishing colonies which sprang from it: Carthage, which was the
rival of the Roman Empire, Utica, Leptis, Cadiz, and other towns, which
also sent every year a present to Tyre, by which they acknowledged that
they looked on Tyre as their mother. Isaiah threatens its destruction,
because it had been hostile to the people of God, as we may infer from
what is said by Ezekiel; for we ought carefully to attend to the cause
of the destruction, because it was the design of the Prophet to shew
that God testifies his fatherly regard to his people by opposing all her
enemies. (<span id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>[Eze
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>..md)
Some think that this refers to the storming of Tyre by Alexander, who
took it with great difficulty. But the argument on which they rely, that
Isaiah mentions *Chittim*,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) has
little force. By that name the Hebrew writers unquestionably denote the
Macedonians, but under this word they likewise include other nations,
such as the Greeks, and the countries that were beyond the sea.
Nebuchadnezzar employed in that siege not only his own soldiers, but
also foreigners, whom he brought from Greece and other places. It is for
a reason altogether different, as we shall immediately see, that he
mentions the Greeks, namely, that henceforth they will not take their
ships to Tyre for the sake of carrying on merchandise.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span>But from the conclusion of this chapter I
draw an argument for a contrary opinion, for Isaiah speaks of the
restoration of Tyre, and it was never restored after having been stormed
by Alexander. Besides, when I compare Ezekiel’s words with those of
Isaiah, I think that I see one and the same prediction. Now, he does not
speak of Alexander, but of Nebuchadnezzar; and I cannot doubt that it
must be explained in that manner. Not only so, but in the days of
Ezekiel and Isaiah that city was under the dominion of a king, but
historians relate that, when it was stormed by Alexander, it had been
brought to the form of a republic. And if we consider the object of the
prophecy, we shall be sufficiently confirmed in this opinion, for his
aim is to comfort the Jews by threatening that the inhabitants of Tyre,
by whom they had been oppressed, will not pass unpunished. For it would
have been highly inconsistent that the Lord should punish other nations,
and that this nation, which had been not less hostile, should escape
punishment altogether, or be punished five hundred years afterwards.
Every conjecture, therefore, leads us to this conclusion, that we should
expound this passage as relating to Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>*Howl, ye ships of Tarshish.* He employs
various figures of speech, according to his custom, in illustrating the
ruin of Tyre, in order to obtain greater credit to the prediction; for a
plain narrative would have been ineffectual, or would not have exerted a
powerful influence on minds naturally dull and sluggish, and therefore
he sets before their eyes a lively portrait. This calamity, he declares,
will be very grievous, because it will be felt even in distant
countries. He bids the “ships howl,” because, when Tyre has been
destroyed, they will have nothing to do. The ships of the Cilicians are
particularly mentioned by him, because, being neighbors, they traded
often and extensively with the inhabitants of Tyre; and Cilicia is
called by the Hebrews “Tarshish.” It was impossible that there should
not have arisen great inconvenience to that country at the destruction
of Tyre; not only because commerce ceased for a time, but also because
the articles of merchandise were carried off, and there was a
disturbance of commercial relations  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) as usually happens when the fortunes
of rich men have been overthrown.

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>*That there may be no entering in from the
land of Chittim.* What I have translated “that there maybe no entering
in,” is explained by some to signify, that there may be no house “into
which you can enter,” but I think that I have faithfully conveyed the
Prophet’s meaning. And yet he does not mean that the Cilicians or the
Greeks will be hindered from entering, but that they will not hold
intercourse with Tyre as they were formerly accustomed to do, because it
will not be, as formerly, a mart of nations.

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span>Those who think that the Prophet speaks of
the defeat accomplished by Alexander, separate this clause of the verse
“from the land of Chittim” from what goes before, and connect it thus,
“from the land of Chittim it was revealed to them.” But, on the
contrary, I join it differently in this way, “From not going from the
land of Chittim;” that is, that the Greeks may no more enter as they
were formerly accustomed to do. By the word “Chittim,” he means both the
Greeks and the western nations; as if he had said “There will be an end
put to commerce with the Greeks, so that they will no longer take their
ships thither.” Under this designation he includes also the inhabitants
of Cyprus,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) Sicily, and Italy,
and other nations.

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span>*This was revealed to them.* These words may
be understood to refer both to the Greeks and to the inhabitants of
Tyre. If they refer to the inhabitants of Tyre, the meaning will be,
“When the report of the ruin of the city shall reach them, they will put
an end to their wonted voyages, for they will avoid that harbour as they
would avoid a rock;” and this is the meaning which I more readily adopt.
Yet I do not reject the other interpretation, that the Prophet confirms
his prediction, as we commonly speak of a thing that is certain, “Let
this be regarded as addressed to you.”

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span><span id="xii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span>**2.** *Be silent, ye inhabitants of the
islands.* This is intended to place in a more striking light the ruin of
Tyre. There is a change of number in the word *island;* for although he
uses the singular number, yet he means the islands of the Mediterranean
sea, and the countries beyond the sea, especially the neighbors who
frequently performed voyages to Tyre, and traded with it. He enjoins on
them silence and stillness, because they will perform no more voyages to
Tyre. He bids them “be silent” like persons who are stunned, on account
of the grievous calamity which has befallen them, so that they do not
even venture to open their mouth; for it was impossible that the nations
who traded there should not feel it to be a heavy stroke, when a
mercantile city like this was ruined, just as at the present day Venice
or Antwerp could not be destroyed without inflicting great injury on
many nations.

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span>*The merchants of Sidon.* He mentions the
inhabitants of *Sidon* in an especial manner, not only on account of
their vicinity, but because they had a common origin. *Sidon* was highly
celebrated, but greatly inferior to Tyre. Situated on the sea-shore, it
was two hundred furlongs  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md)
distant from Tyre, and appeared both to be so near it, and to be so
closely connected with it by trade, that the poets frequently took Tyre
for Sidon, and Sidon for Tyre. The Sidonians, therefore, were
unquestionably greater gainers than others by imports and exports, and
also by sales and merchandise, in consequence of being so near, and
trading with it continually; for the wealth of Tyre overflowed on them,
and, as the saying is, they flew under its wings. The result was, that
they suffered more severely than others by the destruction of Tyre, and
therefore the Prophet afterwards says, (<span
id="xii.i-p62.1"></span>[Isa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004.md)<span
id="xii.i-p62.1"></span>,) *Be ashamed, O Sidon.*

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span>*Who replenished thee.* He adds this general
expression, either because it was filled with crowds and multitudes of
men, when strangers flocked to it from various and distant countries, or
because they who performed voyages to it for the sake of gain did, in
their turn, enrich the city.

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span><span id="xii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span>**3.** *And by great waters.* He intimates
that the riches of Tyre will not prevent it from being destroyed; and
therefore he extols its wealth, in order that the judgment of God may be
more manifest, and that all may know that it was no ordinary calamity
that befel it; and the more unexpected it was, the more evidently would
it appear to be the work of God.

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>*The seed of the Nile.*  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) By an elegant expression he describes
the wealth of Tyre; for since the Nile supplied it with wheat and other
necessaries of life, and since a great quantity of corn was brought to
it out of Egypt, he says that it had fields and *sowing* on the course
of the Nile, just as the inhabitants of Venice say that their harvest is
on the sea, because they have nothing that grows at home, but all that
is necessary for food is brought to them by commerce. The Prophet speaks
of the inhabitants of Tyre in the same manner; for it might be thought
incredible that they whom the Nile so freely and abundantly supplied
should be in want of food. He shews that this will be a vain boast,
because they will be in want of all things; and these things, as we have
already said, are described by Isaiah, that all may more fully
acknowledge the avenging hand of God.

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span><span id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span>**4.** *Be thou ashamed, O Sidon; for the
sea hath spoken.* This verse is added for the purpose of heightening the
picture. We have explained the reason why he speaks particularly of
Sidon. He calls Tyre, by way of eminence, (<span
id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) *the sea*, as if she reigned
alone in the midst of the sea.

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span>*I have not travailed.* These words are
immediately added, and belong (<span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>μιμητικῶς)
to a fictitious address put into the mouth of Tyre, in which the Prophet
wittily taunts the inhabitants of Tyre, who boasted of her colonies; for
she “brought forth” other illustrious cities. “In ancient times,” says
Pliny, “she was famous for the cities which she built, Leptis, Utica,
and that rival of the Roman empire, Carthage, which aspired to govern
the whole world, besides Cadiz, which was built beyond the limits of the
world. Her whole superiority now consists of scarlet and purple.” (Plin.
Hist. Nat., lib. v. c. 19.) Thus, Isaiah represents Tyre as bewailing
her ancient glory, because she has ceased to be a mother, and because it
is of no avail to her that she has brought forth so many children, and
founded so many cities; for at an early period Carthage sent regularly
every year a present to Tyre, for the purpose of doing homage to her as
the mother. In this manner Tyre appeared to hold a higher rank than all
other cities, since even Carthage, though a rival of the Roman empire,
was in some respect subject to Tyre: but the Lord stripped her of all
her ornaments in a moment, so that she bewailed her bereavement, as if
she had never brought up any children.

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span><span id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span>**5.** *As soon as the report shall reach
the Egyptians.*  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) In this verse
he declares that this destruction will affect equally the inhabitants of
Tyre and those of Egypt; and this confirms the exposition which we
follow, that the present prophecy relates to a former devastation. The
inhabitants of Tyre had been in alliance with the Egyptians, and both
countries had been under kingly government; not as in Alexander’s time,
when Tyre was a free state, and lived under its own laws. The alliance
which existed between the inhabitants of Tyre and those of Egypt could
not have been more appropriately described; and therefore he shews that
this ruin extends also to the Egyptians, because they prompted the Jews
to rebellion, and turned them aside from confidence in God. The former
were open enemies; the latter, under the pretense of friendship,
cherished dangerous hostility; and therefore both are justly punished.

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span><span id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span>**6.** *Pass ye over to Tarshish.* He
addresses not only the inhabitants of Tyre, but foreigners who were
connected with them by trading, and bids them go elsewhere and seek new
harbours: and he mentions Cilicia, which was opposite to Tyre, as if he
had said, “That shore, which was wont to be well supplied with harbours,
will henceforth be forsaken, so that ships will sail in a very different
direction;” for when a harbour or a mercantile city has been ruined,
merchants commonly go in search of another.

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span>*Howl, ye inhabitants of the island.*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) “Island,” as we have formerly
explained, is here put for “islands;” for the change of number is very
customary with Hebrew writers. He foretells that they will lament,
because their support depended entirely on that traffic, and because
their accounts and reckonings  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md)
were scattered about in all directions.

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span><span id="xii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span>**7.** *Is this your exulting city?* The
Prophet mocks at Tyre, and ridicules her pride, because she boasted of
the antiquity of her name. He likewise confirms what all would suppose
to be incredible; for this prediction was undoubtedly laughed at, seeing
that the power of Tyre was unshaken, and her wealth was like a wall of
brass. So much the more confidently does Isaiah speak, and threaten that
her ruin is certain, and that, though she be more ancient than other
cities, and though she be universally applauded on that ground, still
this will not prevent her from being destroyed. The origin of Tyre is
traced in profane history from time almost out of mind, and is so
obscure and intricate, that hardly anything can be ascertained; though
they allege that it was founded by the Phenicians, as those who boast of
the fame of antiquity call themselves natives of the soil. With this
antiquity the Prophet contrasts banishment, intimating that, when God
had determined to inflict punishment on that nation, her stability would
be at an end.

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span>*Her feet shall carry her, to travel into a
distant country.* To follow wherever “the feet carry,” is nothing else
than to have long wanderings. Yet he also means that they will be
deprived of their wealth, and will be in want of all things during their
banishment, so that they will not have a conveyance of any kind, or a
beast to carry them. Banishment is a very hard condition, when poverty
is added to it; for it may be more easily endured where there are the
means of supporting life; but when men must dwell in unknown countries
in the deepest poverty, the misery is extreme. He adds the finishing
stroke to their miseries by saying, that they must “travel into a
distant country;” for the greater the distance, the harder is the
banishment.

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span><span id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span>**8.** *Against crowning Tyre.* He adorns
with this title the city which enriched many, as may be easily learned
from the context; for when he calls her merchants “kings,” he plainly
states that by the word *crown* he intended to express metaphorically
the magnificence of kings. This refutes the opinion of those who refer
it to other cities. The general meaning is, that she enriches her
citizens as if she made them kings and princes.

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span>Some think that the Prophet added this
verse, as if he were assuming the character of one who is astonished at
the destruction of Tyre, in order to strike others with amazement; as if
he had said, “Is it possible that Tyre should be so speedily overthrown,
where riches, and troops, and defences, and fortifications, are so
abundant, and where there is so much pomp and magnificence?” and as if
he suddenly stopped, as we are wont to do, when anything unexpected has
occurred. But it is better to connect it with the following verse, which
removes every difficulty; for in that verse the Prophet himself
immediately answers his own question, by which he intended to arouse the
minds of his hearers to closer attention. He might have simply said,
that these things were done by the purpose of the Lord; but we are
sluggish, and stupid men would have treated them with contempt. By this
question, therefore, he arouses their minds, that all may know that he
is not speaking about an ordinary event, and that they may consider it
more carefully; for the farther the judgments of God are removed from
the ordinary opinions of men, so much the more ought they to excite our
astonishment.

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span>He formerly spoke in the same manner about
Egypt, when he intended to shew that the destruction of it could not be
reckoned one of the ordinary changes. (<span
id="xii.i-p85.1"></span>[Isa
19:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001.md)<span
id="xii.i-p85.1"></span>.) Since therefore it was incredible that Tyre
could be overthrown by man, the Prophet justly infers that God is the
author of its ruin. On this account he calls her the mother or nurse of
kings, that he may place in a more striking light the glory of the
divine judgment; for if it had been any ordinary state, its fall would
have been viewed with contempt; but when it was adorned with the highest
rank, who would think that this happened in any other way than by the
purpose of God?

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span>*Whose merchants are princes.*  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) In like manner the merchants of Venice
in the present day think that they are on a level with princes, and that
they are above all other men except kings; and even the factors look on
men of rank as beneath them. I have been told, too, that at Antwerp
there are factors who do not hesitate to lay out expenses which the
wealthiest of the nobility could not support. We are wont to put
questions, when no reply can be given but what we wish; and this is an
indication of boldness.

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span><span id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span>**9.** *To profane the pride,* or, *to
profane the loftiness;* for it may be read either way, because loftiness
leads to pride, and where loftiness or a high spirit is found, there
seldom is humility. But it will be better to read it *Pride*, which
alone provokes the vengeance of God, when men, under pretense of their
excellence, vaunt themselves above measure. To “profane” and to
“despise” mean the same thing; for those who are high in rank imagine
that they are separated from others, and consider themselves to have
something indescribably lofty belonging to them, as if they ought not to
mingle with the crowd of human beings. But God strips them of their
rank, degrades them, and treats them as vile and worthless.

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span>From this passage let us learn, that we
ought to contemplate the providence of God in such a manner as to
ascribe to his almighty power the praise which it deserves for righteous
government. Although the rectitude by which God regulates his judgments
is not always apparent or made visible to us, still it is never lawful
to separate his wisdom and justice from his power. But as the Scriptures
very frequently state and clearly explain the reason why God does this
or that, we ought carefully to examine the cause of his works.

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span>That invention which the Schoolmen have
introduced, about the absolute power of God, is shocking blasphemy. It
is all one as if they said that God is a tyrant who resolves to do what
he pleases, not by justice, but through caprice. Their schools are full
of such blasphemies, and are not unlike the heathens, who said that God
sports with human affairs. But in the school of Christ we are taught
that the justice of God shines brightly in his works, of whatever kind
they are, “that every mouth may be stopped,” (<span
id="xii.i-p91.1"></span>[Ro 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md)<span
id="xii.i-p91.1"></span>,) and that glory may be ascribed to him alone.

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span>The Prophet therefore assigns the causes of
so great an overthrow, that we may not think that God acts without a
reason; for the inhabitants of Tyre were proud, ambitious, lewd, and
licentious. These vices follow in the train of wealth and abundance, and
commonly abound in mercantile cities. For this reason he shews that God
is provoked on account of these vices, that all who are left may be
taught by this example to pay greater attention to their own interests,
and not to abuse the gifts of God for parade and luxury. Such is the
benefit which we ought to draw from it, for we must not imagine that it
is a bare history which is related to us.

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>But a question arises, Does God hate the
exalted rank of princes and lords? For he raises on high princes,
senators, nobles, and all classes of magistrates and rulers; and how
then can he hate them? I reply, the high station occupied by princes is
not in itself hateful to God, but only on account of the vice which is
accidental to it, that when they have been highly exalted, they despise
others, and do not think that they are men. Thus, pride is almost always
an attendant of high station, and therefore God hates it; and, in a
word, he must rebuke that haughtiness of which he declares that he is an
enemy.

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span><span id="xii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span>**10.** *For there is not any longer a
girdle.*  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) <span
id="xii.i-p96.1"></span>מזח (*mēzăch*) is translated by some *a girdle*,
and by others *strength*. Those who translate it *girdle*, suppose the
meaning to be that Tyre will be so completely plundered, that she will
not even have a *girdle* left; and that the allusion is to the vast
wealth laid out in merchandise, for the poorest of the merchants sell
girdles. But I think that Isaiah alludes to the situation of the city,
which was protected on all sides by ditches, mounds, ramparts, and the
sea.

<span id="xii.i-p97"></span><span id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p98"></span>**11.** *He stretched out his hand over the
sea.* It is thought that the prediction which the Prophet uttered, about
the destruction of Tyre, is here confirmed by examples; namely, that the
Lord has given so many examples of his power in overturning the greatest
kingdoms, that we ought not to think it strange if he now overturn Tyre,
however flourishing and wealthy it may be. And indeed this manner of
speaking is frequently employed in Scripture, if it be not made plain by
manifest examples and by actual demonstration. It is therefore believed
that the Prophet here calls to remembrance the deliverance from Egypt,
when the Lord divided the sea, (<span id="xii.i-p98.1"></span>[Exod.
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p98.1"></span>,.md)
and again, when he drove out seven kings, and brought his people into
the land of Canaan. (<span id="xii.i-p98.2"></span>[Josh.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001.md), [Josh.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001.md), [Josh.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p98.2"></span>..md)
But when I take a closer view of the words of the Prophet, I am more
disposed to explain them as referring to the present state of matters;
for he speaks here of Tyre, whose riches covered the whole sea.

<span id="xii.i-p99"></span>*He shook the kingdoms.* What he says about
the *kingdoms* is, because she could not perish alone, but must at the
same time involve many kingdoms in her ruin. Thus the whole world must
have undergone some change, as appears from history; and finally, the
Prophet himself draws the conclusion, that the Lord commanded that this
mart of nations should be overthrown.

<span id="xii.i-p100"></span>*Jehovah hath given commandment concerning
Canaan.*  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) The word <span
id="xii.i-p101.1"></span>כנען (*chĕnāăn*) has led commentators to think
that the Prophet here speaks of the Canaanites, and refers to the proof
which God gave of his vengeance against them. But there is little force
in that argument; for <span id="xii.i-p101.2"></span>כנען (*chĕnāăn*) is
often taken for a common noun, just as, a little before, (<span
id="xii.i-p101.3"></span>[Isa
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p101.3"></span>,.md)
he used the word <span id="xii.i-p101.4"></span>כנעניה (*chinyāneihā*)
to mean *her factors*. The riches of Tyre having consisted of
merchandise and trading, Isaiah described it by naming the principal
part. By the expression, *hath given commandment*, he extols the
providence of God, that the Jews may know that all that appears to be
permanent in the world stands and falls according to the will of God,
and that there is no need of the instruments of war for overturning the
best fortified place, but the mere expression of the will of God is
enough.

<span id="xii.i-p102"></span><span id="xii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p103"></span>**12.** *And he said, Thou shalt not add
any more to rejoice.*  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) All this
belongs to one and the same object; for, since a plain description would
not have had sufficient weight, the Prophet confirms his prediction by
many words. It was incredible that a city so celebrated and powerful, so
well defended and fortified, and associated with many allies and
confederates, should be destroyed and overturned. When he says, *Thou
shalt not add*, he does not intend to shut out the hope of restoration
which he will give soon afterwards; for this threatening ought to be
limited to the time of the ruin of Tyre, “Thou shalt not live wantonly,
as formerly thou wert wont to do.”

<span id="xii.i-p113"></span>*O virgin.* Metaphorically he calls her *a
virgin*, because, previous to that time, the riches of Tyre were
untouched, and had suffered no injury. This is not praise of chastity,
but a witty manner of saying that the treasures which had been laid up
in faithful custody will be violated. “Formerly thou didst skip lightly,
like heifers in the bloom of youth; but when thou hast suffered
violence, there will be an end of thy mirth;” just as if one should say,
that the city of Venice has not lost her virginity because it has not
been taken by force since it was built.

<span id="xii.i-p114"></span>*Daughter of Sidon.* He continues to speak
of Tyre, but gives it this name, because it was built by the Sidonians,
though the daughter excelled the mother, as frequently happens in human
affairs. The convenience and situation of the place gave a superiority
to the inhabitants of Tyre, and Sidon became but an appendage. From the
book of Kings it is evident enough (<span id="xii.i-p114.2"></span>[1Ki
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p114.2"></span>.md)
that the monarchy of Tyre had a high reputation, but here the Prophet
looked at its origin.

<span id="xii.i-p115"></span>*Pass over to Chittim.* When he bids them
*pass over to Chittim*, he banishes them not only into Cilicia, but into
countries still more distant; for under this name he includes Greece,
Italy, and other countries; as if he had said, “When thou shalt change
thy residence on account of banishment, thou shalt have no settled
habitation in neighboring countries; but thou must wander through the
whole world, shalt be dragged into unknown countries, and even there
thou shalt find no rest.” Lastly, he means that the ruin will be so
lamentable, that they will not have among neighbors, and, after crossing
the sea, they will not have among foreigners, a place of rest.

<span id="xii.i-p116"></span><span id="xii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p117"></span>**13.** *Behold, the land of the
Chaldeans.* He now confirms by an example what he predicted about the
taking of Tyre; for those things could scarcely obtain credit,
especially among the inhabitants of Tyre, who thought that they were
very far from such ruin. I am aware that this passage is explained in
various ways, but I shall not spend time in refuting the opinions of
others. It will be enough if I shall state, as far as I am able to form
a judgment of it, the Prophet’s real meaning.

<span id="xii.i-p118"></span>*The people of the Chaldeans was not;* that
is, they had no name; for, if we inquire into their origin, they were
descended from the Assyrians, as is evident from <span
id="xii.i-p118.1"></span>[Ge
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.i-p118.1"></span>.
He therefore says truly, that they were not at first a nation, but were
concealed under the name of another, so that they did not form a
separate body.

<span id="xii.i-p119"></span>*Ashur founded it for the inhabitants of
the wilderness.* The words which we have rendered “inhabitants of the
wilderness” others translate *ships*, but we do not approve of that
exposition. What we at first stated is preferable, namely, that the
Assyrians gave a settled condition to the Chaldeans, who formerly led a
wandering life in the deserts under skins,  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) but were collected into cities, and
trained to higher civilization, by the Assyrians. This is also the
meaning of the word <span id="xii.i-p120.1"></span>עוררו (*gnōrĕrū*,)
namely, that they erected and built cities; for we cannot agree with
those who render it “to destroy.”  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) What happened?

<span id="xii.i-p122"></span>*He brought it to ruin.* That is, to use a
common expression, “The daughter has devoured the mother;” for the
Assyrian monarchy was overturned by the Chaldeans, though it was more
powerful and flourishing than all the others. It will be said, what has
this to do with Tyre? We answer, it is because Tyre will be overthrown
by the Assyrians and Chaldeans. Since therefore the Chaldeans, who
formerly were no people, could conquer the Assyrians and subject them to
their power, why should we wonder if both united should conquer Tyre?
Since the Lord gave such a display of his power in the case of the
Assyrians, why should Tyre rely on her riches? She will undoubtedly be
made to feel the hand of God, and her power will be of no avail to her.

<span id="xii.i-p123"></span><span id="xii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p124"></span>**14.** *Howl, ye ships of Tarshish.* He
repeats what he formerly said; for the Cilicians, on account of their
vicinity, constantly traded with the inhabitants of Tyre. He bids their
ships *howl*, because, when that harbour is shut up, the merchants will
be struck with amazement at not having their ordinary intercourse. He
calls that harbour which they visited, *their strength*, not only
because it was a place of resort that might be relied on, but because
there was no other way in which their voyages could yield profit.

<span id="xii.i-p125"></span><span id="xii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p126"></span>**15.** *And it shall come to pass in that
day.* After having spoken of the taking of Tyre, he next declares how
long her calamity shall endure. It happens that cities which have been
ruined are suddenly restored, and regain their former position; but the
Prophet testifies that this city will be desolate and ruinous for
*seventy years*. By *being forgotten* he means that there will be no
merchandise, because she will not have the ordinary course of trade.

<span id="xii.i-p127"></span>*According to the days of one king.*  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) Some think that *the days of one king*
relate to David, but that is exceedingly frivolous, for “the days of a
king” are put for the age of a man, in the same manner as the age of a
man is shewn by the Psalmist to be generally limited to seventy years.
(<span id="xii.i-p128.1"></span>[Ps
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span id="xii.i-p128.1"></span>..md)
But why did he mention “a king” rather than any other man? It was
because Tyre had a king, and reckoned time by the life of a king. This
contributed greatly to establish the certainty of the prediction, for
the Prophet could not have ascertained it by human conjectures.

<span id="xii.i-p129"></span>*Tyre shall have a song like that of a
harlot.* By “the song of a harlot” he employs a beautiful comparison to
denote merchandise; not that in itself it ought to be condemned, for it
is useful and necessary to a commonwealth, but he alludes to the fraud
and dishonesty with which it frequently abounds, so that it may justly
be compared to the occupation of a harlot.

<span id="xii.i-p130"></span><span id="xii.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p131"></span>**16.** *Take a harp.* He compares Tyre to
a harlot, who, after having spent the whole period of her youth in
debauchery, has at length grown old, and on that account is forsaken and
despised by all, and yet cannot forget her former gain and lewdness, but
desires to grow young again and renew her loves, and, in order to
attract men, goes about the city, delighting their ears by songs and
musical instruments. Such prostitutes are seized with some kind of
madness, when they perceive that they are disregarded on account of
their old age; and we see that Horace mocks at Lydia on this account.
 <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) Thus Tyre, after having been
ruined, and as it were buried in oblivion, will again put forth her
efforts, and schemes, and contrivances, for recovering her former
condition.

<span id="xii.i-p133"></span>*Make sweet melody.* By the “harp” and
“sweet melody,” he means the tricks, and frauds, and blandishments, and
flatteries of merchants, by which they impose on men, and as it were
drive them into their nets. In a word, he shews by what methods
mercantile cities become rich, that is, by deceitful and unlawful
methods; and therefore he says, that Tyre will regale their ears by
pleasant melody.

<span id="xii.i-p134"></span>*Sing many songs.* That is, Tyre will add
fraud to fraud, and allurements to allurements, that at length she may
attract all to her, may be again remembered by men, and recover her
former celebrity. In short, as an old harlot contrives methods for
regaining the favor of men, and allures them by painting, and ornaments,
and dress, and songs, and musical instruments, so will Tyre recover her
wealth and power by the same arts with which she formerly succeeded. And
yet he does not on that account exhort Tyre to restore herself in this
way, but proceeds with his prophecy.

<span id="xii.i-p135"></span><span id="xii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p136"></span>**17.** *Jehovah will visit Tyre.*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) Although the Lord will afflict Tyre in
such a manner that she will appear to be ruined, yet he declares that
she will obtain mercy, because, rising at length out of her ruins, she
will be restored to her former vigor. Such a restoration is justly
ascribed to the favor of God; for otherwise the same thing must have
happened to them as Malachi foretells would happen to the Edomites, that
the Lord would overturn and destroy all that men would build. (<span
id="xii.i-p137.1"></span>[Mal 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004.md)<span
id="xii.i-p137.1"></span>.) Consequently they would never have returned
to their former condition if the Lord had not aided them.

<span id="xii.i-p138"></span>From these words we ought to draw a
profitable doctrine, that though the Lord is a severe judge towards the
wicked, yet he leaves room for the exercise of his compassion, and is
never so harsh as not to mitigate his chastisements, and at length to
put an end to them. And if he is such towards the wicked, what will he
be towards those whom he has adopted, and on whom he determines to pour
out his goodness? When kingdoms therefore are re-established, when
cities are rebuilt, and nations regain their freedom, this is brought
about solely by the providence of God, who, whenever he pleases, lays
low what is high, (<span id="xii.i-p138.1"></span>[1Sa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.i-p138.1"></span>,
<span id="xii.i-p138.2"></span>[Lu
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052)<span id="xii.i-p138.2"></span>,.md)
and quickly raises up and restores what was fallen.

<span id="xii.i-p139"></span>*And then she will return to her hire.*
This ought to be viewed as a contrast to the former statement, for the
meaning is, that Tyre will be no better, and will not be reformed by so
severe a chastisement, because she will quickly return to her natural
disposition; for he accuses her of ingratitude. We see instances of the
same kind every day. There is scarcely a corner of the world in which
the Lord has not exhibited proofs of his judgment. To those whom he has
chastised he allows time to breathe, but they become no better. Isaiah
says that this will happen to Tyre.

<span id="xii.i-p140"></span>*She will commit fornication.* “She will
not repent, but, on the contrary, will return to her former courses.
*She will commit fornication*, as she was formerly accustomed to do.” He
unquestionably speaks of buying and selling, but continues to employ the
comparison which he had adopted; not that he wishes to condemn the
occupation of a merchant, as we have already said, but that it is so
largely mingled with the corruption of men as to resemble closely the
life of a harlot; for it is so full of tricks, and hidden stratagems,
and deep-laid traps, (as we often see,) that it appears to have been
contrived for the purpose of ensnaring and deceiving men. How many new
and unheard of contrivances for making gain and exacting usury are every
day invented, which no one who has not been long trained in the school
of merchandise can understand? We need not wonder, therefore, that the
Prophet made use of this comparison, for it means that Tyre will have no
more honesty than before in mercantile transactions.

<span id="xii.i-p141"></span><span id="xii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p142"></span>**18.** *But her merchandise and her hire
shall be holiness to the Lord.* This was another instance of the divine
compassion towards Tyre. Though she had been restored, yet she was not
converted to God, but continued to follow dishonest practices, so that
she justly deserved to be ruined. And indeed she was again punished
severely, when Alexander took the city by storm; but still the kingdom
of Christ, as Luke informs us, was erected there. (<span
id="xii.i-p142.1"></span>[Ac 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004.md)<span
id="xii.i-p142.1"></span>.) This verse ought therefore to be viewed as
contrasted with the former, as if he had said, “*And yet* the
merchandise of Tyre shall be consecrated to God.” Here we have an
astonishing proof of the goodness of God, which penetrated not only into
this abominable brothel, but almost into hell itself. The restoration of
Tyre ought thus to be regarded as a proof of the goodness of God; but
the former favor was small in comparison with the second, when God
consecrated her to himself.

<span id="xii.i-p143"></span>But a question arises, “Could that which
the inhabitants of Tyre obtained by cheating and unlawful methods be
offered to God in sacrifice?” For God abhors such sacrifices, and
demands an honest and pure conscience. (<span
id="xii.i-p143.1"></span>[Pr
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.i-p143.1"></span>,
<span id="xii.i-p143.2"></span>[Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)<span id="xii.i-p143.2"></span>..md)
Many commentators, in expounding this passage, give themselves much
uneasiness about this question, but without any good reason; for the
Prophet does not mean that the merchandise of Tyre will be consecrated
to God while she continues to commit fornication, but describes a time
subsequent to her change and conversion. At that time she will not lay
up riches for herself, will not amass them by unlawful methods, but will
employ them in the service of God, and will spend the produce of her
merchandise in relieving the wants of the godly. When he used a word
expressive of what was disgraceful, he had his eye on the past, but
intimated that she would unlearn those wicked practices, and change her
disposition.

<span id="xii.i-p144"></span>*It shall not be treasured nor laid up.* He
describes, in a few words, the repentance of Tyre, who, having formerly
been addicted to avarice, has been converted to Christ, and will no
longer labor to amass riches, but will employ them in kind and generous
actions; and this is the true fruit of repentance, as Paul admonishes,
that “he who stole should steal no more, but, on the contrary, should
labor that he might relieve the poor and needy.” (<span
id="xii.i-p144.1"></span>[Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)<span id="xii.i-p144.1"></span>..md)
Isaiah foretells that the inhabitants of Tyre, who formerly, through
insatiable avarice, devoured the riches of all, will henceforth take
pleasure in generous actions, because they will no longer have an
insatiable desire of gain. It is an evidence of brotherly love when we
relieve our neighbors, as it is an evidence of cruelty if we suffer them
to be hungry, especially when we ourselves have abundance.

<span id="xii.i-p145"></span>*Her merchandise shall be for them that
dwell before the Lord*. He next mentions a proper method of exercising
generosity, which is, to employ their wealth in aiding the servants of
God. Though he includes all godly persons, yet he alludes to the Levites
and priests, some of whom sacrificed, while others made ready the
sacrifices, and others kept watch, and, in short, all were ready to
perform their duty; and therefore they were said to “dwell before the
Lord.” (<span id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>[Nu
3:1-4:49](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001.md)<span
id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>.) The same thing may justly be said of all the
ministers of the Church. But as all believers, of whatever rank they
are, belong to the sanctuary of God, and have been made by Christ “a
royal priesthood,” (<span id="xii.i-p145.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.i-p145.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p145.3"></span>[Re
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p145.3"></span>,.md)
that they may stand in the presence of God, so I willingly regard this
passage as relating to all “the household of faith,” (<span
id="xii.i-p145.4"></span>[Ga 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)<span
id="xii.i-p145.4"></span>,) to whom attention is especially due; for
Paul holds them out as having the highest claims, and enjoins that they
shall be first relieved. If the tie which binds us universally to
mankind ought to prevent us from “despising our own flesh,” (<span
id="xii.i-p145.5"></span>[Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p145.5"></span>,.md)
how much more the tie that binds the members of Christ, which is closer
and more sacred than any natural bonds?

<span id="xii.i-p146"></span>We ought also to attend to this mode of
expression, by which we are said to “dwell before God;”  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) for though there is not now any “Ark
of the Covenant,” (<span id="xii.i-p147.1"></span>[Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p147.1"></span>,.md)
yet, through the kindness of Christ, we approach more nearly to God than
the Levites formerly did. We are therefore enjoined to “walk before
him,” as if we were under his eye, that we may follow holiness and
justice with a pure conscience. We are enjoined to walk before him, and
always to consider him as present, that we may be just and upright.

<span id="xii.i-p148"></span>*That they may eat till they are
satisfied.*  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) The Prophet means
that we ought to supply the wants of brethren with greater abundance and
generosity than what is customary among men; for when neighbors ought to
be relieved, men are very niggardly. Few men perform cheerfully any
gratuitous duty, or labor, or kindness; for they reckon that they give
up and take from their own property all that they bestow on others. For
the purpose of correcting this error, God highly commends cheerfulness;
for the command which Paul gives to deacons, “to distribute joyfully,”
(<span id="xii.i-p149.1"></span>[Ro
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p149.1"></span>,.md)
ought to be applied to all; and all ought to remember that passage which
declares that “God loveth a cheerful giver.” (<span
id="xii.i-p149.2"></span>[2Co 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span
id="xii.i-p149.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p150"></span>It deserves our attention, also, that the
Prophet says that what is bestowed on the poor is consecrated to God; as
the Spirit elsewhere teaches, that “with such sacrifices God is well
pleased.” (<span id="xii.i-p150.1"></span>[Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016.md)<span id="xii.i-p150.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p150.2"></span>[2Co
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p150.2"></span>..md)
Never was it on his own account that he commanded sacrifices to be made,
nor did he ever stand in need of them. But under the law he ordained
such exercises of piety; and he now commands us to bestow and spend on
our neighbors something that is our own, and declares that all that we
lay out on their account  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) is “a
sacrifice of sweet savor,” (<span id="xii.i-p151.1"></span>[Php
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span id="xii.i-p151.1"></span>,.md)
and is approved and accepted by him. This ought powerfully to inflame us
to the exercise of kindness and generosity, when we learn that our alms
are so highly applauded, and that our hands, as well as our gift, are
consecrated to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc14011.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="xii.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span> A slight change of spelling makes it
necessary to remind the reader of the English Bible, that the “Chittim”
were the descendants of Kittim, (<span id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>[Ge
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>,.md) a
son of Javan, and grandson of Japheth. — *Ed*.

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span> FT359 “<span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>Et les
papiers des marchans espars çà et là;” — “And the merchants’ accounts
scattered hither and thither.”

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span> FT360 “<span id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>Les
Egyptiens;” — “The Egyptians.”

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span> FT361 The Roman <span
id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>*stadium* or furlong = 125 paces = 625 feet. A
Roman mile = 1000 paces = 5000 feet. An English mile = 1760 yards = 5280
feet. Therefore a Roman mile is to an English mile as 5000 to 5280, or
as 125 to 132; and the number of English miles is to that of Roman miles
in the inverse ratio of 132 to 125; so that 200 <span
id="xii.i-p44.2"></span>stadia = 25 Roman miles = somewhat less than 24
English miles. It ought to be remembered, that the author does not
profess to state the exact distance, but gives it in round numbers. —
*Ed*

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span> FT362 “The seed of Sihor.” — Eng. Ver.
<span id="xii.i-p45.1"></span>שחר, (*shīchōr*,) and <span
id="xii.i-p45.2"></span>יאור, (*yĕōr*,) are the Hebrew and Egyptian
names of the Nile. The first, according to its etymology, means *black*,
and corresponds to <span id="xii.i-p45.3"></span>Μέλας and <span
id="xii.i-p45.4"></span>*Melo*, of Greek and Latin names of the same
river, all derived from the color of the water, or the mud which it
deposits.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span> FT363 “As at the report concerning Egypt.”
— Eng. Ver. Luther’s version runs thus:— “<span
id="xii.i-p46.1"></span>Gleichwie man erschrak, da man von Egyptian
hörete; also wird man auch erschrecken, wenn man von Tyrus hören wird;”
— “Like as they were terrified when they heard of Egypt; so will they
also be terrified when they shall hear of Tyre.” — *Ed*

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span> FT364 “Tyre at this time was seated on an
island; after Alexander’s conquest it was rebuilt on the continent.” —
*Stock*

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span> FT365 “<span id="xii.i-p48.1"></span>Leurs
registres et papiers de comtes;” — “Their records and account-books.”

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span> FT366 “The trade carried on by the
Phoenicians of Sidon and Tyre,” says an able historian, “was extensive
and adventurous; and both in their manners and policy, they resemble the
great commercial states of modern times, more than any people in the
ancient world.” After mentioning the navigation to Tyre as the earliest
route of communication with India, he goes on to say, “To this
circumstance, which, for a considerable time, secured to them a monopoly
of that trade, was owing, not only the extraordinary wealth of
individuals, which rendered the ‘merchants of Tyre, princes and her
traffickers the honorable of the earth,’ (<span
id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>[Isa 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>,) but the extensive power of the state itself,
which first taught men to conceive what vast resources a commercial
people possess, and what great exertions they are capable of making.” He
adds in a note, “The power and opulence of Tyre, in the prosperous age
of its commerce, must have attracted general attention. In the
prophecies of Ezekiel, who flourished two hundred and sixty years before
the fall of Tyre, there is the most particular account of the nature and
variety of its commercial transactions that is to be found in any
ancient writer; and which conveys, at the same time, a magnificent idea
of the extensive power of that state.” — *Robertson’s Historical*
*Disquisition concerning the Knowledge which the Ancients had* *of
India*

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span> FT367 “There is no more strength.” — Eng.
Ver. “There is no mound now left.” — *Stock*

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span> FT368 “The Lord hath given a commandment
against the merchant-city.” — Eng. Ver. “Jehovah hath given a charge
concerning Canaan.” — *Stock.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc14011.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="xii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span>

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc14011.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="xii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span>

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc14011.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="xii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span>

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc14011.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span>

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc14011.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="xii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span>

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc14011.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span>

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc14011.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span>

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc14011.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="xii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span>

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc14011.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="xii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p96"></span>

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc14011.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="xii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p101"></span>

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc14011.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="xii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p104"></span> “And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice.”
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xii.i-p105"></span> FT370 “<span id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>Sous
des tentes de peaux;” — “Under tents of skins.”

<span id="xii.i-p106"></span> FT371 “They raised up the palaces
thereof.” — Eng. Ver. “Erected her palaces.” — *Stock*. Professor
Alexander renders it, “They have roused up her palaces;” but says,
“According to the usual interpretation, the *towers* mentioned are those
used in ancient sieges; the masculine suffix refers to <span
id="xii.i-p106.1"></span>עם, (*gnām*;) the feminine suffix to Tyre; and
<span id="xii.i-p106.2"></span>עורר (*gnōrēr*) may be taken either in
the sense of *raising*, (from <span id="xii.i-p106.3"></span>ערר,
*gnārăr*,) or in that of *rousing*, (from <span
id="xii.i-p106.4"></span>עור, *gnūr*,) that is, filling with confusion
and alarm.”

<span id="xii.i-p107"></span> FT372 “That is, of one kingdom. See <span
id="xii.i-p107.1"></span>[Dan. 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017.md),
[Dan. 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020.md)<span
id="xii.i-p107.1"></span>. Nebuchadnezzar began his conquests in the
first year of his reign: from thence to the taking of Babylon by Cyrus
are seventy years; at which time the nations conquered by Nebuchadnezzar
were to be restored to liberty.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xii.i-p108"></span> FT373 “<span id="xii.i-p108.1"></span>Que
le poete Horace s’est moqué d’une putain nommee *Lydia* pour la mesme
occasion;” — “That the Poet Horace mocked at a prostitute named *Lydia*
for the same reason.”

<span id="xii.i-p109"></span> FT374 “Tyre, after its destruction by
Nebuchadnezzar, recovered, as is here foretold, its ancient trade,
wealth, and grandeur; as it did likewise after a second destruction by
Alexander. It became Christian early with the rest of the neighboring
countries. St. Paul himself found many Christians there. (<span
id="xii.i-p109.1"></span>[Ac 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004.md)<span
id="xii.i-p109.1"></span>.) It suffered much in the Diocletian
persecution. It was an archbishopric under the patriarchate of
Jerusalem, with fourteen bishoprics under its jurisdiction. It continued
Christian till it was taken by the Saracens in 639; was recovered by the
Christians in 1124; but in 1280 was conquered by the Mamalukes, and
afterwards taken from them by the Turks in 1516. Since that time it has
sunk into utter decay, is now a bare rock, ‘a place to spread nets
upon,’ as the Prophet Ezekiel foretold it should be. (<span
id="xii.i-p109.2"></span>[Eze
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#014)<span id="xii.i-p109.2"></span>..md)
See Sandy’s Travels; Vitringa on the place; Bishop Newton on the
Prophecies, Dissert. xi.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xii.i-p110"></span> FT375 “The revenues of Tyre shall be
employed in supporting the worshippers of the true God. The prophecy
intimates that Tyre should be converted to the religion of Christ as it
was in the earliest times of the gospel. Of the same event David also
had prophesied in <span id="xii.i-p110.1"></span>[Ps.
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012.md), [Ps.
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010.md), [Ps.
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.i-p110.1"></span>.”
— *Stock*

<span id="xii.i-p111"></span> FT376 “<span id="xii.i-p111.1"></span>Afin
qu’ils mangent leur saoul;” — “That they may eat their fill.”

<span id="xii.i-p112"></span> FT377 “<span id="xii.i-p112.1"></span>Tout
ce que nous employons pour la necessité de nos freres;” — “All that we
spend for relieving the want of our brethren.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc14011.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="xii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p120"></span>

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc14011.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="xii.i-p120.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p121"></span>

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc14011.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="xii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p128"></span>

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc14011.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="xii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p132"></span>

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc14011.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="xii.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p137"></span>

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc14011.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="xii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p147"></span>

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc14011.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="xii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p149"></span>

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc14011.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="xii.i-p150.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p151"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](cc14012.md)
