[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14018)  [Next](cc14020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 31

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
31:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to them that go down to Egypt for
help, and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because *they are*
many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not
to the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord!

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Væ descendentibus in Ægyptum ad
auxilium, et qui equis innituntur; et qui curribus confidunt, quia multi
sunt; et equitibus, quia prævalidi; et non respexerunt ad Sanctum
Israel, nec Iehovam inquisierunt.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** Yet he is also *is* wise, and will
bring evil, and will not call back his words: but will arise against the
house of evil-doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Atqui ipse quoque sapiens est. Itaque
adducet malum, nec verba sua faciet irrita; insurgent, inquam, contra
domum malignorum, et contra auxilium opificum vanitatis.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** Now the Egyptians *are* men, and not
God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch
out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen
shall fall down, and they shall fail together.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et certe Ægyptius homo est, non Deus;
et equi eorum caro, et non spiritus. Itaque simulac extenderit Iehova
manum suam, ruet auxiliator, et cadet adjutus, omnesque simul deficient.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me,
Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a
multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, *he* will not be
afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall
the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill
thereof.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quoniam sic dixit Iehova ad me: Ut leo
rugit et catulus leonis ad prædam suam, contra quem si convocetur cœtus
pastorum, a clamore eorum non commovebitur, neque ob eorum tumultum
humiliabitur; sic descendet Iehova exercituum ad præliandum pro monte
Sion, et pro colle ejus.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** As birds flying, so will the Lord of
hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver *it*; *and*
passing over he will preserve *it*

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Sicut aves quæ volant, ita proteget
Iehova exercituum Ierusalem; protegens liberabit, transiliens servabit.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** Turn ye unto *him from* whom the
children of Israel have deeply revolted.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Revertimini ut profundam fecistis
defectionem, filii Israel.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** For in that day every man shall cast
away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands
have made unto you *for* a sin.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Quoniam in die illa abjicit homo idola
argenti sui, et idola auri sui, quæ fecerunt vobis manus vestræ
peccatum.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**8.** Then shall the Assyrians fall with the
sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall
devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be
discomfited.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Tum cadet Assur per gladium, non viri;
et gladius non hominis devorabit eum; et fuga sibi consulet a facie
gladii, et juvens ejus in liquefactionem erunt.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he shall pass over to his strong
hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the
Lord, whose fire *is* in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** In arcem suam præ formidine transibit,
et pavebunt Principes ejus a vexillo, dicit Iehova, cui ignis est (*vel,
qui ignis illi est*) in Sion, et cui fornax in Ierusalem.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span><span id="xx.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**1.** *Woe to them that go down to Egypt.*
He again returns to the subject which he had handled at the beginning of
the former chapter; for he still cries loudly against the Jews, whose
ordinary custom it was, in seasons of danger, to resort, not to the
Lord, but to the Egyptians. We have formerly explained why this was so
highly displeasing to God. To state the matter briefly, there are two
reasons why the Prophet reproves this crime so severely. The first is,
because it is impossible for us to place confidence for our salvation in
creatures, and at the same time in God; for our eyes must be withdrawn
from him as soon as they are directed to them. The second reason is, God
had expressly forbidden them to enter into alliance with the Egyptians.
(<span id="xx.i-p22.1"></span>[De
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)<span id="xx.i-p22.1"></span>.)
To sinful confidence was added rebelliousness, as if they had resolved
to provide for their safety by despising God, and by disobeying his
will.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>We must therefore look at the source of this
evil, if we wish to understand fully the Prophet’s meaning. There was
also a peculiar reason, as we have formerly remarked, why the Lord
wished the Jews to have no intercourse with the Egyptians. It was, lest
that wicked alliance should obliterate the remembrance of the redemption
from Egypt, and lest they should be corrupted by the superstitions and
sinful idolatry of the Egyptians. Yet these arguments were regarded by
them as of no weight; and, though God had forbidden it, this did not
hinder them from continually applying to them for assistance, and
imagining that their assistance was a shield which defended them against
the arm of God. Consequently, there are good reasons why the Prophet
exclaims so earnestly against such madness. Even on the ground that God
had forbidden it, their “going down into Egypt” deserved to be severely
blamed; but it was still more intolerably criminal, that by false
confidence they bestowed on mortal men the glory which was due to God.
In order to make it still more clear that in this manner they defraud
God of his right, he not only accuses them of having relied on the
Egyptians, but likewise brings a charge against them, on the other hand,
that

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>*They have not looked to the Holy One of
Israel.* Here appears more clearly the reason why that treachery of the
Jews is so sharply reproved by Isaiah; for in other respects God does
not disapprove of our using lawful remedies, just as we eat bread and
other kinds of food which were intended for our use. Thus if any person,
placed in danger, employ means which were not forbidden, but which are
customary and lawful, provided that he do not at all deny the power of
God, he certainly ought not to be blamed; but if we are so strongly
attached to outward means, that we do not at the same time seek God, and
if, through distrust of his promises, we resort to unlawful methods,
this is worthy of condemnation and abhorrence.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>The word *look* is frequently employed in
Scripture to denote this confidence; for we commonly turn our eyes
towards that quarter from which we expect assistance. In a word, we are
here taught that we ought to place our trust for salvation in none other
than in God alone, that, relying on his promises, we may boldly ask from
him whatever is desirable. He undoubtedly permits us to use all things
which he intended for our use, but in such a manner that our minds must
be entirely fixed on him.

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>When he calls God “the Holy One of Israel,”
he presents in a striking light the wickedness and ingratitude of the
people, who, after having been taken under God’s protection and
guardianship, despised such a protector and guardian of their salvation,
and ran eagerly after their own lusts. By immediately adding, *neither
have they sought Jehovah,* he shews that neither the power, nor the
goodness, nor the fatherly kindness of God, could keep them in the
discharge of their duty. In the present day, since he invites us not
less kindly to come to him, we offer a grievous insult to him if we look
to any other, and do not resolve to trust in him alone; and everything
that shall turn away and withdraw our minds from God will be to us like
“Egypt.”

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span><span id="xx.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**2.** *Yet he also is wise.* By calling God
“wise,” he does not merely bestow on him the honor of an attribute which
always belongs to him, but censures the craftiness of those whom he saw
to be too much delighted with their own wisdom. He said a little before,
(<span id="xx.i-p28.1"></span>[Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span id="xx.i-p28.1"></span>,)
that they “dug caves for themselves,” when they thought that, by hidden
plans and secret contrivances, they avoided and deceived the eyes of
God. He now pours witty ridicule on this madness, by affirming that, on
the other hand, wisdom belongs also to God; indirectly bringing against
them the charge of believing that they could shut God’s mouth as not
knowing their affairs. As if he had said, “What shall become of your
wisdom?” Will the effect of it be that God shall cease to be “wise?” On
the contrary, by reproving your vanity, he will give practical
demonstration that “he taketh the wise in their own craftiness.” (<span
id="xx.i-p28.2"></span>[Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span
id="xx.i-p28.2"></span>;<span id="xx.i-p28.3"></span>[1Co
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)<span id="xx.i-p28.3"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>We may draw from this a general doctrine,
that they who shelter themselves under craftiness and secret
contrivances, gain nothing but to provoke still more the wrath of God. A
bad conscience always flees from the judgment of God, and seeks
lurking-places to conceal itself. Wicked men contrive various methods of
guarding and fortifying themselves against God, and think that they are
wise and circumspect, even though they be covered only with empty masks;
while others, blinded by their elevated rank, despise God and his
threatenings. Thus, by declaring that “God is also wise,” the Prophet
wounds them painfully and sharply, that they may not lay claim to so
great craftiness as to be capable of imposing on God by their delusions.

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>*He will arise against the house of the
evil-doers.* As they did not deserve that he should reason with them, he
threatens that they shall feel that God has his arguments at his
command, for ensnaring transgressors. First, they did not think that God
has sufficient foresight, because he did not, according to the ordinary
practice of the world, provide for their safety amidst so great dangers,
and because they considered all threatenings to be empty bugbears, as if
they had it in their power by some means to guard against them. Hence
arises their eagerness to make every exertion, and their hardihood to
plot contrivances. He therefore threatens that God will take revenge on
so gross an insult, and that he has at his command the means of
executing what he has promised; and that no schemes, inventions, or
craftiness can overthrow the word of God.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>*Of the workers of vanity.*  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) He gives them this appellation,
because they wished to fortify themselves against the hand of God by a
useless defense; that is, by the unlawful aid of the Egyptians.
Formerly, it might be thought that he silently admitted their claim to
the appellation of “wise men,” by contrasting them with the wisdom of
God; but now he scatters the smoke, and openly displays their shame and
disgrace. This teaches us that there is nothing better than to renounce
our own judgment, and to submit entirely to God; because all that
earnest caution by which wicked men torture themselves has no solidity,
but, on the contrary, as if on purpose, provokes the wrath of God by the
deceitful contrivances of the flesh.

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span><span id="xx.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span>**3.** *And surely the Egyptian is a man, and
not God.* It may be thought that Isaiah here brings forward nothing but
what is common and beyond all doubt; for who ever imagined that the
Egyptians were not “men,” and must be put in the place of “God?” There
is indeed no debate on this point, and it is openly acknowledged; but
when it is found necessary to reduce it to practice, men are altogether
dull of apprehension, or remain uncertain about that which they formerly
appeared to know and firmly to believe. They exalt themselves as highly,
and claim as much for themselves, as if they did not believe that they
are men, and did not think that they ought to obey God. This is the
reason why Scripture so frequently warns

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>“not to trust in men, than whom nothing can
be more vain.” (<span id="xx.i-p45.1"></span>[Ps
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)<span id="xx.i-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span>“Cursed is he who trusteth in man, and
relieth on an arm of flesh.” (<span id="xx.i-p46.1"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="xx.i-p46.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span>Yet we see both princes and men of ordinary
rank contrive and resolve in such a manner as if they could establish
for a hundred years all that they contrived, and could subject heaven,
sea, and earth, and could regulate and dispose everything according to
their will. When we perceive in men such pride and arrogance, we need
not wonder that the Prophet exclaims that “the Egyptians are men, and
not God;” for the Jews ascribed to them what ought to be ascribed to
God, the defense and preservation of the Church, which God claims for
himself alone, and does not allow to be given to another. Isaiah
therefore indirectly censures that contempt of God and wicked confidence
by which they are swelled with pride.

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span>Here we see how great a difference there is
between God and men; for men have no power in themselves but what God
has granted to them. If we were reasoning about the nature and
excellence of man, we might bring forward the singular gifts which he
has received from God; but when he is contrasted with God, he must be
reduced to nothing; for nothing can be ascribed to man without taking it
from God. And this is the reason why we cannot agree with the Papists,
when we argue about the cause of salvation, freewill, the value of
works, and merits; for since on this subject God is contrasted with man,
we must take from God whatever is attributed to man. But they make a
division between man and God, so as to assign one part to God, and
another part to man; while we say, that the whole and undivided cause of
salvation must be ascribed to God, and that no part of it can be
attributed to another without detestable sacrilege. In a word, let us
learn that in such a contrast nothing worthy of praise can be left for
man.

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span>*And their horses are flesh and not spirit.*
By the word flesh he means weakness and frailty; for what is there in
“flesh” but corruption? He speaks of “horses,” but to the Egyptians also
belongs a weakness of the same or of a kindred nature; as if he had said
that they, and all their forces, have nothing that is solid or
permanent. Although the Egyptians had a soul as well as a body, yet, so
far as they were creatures, and dwelt in a frail tabernacle, they must
hold an inferior rank; as if he had said, that they do not possess
heavenly or spiritual power; as it is said also in the Psalm,

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span>“Do not trust in princes; for their breath
shall go out, and they shall return to their earth.”  
(<span id="xx.i-p50.2"></span>[Ps
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)<span id="xx.i-p50.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span>So far as relates to “horses,” the word
“flesh” applies to them with greater propriety; but it is not wonderful
that men are sent to learn from rottenness how frail they are.

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span>*As soon as Jehovah shall stretch out his
arm.* From this threatening we may draw a universal doctrine, that this
wickedness shall not pass unpunished; for the Lord will not suffer men
with impunity to give to creatures the honor due to him, or to rely on
the assistance of men with that confidence which ought to be placed on
him alone. He therefore threatens those who shall yield assistance and
give occasion to false confidence, as well as those who shall make use
of their assistance and rely on it for their safety. And if the Lord
cannot endure this wicked confidence, where nothing more than temporal
safety is concerned, how much less will he endure those who, in order to
obtain eternal salvation, contrive various aids according to their own
fancy, and thus elevate the power of men, so as to ascribe to it the
place and authority of God.

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span><span id="xx.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span>**4.** *For thus hath Jehovah said to me.*
The Prophet adds this verse, that it may not be thought that the Lord
leaves us destitute of necessary means; for if, while he forbids us to
place our confidence in creatures, he did not promise us any assistance,
we might complain that he gave ground for despair, and not for
consolation; as we saw, a little before, that men are more careful and
attentive than they ought to be, because they think that they will be
deficient in thoughtfulness, if they rest satisfied with God alone, and
abstain from forbidden means. He therefore takes away every excuse, when
he promises that he will be a faithful guardian to us; for what pretense
can be left, if we despise the salvation which he offers to us of his
own accord? It is therefore as if he had said, “The Lord assists, and
will assist; he forbids you to ask assistance from the Egyptians.” By
comparing himself to *a lion*, a very powerful animal and keenly bent on
prey, he employs a very appropriate comparison, to shew that he is in
the highest degree both able and willing to defend us.

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span>In the second part of the comparison, the
Prophet dwells largely on the great eagerness with which the Lord takes
hold of his people, keeps them near himself, preserves them from being
carried off, and defends them against all dangers; while he also points
out that strength and power which no arms and no forces can resist. Now,
it is impossible that comparisons should hold on every point, nor is it
necessary, but they ought to be suitable to the subject which is
handled. Since therefore we know that the Lord loves us so much and
takes such care of us, must we not be worse than mad if we despise him,
and seek other aids, which will not only be useless but destructive to
us?

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span><span id="xx.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span>**5.** *As birds that fly.* This is the
second comparison, by which the Prophet shews how great care the Lord
takes of us, and how earnestly he is bent on making us happy. It is
taken from *birds*, which are prompted by astonishing eagerness to
preserve their young; for they almost kill themselves with hunger, and
shrink from no danger, that they may defend and preserve their young.
Moses makes use of the same comparison when, reproaching the people for
their ingratitude, he compares the Lord to an eagle

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span>“laying her nest, spreading her wings, and
fluttering over her young.” (<span id="xx.i-p58.1"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span id="xx.i-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span>Christ also remonstrates with Jerusalem,

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>“How often would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would not!”  
(<span id="xx.i-p60.2"></span>[Mt
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="xx.i-p60.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span>The sum of this passage is, that the Lord
will be sufficiently powerful to defend his people, for whom he has a
special love and a peculiar care. What Moses relates that God did,
Isaiah promises that he will always do; for he will never forsake those
whom he has once received into his favor. Lest any one therefore should
imagine that this statement related only to the men of a single age, he
expressly declares that God will spread his wings to defend Jerusalem.
Nor is it unnecessarily that he mentions not only *Mount Zion* but *its
hill*; for on that “hill” was built the temple in which God desired that
men should call upon him. Wherever therefore the worship of God is pure,
let us know that salvation will be certain; for men cannot call upon him
in vain.

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span>“Let us be his people, and, on the other
hand, he will be our God.” (<span id="xx.i-p62.1"></span>[Le
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span id="xx.i-p62.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span><span id="xx.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span>**6.** *Return.* This verse is explained in
various ways; for the Hebrew commentators explain it thus, “Return to
the Lord, for you have multiplied revolts.” But, in my opinion, the
meaning is more simple: “Return according as you have made a deep
revolt;  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) for <span
id="xx.i-p65.1"></span>לאשר (*lăăshĕr*) is, I think, employed in the
same sense as <span id="xx.i-p65.2"></span>כאשר (*kăăshĕr*), “according
as.”  <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) He means that the
aggravated nature of their wickedness does not shut the door against
them from returning to God, if they repent; that, although they have
been sunk into the deepest wickedness, still God will pardon them. Yet,
at the same time, he makes use of this spur to stimulate them to earnest
grief and hatred of their sins, that they may not carelessly and
lightly, as frequently happens, aim at a half repentance. He therefore
bids them consider attentively with what fearful destruction they have
cast themselves down to hell, that they may abhor themselves on account
of their aggravated transgressions.

<span id="xx.i-p67"></span>It ought first to be observed, that the
Prophet does not lessen the guilt of the people. They who need to be
brought back to the Lord must first be made to have a deep and painful
conviction of their guilt; for they who flatter themselves in their
iniquities are very far from obtaining pardon, and therefore there is
nothing better than to lay open the alarming nature of the disease, when
a remedy must be applied. Yet, that their hearts may not be led to
despair, they must be encouraged and comforted by holding out to them
the mercy of God; for Satan aims at nothing else than to cut us off from
all hope of pardon. Accordingly, Isaiah declares that, although by their
wickedness they have sunk down to hell, God is ready to forgive; for not
in vain does the Lord invite us to repentance, but he likewise offers
pardon. Hence also, to such exhortations the Scripture always adds
promises of grace, that, whenever we are called to repentance, we may
know that the hope of pardon is also held out to us.

<span id="xx.i-p68"></span>*As you have made a deep revolt.* Instead of
this rendering, the word <span id="xx.i-p68.1"></span>עמק, (*gnāmăk*,)
which signifies to be deep, is explained by some as meaning to multiply
and the metaphor is supposed to be borrowed from heaps, “As you have
heaped up your sins, so return now.” But I prefer the former exposition.
<span id="xx.i-p68.2"></span>סרה (*sārāh*) signifies “revolt.” Others
explain it to mean here “depravity,” but the word “revolt” is more
appropriate. The Prophet therefore invites them to return to the Lord.
 <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="xx.i-p70"></span>*O children of Israel.* In calling them by
this name, he does not intend to shew them respect, but reproaches them
for their ingratitude; for they were degenerate sons  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) who had revolted from the faith and
obedience of their fathers, and therefore this title contains an
indirect reproach. Yet he means that the Lord had not forgotten the
covenant which he made with their fathers, though they had departed
widely from him by their treachery; for he declares, that he will
acknowledge them to be “the children of Israel,” and will fulfill all
that he promised to Abraham and the other patriarchs, if they return to
him with all their heart.

<span id="xx.i-p72"></span><span id="xx.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p73"></span>**7.** *For in that day.* He continues the
subject which he began in the former verse. Yet there is this
difference, that in the former verse he exhorted to repentance, but now
he points out the fruits of repentance, which, we know, is the customary
way of teaching in Scripture; for, since repentance is concealed within
us, and has its root in the heart, it must be made known by the
practical result, and by works, as “a tree shews by its fruits” (<span
id="xx.i-p73.1"></span>[Mt 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017)<span
id="xx.i-p73.1"></span>) its inherent goodness; and therefore he points
out repentance by works which are the fruit of it.  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)

<span id="xx.i-p75"></span>*Shall cast away the idols.* When he speaks
of “idols” only, it is by a figure of speech frequently employed in
Scripture, in which a part is taken for the whole; for the Prophet
undoubtedly intended to speak of the whole of man’s conversion, but, as
it would have been tedious to enumerate all the kinds, under one of them
he includes all the rest. Now, the beginning of repentance is the change
of the heart; and next we must come to outward fruits, that is, to
works. Above all, we must observe the object which the Prophet had in
view in discoursing about repentance. It was because the Lord had
promised salvation near at hand; and, that they might be capable of it,
he exhorts them to repentance. Hence it ought to be observed that, when
we persevere in being wicked, we resist God by our wickedness, and thus
restrain his grace from assisting us; and, therefore, that the way may
be open for God’s assistance, he demands that we shall repent.

<span id="xx.i-p76"></span>He calls them *The idols of his silver and
the idols of his gold*, because, as we have formerly seen,  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) they who sincerely repent are affected
by deep grief for their sin, so that the traces of their superstitions,
which are stamped with the highest dishonor of God, cannot be beheld by
them without the greatest horror. On this account they abhor them, and
do not dread the loss of “gold or silver,” to testify their conversion
and their faith; for he who has sincerely renounced superstitions does
not spare any expense in order to possess the pure worship of God. This
is what the Prophet intended to express by calling them “gold and
silver” rather than wood and stone. However excellent anything may be,
the loss of it is a happy event when we are cleansed from such base and
abominable pollutions. Those who retain them, though they profess to be
Christians, shew that they are still involved in the remains of
superstition; and hence it is evident that their hearts are not truly or
completely reformed. In this matter we must listen to none of the
excuses which we frequently hear from the lips of hypocrites, who cannot
absolutely renounce idolatry, “What could I do? How could I live? I am
aware that this revenue, this ‘gold,’ is detestable in the sight of God,
because it arises from idolatry; but in some way or other my life must
be supported.” Away with such fooleries! say I; for where the conversion
of the heart is real, that which cannot be retained without insulting or
dishonoring God is instantly thrown away.

<span id="xx.i-p78"></span>*Which your own hands have made.* The Prophet
urges them to make a more full acknowledgment of their sin; for, when
men are accused, they generally throw the blame on some other person,
and do not willingly allow it to fall on themselves, or acknowledge that
it is chargeable upon them; in like manner as the common people
willingly accuse the priests, but no man is willing to acknowledge his
own guilt. The Prophet therefore bids them look to “their own hands,”
that they may know that they have committed so great a crime. He reminds
them, at the same time, how grossly they have been deceived by their
unbelief in making gods to themselves; and hence we ought to conclude
that God rejects everything that is of our contrivance, and that he
cannot accept as good that worship which has originated with ourselves.

<span id="xx.i-p79"></span>I consider <span id="xx.i-p79.1"></span>חאט,
(*chēt*,) *sin*, to be a noun;  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)
as if he had said, “Whenever you behold idols, behold your guilt;
acknowledge the proofs of your treachery and revolt; and if you are
truly converted to God, shew it practically, that is, by throwing away
idols and bidding adieu to superstitions; for this is the true fruit of
conversion.”

<span id="xx.i-p81"></span><span id="xx.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p82"></span>**8.** *Then the Assyrian.* The copulative
<span id="xx.i-p82.1"></span>ו (*vau*) is better translated as an adverb
of time: “*Then* the Assyrian shall fall down;” that is, “When you shall
have turned to the Lord, and when your life shall testify a sincere
repentance, *then* the enemy shall fall down;” for, as the Lord raised
up the Assyrian to punish the Jews for their crimes, and especially for
idolatry, so he promises that the Assyrians shall be brought down, when
they shall have ceased to sin and worship idols. Hence he informs us,
that our obstinacy is the reason why the Lord adds evil to evil, and
doubles his strokes, and pursues us more and more; for we continually
supply fresh materials to inflame his vengeance against us more and
more. If therefore we wish that God’s chastisements should be less
severe, if we wish that the enemies should fall to the ground and
perish, let us endeavor to be reconciled to him by repentance; for he
will speedily put an end to the chastisement, and will take away from
enemies strength and power to injure us.

<span id="xx.i-p83"></span>*By the sword not of a man.*  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) The Prophet means that the deliverance
of the Church is God’s own work, that the Jews may know that, although
no earthly power is visible, God’s secret power is sufficient to deliver
them. If therefore enemies are subdued, if their rage is restrained, let
us know that it proceedeth from the Lord. By various methods, indeed, he
represses the force and violence of wicked men, but by his own hand
alone he delivers his Church; for, while the Lord makes use of human
means, he preserves his own people miraculously and by extraordinary
methods, which may be seen to have happened since the beginning of the
world, and which we may even now behold, if we are not blind. And yet
this does not hinder the Lord from employing his servants to deliver the
Church; but he employs them in such a manner that his own hand is
peculiarly and illustriously displayed in it.

<span id="xx.i-p85"></span>We know that this prediction of Isaiah was
fulfilled when the Assyrian army was destroyed, and Sennacherib was put
to flight; for “not by the arm of man” was he destroyed, but the Lord
displayed his power, that it might be known that he alone is the
deliverer of his Church. (<span id="xx.i-p85.1"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xx.i-p85.1"></span>;
<span id="xx.i-p85.2"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xx.i-p85.2"></span>.)
By delivering Jerusalem at that time from the siege, God thus exhibited,
as in a picture, spiritual redemption. He alone, therefore, will destroy
our spiritual enemies. In vain shall we resort to other aids or
remedies, or rely on our own strength, which is nothing; but let us have
the direction and assistance of God, and we shall come off victorious.

<span id="xx.i-p86"></span>*And his young men shall melt away.*  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) He means that the power of the Lord
displayed against the Assyrians will be so great that the hearts of
young men, who in other circumstances are wont to be fierce, shall be
altogether softened and melt like wax; for young men, having less
experience than old men, are on that account more fierce and impetuous.
God will easily restrain such fierceness, when he shall determine to
deliver his people from the hands of their enemies. For this reason
Isaiah has especially mentioned “young men;” as if he had said, “the
very flower or strength.”

<span id="xx.i-p88"></span><span id="xx.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p89"></span>**9.** *He shall pass to his stronghold for
fear.*  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) He now speaks of
Sennacherib himself, who, trembling, shall betake himself in base and
shameful flight to his “stronghold” or fortress, Nineveh, as to his
nest. (<span id="xx.i-p90.1"></span>[2Ki
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036)<span id="xx.i-p90.1"></span>.)
The Prophet adds that “his princes,” or military officers, whose duty it
is to encourage the rest of the soldiers, will be so timid that they
shall not venture to join the ranks or await the battle, but shall “flee
away from the standard.”

<span id="xx.i-p91"></span>*Saith Jehovah, who hath a fire in Zion.* At
length he declares that he is God’s herald in making this proclamation,
that the Jews may not, as they are accustomed to do, dispute or hesitate
as to the accomplishment of it, or afterwards forget so great a
blessing, and ascribe it to fortune. If we read, as some do, Whose fire
is in Zion, the meaning will be, that God has abundance of fiery power
to consume his enemies. But I think that the relative <span
id="xx.i-p91.1"></span>אשר (ă*shĕr*) is redundant, or that it should be
rendered in the nominative case, “*Who* shall be to him a fire;” for God
is justly called “a fire,” in reference to the Assyrians, whom he will
consume.

<span id="xx.i-p92"></span>When the Prophet calls him “a fire,” some
consider it to refer to sacrifices; but such an interpretation appears
to me to be feeble and unnatural. I have no doubt that he says either
that “the Lord has a fire” to consume the Assyrian, or that “God himself
is a fire,” and that he thus makes an implied comparison of the Assyrian
to straw or chaff. He says that this “fire” is kindled and kept alive
“in Zion and Jerusalem,” that is, in the midst of his people, in order
to intimate that the persecution of the Church of God by wicked men
shall not pass unpunished; for they shall one day feel that he is their
Judge, and shall know by experience that he assists his people, who
thought that they had been left without all assistance.

<span id="xx.i-p93"></span>In a word, against wicked men, who have
maintained unceasing hostility against the Church, vengeance is
prepared; and the Lord will not only avenge himself, but will also
avenge his people. Let us therefore enjoy this consolation; and though
it may appear as if we were defenceless and exposed to every danger, yet
let us be fully convinced that the Lord will be “a fire” to our
adversaries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc14019.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xx.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span> “Of them that work iniquity.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span> FT574 “Return to him against whom you have
entertained deep thoughts; in the same manner as you revolted, and have
still revolted, from him, return now to him.” — *Jarchi*. Among the
commentators who belonged to the Hebrew nation, or wrote in the Hebrew
language, Jarchi was probably held, on the ground of the first part of
his paraphrase, to support that view which our Author condemns; but the
second part of it, beginning with “in the same manner as” approaches
very closely to the Reformer’s own words. — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span> FT575 Piscator and others construe <span
id="xx.i-p34.1"></span>לאשר (*lăăshĕr*) as equivalent to <span
id="xx.i-p34.2"></span>אשר ממנו אליו, (ē*lāiv ăshĕr mĭmmĕnnū*,) “to him
from whom.” Vitringa does not reject this exposition, which he
acknowledges to be supported by an analogous use of <span
id="xx.i-p34.3"></span>מאשר, (*mēăshĕr*,) in <span
id="xx.i-p34.4"></span>[Ru 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009)<span
id="xx.i-p34.4"></span>; but he pronounces the rendering, “according
as.” to be more elegant and probably more correct. Modern critics,
however, approve of the meaning given in our common version. “The syntax
may be solved either by supposing ‘to him’ to be understood, and giving
<span id="xx.i-p34.5"></span>לאשר (*lăăshĕr*) the sense of ‘with respect
to whom,’ or by assuming that, as both these ideas could be expressed by
this one phrase, it was put but once in order to avoid the tautology.” —
*Alexander*. The other mode of resolving the syntax, by bringing out the
sense, “to him from whom,” appears to adhere more closely to the usage
of the Hebrew language. — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span> FT576 <span id="xx.i-p35.1"></span>העמיקו
סרה (*hĕgnĕmīkūsārāh*) literally signifies, “they have deepened revolt;”
and Professor Alexander justly remarks that the substitution of the
second person for the third, in the ancient versions, and in Barnes, (ye
have revolted), is wholly arbitrary. — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span> FT577 “<span id="xx.i-p36.1"></span>Enfans
rebelles;” — “Rebellious children.”

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span> FT578 “<span id="xx.i-p37.1"></span>Et
pourtant il marque la repentance par les fruits;” — “And therefore he
points out repentance by the fruits.”

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span> FT579 See *Commentary on Isaiah*, vol. 1 p.
118

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span> FT580 That is, he does not follow the
ancient versions, by viewing it as an adjective, qualifying the word
“hands,” — “your sinful hands.” — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span> FT581 <span id="xx.i-p40.1"></span>לא איש
(*lōīsh*,) not of a man, that is, of one who is totally different from a
man. The word <span id="xx.i-p40.2"></span>לא (*lō*) often unites with a
substantive, so as to form one word, which shall bear a quite different
and even opposite meaning; as <span id="xx.i-p40.3"></span>תהו לא דרך
(*tōhūlōdĕrĕch* ‘desolation not-a-way,’ that is, ‘an impassable way.’
<span id="xx.i-p40.4"></span>[Ps
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040)<span id="xx.i-p40.4"></span>;
and <span id="xx.i-p40.5"></span>לא שם לו, (*lōshēm lō*,) ‘he shall have
not-a-name,’ that is, ‘he shall have public disgrace.’ (<span
id="xx.i-p40.6"></span>[Job 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017)<span
id="xx.i-p40.6"></span>.)” — *Rosenmüller*. “An Hebrew idiom; of one far
different from a man, viz., an angel.” — *Stock*

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span> FT582 “And his young men shall be
discomfited. (Heb. for melting or tribute.)” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span> FT583 “And he shall pass over to his
stronghold (or, his strength) for fear, (Heb. his rock shall pass away
for fear.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc14019.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xx.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span>

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc14019.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xx.i-p65.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span>

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc14019.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xx.i-p68.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p69"></span>

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc14019.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xx.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p71"></span>

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc14019.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xx.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p74"></span>

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc14019.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xx.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p77"></span>

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc14019.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xx.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p80"></span>

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc14019.htm#fr_324) <span
id="xx.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p84"></span>

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc14019.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xx.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p87"></span>

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc14019.htm#fr_326) <span
id="xx.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p90"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](cc14020)
