[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc14012)  [Next](cc14014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 25

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 25:1-12

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1**. O Lord, thou *art* my God: I will
exalt thee, I will praise thy name: for thou hast done wonderful
*things*; *thy* counsels of old *are* faithfulness *and* truth.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Iehova Deus meus es tu; exaltabo te:
celebrabor nomin tuum; quia fecisti rem mirificam; consilia iam olim
decreta, veritatem firmam.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2**. For thou hast made of a city an heap;
*of* a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it
shall never be built.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Quia posuisti ex urbe acervum, urbem
munitam in ruinam; palatium extraneorum, ut non sit civitas, nec unquam
ædificetur.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3**. Therefore shall the strong people
glorify thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Propterea glorificabit te populus
fortis; civitas gentium robustarum timebit te.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4**. For thou hast been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm,
a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones *is* as a
storm *against* the wall.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Nam fuisti fortitudo pauperi;
fortitudo, inquam, egeno in afflictione ejus; refugium ab inundatione,
umbra ab æstu, quia spiritus fortium (*aut, violentorum*) quasi turbo
(*vel, inundatio*) contra murum.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5**. Thou shalt bring down the noise of
strangers, as the heat in a dry place; *even* the heat with the shadow
of a cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>**5**. Sicut æstum in arido, strepitum
alienorum humiliabis, æstum in umbra nubis; clamorem (*vel, cantum, vel,
excisionem*) fortium humiliabit.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6**. And in this mountain shall the Lord
of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on
the lees; of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well
refined.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>**6**. Et faciet Iehova exercituum cunctis
populis in monte isto convivium pinguium, convivium defecatorum;
pinguium, inquam, medullatorum; defecatorum liquidorum.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7**. And he will destroy in this mountain
the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is
spread over all nations.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7**. Et destruet in monte isto faciem
involucri quo involuti sunt populi omnes, et operimentum quad expansum
est super omnes gentes.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8**. He will swallow up death in victory;
and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke
of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord
hath spoken *it.*

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8**. Destruxit mortem in æternum. Et
absterget Dominus Iehova lachrymam a cunctis faciebus, et opprobrium
populi sui auferet ab universa terra; quia Iehova locutus est.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9**. And it shall be said in that day, Lo,
this *is* our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this
*is* the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>**9**. Et dicetur in die illa: Ecce Deus
noster iste; expectavimus eum, et salvabit nos. Iste Iehova;
expectavimus eum, exultabimus, et lætabimur in salute ejus.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10**. For in this mountain shall the hand
of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as
straw is trodden down for the dunghill.

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10**. Nam quiescet manus Iehovæ in monte
isto; et triturabitur Moab subter eum, sicut trituratur palea in
sterquilinio.

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11**. And he shall spread forth his hands
in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth *his hands* to
swim; and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of
their hands.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11**. Et extendet manum suam sub medio
ejus, sicut extendit natator ad natandum; et humiliabit superbiam ejus,
cum brachiis manuum suarum.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**12**. And the fortress of the high fort of
thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, *and* bring to the ground,
*even* to the dust.

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>**12**. Et munitionem sublimitatis murorum
tuorum sternet, humiliabit, dejiciet in terram, ad pulverem.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span><span id="xiv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>**1.** *O Lord, thou art my God.* Hitherto
Isaiah has prophesied about the judgments of God, which threatened not
only a single nation, but almost the whole world. Now, it was impossible
that the contemplation of calamities so dismal as those which he foresaw
should not give him great uneasiness; for godly persons would desire
that all mankind should be saved, and, while they honor God, they desire
also to love all that belongs to him; and, in short, so far as any man
sincerely fears God, he has a powerful and lively feeling of the divine
judgments. While wicked men stand amazed at the judgments of God, and
are not moved by any terror, godly men tremble at the slightest token of
his anger. And if this be the case with us, what do we suppose was
experienced by the Prophet, who had almost before his eyes those
calamities which he foretold? For, in order that the ministers of the
word might be convinced of the certainty of what they taught, it was
necessary that they should be more powerfully impressed by it than the
generality of men.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>Since therefore the Lord held out to Isaiah,
as in a picture, those dreadful calamities, he found it necessary, under
the overpowering influence of grief and anxiety, to betake himself to
the Lord; otherwise the confused emotions of his mind would have
agitated him beyond measure. He therefore takes courage from the belief
that, in the midst of these tempests, the Lord still determines to
promote the advantage of his Church, and to bring into subjection to
himself those who were formerly estranged. Isaiah therefore remains firm
and steadfast in his calling, and does not allow himself to be drawn
aside from his purpose, but continually relies on the expectation of
mercy, and therefore perseveres in celebrating the praises of God. Thus
we learn that this thanksgiving is connected with the former prophecies,
and that Isaiah considers not only what he foretold, but why the Lord
did it; that is, why the Lord afflicted so many nations with various
calamities. It was, that he might subdue those who were formerly
incorrigible, and who rushed forward with brutal eagerness, who had no
fear of God, and no feeling of religion or godliness.

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>*Thou art my God.* Being as it were
perplexed and confused, he suddenly raises his thoughts to God, as we
have already said. Hence we ought to draw a very useful doctrine,
namely, that when our minds are perplexed by a variety of uneasy
thoughts on account of numerous distresses and afflictions which happen
daily, we ought immediately to resort to God, and rely on his
providence; for even the smallest calamities will overwhelm us, if we do
not betake ourselves to him, and support our hearts by this doctrine. In
order to bring out more fully the meaning of the Prophet, the word *but*
or *nevertheless* may be appropriately inserted in this manner:
“Whatever temptations from that quarter may disturb me, nevertheless I
will acknowledge thee to be my God.” Thus he promises that he will give
to God the praise which is due to him; and this cannot be, unless a firm
belief of his grace dwell in our hearts, and hold a superiority, from
which grace springs a joy, which yields to us the most abundant ground
for praises, when we are certain of our salvation, and are fully
convinced that the Lord is our God. Accordingly, those who are
influenced by no desire to praise God, have not believed and have not
tasted the goodness of God; for if we actually trust in God, we must be
led to take great delight in praising his name.

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>*For thou hast done a wonderful thing.* He
uses the word <span id="xiv.i-p31.1"></span>פלא, (*pĕlĕ*,) *wonderful*,
in the singular number instead of the plural. The Prophet does not
confine his view to the present appearance of things, but looks to the
end; for even men who in other respects are heathens, behold in the
government of the world astonishing events, the sight of which
overwhelms them with amazement; which undoubtedly happened to the
inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon, and to the Babylonians and Moabites. But
those only who have tasted his goodness and wisdom can profit by the
works of God; for otherwise they undervalue and despise his works, and
do not comprehend their excellence, because they do not perceive their
end, which is, that God, wonderfully bringing light out of darkness,
(<span id="xiv.i-p31.2"></span>[2Co
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="xiv.i-p31.2"></span>,.md)
raises his Church from death to life, and regulates in the best manner,
and directs to the most valuable purpose, those things which to the eye
of man appear to be confused.

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span>*Counsels which have been already decreed of
old.*  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) Now, in order to bestow
still higher commendation on the providence of God, he adds, that the
“counsels have been already decreed of old;” as if he had said, that to
God nothing is sudden or unforeseen. And indeed, though he sometimes
appears to us to act suddenly, yet all things were undoubtedly ordained
by him before the creation of the world. (<span
id="xiv.i-p50.3"></span>[Ac 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p50.3"></span>.) By this word, therefore, the Apostle means
that all the miracles which happen contrary to the expectation of men,
are the result of that regular order which God maintains in governing
the world, arranging all things from the beginning to the end. Now,
since we do not understand those secret decrees, and our powers of
understanding cannot rise so high, our attention must therefore be
directed to the manifestation of them; for they are concealed from us,
and exceed our comprehension, till the Lord reveal them by his word, in
which he accommodates himself to our weakness; for his decree is (<span
id="xiv.i-p50.4"></span>ἀνεξεύρητον) unsearchable.

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span>*Firm truth.*  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) From the eternal decrees of God the
Prophet thus proceeds to doctrines and promises, which he undoubtedly
denotes by the word *truth*; for the repetition would be frivolous, if
this word did not signify a relation; because, when God has revealed to
us his purpose, if we believe his sayings, he then appears to be
actually true. He commends the firmness and certainty of the word, when
he says that it is “steadfast truth;” that is, that everything that
comes from God, everything that is declared by him, is firm and
unchangeable.

<span id="xiv.i-p53"></span><span id="xiv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p54"></span>**2.** *For thou hast made of a city a
heap.* Some refer this to Jerusalem; but I think that there is a change
of the number, as is very customary with the prophets; for the Prophet
does not speak merely of a single city, but of many cities, which he
says will be reduced to heaps. As to the view held by some, that the
Romans made Jerusalem a palace, it has nothing to do with the Prophet’s
meaning, which will be easily enough understood, if we keep in
remembrance what has been already stated, that the Prophet does not
confine his thoughts to those calamities by which the Lord afflicts many
nations, but extends his view to the end of the chastisements. In this
manner the Lord determined to tame and subdue the obstinacy of men, whom
he would never have brought into subjection to him without having been
broken down by various afflictions.

<span id="xiv.i-p55"></span>*A palace of foreigners,*  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) *that it may not be a city.* The
Prophet does not merely mean that, when the natives have been driven
out, “foreigners” wil1 inhabit the cities which have been taken; for
that would not agree with what he immediately adds, “that it may be no
longer a city;” but that wandering bands of men who shall be in want of
a habitation will there find abundance of room, because there will be no
inhabitants left. Since <span id="xiv.i-p56.1"></span>ארמון (*armōn*)
denotes a magnificent palace, the Prophet thus says ironically, that
highwaymen will dwell as in palaces, on account of the vast extent of
the place which shall be deserted.

<span id="xiv.i-p57"></span><span id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p58"></span>**3.** *Therefore shall the strong people
glorify thee.* This is the end which I mentioned;  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) for if the Lord should destroy the
world, no good result would follow, and indeed destruction could produce
no feeling but horror, and we would never be led by it to sing his
praise; but, on the contrary, we must be deprived of all feeling, when
we perceive nothing but wrath. But praises flow from a sense of grace
and goodness. It is therefore as if he had said, “Thou wilt not only
strike and afflict, O Lord, but wilt cause the chastisements to be not
without effect; for by them thou wilt subdue the fierceness of men, so
that those who were formerly estranged from thee shall bend their neck
to thee.” This passage should lead us to observe how much we need
chastisements, which train us to obedience to God; for we are carried
away by prosperity to such an extent, that we think that we have a right
to do anything, and we even grow wanton and insolent when God treats us
with gentleness.

<span id="xiv.i-p60"></span>*The city of the terrible nations shall fear
thee.* When the Prophet next mentions *fear*, he shews that this praise
does not consist in words or outward gestures, but in the sincere
feeling of the heart. Hence we infer that he now speaks of the entire
worship of God; but, as many persons think that they have fully
discharged their duty, as soon as they have made a confession with the
mouth, he adds, for the sake of explanation, “The nations shall fear
thee.” When he calls them strong and powerful, by these epithets he
denotes their pride and arrogance; for they were elated by their
prosperity. They rebel against God, and cannot be made humble or
submissive, unless they have been deprived of all things. To such views,
therefore, ought our thoughts to be directed amidst those calamities
which we perceive. The fierceness of men must be restrained and subdued,
that they may be prepared for receiving doctrine and for rendering true
obedience. So long as they shall be blinded by their wealth and vain
confidence, they will fearlessly mock at the judgments of God, and will
never yield subjection to him.

<span id="xiv.i-p61"></span><span id="xiv.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p62"></span>**4.** *For thou hast been a strength to the
poor.* Hence we see the fruit of conversion, namely, that the Lord
raises us from the dead, and brings us, as it were, out of the grave,
stretching out his hand to us from heaven, to rescue us even from hell.
This is our first access to him, for it is only in our poverty that he
finds the means of exercising his kindness. To us in our turn,
therefore, it is necessary that we be poor and needy, that we may obtain
assistance from him; and we must lay aside all reliance and confidence
in ourselves, before he display his power in our behalf. This is the
reason why he visits us with chastisements and with the cross, by which
he trains us, so that we may be able to receive his assistance and
grace.

<span id="xiv.i-p63"></span>*A refuge from the storm, a shadow from the
heat.* It is not without good reason that Isaiah adorns this description
by these comparisons; for numerous and diversified temptations arise,
and, in order to bear them courageously, it is necessary that the weak
minds of men should be strengthened and fortified. On this account he
says that God will be “a strength to the poor, a refuge from the storms,
and a shadow from the heat;” because, whatever may be the nature of the
dangers and assaults which threaten them, the Lord will protect his
people against them, and will supply them with every kind of armor.

<span id="xiv.i-p64"></span>*The breath of the strong* or *of the
violent ones.* In this passage, as in many others, (<span
id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>[Ge 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>; <span id="xiv.i-p64.2"></span>[Ex
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010.md)<span id="xiv.i-p64.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p64.3"></span>[1Ki
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011)<span id="xiv.i-p64.3"></span>,.md)
<span id="xiv.i-p64.4"></span>רוח (*rūăch*) signifies “the blowing of
the wind,” and denotes the tremendous violence with which wicked men are
hurried along against the children of God; for not only do they “breathe
out threatenings and terrors,” (<span id="xiv.i-p64.5"></span>[Ac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p64.5"></span>,.md)
but they appear to vomit out fire itself.

<span id="xiv.i-p65"></span>*A storm* or *flood against the wall.* This
is to the same purport as the former; for by this figure he means, that
wicked men, when they obtain liberty to do mischief, rush on with such
violence that they throw down everything that comes in their way, for to
overthrow and destroy walls is more than if the water were merely
flowing over the fields.

<span id="xiv.i-p66"></span><span id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p67"></span>**5.** *As the heat in a dry place.* If the
Lord did not aid when violent men rush upon us, our life would be in
imminent danger; for we see how great is the rage of wicked men, and if
the Lord overturn walls, what can a feeble man do against him? These
things therefore are added in order to magnify the grace of God, that we
may consider what would become of us if the Lord did not render
assistance.

<span id="xiv.i-p68"></span>Yet there are two ways in which commentators
explain this passage. Some understand it to mean, that wicked men will
be consumed by God’s indignation, in the same manner as the violence of
the heat burns up the fields which are in themselves barren. Others
render it in the ablative case, *As if by heat*, and make the meaning to
be, “Though wicked men, relying on their power, are so violent, yet the
Lord will prostrate them in a moment, as if they were overpowered ‘by
heat in a dry place.’” But I consider the meaning to be different, for,
after having shewn how great is the rage of wicked men against
believers, he adds:

<span id="xiv.i-p69"></span>*Thou wilt bring them down, O Lord.*
Alluding to the metaphor of the deluge, which he had formerly used, he
says, “Thou wilt quench their heat, which would otherwise consume us,
even as rain, or a shower, falling from heaven, quenches the heat that
scorched the thirsty fields.” And thus the passage flows naturally; for
the other interpretation is forced, and does violence, as the saying is,
to the letter.

<span id="xiv.i-p70"></span>*The noise of the strong ones will he lay
low.*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) This clause is tortured
in various ways. Some think that <span id="xiv.i-p71.1"></span>זמיר
(*zĕmīr*) means *seed*; others that it means *a root;* as if he had
said, that God will not only destroy wicked men, but will utterly root
them out. This meaning would be probable, were it not opposed by the
metaphor of the heat. In my opinion, therefore, it is more correctly
interpreted by others to mean “singing and shouting,” or “cutting off,”
although even those interpreters do not fully succeed in getting at the
meaning of the Prophet. He therefore confirms the preceding statement,
that the violence of wicked men, or the shouting which they haughtily
and daringly set up, will presently be laid low, as the heat of the sun
is overpowered by the falling rain, which is meant by *the shadow of a*
*cloud*

<span id="xiv.i-p72"></span><span id="xiv.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p73"></span>**6.** *And the Lord of hosts shall make.*
This passage has received various interpretations. Some think that the
Prophet threatens the Jews, and threatens them in such a manner as to
invite various nations to a banquet. This mode of expression is also
found in other passages, for the Lord is said to fatten the wicked for
the day of slaughter. Those commentators think that, as if the Jews were
exposed as a prey to the Gentiles on account of their impiety, the
Gentiles are invited to a banquet; as if the Lord had said, “I have
prepared a splendid entertainment for the Gentiles; the Romans shall
plunder and prey on the Jews.” But, in my opinion, that view of the
passage cannot be admitted, nor will it be necessary for me to give a
long refutation of it, after having brought forward the true
interpretation. Others explain it as if Isaiah were speaking of the
wrath of God in this manner, “The Lord will prepare a banquet for all
nations; he will give to them to drink the cup of his anger, that they
may be drunken.”

<span id="xiv.i-p74"></span>But the Prophet had quite a different
meaning, for he proceeds in making known the grace of God, which was to
be revealed by the coming of Christ. He employs the same metaphor which
is also used by David, when he describes the kingdom of Christ, and
says, that

<span id="xiv.i-p75"></span>“the poor and the rich will sit down at this
feast,  
and will eat and be satisfied.” (<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>[Ps.
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029)<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p76"></span>By this metaphorical language he means, that
no class of men will be excluded from partaking of this generous
provision. Formerly it seemed as if the Lord nourished the Jews only,
because they alone were adopted, and, as it were, invited to the feast
provided for his family; but now he admits the Gentiles also, and
extends his beneficence to all nations.

<span id="xiv.i-p77"></span>*Will make for all nations a feast of fat
things.* This is an implied contrast when he says, *to all nations*, for
formerly he was known to one nation only. (<span
id="xiv.i-p77.1"></span>[Ps 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p77.1"></span>.) By “a feast of fat things” is meant a banquet
consisting of animals that have been well fattened.

<span id="xiv.i-p78"></span>*Of liquids purified.*  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) Some render the Hebrew word <span
id="xiv.i-p79.1"></span>שמרים, (*shĕmārīm*,) *dregs*, but inaccurately,
for it means “old wines,” such as the French call, <span
id="xiv.i-p79.2"></span>*vins de garde*, “wines that have been long
kept,” and that are preferable to ordinary wines, especially in an
eastern country, where they carry their age better. He calls them
liquids which contain no dregs or sediment.

<span id="xiv.i-p80"></span>In short, it is sufficiently evident that he
does not here threaten destruction against Gentiles or Jews, but that
both are invited together to a very splendid banquet. This is still more
evident from Christ’s own words, when he compares the kingdom of heaven
to a marriage-feast which the King prepared for his Son, to which he
invites all without exception, because those who were at first invited
refused to come. (<span id="xiv.i-p80.1"></span>[Matt.
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p80.1"></span>..md) Nor
have I any doubt that he speaks of the preaching of the gospel; and as
it proceeded from Mount Zion, (<span id="xiv.i-p80.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p80.2"></span>,.md) he
says that the Gentiles will come to it to feast; for when God presents
to the whole world spiritual food for feeding souls, the meaning was the
same as if he had prepared a table for all. The Lord invites us at the
present day, that he may fill and satisfy us with good things; he raises
up faithful ministers to prepare for us that feast, and gives power and
efficacy to his word, that we may be satisfied with it.  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p82"></span>*In this mountain.* As to the word
*mountain*, though the servants of God do not now come out of the
mountain to feed us, yet by this name we must understand the Church; for
nowhere else can any one partake of this food. That feast is not set
down in streets and highways, the table is not spread everywhere, and
this banquet is not prepared in all places. In order that we may feast,
we must come to the Church. That place was mentioned, because there
alone God was worshipped, and revelations proceeded from it; as also the
gospel came forth from it. When he says that this banquet will be rich
and sumptuous, the design of this is to commend the doctrine of the
gospel; for it is the spiritual food with which our souls are fed, and
is so exquisitely delightful that we have no need of any other.

<span id="xiv.i-p83"></span><span id="xiv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p84"></span>**7.** *And he will destroy the face of the
covering.*  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) Here also
commentators differ, for by the word *covering* is meant the disgrace
with which believers are covered in this world, so that the glory of God
is not seen in them; as if he had said, “Though many reproaches oppress
the godly, yet God will take away those reproaches, and will make their
condition glorious. I pass by other interpretations; but, in my opinion,
the true meaning is, that the Lord promises that he will take away the
veil by which they were kept in blindness and ignorance; and therefore
it was by the light of the gospel that this darkness was dispelled.

<span id="xiv.i-p86"></span>*In that mountain.* He says that this will
be in mount Zion, from which also the light of the word shone on the
whole world, as we have already seen. (<span
id="xiv.i-p86.1"></span>[Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p86.1"></span>.) This passage, therefore, must unavoidably be
referred to the kingdom of Christ; for the light did not shine on all
men till Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, arose, (<span
id="xiv.i-p86.2"></span>[Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p86.2"></span>,) who took away all the veils, wrappings, and
coverings. And here we have another commendation of the gospel, that it
dispels the darkness, and takes away from our eyes the covering of
errors. Hence it follows, that we are wrapped up and blinded by the
darkness of ignorance, before we are enlightened by the doctrine of the
gospel, by which alone we can obtain light and life, and be fully
restored. Here, too, we have a confirmation of the calling of the
Gentiles, that is, of our calling; for not only the Jews, but all
nations, which formerly were buried in every kind of errors and
superstition, are invited to this banquet.

<span id="xiv.i-p87"></span><span id="xiv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p88"></span>**8.** *He hath destroyed death eternally.*
 <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) The Prophet continues his
subject; for in general he promises that there will be perfect happiness
under the reign of Christ, and, in order to express this the more fully,
he employs various metaphors admirably adapted to the subject. That
happiness is real, and not temporary or fading, which not even death can
take away; for amidst the highest prosperity our joy is not a little
diminished by the consideration that it will not always last. He
therefore connects two things, which render happiness full and complete.
The first is, that the life is perpetual; for to those who in other
respects are happy for a time, it is a wretched thing to die. The second
is, that this life is accompanied by joy; for otherwise it may be
thought that death would be preferable to a sorrowful and afflicted
life. He next adds that, when all disgrace has been removed, this life
will be glorious; for otherwise less confidence would have been placed
in the prophecy, in consequence of the wretched oppression of the
people.

<span id="xiv.i-p90"></span>But it is asked, To what period must we
refer these promises? for in this world we must contend with various
afflictions, and must fight continually; and not only are we “appointed
to death,” (<span id="xiv.i-p90.1"></span>[Ps
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)<span id="xiv.i-p90.1"></span>,.md)
but we “die daily.” (<span id="xiv.i-p90.2"></span>[1Co
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031)<span id="xiv.i-p90.2"></span>..md)
Paul complains of himself and the chief pillars of the Church, that they
are “a spectacle to all men,” and endure insults of every kind, and are
even looked upon as (<span id="xiv.i-p90.3"></span>καθάρματα)
“cleansings” and (<span id="xiv.i-p90.4"></span>περιψήματα) “sweepings,”
or “offscourings.”  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) (<span
id="xiv.i-p91.1"></span>[1 Cor. 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p91.1"></span>..md)
Where or when, therefore, are these things fulfilled? They must
undoubtedly be referred to the universal kingdom of Christ; — universal,
I say, because we must look not only at the beginning, but also at the
accomplishment and the end: and thus it must be extended even to the
second coming of Christ, which on that account is called “the day of
redemption” and “the day of restoration;” because all things which now
appear to be confused shall be fully restored, and assume a new form.
(<span id="xiv.i-p91.2"></span>[Luke
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028.md), [Acts
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021.md), [Rom.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md), [Eph.
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="xiv.i-p91.2"></span>..md)
This prediction relates, no doubt, to the deliverance from Babylon; but
as that deliverance might be regarded as the earnest and foretaste of
another, this promise must undoubtedly be extended to the last day.

<span id="xiv.i-p92"></span>Let us therefore direct all our hope and
expectation to this point, and let us not doubt that the Lord will
fulfill all these things in us when we have finished our course. If we
now “sow in tears,” then undoubtedly we shall “reap with joy” and
ecstasy. (<span id="xiv.i-p92.1"></span>[Ps
126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p92.1"></span>..md)
Let us not dread the insults or reproaches of men, which will one day
procure for us the highest glory. Having obtained here the beginnings of
this happiness and glory, by being adopted by God, and beginning to bear
the image of Christ, let us firmly and resolutely await the completion
of it at the last day.

<span id="xiv.i-p93"></span>*For Jehovah hath spoken it.* After so many
dreadful calamities, it might be thought that such an event was
incredible; and therefore the Prophet shews that it proceeds not from
man, but from God. When Jerusalem had been overthrown, the worship of
God taken away, the temple destroyed, and the remnant of the people
oppressed by cruel tyranny, no man would have believed it to be possible
that everything would be raised to its original condition. It was
necessary to combat with this distrust, to which men are strongly
inclined; and therefore the Prophet confirms and seals these promises.

<span id="xiv.i-p94"></span>“Know that God communicated to me these
declarations; fix your minds therefore on him, and not on me; let your
faith rely on him ‘who cannot lie’ or deceive.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p94.2"></span>Titus 1:2.)

<span id="xiv.i-p95"></span><span id="xiv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p96"></span>**9.** *And it shall be said.* The verb
<span id="xiv.i-p96.1"></span>אמר (ā*măr*) is indefinite, “He shall
say;” but as the discourse does not relate to one or another individual,
but to all in general, I chose to render it in a passive form.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) This is an excellent conclusion; for
it shews that God’s benefits are not in any respect doubtful or
uncertain, but are actually received and enjoyed by men. The Prophet
declares that the banquet, of which he formerly spoke, (verse 6,) will
not in vain be prepared by God; for men shall feast on it, and possess
everlasting joy.

<span id="xiv.i-p98"></span>*Lo, this is our God.* That joyful shout,
which he declares will be public, is the actual test and proof, so to
speak, of the experience of the grace of God. This passage ought to be
carefully observed; for the Prophet shews that there will be such a
revelation as shall fix the minds of men on the word of God, so that
they will rely on it without any kind of hesitation; and if these things
belong, as they undoubtedly do belong, to the kingdom of Christ, we
derive from them this valuable fruit, that Christians, unless they are
wanting to themselves, and reject the grace of God, have undoubted truth
on which they may safely rely. God has removed all ground of doubt, and
has revealed himself to them in such a manner, that they may venture
freely to declare that they know with certainty what is his will, and
may say with truth what Christ said to the Samaritan woman, “We worship
what we know.” (<span id="xiv.i-p98.1"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="xiv.i-p98.1"></span>..md)
Having been informed by the gospel as to the grace offered through
Christ, we do not now wander in uncertain opinions, as others do, but
embrace God and his pure worship. Let us boldly say, “Away with all the
inventions of men!”

<span id="xiv.i-p99"></span>It is proper to observe the contrast between
that dark and feeble kind of knowledge which the fathers enjoyed under
the law, and the fullness which shines forth to us in the gospel. Though
God deigned to bestow on his ancient people the light of heavenly
doctrine, yet he made himself more familiarly known through Christ, as
we are told;

<span id="xiv.i-p100"></span>“No man hath seen God at any time; the
only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, hath declared
him.” (<span id="xiv.i-p100.1"></span>[Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="xiv.i-p100.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p101"></span> The Prophet now extols that certainty
which the Son of God brought to us by his coming, when he “sheweth to us
the Father.” (<span id="xiv.i-p101.1"></span>[Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p101.1"></span>..md)
Yet, while we excel the ancient people in this respect, that the
reconciliation obtained through Christ makes God, as it were, more
gracious to us, there is no other way in which God can be known but
through Christ, who is “the pattern and image of his substance.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p101.2"></span>[Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p101.2"></span>.) “He who knoweth not the Son, knoweth not the
Father.” (<span id="xiv.i-p101.3"></span>[Joh
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p101.3"></span>..md)
Though Jews, Mahometans, and other infidels, boast that they worship
God, the creator of heaven and earth, yet they worship an imaginary God.
However obstinate they may be, they follow doubtful and uncertain
opinions instead of the truth; they grope in the dark, and worship their
own imagination instead of God. In short, apart from Christ, all
religion is deceitful and transitory, and every kind of worship ought to
be abhorred and boldly condemned.

<span id="xiv.i-p102"></span>Nor is it without good reason that the
Prophet employs not only the adverb *Lo*, but the demonstrative pronoun
*This,*  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) in order to attest more
fully the presence of God, as, a little afterwards, by repeating the
declaration of certainty and confidence, he expresses the steadfastness
that will be found in those who shall worship God through Christ. It is
certain that we cannot comprehend God in his majesty, for he “dwelleth
in unapproachable light,” (<span id="xiv.i-p103.1"></span>[1Ti
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p103.1"></span>,.md)
which will immediately overpower us, if we attempt to rise to it; and
therefore he accommodates himself to our weakness, gives himself to us
through Christ, by whom he makes us partakers of wisdom, righteousness,
truth, and other blessings. (<span id="xiv.i-p103.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="xiv.i-p103.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p104"></span>*This is Jehovah.* It is worthy of
observation that, when he calls Christ the God of believers, he gives to
him the name “Jehovah;” from which we infer that the actual eternity of
God belongs to the person of Christ. Besides, since Christ has thus made
himself known to us by the gospel, this proves the base ingratitude of
those who, not satisfied with so full a manifestation, have dared to add
to it their own idle speculation, as has been done by Popery.

<span id="xiv.i-p105"></span>*We have waited for him.* He expresses the
firmness and perseverance of those who have once embraced God in Christ;
for it ought not to be a temporary knowledge, but we must persevere in
it steadfastly to the end. Now, Isaiah speaks in the name of the ancient
Church, which at that time had its seat, strictly speaking, among the
Jews alone; and therefore, despising as it were all the gods that were
worshipped in other countries, he boldly declares that he alone, who
revealed himself to Abraham, (<span id="xiv.i-p105.1"></span>[Ge
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p105.1"></span>,.md)
and proclaimed his law by the hand of Moses, (<span
id="xiv.i-p105.2"></span>[Exod. 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p105.2"></span>,.md) is
the true God. Other nations, which were involved in the darkness of
ignorance, did not “wait for” the Lord: for this “waiting” springs from
faith, which is accompanied by patience, and there is no faith without
the word.

<span id="xiv.i-p106"></span>Thus he warns believers that their
salvation rests on hope and expectation; for the promises of God were as
it were suspended till the coming of Christ. Besides, we ought to
observe what was the condition of those times; for it appeared as if
either the promise of God had come to nought, or he had rejected the
posterity of Abraham. Certainly, though they looked very far, God did
not at that time appear to them; and therefore they must have been
endued with astonishing patience to endure such heavy and sharp
temptations. Accordingly, he bids them wait quietly for the coming of
Christ; for then they will clearly perceive how near God is to them that
worship him.

<span id="xiv.i-p107"></span>The same doctrine ought to soothe us in the
present day, so that, though our salvation be concealed, still we may
“wait for the Lord” with firm and unshaken hope, and, when he is at a
distance, may always say, *Lo, here he is.* In times of the greatest
confusion, let us learn to distinguish him by this mark, *This is he*.
 <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) As to the words, though he
says, in the past tense,  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) “We
rejoiced and were glad in his salvation;” yet the words denote a
continued act; and, a little before, he had said in the future tense,
“He will save us.” The meaning may be thus summed up, “Christ will never
disappoint the hopes of his people, if they call on him with patience.”

<span id="xiv.i-p110"></span><span id="xiv.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p111"></span>**10.** *For the hand of Jehovah shall
rest.* The design of the Prophet in the beginning of this verse, I have
no doubt, was to comfort the godly, who but for this would have thought
that God had forsaken and abandoned them; for the opinion of those who
view it as describing the judgment which the Lord was about to execute
on the Jews, has no foundation whatever; but the meaning is the same as
if he had said, that the Lord will always assist his Church. I am aware
that “the hand of God” rests also on the reprobate, when he does not
cease to pursue them with his vengeance, till he completely overwhelm
them; but here the word “hand” denotes assistance, and not
chastisements, and therefore by the word “rest,” is meant the
uninterrupted continuance of defense or protection.

<span id="xiv.i-p112"></span>We draw from this a profitable doctrine,
that although God scatters innumerable blessings over the whole world,
in such a manner that wicked men also obtain a share of them, yet his
“hand” does not “rest,” or is not continually present, but in the holy
*mountain*; that is, in the Church, where he is worshipped. It ought
also to be observed, that Jerusalem had been chastised, before she
received these blessings; for he had formerly threatened chastisements
and punishments, to which he added this consolation.

<span id="xiv.i-p113"></span>*And Moab shall be trodden down under him.*
In this clause he gives an additional view of the grace of God; for, by
inflicting punishment on the enemies of the Church, he will shew how
dearly he values its salvation. The Jews had no enemies more deadly than
the Moabites, though their ancestors  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) were near relatives. By a figure of
speech (<span id="xiv.i-p114.1"></span>συνεκδοχικῶς) in which a part is
taken for the whole, he includes under this name all the enemies of the
Church, and especially those who are somewhat related to them, and who
are more destructive than all others. He shews that, though for a time
they are victorious and oppress the Church, yet eventually they shall be
punished. His object is, that under their afflictions believers may not
lose heart, as if their condition were unhappy, while wicked men are
cheerful and prosperous; for the “treading down,” which is here
mentioned, will quickly follow. Consequently, if at the present day we
see the Church disturbed and oppressed by those who are somewhat related
to us, and who even assume the name and title of the Church, let us
comfort our hearts by this promise.

<span id="xiv.i-p115"></span>*As straw is trodden down in the
dunghills.*  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) The word <span
id="xiv.i-p116.1"></span>מדמנה, (*Mădmēnāh*,) which we translate
“dunghill,”  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) is supposed by some
to be the name of a city, which is also mentioned by Jeremiah, (<span
id="xiv.i-p117.1"></span>[Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p117.1"></span>..md)
But what if we should say that the Prophet alludes to the city, which
was probably situated in a fertile soil, and thus conveys a stronger
censure, and presses harder on the Moabites? As if he had said, “As
straw is trodden down in their fields, so will the Lord tread down the
Moabites.” I do not dislike other interpretations, but consider it to be
not improbable that he alludes to the fertility of the soil in which
that city was situated. Yet in my version I have not hesitated to follow
the common opinion.

<span id="xiv.i-p118"></span><span id="xiv.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p119"></span>**11.** *And he shall spread out.* The
Prophet now explains and confirms the former statement; but he employs a
different metaphor, by which he means, that the Lord will spread out his
hand to the innermost part of the country of Moab, and not merely to its
extremities. Some explain the metaphor thus: “As the arms are stretched
out in swimming, so the Lord will chastise the Moabites on all sides.”
Others think that it expresses the doubling of punishments, as if he had
said, “The Lord will not only punish the Moabites, but will again and
again take vengeance for the cruelty which they exercised against the
children of God.”

<span id="xiv.i-p120"></span>But we might take another way of explaining
that metaphor. Those who swim do not rush forward with the utmost
violence, but gently spread out and quickly draw back their arms, and
yet they cut and subdue the waters. In like manner, the Lord does not
always put forth great strength to cut down the wicked, but without any
effort, without the use of armies, without any noise or uproar, he
destroys and puts them to flight, however valiant or well prepared for
battle they may appear to be. And I approve of this explanation, because
it takes nothing from the meaning formerly given, and explains more
clearly, that the wicked are often brought to nothing by the hand of
God, though he do not openly thunder from heaven. When he says, “*In the
midst of it*,” he shews that no part will be hidden in such a manner as
not to be overtaken by this vengeance.

<span id="xiv.i-p121"></span><span id="xiv.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p122"></span>**12.** *And the fortress.* The Prophet now
directs his discourse to the country of Moab. It was highly fortified,
and was proud of its walls and fortifications; and he affirms that the
lofty towers, and other defences, however strong and seemingly
impregnable, will be of no avail. The ancients, it is well known, had
quite a different method of fortifying from what is practiced among us.

<span id="xiv.i-p123"></span>*He will bring down, lay low, and cast to
the ground.* The three words here employed, for conveying the meaning
more strongly, are not superfluous; for it was necessary to beat down
that pride which swelled the hearts of the Moabites, and which, as we
formerly saw,  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) made them
intolerable. The Prophet therefore mocks at them, “As if the Lord could
not cast down that loftiness of which you boast!”

<span id="xiv.i-p125"></span>*To the dust.* The meaning of this clause
is as if he had said, “He will not only level it with the ground, but
will reduce it *to dust*, so that there will not even be a trace of the
ancient ruin.” This passage contains an excellent and highly seasonable
consolation; for the enemies of the Church in the present day are so
haughty, that they mock not only at men, but at God himself, and are so
much swelled and puffed up by their power, that they imagine themselves
to be invincible; but, in opposition to their bulwarks and defences, we
ought to bring forward this declaration of the Prophet, “The Lord will
quickly bring down and lay them low.” Yet we must patiently endure to
see them strong and powerful, till the full time for their destruction
arrive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc14013.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span> “Faithfulness and truth.” — Eng. Ver.
“Perfectly true.” — *Stock*. “Truth, certainty.” — *Alexander*.

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span> FT394 “Counsels of old.” — Eng. Ver.
“Counsels of old time.” — *Stock*

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span> FT395 “*Of foreigners*, a term with the
Jews synonymous to barbarians or enemies; as the Romans confounded <span
id="xiv.i-p35.1"></span>*hospites* with <span
id="xiv.i-p35.2"></span>*hostes*, being to them nearly the same thing.”
— *Stock*

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span> FT396 See page 191

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span> FT397 “The branch of the terrible ones.” —
Eng. Ver. “So shall the song of the tyrants be brought low.” —
*Alexander*

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span> FT398 “Of wines on the lees well refined.”
— Eng. Ver.

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span> FT399 “<span id="xiv.i-p39.1"></span>Que
nous en soyons remplis et rassassiez;” — “That we may be filled and
satisfied with it.”

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span> FT400 “<span id="xiv.i-p40.1"></span>Le
voile qui cache la face de tous les peuples;” — “The veil which covers
the face of all people.”

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span> FT401 “He will swallow up death in
victory.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span> FT402 “When we consider the expression
which follows, (evidently meant, by a parallelism, to be exegetical,)
<span id="xiv.i-p42.1"></span>πάντων περίψημα, there is little doubt
that the sense of <span id="xiv.i-p42.2"></span>περικαθάρματα is ‘the
cleansings up,’ as <span id="xiv.i-p42.3"></span>περίψημα is ‘the
sweepings up or around;’ metaphorically denoting ‘the vilest things’ or
‘persons,’ the very ‘outcasts’ of society.” — *Bloomfield* on <span
id="xiv.i-p42.4"></span>[1Co 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p42.4"></span>. “<span id="xiv.i-p42.5"></span>Περίψημα
denotes filings or scrapings of any kind, and also the sweepings that
are cleared away with a brush.” —Calvin on Corinthians, vol. 1 p. 166

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span> FT403 “<span id="xiv.i-p43.1"></span>J’ay
mieux aimé le tourner, On dira;” — “I chose rather to render it, It
shall be said.”

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span> FT404 “<span id="xiv.i-p44.1"></span>Ces
deux mots, *Voici, Cestui-ci*;” — “These two words, *Lo, This*.”

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span> FT405 “<span
id="xiv.i-p45.1"></span>C’est-ci l Eternel;” — “This is the Eternal.”

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span> FT406 “This is a strange oversight. <span
id="xiv.i-p46.1"></span>נגילה (*nagīllah*) and <span
id="xiv.i-p46.2"></span>נשמחה (*nismĕchāh*) are in the future tense, and
are so rendered by our Author in his version, “<span
id="xiv.i-p46.3"></span>Exultabimus et lætabimur,” — “We will rejoice
and be glad.” “The augmented futures at the close,” says Professor
Alexander, alluding to the He paragogic, “may either denote fixed
determination (‘we will rejoice, we will be glad’) or a proposition,
(‘Let us then rejoice,’) for which the language has no other distinct
form.” — *Ed*

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span> FT407 That is, Abraham and Lot. (<span
id="xiv.i-p47.1"></span>[Gen. 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031.md),
[Gen. 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p47.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span> FT408 “As straw is trodden down for the
dunghill, (or, thrashed in Madmenah.)” — (Eng. Ver.)

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span> FT409 Professor Alexander renders it, “in
the water of the dunghill,” and remarks, “The Keri, or Masoretic reading
in the margin, has <span id="xiv.i-p49.1"></span>במו, a poetical
equivalent of <span id="xiv.i-p49.2"></span>ב, the preposition. The
Kethib, or textual reading, which is probably more ancient, is <span
id="xiv.i-p49.3"></span>במי, *in the water*. This, with the next word,
may denote a pool in which the straw was left to putrefy.”

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span> FT410 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
488

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc14013.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p52"></span>

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc14013.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p56"></span>

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc14013.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p59"></span>

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc14013.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p71"></span>

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc14013.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p79"></span>

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc14013.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p80.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p81"></span>

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc14013.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p85"></span>

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc14013.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p89"></span>

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc14013.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p90.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p91"></span>

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc14013.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p97"></span>

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc14013.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p103"></span>

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc14013.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p108"></span>

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc14013.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p109"></span>

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc14013.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p114"></span>

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc14013.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p116"></span>

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc14013.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p116.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p117"></span>

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc14013.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p124"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](cc14014.md)
