[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14008)  [Next](cc14010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 21

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 21:1-17

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1**. The burden of the desert of the sea. As
whirlwinds in the south pass through; *so* it cometh from the desert,
from a terrible land.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1**. Onus deserti maris, Sicut tempestates in
australi regione, transituræ a deserto, veniet a terra horribili.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2**. A grievous vision is declared unto me:
The treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth.
Go up, O Elam; besiege, O Media: all the sighing thereof have I made to
cease.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2**. Visio dura indicata est mihi:
transgressor transgressori, et vastator vastatori. Ascende, Persa;
obside, Mede; omnem gemitum ejus cessare feci.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3**. Therefore are my loins filled with pain:
pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth:
I was bowed down at the hearing *of* *it*; I was dismayed at the seeing
*of* *it*

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3**. Propterea impleti sunt lumbi mei dolore;
angustiæ corripuerunt me,sicut angustiæ parturientis; incurvatus sum
audiendo, et videndo obstupui.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4**. My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted
me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4**. Concussum est cor meum; horror
perterruit me; noctem deliciarum mearum posuit mihi in horrorem.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5**. Prepare the table, watch in the
watch-tower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, *and* anoint the shield.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5**. Adorna mensam, speculare in specula,
comede, bibe; surgite, Principes, et ungite clypeum.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**6**. For thus hath the Lord said unto me,
Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6**. Quoniam sic dixit ad me Dominus: Vade,
constitue vigilem, qui annuntiet quod viderit.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**7**. And he saw a chariot *with* a couple of
horsemen, a chariot of asses, *and* a chariot of camels; and he
hearkened diligently with much heed.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7**. Et vidit currum paris equitum, currum
asini, et currum cameli; deinde attentius speculatus est, multum,
inquam, speculatus est.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**8**. And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand
continually upon the watch-tower in the day-time, and I am set in my
ward whole nights;

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8**. Tum clamavit, Leo. In specula mea,
Domine mi, jugiter sto interdiu, et totis noctibus in custodia mea
locatus sum.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>**9**. And, behold, here cometh a chariot of
men, *with* a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken
unto the ground.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9**. Et ecce, hic venit currus hominis, par
equitum. Et loquutus est, ac dixit, Cecidit, cecidit Babel, et omnia
sculptilia deorum ejus contrivit ad terram.

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**10**. O my thrashing, and the corn of my
floor: that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
have I declared unto you.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span>**10**. Tritura mea, et filius areæ meæ. Quæ
audivi a Iehova exercituum Deo Israel, nuntiavi vobis.

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**11**. The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me
out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**11**. Onus Duma. Clamat ad me ex Seir:
Custos, quid de nocte? Custos, quid de nocte?

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>**12**. The watchman said, The morning cometh,
and also the night: if ye will enquire, enquire ye; return, come.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>**12**. Dixit custos: Venit mane, postea nox.
Si interrogavaris, interrogate. Revertimini, venite.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**13**. The burden upon Arabia. In the forest
in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**13**. Onus in Arabia. In nemore in Arabia
pernoctabitis, in viis Dedanim.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**14**. The inhabitants of the land of Tema
brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread
him that fled.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>**14**. In occursum ferte aquas sitienti,
icolæ terræ Tema, pane suo succurrite profugo.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**15**. For they fled from the swords, from
the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of
war.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>**15**. Quia a facie gladiorum fugiunt, a
facie gladii extenti, a facie arcus intenti, a facie gravitatis belli.

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>**16**. Fore thus hath the Lord said unto me,
Within a year, according to the years of an hireling, and all the glory
of Kedar shall fail:

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>**16**. Nam sic dixit mihi Dominus: Adhuc
annus, secundum annos mercenarii, tum deficiet omnis gloria Cedar;

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>**17**. And the residue of the number of
archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished:
for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken *it*

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>**17**. Et residuum arcus, quod numerabitur
fortium filiorum Cedar, imminuetur; quoniam Iehova Deus Israel loquutus
est.

<span id="x.i-p36"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p37"></span><span id="x.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**1.** *The burden of the desert of the sea.*
The Prophet, after having taught that their hope ought to be placed, not
on the Egyptians, but on the mercy of God alone, and after having
foretold that calamities would come on the nations on whose favor they
relied, adds a consolation in order to encourage the hearts of the
godly. He declares, that for the Chaldeans, to whom they will be
captives, a reward is prepared; from which it follows, that God takes
account of the injuries which they endure. By *the desert*  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) he means Chaldea, not that it was
deserted or thinly inhabited, but because the Jews had a desert on that
side of them; just as if, instead of Italy, we should name “the Alps,”
because they are nearer to us, and because we must cross them on our
road to Italy. This reason ought to be kept in view; for he does not
describe the nature of the country, but forewarns the Jews that the
destruction of the enemies, which he foretells, is near at hand, and is
as certain as if the event had been before their eyes, as that desert
was. Besides, the prophets sometimes spoke ambiguously about Babylon,
that believers alone might understand the hidden mysteries, as Jeremiah
changes the king’s name.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="x.i-p55"></span>*As storms from the south.* He says *from the
south*, because that wind is tempestuous, and produces storms and
whirlwinds.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) When he adds that “it
cometh from the desert,” this tends to heighten the picture; for if any
storm arise in a habitable and populous region, it excites less terror
than those which spring up in deserts. In order to express the shocking
nature of this calamity, he compares it to storms, which begin in the
desert, and afterwards take a more impetuous course, and rush with
greater violence.

<span id="x.i-p57"></span>Yet the Prophet appears to mean something
else, namely, that as they burst forth like storms from that direction
to lay Judea desolate, so another storm would soon afterwards arise to
destroy them; and therefore he says that this burden will come *from a
terrible land*. By this designation I understand Judea to be meant, for
it was not enough to speak of the ruin of Babylon, if the Jews did not
likewise understand that it came from God. Why he calls it “a terrible
land” we have seen in our exposition of the eighteenth chapter.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) It was because, in consequence of so many
displays of the wrath of God, its disfigured appearance might strike
terror on all. The occasion on which the words are spoken does not allow
us to suppose that it is called “terrible” on account of the astonishing
power of God by which it was protected. Although therefore Babylon was
taken and plundered by the Persians and Medes, Isaiah declares that its
destruction will come from Judea; because in this manner God will
revenge the injuries done to that nation of which he had promised to be
the guardian.

<span id="x.i-p59"></span><span id="x.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p60"></span>**2.** *A harsh vision.* As the object was to
soothe the grief of the people, it may be thought not to be appropriate
to call a vision, which is the occasion of joy, *a harsh vision*. But
this refers to the Babylonians, who, puffed up with their prosperity,
dreaded no danger; for wealth commonly produces pride and indifference.
As if he had said, “It is useless to hold out the riches and power of
the Babylonians, and when a stone is hard, there will be found a hard
hammer to break it.”

<span id="x.i-p61"></span>*The spoiler.* As Babylon had gained its power
by plundering and laying waste other nations, it seemed to be free from
all danger. Although they had been a terror to others, and had practiced
every kind of barbarity and cruelty, yet they could not avoid becoming a
prey and enduring injuries similar to those which they had inflicted on
others. The Prophet goes farther, and, in order to obtain credit to his
statements, pronounces it to be a righteous retaliation, that violence
should correspond to violence.

<span id="x.i-p62"></span>*Go up, O Elam.* *Elam* is a part of Persia;
but is taken for the whole of Persia, and on this account also the
Persians are called Elamites. It is worthy of observation, that, when
Isaiah foretold these things, there was no probability of war, and that
he was dead a hundred years before there was any apprehension of this
calamity. Hence it is sufficiently evident that he could not have
derived his information on this subject from any other than the Spirit
of God; and this contributes greatly to confirm the truth and certainty
of the prediction.

<span id="x.i-p63"></span>*Besiege, O Mede.* By commanding the Medes and
Persians, he declares that this will not befall the Babylonians at
random or by chance, but by the sure decree of God, in whose name, and
not in that of any private individual, he makes the announcement. Coming
forward therefore in the name of God, he may, like a captain or general,
command his soldiers to assemble to give battle. In what manner God
employs the agency of robbers and wicked men, has been formerly
explained at the tenth chapter.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="x.i-p65"></span>*I have made all his groaning to cease.* Some
understand it to mean, that the groaning, to which the Babylonians had
given occasion, ceased after they were subdued by the Medes and
Persians; for by their tyrannical measures they had caused many to
groan, which must happen when wicked and ungodly men possess rank and
power. Others approach more closely, perhaps, to the real meaning of the
Prophet, when they say, that “the groaning ceased,” because the
Babylonians experienced no compassion, having formerly shewn none to
others. But I explain it more simply to mean, that the Lord was deaf to
their groanings; as if he had said, that there would be no room for
their groanings and lamentations, because having been cruel and
barbarous, it was just that they should receive back the same measure
which they had meted out to others. (<span id="x.i-p65.1"></span>[Mt
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="x.i-p65.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p66"></span><span id="x.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p67"></span>**3.** *Therefore are my loins, filled with
pain.* Here the Prophet represents the people as actually present, for
it was not enough to have simply foretold the destruction of Babylon, if
he had not confirmed the belief of the godly in such a manner that they
felt as if the actual event were placed before their eyes. Such a
representation was necessary, and the Prophet does not here describe the
feelings of his own heart, as if he had compassion on the Babylonians,
but, on the contrary, as we have formerly said,  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) he assumes, for the time, the character
of a Babylonian.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) It ought
undoubtedly to satisfy our minds that the hidden judgments of God are
held out to us, as in a mirror, that they may arouse the sluggishness of
our faith; and therefore the Prophets describe with greater beauty and
copiousness, and paint in lively colors, those things which exceed the
capacity of our reason. The Prophet, thus expressing his grief, informs
believers how awful is the vengeance of God which awaits the Chaldeans,
and how dreadfully they will be punished, as we are struck with surprise
and horror when any sad intelligence is brought to us.

<span id="x.i-p70"></span>*As the pangs of a woman that travaileth.* He
adds a stronger expression of grief, when he compares it to that of a
woman in labor, as when a person under fearful anguish turns every way,
and writhes in every part of his body. Such modes of expression are
employed by the Prophets on account of our sluggishness, for we do not
perceive the judgments of God till they be pointed at, as it were, with
the finger, and affect our senses. We are warned to be on our guard
before they arrive.

<span id="x.i-p71"></span><span id="x.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p72"></span>**4.** *My heart was shaken.* Others render it
not amiss, “my heart wandered;” for excessive terror moves the heart, as
it were, out of its place. He declares how sudden and unlooked for will
be the destruction of Babylon, for a sudden calamity makes us tremble
more than one which has been long foreseen and expected. Daniel relates,
that what Isaiah here foretells was accomplished, and that he was an
eye-witness. Belshazzar had that night prepared a magnificent banquet,
when the Persians suddenly rushed upon him, and nothing was farther from
his expectation than that he would be slain. High delight was thus
suddenly changed into terror. (<span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>[Da
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)<span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p73"></span><span id="x.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p74"></span>**5.** *Prepare the table.* These verbs may be
taken for participles; as if he had said, “While they were preparing the
table and appointing a guard, while they were eating and drinking,
sudden terror arose; there was a call to arms, Arise ye princes,” etc..
But Isaiah presents lively descriptions, so as to place the actual
event, as it were, before our eyes. Certainly Xenophon does not describe
so historically the storming of the city; and this makes it evident that
it was not natural sagacity, but heavenly inspiration, that taught
Isaiah to describe so vividly events that were unknown. Besides, we
ought to observe the time when these predictions were uttered; for at
that time the kingdom of Babylon was in its most flourishing condition,
and appeared to have invincible power, and dreaded no danger. Isaiah
ridicules this vain confidence, and shews that this power will speedily
be laid in ruins.

<span id="x.i-p75"></span>Let it not be thought absurd that he
introduces the watchmen as speaking; for although the siege had not
shaken off the slothfulness of a proud and foolish tyrant so as to
hinder him from indulging in gaiety and feasting, still there is no room
to doubt that men were appointed to keep watch. It is customary indeed
with princes to defend themselves by guards, that they may more freely
and without any disturbance abandon themselves to every kind of
pleasure; but the Prophet expressly mixes up the sentinels with the
delicacies of the table, to make it more evident that the wicked tyrant
was seized with a spirit of giddiness before he sunk down to drunken
reveling. The king of Babylon was thus feasting and indulging in mirth
with his courtiers, when he was overtaken by a sudden and unexpected
calamity, not that he was out of danger, but because he disregarded and
scorned the enemy. The day before it happened, it might have been
thought incredible, for the conspiracy of Gobryas, and of that party
which betrayed him, had not yet been discovered. At the time when Isaiah
spoke, none would have thought that an event so extraordinary would ever
take place.

<span id="x.i-p76"></span><span id="x.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p77"></span>**6.** *For thus hath the Lord said to me.*
The Prophet is commanded to set a *watchman* on the watchtower, to see
these things at a distance; for they cannot be perceived by the eyes, or
learned by conjecture. In order, therefore, that all may know that he
did not speak at random, he declares that he foretells these things; for
although they are unknown to men, and incredible, yet he clearly and
distinctly knows them by the spirit of prophecy, because he is elevated
above the judgment of men. This ought to be carefully observed; for we
must not imagine that the prophets learned from men, or foresaw by their
own sagacity, those things which they made known; and on this account
also they were justly called “Seers.” (<span id="x.i-p77.1"></span>[1Sa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)<span id="x.i-p77.1"></span>.)
Though we also see them, yet our sight is dull, and we scarcely perceive
what is at our feet; and even the most acute men are often in darkness,
because they understand nothing but what they can gather by the use of
reason. But the prophets speak by the Spirit of God, as from heaven. The
amount of what is stated is, that whosoever shall attempt to measure
this prophecy by their own judgment will do wrong, because it has
proceeded from God, and therefore it goes far beyond our sense.

<span id="x.i-p78"></span>*Go, appoint a watchman.* It gives additional
weight that he “appoints a watchman in the name of God.” If it be
objected, “You relate incredible things as if they had actually
happened,” he replies that he does not declare them at random; for he
whom the prince has appointed to be a watchman, sees from a distance
what others do not know. Thus Isaiah saw by the revelation of the Spirit
what was unknown to others.

<span id="x.i-p79"></span><span id="x.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p80"></span>**7.** *And he saw a chariot.* What he now
adds contains a lively description of that defeat. Some think that it is
told by the king’s messenger. This is a mistake; for the Prophet, on the
contrary, foretells what he has learned from the watchman whom he
appointed by the command of God. Here he represents the watchman as
looking and reporting what he saw. As if at the first glance he had not
seen it clearly, he says that there is “a chariot,” and afterwards
observing more closely, he says that there is “a couple of horses” in
the chariot. At first, on account of the novelty and great distance of
the objects, the report given is ambiguous and confused; but afterwards,
when a nearer view is obtained, they are better understood. There is no
absurdity in applying to prophets or to divine visions what belongs to
men; for we know that God, accommodating himself to our feeble capacity,
takes upon himself human feelings.

<span id="x.i-p81"></span><span id="x.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p82"></span>**8.** *And he cried, A lion.* “Having
hearkened diligently with much heed,” at length he observes *a* *lion*.
This is supposed to mean Darius who conquered and pillaged Babylon, as
we learn from Daniel. (<span id="x.i-p82.1"></span>[Dan.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#028),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031)<span id="x.i-p82.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p83"></span>*I stand continually.* When the watchman says
that he is continually on his watchtower by day and by night, this tends
to confirm the prediction, as if he had said that nothing can be more
certain than this vision; for they whom God has appointed to keep watch
are neither drowsy nor dim-sighted. Meanwhile, by this example, he
exhorts and stimulates believers to the same kind of attention, that by
the help of the lamp of the word, they may obtain a distant view of the
power of God.

<span id="x.i-p84"></span><span id="x.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p85"></span>**9.** *Babylon is fallen, is fallen.* This
shews plainly that it is not king Belshazzar’s watchman who is
introduced, for this speech would be unsuitable to such a character. The
Prophet therefore makes known, by the command of God, what would happen.
Now, this may refer either to God or to Darius, as well as to the
watchman; and it makes little difference as to the meaning, for Darius,
being God’s servant in this matter, is not inappropriately represented
to be the herald of that judgment. There would be greater probability in
referring it to God himself; for Darius had no such thoughts when he
overthrew the idols of the Babylonians. But the speech agrees better
with the character of a guardian, as if an angel added an interpretation
to the prophecy.

<span id="x.i-p86"></span>*And all the graven images of her gods.* There
is here an implied contrast between the living God and dead idols. This
mode of expression, too, deserves notice, when he calls them “images of
gods;” for the Babylonians knew, as all idolaters loudly proclaim, that
their images are not gods. Yet they ascribed to them divine power, and
when this is done, “the truth of God is changed into a lie,” (<span
id="x.i-p86.1"></span>[Ro 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="x.i-p86.1"></span>,) and not only so, but God himself is denied. But
on this subject we shall afterwards speak more largely. Here we see,
that by her destruction Babylon was punished for idolatry, for he
assigns the reason why Babylon was destroyed. It was because the Lord
could not endure that she should glory in her “graven images.”

<span id="x.i-p87"></span><span id="x.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p88"></span>**10.** *My thrashing, and the son of my
floor.*  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) The wealth of that
powerful monarchy having dazzled the eyes of all men by its splendor,
what Isaiah foretold about its destruction might be reckoned fabulous.
He therefore leads their minds to God, in order to inform them that it
was God who had undertaken to destroy Babylon, and that it is not by the
will of men, but by divine power, that such loftiness will fall to the
ground. The “thrashing” and “the son of the floor” mean the same thing;
for this mode of expression is frequently employed by Hebrew writers,
who often repeat the same statement in different language.

<span id="x.i-p90"></span>This passage ought to be carefully observed,
that we may correct a vice which is natural to us, that of measuring the
power of God by our own standard. Not only does our feebleness place us
far below the wisdom of God; but we are wicked and depraved judges of
his works, and cannot be induced to take any other view of them than of
what comes within the reach of the ability and wisdom of men. But we
ought always to remember his almighty power, and especially when our own
reason and judgment fail us. Thus, when the Church is oppressed by
tyrants to such a degree that there appears to be no hope of
deliverance, let us know that the Lord will lay them low, and, by
trampling on their pride and abasing their strength, will shew that they
are his “thrashing-floor;” for the subject of this prediction was not a
person of mean rank, but the most powerful and flourishing of all
monarchies. The more they have exalted themselves, the more quickly will
they be destroyed, and the Lord will execute his “thrashing” upon them.
Let us learn that what the Lord has here given as a manifestation of
inconceivable ruin, applies to persons of the same stamp.

<span id="x.i-p91"></span>*That which I have heard from the Lord of
hosts.* When he says that he has “heard it from the Lord of hosts,” he
sets a seal, as it were, on his prophecy; for he declares that he has
not brought forward his own conjectures, but has received it from the
Lord himself. Here it is worthy of our notice, that the servants of God
ought to be fortified by this boldness to speak in the name of God, as
Peter also exhorts, “He that speaketh, let him speak as the oracles of
God.” (<span id="x.i-p91.1"></span>[1Pe
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p91.1"></span>.)
Impostors also boast of the name of God, but his faithful servants have
the testimony of their conscience that they bring forward nothing but
what God has enjoined. Observe, also, that this confirmation was highly
necessary, for the whole world trembled at the resources of this
powerful monarchy.

<span id="x.i-p92"></span>*From the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel.*
It is not without reason that he gives to God these two appellations. As
to the former, it is indeed a title which always applies to God; but
here, undoubtedly, the Prophet had his eye on the matter in hand, in
order to contrast the power of God with all the troops of the
Babylonians; for God has not a single army, but innumerable armies, to
subdue his enemies. Again, he calls him “the God of Israel,” because by
destroying Babylon he shewed himself to be the defender and guardian of
his people; for the overthrow of that monarchy procured freedom for the
Jews. In short, all these things were done for the sake of the Church,
which the Prophet has here in view; for it is not the Babylonians, who
undoubtedly laughed at these predictions, but believers, whom he exhorts
to rest assured that, though they were oppressed by the Babylonians, and
scattered and tossed about, still God would take care of them.

<span id="x.i-p93"></span><span id="x.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p94"></span>**11.** *The burden of Dumah.* It is evident
from <span id="x.i-p94.1"></span>[Ge
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p94.1"></span>,
that this nation was descended from a son of Ishmael, to whom this name
was given, and hence his posterity are called Dumeans.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) The cause of their destruction, which is
here foretold, cannot be known with certainty, and this prophecy is
obscure on account of its brevity. Yet we ought always to remember what
I have formerly remarked, that it was proper that the Jews should be
fortified against the dreadful stumbling-blocks which were approaching.
When so many changes take place, particularly if the world is turned
upside down, and if there is a rapid succession of events, we are
perplexed and entertain doubts whether all things happen at random and
by chance, or are regulated by the providence of God. The Lord therefore
shews that it is he who effects this revolution, and renews the state of
the world, that we may learn that nothing here is of long duration, and
may have our whole heart and our whole aim directed to the reign of
Christ, which alone is everlasting.

<span id="x.i-p96"></span>Since therefore these changes were near at
hand, it was proper that the Jews should be forewarned, that when the
event followed, they should call them to remembrance, contemplate the
wisdom of God, and strengthen their faith. Besides, there is no room to
doubt that the Jews were harassed by various thoughts, when they saw the
whole world shaken on all sides, and desired to have some means of
avoiding those storms and tempests; for we always wish to be in safety
and beyond the reach of danger. Some might have wished to find new
abodes, that they might better provide for their own safety; but when
storms raged on every hand, they were reminded to remain at home, and to
believe that no safer habitation could anywhere be found than in the
company of the godly.

<span id="x.i-p97"></span>This example ought also to be a warning to
many who separate themselves from the Church through fear of danger, and
do not consider that a greater danger awaits them out of it. These
thoughts might therefore distress the Jews, for we have seen in the
eighth chapter that their minds were restless.  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) When they were thus tossed about in
uncertainty, and fleeing to foreign nations, they would naturally lose
heart; and this, I think, is the chief reason why the destruction of the
Dumeans is foretold, namely, that the Jews might seek God with their
whole heart, and that above all things they might commit to his care the
safety of the Church. Let us therefore learn to keep ourselves within
the Church, though she be afflicted by various calamities, and let us
bear patiently the fatherly chastisements which are inflicted on
children, instead of choosing to go astray, that we may drink the dregs
which choke the wicked. (<span id="x.i-p98.1"></span>[Ps
75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p98.1"></span>;
<span id="x.i-p98.2"></span>[Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017)<span id="x.i-p98.2"></span>.)
What shall become of strangers and reprobates, if children are thus
chastised? (<span id="x.i-p98.3"></span>[1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="x.i-p98.3"></span>.) Yet
it is possible that the chosen people suffered some molestation from the
people of God, when their neighbors assailed them on every side.

<span id="x.i-p99"></span>*Out of Seir.* Mount Seir, as we learn from
the book of Genesis, was a mountain of the Edomites. (<span
id="x.i-p99.1"></span>[Gen. 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006),
[Gen. 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003), [Gen.
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)<span id="x.i-p99.1"></span>.) Under
the name of this mountain he includes the whole kingdom. In this place
he represents, as in a picture, those things which called for an earnest
address.

<span id="x.i-p100"></span>*Watchman, what of the night?* It is probable
that the Edomites, who put the question, were not at a great distance
from them, and that they were solicitous about the danger as one in
which they were themselves involved. He introduces them as inquiring at
the “watchman,” not through curiosity, but with a view to their own
advantage, what he had observed in “the night,” just as when one has
asked a question, a second and a third person follow him, asking the
same thing. This is the meaning of the repetition, that the inquiry is
made not by one individual only, but by many persons, as commonly
happens in cases of doubt and perplexity, when every man is afraid on
his own account, and does not believe what is said by others.

<span id="x.i-p101"></span><span id="x.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p102"></span>**12.** *The morning cometh.* This means that
the anxiety will not last merely for a single day, or for a short time,
as if the watchman had replied, “What I tell you to-day, I will tell you
again to-morrow; if you are afraid now, you will also be afraid
to-morrow.” It is a most wretched condition when men are tortured with
anxiety, in such a manner that they hang in a state of doubt between
death and life; and it is that dismal curse which the Lord threatens
against wicked men by Moses,

<span id="x.i-p103"></span>“Would that I lived till the evening; and in
the evening, would that I saw the dawn!” (<span
id="x.i-p103.1"></span>[De 28:67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#067)<span
id="x.i-p103.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p104"></span>The godly indeed are beset with many dangers,
but they know that they and their life are committed to the hand of God,
and even in the jaws of death they see life, or at least soothe their
uneasy fears by hope and patience. But the wicked always tremble, and
not only are tormented by alarm, but waste away in their sorrows.

<span id="x.i-p105"></span>*Return, come.* These words may be explained
in two ways; either that if they run continually, they will lose their
pains, or in this way, “If any among you be more careful, let them go to
Dumah, and there let them tremble more than in their native country, for
nowhere will they be safe.” But since God always takes care of his
Church, nowhere shall we find a safer retreat, even though we shall
compass sea and land.

<span id="x.i-p106"></span><span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p107"></span>**13.** *The burden upon Arabia.* He now
passes on to the Arabians, and foretells that they too, in their own
turn, will be dragged to the judgment-seat of God; so that he does not
leave unnoticed any of the nations which were known to the Jews. He
declares that they will be seized with such fear that they will leave
their houses and flee into the woods; and he states the direction in
which they will flee, that is, to “Dedanim.”

<span id="x.i-p108"></span><span id="x.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p109"></span>**14.** *To meet the thirsty bring waters.*
 <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) He heightens the description of
that trembling with which the Lord had determined to strike the Arabians
in such a manner that they thought of nothing but flight, and did not
take time even to collect those things which were necessary for the
journey. Isaiah therefore declares that the Arabians will come into the
country of Dedanim, empty and destitute of all things, and that they
will not be provided with any food. On this account he exhorts the
inhabitants to go out and meet them with bread and water, because
otherwise they will faint through the want of the necessaries of life.

<span id="x.i-p111"></span>I am aware that this passage is explained
differently by some commentators, who think that the Prophet mocks at
the Arabians, who had been cruel and barbarous towards the Jews; as if
he had said, “How gladly you would now bring water to the thirsty!” But
that exposition is too constrained. And yet I do not deny that they
received the reward of their cruelty, when they ran hither and thither
in a state of hunger. But the meaning which I have given is twofold,
 <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) that the Arabians in their flight
will be so wretched that they will not even have the necessary supply of
water, and they will therefore faint with thirst, if they do not quickly
receive assistance; and he intimates that there will be a scarcity both
of food and of drink. He calls on the neighbors to render assistance;
not to exhort them to do their duty, but to state the fact more clearly;
and he enjoins them to give their bread to them, not because it is
deserved, but because they are suffering extreme want. Yet as it is
founded on the common law of nature and humanity, the Prophet indirectly
insinuates that the hungry and thirsty are defrauded of their bread,
when food is denied to them.

<span id="x.i-p113"></span><span id="x.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p114"></span>**15.** *For they flee from the face of the
swords.*  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) He means that the
calamity will be dreadful, and that the Arabians will have good reason
for betaking themselves to flight, because the enemies will pursue them
with arms and with swords, so that they will have no other way of
providing for their safety than by flight. The reason why he foretells
this defeat is plain enough; for it was necessary that the Jews should
obtain early information of that which should happen long after, that
they might learn that the world is governed by the providence of God and
not by chance, and likewise that they should be taught by the example of
others to behold God as the judge of all nations, wherever they turned
their eyes. We do not know, and history does not inform us, whether or
not the Arabians were enemies of the Jews. However that may be, it is
certain that these things are spoken for the consolation of the godly,
that they may behold the justice of God towards all nations, and may
acknowledge that his judgment-seat is at Jerusalem, from which he will
pronounce judgment on the whole world.

<span id="x.i-p116"></span><span id="x.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p117"></span>**16.** *For thus hath the Lord said to me.*
He adds that this defeat of the Arabians, of which he prophesied, is
close at hand; which tended greatly to comfort the godly. We are
naturally fiery, and do not willingly allow the object of our desire to
be delayed; and the Lord takes into account our weakness in this
respect, when he says that he hastens his work. He therefore declares
that he prophesies of things which shall happen, not after many ages,
but immediately, that the Jews may bear more patiently their
afflictions, from which they know that they will be delivered in a short
time.

<span id="x.i-p118"></span>*Yet a year according to the years of the
hireling.* Of the metaphor of “the year of the hireling,” which he adds
for the purpose of stating the matter more fully, we have already
spoken.  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) It means that the time
will not be delayed. The same comparison is used by heathen authors,
where they intend to describe a day appointed and desired; as appears
from that passage in Horace, “The day appears long to those who must
render an account of their work.”  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="x.i-p121"></span><span id="x.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p122"></span>**17.** *And the residue of the archers.* He
threatens that this slaughter will not be the end of their evils,
because if there be any residue in Arabia, they will gradually decrease;
as if he had said, “The Lord will not merely impoverish the Arabians by
a single battle, but will pursue to the very utmost, till all hope of
relief is taken away, and they are utterly exterminated.” Such is the
vengeance which he executes against the ungodly, while he moderates the
punishment which he inflicts on the godly, that they may not be entirely
destroyed.

<span id="x.i-p123"></span>*Of the mighty men.* He means warlike men and
those who were fit to carry arms, and says, that although they escaped
that slaughter, still they will be cut off at their own time. He
formerly threatened similar chastisements against the Jews, but always
accompanied by a promise which was fitted to alleviate their grief or at
least to guard them against despair. It frequently happens that the
children of God are afflicted as severely as the reprobate, or even with
greater severity; but the hope of favor which is held out distinguishes
them from the whole world. Again, when we learn that God visits on the
wicked deadly vengeance, this is no reason why we should be immoderately
grieved even at the heaviest punishments; but, on the contrary, we ought
to draw from it this consolation, that he chastises them gently, and
“does not give them over to death.” (<span id="x.i-p123.1"></span>[Ps
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)<span id="x.i-p123.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p124"></span>*The God of Israel hath spoken it.* The
Prophet shews, as we have frequently remarked on former occasions, that
we ought not only to acknowledge that these things happened by divine
appointment, but that they were appointed by that God whom Israel
adores. All men are sometimes constrained to rise to the acknowledgment
of God, though they are disposed to believe in chance, because the
thought that there is a God in heaven comes into their minds, whether
they will or not, and that both in prosperity and in adversity; but then
they imagine a Deity according to their own fancy, either in heaven or
on earth. Since therefore irreligious men idly and foolishly imagine a
God according to their own pleasure, the Prophet directs the Jews to
that God whom they adore, that they may know the distinguished privilege
which they enjoy in being placed under his guardianship and protection.
Nor is it enough that we adore some God as governor of the world, but we
must acknowledge the true God, who revealed himself to the fathers, and
hath manifested himself to us in Christ. And this ought to be earnestly
maintained, in opposition to the profane thoughts of many persons who
contrive some strange and confused notion of a Deity, because they dare
not openly deny God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc14009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="x.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p39"></span> “This plainly means Babylon, which is the
subject of the prophecy. The country about Babylon, and especially below
it towards the sea, was a great flat morass, often overflowed by the
Euphrates and Tigris. It became habitable by being drained by the many
canals that were made in it.” — *Lowth*.

<span id="x.i-p40"></span> FT320 The allusion appears to be to the use
of the name “Coniah” instead of “Jehoiachin.” “Though Coniah ... were
the signet upon my right hand. Is this man Coniah a despised broken
idol?” (<span id="x.i-p40.1"></span>[Jer.
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028)<span id="x.i-p40.1"></span>.) —
*Ed*

<span id="x.i-p41"></span> FT321 Lowth remarks, and quotes <span
id="x.i-p41.1"></span>[Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019), [Job
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009), [Zech.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p41.1"></span>, in
support of the statement, that “the most vehement storms to which Judea
was subject came from the great desert country to the south of it.” —
*Ed*

<span id="x.i-p42"></span> FT322 See p. 37

<span id="x.i-p43"></span> FT323 See vol. 1 p. 341

<span id="x.i-p44"></span> FT324 See vol. 1 p. 494

<span id="x.i-p45"></span> FT325 “Vivacity is here imparted to the
description by the Prophet’s speaking of himself as of a Babylonian
present at Belshazzar’s feast, on the night when the town was surprised
by Cyrus.” — *Stock*

<span id="x.i-p46"></span> FT326 “The corn (Heb. son) of my floor.” —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="x.i-p47"></span> FT327 “Of *Dumah* there are two
interpretations, J. D. Michaelis, Gesenius, Maurer, Hitzig, Ewald, and
Umbreit understand it as the name of an Arabian tribe descended from
Ishmael, (<span id="x.i-p47.1"></span>[Gen.
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014), [1 Chr.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#030)<span id="x.i-p47.1"></span>,) or
of a place belonging to that tribe, perhaps the same now called *Dumah
Eljandil*, on the confines of Arabia and Syria. In that case, Seir,
which lay between Judah and the desert of Arabia, is mentioned merely to
denote the quarter whence the sound proceeded. But as Seir was itself
the residence of the Edomites or children of Esau, Vitringa,
Rosenmüller, and Knobel follow the Septuagint and Jarchi in explaining
<span id="x.i-p47.2"></span>דומה (*Dumah*) as a variation of <span
id="x.i-p47.3"></span>אדום, (*Edom*,) intended at the same time to
suggest the idea of *silence*, solitude, and desolation. — *Alexander*

<span id="x.i-p48"></span> FT328 See vol. 1 p. 265

<span id="x.i-p49"></span> FT329 “Brought water (or, bring ye, or,
prevent ye) to him that was thirsty.” — Eng. Ver. Calvin’s version
follows closely that of the Septuagint, <span id="x.i-p49.1"></span>εἰς
συνάντησιν ὕδωρ διψῶντι φέρετε, and agrees with other ancient versions;
but modern critics assign strong reasons for reading this verse in the
preterite rather than in the imperative.” — *Ed*

<span id="x.i-p50"></span> FT330 It would appear that, instead of “<span
id="x.i-p50.1"></span>geminus est sensus,” some copies had read, “<span
id="x.i-p50.2"></span>genuinus est sensus;” for the French version gives
“<span id="x.i-p50.3"></span>Cependant l’exposition que j’ay mise en
avant est plus simple;” “but the exposition which I have given is more
simple.” — *Ed*

<span id="x.i-p51"></span> FT331 “From the swords,” or, for fear (Heb.
from the face.) — Eng. Ver. “From before the swords.” — *Stock*. “From
the presence of swords.” — *Alexander*

<span id="x.i-p52"></span> FT332 See vol 1 p. 496

<span id="x.i-p53"></span> FT333 “<span id="x.i-p53.1"></span>Diesque
longa videtur opus debentibus.” — Hor. Ep. I.21. Another reading of this
passage, which gives “<span id="x.i-p53.2"></span>lenta“ instead of
“<span id="x.i-p53.3"></span>longa,” is not less apposite to the purpose
for which the quotation is made. “To those who perform task-work the day
appears to advance *slowly*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc14009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="x.i-p53.4"></span>

<span id="x.i-p54"></span>

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc14009.htm#fr_63) <span
id="x.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p56"></span>

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc14009.htm#fr_64) <span
id="x.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p58"></span>

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc14009.htm#fr_65) <span
id="x.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p64"></span>

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc14009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="x.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p68"></span>

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc14009.htm#fr_67) <span
id="x.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p69"></span>

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc14009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="x.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p89"></span>

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc14009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="x.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p95"></span>

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc14009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="x.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p98"></span>

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc14009.htm#fr_71) <span
id="x.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p110"></span>

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc14009.htm#fr_72) <span
id="x.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p112"></span>

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc14009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="x.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p115"></span>

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc14009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="x.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p119"></span>

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc14009.htm#fr_75) <span
id="x.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p120"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](cc14010)
