[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ath02)  [Next](ath04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766171663/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Athanasian Creed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1759\], tr. by Samuel H.
Worcester \[1885\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Athanasian Creed

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

It is said that He also is a rational man; but because such a rational
man is from the mother alone, lest there should be contradiction it
therefore follows that the Divine and the Human are one Person; so there
is agreement, and a contradiction does not result.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

It was from the papists that the Lord's Human was made to be less than
the Divine of the Father, and thus less than His own Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

That the Lord's Human is Divine, is manifest from the passages in the
Word where the Lord is called "Redeemer"; as in the Old Testament,
"Jehovah your Redeemer," "the Lord your Redeemer"; and this then is the
Divine Human, for the Lord was the Redeemer as to that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

Whereas the Lord alone is acknowledged in all the heavens, and the Trine
one in Him, therefore to acknowledge the Lord is the first thing. In no
other way can any idea of the thought enter heaven, but is repelled; and
neither is conjunction given in heaven, and thus in the world, and
consequently there is not elevation into heaven after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

The Lord in many passages calls Himself the Divine truth or "the Word,"
as in John in His transfiguration in the presence of the disciples, and
in other places; the same is signified by "the Son of Man," and also by
"the sons of man" in the Old Testament.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

By his death the Lord rejected all the human that was from the mother,
and put on the Human from the Father (concerning which see Apocalypse
Explained, n. 899 at the end).

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

The Lord said that there was freedom to die, and not to die. This was
the case in order that He might glorify His Human from His own proper
power, and this must be from freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

To spirits who were saying that they believed in three Persons and still
one God, because there is one essence or substance to the three, I said
"What need is there of the metaphysical term essence, and substance?"
that I might by this means persuade them. "Consult your thoughts; do you
not think of three Gods? And so do you not believe in three Gods? Can
you by any means think metaphysically?" And it was found that it was so;
for if there are three Persons there are three Gods. That term involves
nothing else than that they are of one mind; or that what one wills
another wills; and what one does another wills; and then their
properties differ; and then the Father is implored for the sake of the
Son, and the Holy Spirit is approached for the sake of enlightenment;
the Father is adored on account of creation, the Son on account of
redemption, and the Holy Spirit for the sake of enlightenment. Would not
this be allowable if God were three Persons? And each is one and
another, as to works.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

Worshiping the Father only, induces a severe pain in the arm and the
shoulder blade. I know this by experience, for it has been tried many
times.

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

Take the idea that there is one Person, and that the Trine is in that
Person, and you will see that the Creed of Athanasius, from beginning to
end, will coincide and harmonize with that idea; it will be free from
paradoxes, or things that must be of faith although not understood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

That the Divine Human was from eternity is manifest from this, that the
Lord says that Abraham saw Him; that it is He who was seen, and not the
Father; that it is He who spoke; and that He is "the Holy One of
Israel," who was seen; besides many other things in the Word. These
things cannot be said of the Divine Itself, for this can appear to no
one; but they can be said of the Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

Scarcely anyone knows why the Lord came into the world and became Man;
therefore it shall be told; but it falls within the understanding of the
learned only. There are successive things from the Lord through the
heavens to man, and thus to ultimates. Successive order is not
continuous but discrete; that is, one thing is from another, as is the
case with everything in the world. The more remote things in successive
order contain in themselves the successive things in their own order;
which order is called simultaneous. In this order, namely, the
simultaneous, all the successive things are together; so formed that you
may wish to have a conception of them: the first things are there
created within; and so on, even to the last circumference; and because
successive things are together in the simultaneous, therefore in things
simultaneous is all strength or all power at once. And because there was
no longer this ultimate with men in the world, that is, in their truths
and goods in which the Lord has His abode, therefore He Himself came
into the world, that He might become the last, and that so the first
might act by last things and reduce to order all things in the heavens
and in the hells; that is, from firsts by lasts; for when He acted from
firsts by lasts, He acted also by all things, and thus likewise by the
successive things which were in order in the lasts as in their firsts.
This now was the cause of the Coming of the Lord into the world; thus
also He was where there is fullness in His creation; and the Lord works
those things which He works, where there is fullness. It is for this
reason that the Lord is called in the Word "the First and the Last"; and
for the same reason the Word in the letter is most holy, because this is
the Divine truth in the ultimate of order, and for the same reason also
strength itself is there. That this is so, is known to me more than to
others. For the same reason the Lord said to the disciples that He has
flesh and bones, otherwise than a spirit; and thus can the Lord be
present with man in ultimates, and can save those who also are in
ultimates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

Man, because he is a miniature heaven, has also successive things in
himself corresponding to the successive things in the heavens; and in
his natural part especially, as the ultimate, the successive things are
in simultaneous order; and whereas the Lord had heaven in His Human,
consequently from the heaven in Himself He arranged into order all
things in the heavens and in the hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

(Concerning successive and simultaneous order see Heaven and Hell, n.
38. Quotations may be made therefrom.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

Moreover, it cannot be comprehended in the world that the Lord from
Himself could arrange into order all things in the heavens and the
hells. But they do not understand this, because they think from space
and distance. But spaces and distances in the spiritual world are states
of affections and thoughts; in accordance with these states are all
spaces and all distances there; and this it has been given me to know
from experience, namely, that things that were a thousand miles away,
yes, a hundred thousand, were present when there was similarity of
state. And from this I have been able to be present near earths in our
solar system, and near earths beyond that system, while my body, and my
spirit too, remained in their own place. What could not the Lord do, who
wrought all things in Himself from the Divine, and from the Divine in
Himself?

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

That the Lord from eternity was the proceeding Divine, thus the Divine
Human, may be seen from this: that all heaven is the greatest Man, and
the proceeding Divine makes heaven. (See Heaven and Hell where it treats
of the greatest Man.) That this was the Divine Human is evident from the
passages where it is said that the Father was not seen and that He did
not speak, but the Son; then that the Lord spoke through the Prophets;
also for the reason that God cannot appear as Man except from the
proceeding Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

That the Lord says that He should be with the Father as it had been from
eternity, is for the reason that in the world He was the Divine truth
which is the proceeding Divine. It is plain from this what was the Son
of God from eternity, and what the Son of God that was born. No mortal
can comprehend what "born from eternity" means, in any other sense; but
what has now been said can be comprehended.

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

That the Lord is the Father may be shown from the Word. He is there said
to be "Father of eternity," "Jehovah," "one with the Father," "in the
Father and the Father in Him." The Father can be in no other Human than
that which is from Himself, and thus His own Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

From first creation He was in a Human, and in a Human from Himself;
namely, in the universal heaven, which in the complex constitutes one
Man; but this was not His own proper \[Human\], because it was in the
angels of heaven; but in the Divine Human He is in his own, that is
proper to Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

That men do not comprehend that the Creator of the universe can be in a
Human, is for the reason that their conception of the universe is from
space, which idea does not reach God unless there be the idea of the
proceeding Divine; nor should the idea of the proceeding Divine in the
spiritual world be taken from space, but in the natural world only. Of
the Divine from which is the universe, an idea is to be conceived in no
other way than as of the Divine Man in firsts, who is life itself, and
whose Divine love appears as a sun above the heavens, whence all things
are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

The Lord means His own Divine by "Father"; this, therefore, assumed the
Human; wherefore it is as His soul in the body; for "the Father" cannot
be understood to have been a first Person, since so there would have
been two Fathers. The Divine cannot be in any other body than its own;
thus it must be Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

That heaven was endangered by conjunction with the hells in its
disordered ultimates, may be illustrated by the extreme prostration of a
man, from which at last he dies; and that thus no one could have been
saved if the Lord had not come into the world, is illustrated in
Apocalypse Explained (n. 744); in which work it is also shown that the
more distinct the separation of heaven and hell, the more perfect is the
state of heaven (n. 746).

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

(Let those things be adduced which have been gathered from the spiritual
world concerning the faith of the Mohammedans respecting three Persons,
and concerning Christ, n. . . . not yet transcribed, being not yet
reached, n. 5992 \[? Spiritual Experiences, n. 5952\].)

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

Christians were examined, to ascertain what kind of an idea they have
concerning three Persons of the Divinity. It was found that they have
various ideas; some placing one near another in consultation, and the
third as sent forth from these; some, as conversing together, and Christ
interceding; some place them in successive order, and some in other
ways; but because these are three Gods, at the presence of Mohammedans
and of Gentiles, who see their ideas, they are ashamed and are on their
guard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

Let all the representatives concerning the Lord that are found in the
Gospels, be taken up: that He was laid in a manger, because there was no
room in the inn; that He was a carpenter's son; that He chose twelve
disciples; then all things pertaining to His passion, His garments, and
other things besides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

He was called a Prophet (Deut. 18:15, 18, and also in the Gospels),
because "a prophet" signifies the Word, and doctrine from the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

Let it be explained what is meant by "proceeding," when said concerning
the Holy Spirit; that it is like the light and heat from the sun; but
that the opinion of the multitude is that the Holy Spirit hears and goes
forth as a person from a person.

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

There are paradoxes in the Creed of Athanasius, and consequently the
opinions of the multitudes are various; to the understanding of which
the understanding must be constantly kept under faith; but from the
heavenly doctrine, according to which that paradox is to be explained,
not anything of the understanding is to be kept under faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

Concerning the Divine Human from eternity; and that it was of the
Father's love to become Man even to ultimates, which could be done only
by being born of a virgin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

The Lord in the world was the Divine truth; but so long as He was in the
human from the mother, he was not life in Itself, as to the human; but
afterwards, when he had put off4 that human, he was life from himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

(Let it be explained what is life of Itself, and what is life not of
Itself; that he was Life of Itself, from the Divine which was His soul,
and which was inwardly in the human from the mother. Life of Itself is
pure love, the Divine Itself; life not of itself is a form recipient of
life. Let this be illustrated by other things, etc.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

The Divine truth is the Christ; the proceeding Divine good is Jesus; the
Divine Human is the Son of God; the proceeding Divine which is the Word
is the Son of Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

The separation of the Human of the Lord from the Divine was made in the
Council of Nice, for the sake of the Pope - that he might not be called
God on earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

Let facts be presented concerning the Council of Nice, who were present
of the papal party; that unless the words "that He is perfect Man" had
been accepted, the Pope could not have been acknowledged as His vicar.
But these things also were not solely for the Pope. He would otherwise
be acknowledged as God of heaven and God of earth, if he had taken upon
himself the Divine, when nevertheless it is actually Divine to save men,
to create them anew, to impart heaven to them, to lead them from infancy
even to the last moments of life and afterward forever. But because they
who protested also saw contradictions in the Council, therefore they
admitted the things that follow \[in the Creed\], to which, however, few
of the Protestants of the present day give any attention; wherefore they
believe with the Papists that the Human is not Divine; hence \[they
place\] the Divine above the Human, near to the Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

From the Creed of Athanasius it is allowable to say that three Gods are
one God by unition; that there are three, is of the thought; that they
are one is of the speech. May one be prohibited from speaking thus? What
would be the feeling of Mohammedans, of Jews, of Gentiles, at such an
expression? Would they not say, "They are insane"?

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

Let the signification of His bearing the iniquities of all, be
illustrated by the case of the Prophets, who represented the quality of
the church; let it also be told what is signified by His having been
laid in a manger, because there was no room in the inn, etc., etc., etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

(Let it be illustrated in many ways how the Lord through temptations
subjugated the hells, and glorified the Human from the state of spirits
in temptations from the hells; and other things from personal
experience.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

That the Divine Human was from eternity, is also meant by its being said
that the Word, which in the beginning was with God, became flesh; and
this because it was from the Divine love; the Lord also, conceived of
Jehovah, was the Divine truth in the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

Concerning the three Persons: that specific properties distinguished
them; and if this were not so, they would not be three Persons but one .
. . moreover they are conjoined into one metaphysical God; also
concerning Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; these things by no
means fall within the idea of the common nor of the learned man. It
therefore necessarily follows, that three Gods are thought of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

Man has an idea, when it is said that the second Person descended and
assumed the Human; not, however, when it is said that the first Person
did so; and yet they are altogether equal. Let examination thereof be
made to ascertain whether a finite idea will not be held concerning the
second Person, and not a truly infinite idea, as of the Father; also
that concerning the Father there will be held the infinite idea as of
the universe; and that this in the idea is that it is impossible, but
that the other is possible. From this idea a conclusion may be drawn as
to the quality of the idea concerning the Lord as God, also that
therefore He is not approached.

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

It may be said that it is contrary to perception that the Divine which
is the Father took on the Human, but not that the Divine which is the
Son, did so; when nevertheless it is the same thing, both because the
one Divine is equal to the other, and because they are one as to
substance; so that this also ought not to be separated, since thus three
Divines as to Persons which are one as to substance, assumed the Human;
otherwise they would be separated, and one would be the soul in the
Human, and not another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

And thus, also, one saved the human race, and not the other; that is, to
one would belong the work of redemption, and not to the other; for the
Lord wrought redemption from the Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

And besides, it is believed that His soul was from the Divine which is
called the Father, from the common faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

Besides, there is a common idea that the Divine which is the Father did
not take on the Human, because this Divine fills the whole world. But
the idea of space ought not to come into the matter; because God,
regarded in Himself, is Man (as will be shown). The case would be the
same if the Divine which is called the Son took the Human, for this
Divine is like the Divine which is called the Father; for it is not
denied that the Lord's Divine assumed the Human; nor can the idea of
extension into the universe be held in respect to this Divine any more
than concerning the Divine of the Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

The extension of the Divine into the universe is what can be predicated
of the proceeding Divine, which is the Divine truth and is called the
Word. Through this were all things made which were made, and the world
was created from it, according to the words in John (chap. 1). But an
idea is to be held concerning the Divine Itself - the idea as of man
whose Divine love appears as a sun, and the light from which is Divine
truth, and the heat Divine good. But still the idea of extension is
fitting only for the natural world, but not in the spiritual world; in
the spiritual world extension, like space and distance, is but an
appearance. (Concerning which, see Heaven and Hell, in the chapter
concerning space.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

When the Lord was transformed and seen in glory, a voice out of the
cloud said, "This is My beloved Son." It was His Human which was
transformed and seen in glory; and this was the Son of God (Matt. 17 and
other places).

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

The essential of the doctrine of the New Church which is called the New
Jerusalem, is this concerning the Lord; and he who wishes to be therein,
acknowledges it; for this church is the very Christian church; and no
one is admitted therein but he who thinks of, and believes in, one God,
and thus the Lord alone. It is to be known that one is admitted into
heaven in accordance with his confession of God; he is explored as to
the quality of his thought and faith concerning God; for through that
confession is conjunction; and when there is conjunction, there is
enlightenment in particulars. All of love and of faith is dependent
thereon; they, therefore, who deny God are in hell, because there is
disjunction. The first and primary thing, therefore, is to know and
acknowledge, believe in, and love God; all other things depend on this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

Anointing, spoken of in the Old Testament, was representative of the
Lord; wherefore He is called "the Messiah," and "the Christ," meaning
"the Anointed," for the reason that in Him was the Divine good of the
Divine love. By the oil with which kings were anointed, is signified the
good of love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

By "the Son of God" is signified the Divine truth, because by "sons" in
the Word are signified truths; "the Son of God" therefore means the
Divine truth. Hence by "the Son of God from eternity" is meant the
proceeding Divine which is called the Divine truth, and from which is
heaven; and hence, likewise, the Lord in the world was the Divine truth,
which afterwards proceeded from Him. Thence it is that they are called
"sons of God" who are recipients of the Divine truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

The Lord was conceived of the Divine Itself, and was afterwards born of
that; for what was born of Mary, this the Lord from His own Divine
expelled; thence He assumed a Human corresponding to the Divine; thus He
united the Divine, which means that the Divine took to Itself the Human.
Hence it is that He was not only conceived but was also born of Jehovah,
according to what is written in Psalm 2:1, 2, 6. It is also said: I will
tell the decree; Jehovah hath said unto Me, Thou art My Son; this day
have I begotten Thee (Ps. 2:7); and hence it is that He is the Son of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](ath04.md)
