[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kj160)  [Next](kj162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4SZY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kojiki*, translated by Basil Hall Chamberlain, \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

## \[SECT. CLIV.—EMPEROR YŪ-RIYAKU (PART V.—STORY OF THE WOMAN AKAWI-KO).\]

Again once when the Heavenly Sovereign going out for amusement, reached
the River Miwa, <span id="fr_2317"></span>[1](#fn_2312) there was a
girl, whose aspect was very beautiful, washing clothes by the
river-side. The Heavenly Sovereign asked the girl, \[saying\]: "Whose
child art thou?" She replied, saying: "My name is Akawi-ko of the Hiketa
Tribe." <span id="fr_2318"></span>[2](#fn_2313) Then he caused her to be
told, saying: "Do not thou \[314\] marry a husband. I will send for
thee, "—and \[with these words\] he [returned](errata.htm#99) to the
palace. So eighty years had already passed while she reverently awaited
the Heavenly Sovereign's commands. Thereupon Akawi-ko thought: "As,
while looking for the \[Imperial\] commands, I have already passed many
years, and as my face and form are lean and withered, there is no longer
any hope. Nevertheless, if I do not show \[the Heavenly Sovereign\] how
truly I have waited, my disappointment will be unbearable;"—and \[so
saying\] she caused merchandise

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

to be carried on tables holding an hundred, <span
id="fr_2319"></span>[3](#fn_2314) and came forth and presented \[these
gifts as\] tribute. Thereat the Heavenly Sovereign, who had quite
forgotten what he had formerly commanded, asked Akawi-ko, saying: "What
old woman art thou, and why art thou come hither?" Then Akawiko replied,
saying: "Having in such and such a month of such and such a year
received the Heavenly Sovereign's commands, I have been reverently
awaiting the great command until this day, and eighty years have past
by. Now my appearance is quite decrepit, and there is no longer any
hope. Nevertheless I have come forth in order to show and declare my
faithfulness." Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign was greatly startled
\[and exclaimed\]: "I had quite forgotten the former circumstance; and
thou meanwhile, ever faithfully awaiting my commands, hast vainly let
pass by the years of thy prime. This is very pitiful." In his heart he
wished to marry her, but shrank from her extreme age, and could not make
the marriage; but he conferred on her an august Song. That Song said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"How awful is the sacred oak-tree, the oak-tree of the august dwelling!
Maiden of the oak-plain!" <span id="fr_2320"></span>[4](#fn_2315)

</div>

Again he sang, saying: \[315\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"The younger chestnut orchard plain of Hiketa:—o si dormivissem cum iliâ
in juventâ! Oh! how old she has become!" <span
id="fr_2321"></span>[5](#fn_2316)

</div>

Then the tears that Akawi-ko wept quite drenched the red-dyed sleeve
that she had on. <span id="fr_2322"></span>[6](#fn_2317) In reply to the
great august Song, she sang, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Left over from the piling up of the jewel-wall piled up round the
august dwelling,<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>—to whom shall the
person of the Deity's temple go?" <span
id="fr_2323"></span>[7](#fn_2318)

</div>

\[316\] Again she sang, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Oh! how enviable is she who is in her bloom like the flowering
lotus,—the lotus of the inlet, of the inlet of Kusaka!" <span
id="fr_2324"></span>[8](#fn_2319)

</div>

Then the old woman was sent back plentifully endowed. So these four
[Songs](errata.htm#102) are Quiet Songs. <span
id="fr_2325"></span>[9](#fn_2320)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[392:1](kj161.htm#fr_2317) *Miwa gawa*. It is
the stream which flows past Hatsuse. For Miwa see Sect. LXV, Note 8.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[392:2](kj161.htm#fr_2318) *Hiketa-bo no
Akawi-ko*. *Hiketa* is in Yamato. The etymology of the word is obscure.
*Akawi-ko* signifies "red boar child;" but the appropriateness of the
name to the woman in the story is not made to appear.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[393:3](kj161.htm#fr_2319) See Sect. XXXVII,
Note 7.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[393:4](kj161.htm#fr_2320) Moribe says that,
in this Song, the forgetful [Monarch](errata.htm#100) calls to mind the
majestic and awful appearance of the sacred tree in the temple-grounds,
and is moved by this religious thought to repent of his neglectful
treatment as her who had so patiently waited for him through so many
years. Motowori, on the contrary, sees in the words nothing more than a
comparison of the old woman to some sacred tree of immemorial age, and
the aversion felt by the monarch to an union with her.—The oak mentioned
(the Kashi, *Quercus myrsinæfolia*) is an evergreen species. Both
Motowori and Moribe consider that *mimoro* in the original Japanese of
this Song should be taken, not as a proper name (see Sect. XXVIII, Notes
3 and 5), but simply as signifying "a sacred dwelling." As Miwa is
mentioned in the earlier part of the story, it might seem more natural
to regard *mimoro* as likewise being a Proper Name. But the word mimoro
itself signifying "sacred spot," the difference between the two views
does not amount to much, and it is best to follow native authority.
"Oak-plain" (*kashi-hara*) means "a place planted with oak-trees." The
first sentence of the Song must be looked on as a sort of preface to the
second.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[393:5](kj161.htm#fr_2321) The first words of
this Song down to the colon and dash are a Preface to the Song proper,
whose meaning stands in need of no explanation,—Moribe surmises that the
word *kuri*, "chestnut," was formerly <span id="page_395">p. 395</span>
a general name for all sorts of fruits, somewhat like our
[English](errata.htm#101) word "berry."

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[393:6](kj161.htm#fr_2322) The drenching of
the sleeve with tears is a common figure in Japanese poetry.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[394:7](kj161.htm#fr_2323) Or we might
(following Moribe) render thus: "Left over from the guarding of the
jewel-grove guard at the august dwelling," etc. The wording of his Song
is far from clear. While Motowori sees in it a reference to the
construction of a wall round the ground of a temple, the overplus of the
materials for which sacred wall could not, it may be presumed, be
applied to any profane purpose, Moribe disputes the propriety of such an
interpretation of the word *kaki* which, according to him, denotes the
grove planted in temple-grounds, temples never having been surrounded by
walls such as Motowori assumes the existence of, nor even by "hedges" or
"fences," which is the more usual acceptation of the term. He thinks,
therefore, that the superficial signification of the actual words of the
Song is that the priest, who has all his life been in the service of one
particular shrine, cannot desert it for the adoration of some other
deity. The underlying deeper significance of the little poem is in
either case the same: Akawi-ko had, during her long waiting of eighty
years, remained true to her first love, the Emperor. For every reason it
had been impossible for her ever to give her affections to another, and
she had now come up to the capital to demonstrate to him who had
forgotten her the unchangeable nature of her feelings.

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[394:8](kj161.htm#fr_2324) This pretty little
poem is too clear to need any comment. Moribe supposes that some lotuses
brought from Kusaka may have been among the presents made by Akawi-ko to
the Emperor. In the original Japanese the reference to the lotuses comes
first, as a sort of preface to the rest of the poem. The laws of English
construction necessitate its being put last in the translation.

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[394:9](kj161.htm#fr_2325) See Sect. CXXIV,
Note 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLV.—Emperor Yū-riyaku (Part VI.—He Makes a Progress to
Yeshinu)](kj162)
