[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had03)  [Next](had05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CHAPTER I

### HOW DIVINE REVELATION CAME TO THE HOLY PROPHET

1\. "And it is not for any mortal that Allāh should speak to him except
by inspiration or from behind a veil or by sending a messenger and
revealing by His permission what He pleases" (42:51).

2\. "And surely this is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds--the
Faithful Spirit has come down with it upon thy heart that thou mayest be
of the warners--in plain Arabic language" (26:192-195).

3\. "And thus have We revealed to thee an Arabic Qur'ān" (42:7).

4\. "The Holy Spirit has brought it down from thy Lord with truth"
(16:102).

5\. "Whoever is the enemy of Gabriel, surely he revealed it to thy heart
by Allāh's command" (2:97).

6\. "We have revealed it, revealing portion by portion" (17:106).

Revelation according to the Holy Qur'ān is a universal fact. It speaks
of revelation to inanimate objects--heaven and earth (41:11, 12;
99:5)--and of revelation to lower animals (16:68, 69). Revelation to man
is undoubtedly of a different nature from these revelations, and it is
with this that we are at present concerned. In the first verse quoted
above it is stated that Allāh speaks to man--*i.e.*. revelation to man
is granted--in three ways: (1) by infusing an idea into the mind--the
word *wahy* used here carries its original significance of a *sudden
suggestion*; (2) from behind a veil, which includes *ru'yā* (dream), its
higher form *kashf* (vision) and the still higher form *ilhām*, when
voices are heard or uttered in a state of trance; (3) when a messenger,
the angel Gabriel, is sent with the Divine message in clear words to the
recipient of the revelation. The third is the highest form of
revelation: the Divine message is sent not in the form of a n idea as in
the first case or in the form of a vision as in the second but in words
through the angel; and it is peculiar to the prophets.\* The Holy Qur'ān
was revealed to the Prophet in words in the Arabic language (vv. 2, 3)
through Gabriel, who is also called the Faithful Spirit and the Holy
Spirit (vv. 2. 4, 5),

\*. I have discussed this subject fully in *The Religion of Islām*, in
the chapter on Revealed Books.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the angel descending upon the heart of the Prophet (vv. 2, 5). The last
verse shows that the Holy Qur'ān was revealed in portions.

The hadīth narrated in this chapter bear out what has been so clearly
established in the Holy Qur'ān. We are told that before the higher
revelation, the Prophet received revelation in the form of dreams; that
the Prophet's first experience of higher revelation was marked by the
appearance of the Angel, who communicated to him the first Divine
message in words, contained in the first five verses of ch. 96, and that
the Prophet related his existence to Waraqah who believed in him, saying
that it was the angel Gabriel who brought the Divine message to Moses
(h. 2). The prophet's second experience of the higher revelation was
similar to the first (h. 3). It is further shown that the higher
revelation of the Holy Qur'ān came *in words* through Gabriel (hh. 4,
5). He felt a great strain when this revelation came to him: he
perspired even on cold days and grew heavier and a change came over him.
(hh. 5-8). It appears that to receive this spiritual experience he was
translated to another sphere, and his detachment from the material
environment was so real that it brought about a physical change as well.

**1**.1 'Umar ibn al-Khattāb said, I heard the Messenger of Allāh, peace
and blessings of Allāh be on him, say:

"Actions shall be judged only by intention2, and a man shall have what

1\. Bukhārī opens his *Jāmi'* with the hadīth that follows here, and it
is the first hadīth of the chapter entitled *The Beginning of
Revelation*. But, as the subject matter of the hadīth shows, it does not
really relate to this chapter; it is in fact a sort of introduction to
the Collection itself. It is a very appropriate introduction indeed, for
it shows not only the sincerity of purpose of the author but also warns
the reader that the good and noble deeds to which he is guided by the
sayings and deeds of the Prophet, will prosper only if there is
sincerity of purpose beneath them.

2\. By *a'māl* (pl. of *'amal*) are meant the good and noble deeds to
which the Holy Prophet invited. The best of deeds would be worthless if
the motives were not sincere. Sincerity thus occupies the first place in
the moral development of a Muslim.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

he intends; so whoever flies from his home3 for the sake of Allāh and
His Messenger, his flight shall be accounted for the sake of Allāh and
His Messenger, and whoever flies from his home for the sake of worldly
gain which he aims to attain or a woman whom he wants to marry, his
flight shall be accounted for that for which he flies."

(B. 83:23; 1:1).

**2** 'Ā'ishah said: The first revelation that was granted to the
Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was the true
dream in a state of sleep,4 so that he never

3\. The original word is *hijrah* which literally means forsaking
someone or flying from a place or giving up low desires, evil tendencies
or bad morals. and is specially used of the historic flight of the Holy
Prophet from Makkah to Madīnah, which has become the starting-point of
the Muslim era. The Muslims had to fly from Makkah because they did not
enjoy freedom of conscience there and were persecuted on account of
their religious convictions. *Hijrah* has thus become synonymous with
the forsaking of worldly relations, comforts and possessions and
undergoing the severest hardships for the sake of one's convictions.

4\. A true dream is thus a kind of Divine revelation (*wahy*). According
to another hadīth *al-ru'yā al-sahhah* (the true vision) is a part of
prophethood: "The Messenger of Allāh said, 'nothing has remained of
prophethood except *mubashshirāt'* (lit. good news). (The companions)
asked, 'And what is meant <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> by
mubashshirāt?' He said, 'The true dream'" (B. 92:5). The dream of the
believer is expressly called a part of prophethood in B. 92:26. In the
Holy Qur'ān also *al-bushrā* or true visions are promised to believers
(10:64). Prophethood and revelation are not therefore synonymous terms,
and while prophethood has terminated, revelation of the first two kinds
(42:51) will continue for ever.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

dreamed a dream but the truth of it shone forth like the dawn of the
morning. Then solitude became dear to him and he used to seclude himself
in the cave of Hirā',5 and therein he devoted himself to Divine worship
for several nights before he came back to his family and took provisions
for this (retirement); then he would return to Khadījah6 and take (more)
provisions for a similar (period), until the Truth7 came to him while he
was in the cave of Hirā'; so the angel

5\. This cave (6 ft. by 2) ft. lies to the north-east of Makkah at a
distance of about three miles from the city.

6\. Khadījah was the Holy Prophet's wife whom he married when he was
twenty-five years old while she was forty, and who remained his only
wife till her death when he was fifty years of age.

7\. By the Truth is meant the Spirit of Truth or the Holy Spirit,
*i.e.*, Gabriel. <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> He is called "'the Angel"
in the words that follow. This first appearance of Gabriel which was the
beginning of the highest form of revelation took place according to one
report on the 25th of the month of Ramadzān. Others say it was the 17th
of Ramadzān which seems to be a mistake for the 27th, for according to
the Holy Qur'ān, the first revelation came on the *lailat al-qadr*,
which occurs on one of the three nights of Ramadzān, 25th, 27th and
29th. According to a report of Ibn 'Abbās, the Holy Prophet had then
attained the age of forty (B. 63:28).

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

(Gabriel) came to him and said, Read. He (the Prophet) said, "I said I
am not one who can read." And he continued: "Then he (the angel) took
hold of me and he pressed me so hard that I could not bear it any more,
and then he let me go and said, Read. I said, I am not one who can read.
Then he took hold of me and pressed me a second time so hard that I
could not bear it any more, then he let me go again and said, Read. I
said, "I am not one who can read." (The Prophet) continued: "Then he
took hold of me and pressed me hard for a third time, then he let me go
and said, 'Read in the name of thy Lord Who

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

created--He created man from a clot--Read and thy Lord is most
Honourable.'"8 The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be
on him, returned with this (message) while his heart trembled and he
came to Khadījah, daughter of Khuwailid, and said, "Wrap me up, wrap me
up," and she wrapped him up until the awe left him.9 Then he said to
Khadījah, while he related to her what had happened: "I fear for
myself."10 Khadījah said, Nay, By Allāh, Allāh will never bring thee to
disgrace, for thou unitest the ties of relationship and bearest the
burden of the weak and earnest for the destitute and

8\. These are the first three verses of the 96th chapter of the Holy
Qur'ān, and the first five verses of this chapter are by consensus of
opinion the first Quranic revelation that came to the Holy Prophet. It
was after this, as appears from the hadīth that follows, that the first
verses of ch. 74 were revealed.

9\. The awe was due to his first experience of Divine revelation.

10\. The fear to which the Prophet gave expression was lest he should be
unable to achieve the great task of the reformation of humanity which
was imposed upon <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> him. Khadījah's reply
clearly shows this to be the import. If any one was equal to that great
task, Khadījah comforted him, it was he who had already laid down his
life for the service of humanity. This also shows how well the Prophet's
life was spent even before prophethood. Neither in this hadīth nor in
any other is there anything to show that the Prophet feared that he
would be killed by the jinn or that he had become insane. The Prophet
knew for sure at the first experience that he had been raised to the
dignity of prophethood and entrusted with the great task of reforming
humanity.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

honourest the guest and helpest in real distress.

Then Khadījah went with him until she brought him to Waraqah ibn Naufal
ibn Asad ibn 'Abd al-'Uzzā, Khadījah's uncle's son, and he was a man who
had become a Christian in the time of Ignorance,11 and he used to write
the Hebrew script, and he wrote from the Gospel in Hebrew what it
pleased Allāh that he should write, and he was a very old man who had
turned blind. Khadījah said to him, O uncle's son!

11\. Pre-Islām days are called *al-Jāhiliyyah* (Ignorance) or *ayyām al
Jāhiliyyah* (Time of Ignorance) as compared with the learning and light
which followed in the wake of Islām.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Listen to thy brother's son. Waraqah said to him, My brother's son! What
hast thou seen? So the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him, related to him what he had seen. Waraqah said to him, This is
the angel Gabriel whom Allāh sent to Moses;12 would that I were a young
man at this time-would that I were alive when thy people would expel
thee! The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
said, Would they expel me? He said, Yes; never has a man appeared with
the like of that which thou hast brought but he has been held in enmity;
and if thy time finds me (alive) I shall help thee with the fullest
help. After that

12\. Nāmūs means the angel Gabriel (Fr). Nāmūs is the person to whom the
king entrusts his secrets and by it is meant (in hadīth) *the angel
Gabriel whom Allāh has chosen to communicate His revelations* (N). This
meaning has also been given by Bukhārī himself when repeating this
hadīth in B. 60:22. Waraqah in fact only bore testimony to the truth of
what the Holy Prophet had stated; *viz.*, that the Holy Spirit (Gabriel)
had come to him with a revelation from on high. He, <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> however, added that it was the very angel that had come to
Moses, and this was probably a reference to the Bible prophecy that a
prophet "like unto" Moses would be raised among the Ishmaelites (Arabs).

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

not much time had passed that Waraqah died, and the revelation broke off
temporarily.13

(B. 1:1.)

**3** Jābir said, speaking of the temporary break in the revelation,
(The Holy Prophet) said in his narrative:

"Whilst I was walking along, I heard a voice from heaven and I raised up
my eyes, and lo! the Angel that had appeared to me in Hirā' was sitting
on a throne between heaven and earth and I was struck with awe on
account of him and returned (home) and said, Wrap me up, wrap me up.

13\. The temporary break of revelation was not very long; certainly not
longer than six months. Ibn Ishāq's report that it lasted for three
years is belied by historical facts. Persecution had begun and a large
part of the Holy Qur'ān had been revealed, long before the expiry of
three years. It is also an established historical fact that on account
of persecution which had grown very severe the Holy Prophet was
compelled, in the fourth year of the Call, to take shelter in the house
of Arqam and there prayers were said in congregation, and it is a fact
that the Holy Qur'ān was recited in prayers from the first.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Then Allāh revealed: 'O thou who art clothed! Arise and warn, And thy
Lord do magnify, And thy garments do purify, And uncleanness do
shun'."14

Then revelation became brisk and came in succession.15

(B. 1:1.)

**4** Ibn 'Abbās . . . said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, used to
exert himself hard in receiving Divine revelation and would on this
account move his

14\. While the previous Hadīth relates the Holy Prophet's first
experience of revelation, this one speaks of his second experience. On
this occasion the first five verses of ch. 74 were revealed to him. This
portion is from the Holy Prophet's own mouth, and therefore not the
least doubt can be entertained as to the fact: that Gabriel's second
visit to him was the occasion mentioned in this hadīth. What is,
therefore, added by Zuhrī in B. 92:1 (where h. 2 is repeated) that
during the break in revelation the Holy Prophet used to go to the tops
of the mountains to throw himself down and Gabriel appeared to him on
such occasions and comforted him that he was the true Messenger of Allāh
cannot be accepted as true. This Hadīth makes it clear that Gabriel was
never seen by the Holy Prophet during the break, and that when he saw
him on the second occasion, he was struck with awe as on the first
occasion. Zuhrī, moreover, gives no authority for his addition in B.
92:1.

15\. Five short verses of ch. 96 were revealed on the first occasion and
five short verses of ch. 74 on the second. After that, it is stated,
revelation became plentiful--the Arabic word is *hamiya* which literally
means *became hot*--and continuous, there being no break like the break
between the first two revelations.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

lips. . . . so Allāh revealed:

"Move not thy tongue with it to make haste with it. Surely on Us
devolves the collecting of it and the reciting of it." (75:16, 17.)

. . . . So after this when Gabriel came to him the Messenger of Allāh,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, would listen attentively, and
when Gabriel departed, the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on
him, recited as he (Gabriel) recited it.16

(B. 1:1.)

16\. This hadīth shows that all revelations without any exception were
delivered to the Holy Prophet by the angel Gabriel and that the method
of their delivery was always the same, *viz.*, that Gabriel first
recited the revelation and the Holy Prophet listened to it and then when
Gabriel departed the Holy Prophet recited the same words. On the first
two occasions, only five short verses were revealed and it w as not
difficult for the Prophet to repeat them; but after that, a shown in the
last hadīth, revelation became plentiful, *i.e.*, large portions were
revealed at one time, and as Gabriel began to recite, the Holy Prophet
made haste to repeat lest any word or sentence might be lost. He was,
therefore, told not to make haste with it and to wait until Gabriel had
delivered the whole message and then to repeat the same, being assured
that it was a Divine arrangement and that nothing would be lost (75:16,
17). In another very early chapter he was Still more plainly told: "We
will make thee recite so thou shalt not forget" (87:6). There are
chapters--one of these containing over a thirtieth of the Holy
Qur'an--that were revealed to him in their entirety at one time, yet
Gabriel recited them once only and then the Holy Prophet repeated them
without omission of a word and ordered them to be written down at once.

It would further appear from this hadīth that other people saw the Holy
Prophet's lips move when he received the revelation which shows that his
reception of the revelation was not subjective but a real and external
experience.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

**5** 'Ā'ishah reported that Hārith ibn Hishām asked the Messenger of
Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, O Messenger of Allāh! How
does revelation come to thee? The Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Sometimes it comes to me like the ringing of a bell and that is the
hardest on me, then he departs from me and I retain in memory from him
what he says; and sometimes the Angel comes to me in the likeness of a
man and speaks to me and I retain in memory what he says."18

18\. The difference in the two states is one of the form the Angel
assumed. In the first case it is not stated what likeness the Angel
assumed--it was an angelic form beyond description--and the words came
forth with the clear resonant sound of vibrating metal; in the second
case the Angel assumed the likeness of a man and the words were uttered
as one man talks to another. That words were spoken in both cases is
clear enough from the words of the Hadīth; in both cases we are told: "I
retain in memory what he says." In the first case, however, the words
*'an-hu* (*i.e.*, from him) have been added to show that it was the
Angel who spoke the words. In both cases the Holy Prophet saw the Angel
and heard the words from the Angel and then retained them in memory; the
difference was only one of the likeness of the Angel, and consequently,
of the tone in which the words were uttered.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Ā'ishah said, And I saw him when revelation came down upon him on a
severely cold day, then it departed from him and his forehead dripped
with sweat.19

(B. 1:1.)

**6** Zaid ibn Thābit said, Allāh sent down revelation on His Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, and his thigh was upon my thigh
and it began to make its weight felt to me so much so that I feared that
my thigh might be crushed.

(B. 8:12)

19\. There are many Hadīth showing that a real change came over the Holy
Prophet when revelation came down upon him. Here it is stated that
perspiration ran down his brow on a severely cold day; according to h.
6, Zaid felt his thigh being crushed under the Holy Prophet's thigh when
revelation came on: h. 7 says that Ya'lā saw the Holy Prophet when
revelation descended on him and "his face was red"; according to h. 8,
when revelation descended on the Holy Prophet, "he appeared distressed
and a change came over his face." All these hadīth show that whenever
revelation came down upon the Holy Prophet, whether he was in public or
in private, there was a real change which could not be assumed. It is
clear from this that though revelation came to the Holy Prophet in a
state of wakefulness, yet there was a transition from the physical
environment to the spiritual sphere, the effect of which was witnessed
on the body. The new senses which were required to receive the
revelation necessitated the coming of a kind of death over the body. The
story that "froth appeared before his mouth" is a pure invention and no
trace of it is to be met with in any hadīth.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

**7** Safwān ibn Ya'lā reported that

Ya'lā said to 'Umar, Show me the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him, when revelation is sent down to him. So when the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was in Ji'rānah20 and with him a
number of his companions. . . . revelation came to him. Thereupon 'Umar
made a sign to Ya'lā; so Ya'lā came and over the Messenger of Allāh,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was a garment with which he was
covered and he entered his head under the garment), when (he saw that)
the face of the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on
him, was red and he was snoring;21 then that condition departed from
him. (B. 25:17.)

**8** 'Ubādah ibn al-Sāmit said, The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, felt, when the revelation was sent down upon

20\. A place between Makkah and Tā'if.

21\. The change was so perfect that it resembled a state of sleep,
though as the <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> hadīth makes it clear, he
was not asleep and was just at that moment talking to his companions.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

him, like one in grief and a change came over his face.

And according to one report:

He hung down his head, and his companions also hung down their heads,22
and when that state was over, he raised his head.

(M-Msh. 27:5.)

22\. The companions hung down their heads out of respect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Īmān (Faith) And Islām (Submission)](had05.md)
