[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had08)  [Next](had10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### ADHĀN AND IQĀMAH

1\. "O you who believe! When the call is given out for prayer on Friday,
hasten to the remembrance of Allāh and leave off business." (62:9)./}

The *adhān* (lit. an announcement) is an announcement of the time of
prayer in the words of h. 3, on hearing which Muslims flock to the
mosque or to a place of prayer. and the *iqāmah* (lit. *setting upright
of a thing* or *establishing an affair*) is a similar call in the words
of h. 4, at which those gathered in the mosque arrange themselves into
ranks and the prayer service is started. Though prayers were said in
congregation from the very start when this institution was established
very early at Makkah the *adhān* and the *iqāmah* were introduced after
the flight to Madīnah. But the *adhān* is not only an announcement to
the people to gather together for prayer; it is as well a declaration of
the principles of Islām, made with a loud voice, from every locality
inhabited by Muslims. It is an announcement to the whole world five
times a day as to what Islām is and what it stands for. In the
*shahādah* there is a declaration of the basic principles of Islām that
there is no god but Allāh--God is only One--and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allāh. In the *takbīr* there is the declaration that Allāh
is the greatest of all and that, therefore a Muslim bows before none but
Allah--*Allāhu Akbar* the watchword of Islām is repeated no less than
six times in the *adhān*. In *hayya 'ala-l-salā* (come to prayer) there
is the declaration of the real message of religion which is the
realization of the divine in man. This can only be attained through
prayer, by drinking deep at the Divine source. In *hayya 'ala-l-falāh*
(come to success) we are told that success or full development of the
human faculties, can be attained only through prayer or the realization
of the divine in man.

The adhān thus serves a double purpose; it is an announcement of the
time of prayer and at the same time an announcement of the principles of
Islām and the significance underlying them. It replaces the meaningless
ringing of a bell or the blowing of a trumpet by the most effective
propaganda of religion that can be thought of. To everyone's door, nay,
to his very ears. is carried the message every morning, every noon,
every afternoon, every evening and at the time of going to bed that the
Unity of God and the messengership of Muhammad, peace

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and blessings of Allāh be on him, are the fundamental principles Islām,
and that any one can attain to complete self-development through the
realization of the divine in him, which is brought about by prayer.

Muslims must give up all business on hearing the call for prayer (v. 1).
How adhān was started is stated in hh. 1, 2, while h. 3 gives the words
of the adhān and h. 4 the words of the iqāmah. Hh. 5-8 relate to the
mode of delivery of the adhān, while hh. 9, 10 show that the adhān must
be delivered from a high place and in the loudest voice so that it may
reach the largest number of people, The deliverer of the adhān must be a
man who is respected for his virtues and he should take no remuneration
for this service (hh. 11, 12). The call must be obeyed (h. 13). The
words of the adhān should be repeated when it is being delivered, and a
prayer must be offered after it has been delivered (hh. 14-16). The
adhān may be called out earlier than the time of prayer if there is some
other object in view (h. 17). Hh. 18. 19 relate to the delivery of the
iqāmah.

**1** It is reported about Ibn 'Umar that he used to say,

The Muslims when they came to Madīnah used to gather together and they
made an appointment for prayers; no call was given for it. So they
talked about it one day. Some of them said, Have a bell like the bell of
the Christians; others said, Rather a bugle like the horn of the Jews;
'Umar said, Would

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

you not appoint a man who should sound a call for the prayer.1 The
Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said, "O
Bilāl! get up and give a call for prayer."

(B. 10:1.)

**2** Anas said,

When the number of people increased, they conversed that they should
make known the time of prayers by some means which they may recognize.
So they mentioned that they should light the fire or

1\. It appears from other hadīth that the portion that follows relates
to another occasion. A consultation was held but nothing was decided
then, though 'Umar seems to have made a suggestion that, instead of
ringing a bell or blowing a horn, a man should be appointed to give a
call for prayers. According to one hadīth 'Abd Allāh ibn Zaid was shown
in a vision how to give a call for prayer. So when the Messenger of
Allāh came the next day, he informed him: O Messenger of Allāh! I was
half asleep and half awake when there came to me one who showed me how
to deliver the adhān. The narrator of the Hadīth added, 'Umar had been
shown it twenty days previously but concealed it, then he informed the
Holy Prophet (AD. 2:27). Bukhārī refers to this by quoting 'Umar as
saying, Would you not appoint a man who should give a call for prayer.
It was, however, the Holy Prophet's order--or maybe, he himself had
received a revelation, similar to the visions of 'Abd Allāh and 'Umar as
some reports show--which gave the sanction to the adhān.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

ring a bell. Then Bilāl was commanded to callout the adhān, repeating
the words, and to say the iqāmah, uttering the words only once.

(B. 10:2.)

**3** Abū Mabdhūrah said,

I said, O Messenger of Allāh! Teach me the way of delivering the adhān.
He said, So he touched his forehead (and) said:

"Thou shouldst say:

'Allāh is the Greatest, Allāh is the Greatest, Allāh is the Greatest,
Allāh is the Greatest.'

Thou shouldst raise thy voice with it; then thou shouldst say,

'I bear witness that there is no God but Allāh, I bear witness that
there is no God but Allāh, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allāh, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allāh.'

Thou shouldst lower

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

thy voice with it; then thou shouldst raise thy voice with the bearing
of witness,

'I bear witness that there is no God but Allāh, I bear witness that
there is no God but Allāh, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allāh, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allāh. Come
to prayer, Come to prayer; Come to success, Come to success'.

Then if it is the morning prayer, thou shouldst say, 'Prayer is better
than sleep' 'Prayer is better than sleep';

(Then thou shouldst say),

'Allāh is the Greatest, Allāh is the Greatest, there is no God but
Allāh.'"2

(AD-Msh. 4:4.)

2\. The repetition of the *shahādah* a second time as stated in this
hadīth is known as *tarjī'* (lit. returning to a thing again and again).
As the previous hadīth and the one that follows show, the general
practice in the Holy Prophet's time was that the adhān consisted of
fifteen sentences, *Allāhu-Akbar* four times, *ashhadu an lā ilāha
illa-llāh* twice, *ashhadu anna Muhammadan Rasūlu-llāh* twice (both
sentences beginning with *ashhadu* are known as the *shahādah*) *hayya
'ala-l-salā* (pronounced *'ala-s-salā*) twice (turning the face to the
right), *hayya 'ala-l-falāh* twice (turning the face to the left),
*Allāhu Akbar* twice and *lā ilāha illa-llāh* once. The *tarji'* or
repeating the two *shahādah* sentences twice again in a still louder
voice seems to have been resorted to only occasionally. In the adhān for
the morning prayer the sentence *al-salātu* (pronounced *as-salāt*)
*khair-un mina-l-naum* (pronounced *mina-n-naum*) was added after *hayya
'ala-l-falāh*, and repeated twice.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

**4** Ibn 'Umar said,

In the time of the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be
on him, (sentences of) the adhān used to be repeated twice, and (those
of) the iqāmah (were uttered) only once, with this exception that he
used to say, Prayer is ready, Prayer is ready.3

(AD-Msh. 4:4.)

**5** Sa'd reported that

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
commanded

3\. As compared with the adhān, the sentences were uttered only once in
the iqāmah, according to this Hadīth. the significance being that
sentences that were uttered twice in the adhān were uttered once in the
iqāmah. The iqāmah thus consists of *Allāhu Akbar* being uttered
twice--in the adhān it is uttered four times--each of the shahādah
sentences once, *hayya 'ala-l-salā* and *hayy'ala-l-falāh* each once
(without turning to right or left), *qad qāmati-l-salā* twice, *Allāhu
Akbar* and *lā ilāha illa-llāh* once.

But the iqāmah may also consist of all the sentences of the adhān with
the addition in its proper place of *qad qāmati-l-salā* uttered twice.
Between the delivery of the adhān and the iqāmah there is another
difference. The sentences of the adhān are delivered leisurely and in as
loud a voice as possible, while the delivery of the iqāmah is marked by
quickness.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

Bilāl to put his two forefingers into his ears (when delivering the
adhān); this, he said, would help in the raising of thy voice.

(IM-Msh. 4:4.)

**6** It is related about Bilāl that he put his two forefingers into his
ears (when delivering the adhān), while Ibn 'Umar did not put his
fore-fingers into his ears;4 and Ibrāhīm said, There is no harm in
delivering the adhān without performing ablution; and 'Atā' said,
Ablution is necessary and it is the (Prophet's) practice.

(B. 10:19.)

**7** Abū Juhaifah said,

That he saw Bilāl delivering the adhān. (He said), So I followed him
when he turned his face to one side and to the other in the adhān.

(B. 10:19.)

4\. Fore-fingers are not put into ears in the iqāmah.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

**8** Mūsā said,

I saw Bilāl (when) he went forth to the Abtah and delivered the adhān,
so when he reached *hayya 'ala-l-salā, hayya 'ala-falāh*, he turned his
neck to the right side and to the left and did not turn round.5

(AD. 12:34.)

**9** A woman of the Banī Najjār said,

My house was the highest house in the environs of the mosque and Bilāl
used to deliver the morning adhān on it.6

(AD. 2:31)

**10** 'Abd Allāh reported ... that

Abu Sa'īd Khudrī said to him, I see thee living

5\. With *hayya 'ala-l-salā*, the mu'adhdhin turns his face to the right
side and with *hayya 'ala-l-falāh* to the left.

6\. A high place, the top of a house or a minaret, would carry the voice
farthest.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

among goats and in the desert, so when thou are among thy goats or in
thy desert and deliverest the adhān for prayer, raise thy voice with the
adhān, for neither jinn nor man nor anything else hears the voice of the
crier within its reach but it shall bear witness for him on the day of
Resurrection.7

(B. 10:5.)

**11** Abū Hurairah said, The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, said:

"The Imām is a surety and the deliverer of the adhān is one in whom
confidence is placed;8 O Allāh! direct aright the leaders of prayer and
grant protection to the deliverers of the adhān."

(AD. 2:32)

7\. The voice in delivering the adhān should be raised as high as
possible.

8\. The hadīth speaks of the imām as *dzāmin*, being as it were a surety
that prayers are observed in the right manner; and it speaks of the
mu'adhdhin (one <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> who delivers the adhān)
as *mu'taman*, *i.e.*, one in whom trust is placed, which indicates on
the one hand that he is the keeper of the time of prayer and on the
other that he must be a man who is respected on account of his high
qualities.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

**12** Uthmān ibn Abi-l-'Ās said,

O Messenger of Allāh! Make me the imām of a people. He said:

"Thou art their imām and do thou follow the weakest of them9 and appoint
a mu'adhdhin who does not take any remuneration for his adhān."10

(AD. 2:39.)

**13** Abu Hurairah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
commanded us (saying):

"When you are in the mosque and a call for prayers is sounded, let not
one of you go out until he has said his prayers."

(Ah-Msh. 4:23.)

9\. The imām should have regard for the weakest and make his prayer so
light that the weakest man may not feel it a burden.

10\. Islām thus requires that a duty which relates to the prayers should
be performed out of love.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

**14** Abū Sa'īd Khudrī reported that

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"When you hear the adhān, say what the mu'dhdhin says."

(B. 10:7)

**15** Yahyā said,

Some of our brethren related to me that when he (Mu'āwiyah) heard the
words, Come to prayer, he said, There is no strength nor power but in
Allāh, and he said, Thus did we hear your Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allāh be on him, say.11

(B. 10:7.)

**16** Jābir reported that The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings
of Allāh be on him, said:

11\. Hayya 'ala-l-salā being an order, the proper response to it is that
given in this hadīth, When the adhān is being delivered, the hearer
should repeat its sentences and when it is finished, be should offer the
prayer mentioned in the next hadīth.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

"Whoever says when he hears the adhān,

'O Allāh! the Lord of this perfect call and everliving prayer, grant to
Muhammad nearness and excellence and raise him to the position of glory
which Thou hast promised him,'

My intercession will be due to him on the day of Resurrection."

(B. 10:8.)

**17** 'Abd Allāh reported on the authority of the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, (who) said:

"Let not the adhān of Bilāl prevent one of you from taking his
breakfast,12 for he delivers the adhān while it is night, so that he may
send back the one of you who is saying his

12\. "Breakfast" here means the meal taken before dawn when a man
intends to fast. The hadīth thus allows the calling out of the adhān
before the time of prayer. By prayer in the concluding portion is meant
the tahajjud prayer.

prayer or awaken the one who is sleeping."

(B. 10:13.)

**18** Abd Allāh reported that The Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Between every two adhāns, there is a prayer for him who likes."12 (He
said this) thrice.

(B. 10:14.)

**19** Ziyād said that

He delivered the adhān, and Bilāl desired to call out the iqāmah but the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"O brother of *Sudā'*! The one who calls out the adhān shall call out
the iqāmah.",14

(Ah. IV, 169.)

13\. By the two adhāns are meant the adhān and the iqāmah. The interval
between the two should be at least such that a man may be- able to say
two rak'ahs of optional prayer. Another hadīth says that there should be
an interval such that a man taking his food may finish it, say, about a
quarter of an hour.

14\. There may be exceptions to this general rule. *Sudā'* is the name
of a tribe in Yaman and Ziyād was a member of this tribe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Jamā'ah or Congregation](had10)
