[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had16)  [Next](had18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

# CHAPTER XIV

### MISCELLANEOUS PRAYERS

### (ISTIKHĀRAH. SALĀT AL-KUSŪF, ISTISQĀ')

*Istikhārah (lit. the asking of khair, i.e., good or blessing) means the
asking of Divine blessing in the doing of a thing which a man intends to
do. Kusūf means the eclipse of the sun or the moon. Istisqā' (from saqy,
giving to drink) is a prayer for rain.*

**1** Jābir said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, used to
teach us istikhārah in all matters, as he used to teach us a chapter of
the Qur'ān. He said:

"When one of you intends the doing of a thing, he should say two
rak'ahs1 besides the obligatory prayers, then he should pray--'O Allāh!
I desire Thy blessing by Thy knowledge, and I beg of Thee to give

1\. The best time for istikhārah is after the 'Ishā' prayer.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

me power (to do it) by Thy power, and I ask of Thee Thy great grace, for
Thou hast the power while I have not the power, and Thou knowest while I
do not know, and Thou art the Great Knower of the unseen things. O
Allāh! If Thou knowest that this affair is good for me in the matter of
my religion and my living and the result of my affair--or he said, in
the present state of my affair and in its future--then ordain it for me
and make it easy for me and bless (me) therein; and if Thou knowest that
this affair is evil for me in the matter of my religion and my living
and the result of my affair--or he said, in the present state of my
affair and in its future--then turn it away from me and turn me away
from it and ordain what is good

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

for me wheresoever it is, and make me contented with it.'

He (the Prophet) said,

"And he should say what he wants."2

(B. 19:25.)

**2** Abd Allāh ibn 'Amr said 'When the sun was eclipsed in the time of
the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, a call
was given that prayer-service gathering together (people) was going to
be held.

(B. 16:3.)

**3** 'Ā'ishah said,

'The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, recited aloud his
*qirā'at* in the eclipse prayer and when he finished his recital he
pronounced the takbīr and performed the rukū'; and when he raised (his
head) from the rukū', he said, "Allāh listens to him who praises Him.
Our

2\. *Istikhārah* is an individual prayer. and it may be continued for
several days until the mind through Divine help is settled on an affair.
It is not necessary that a man should be informed in a vision as to the
course which he should adopt.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

Lord! And Thine is the praise." Then he returned to the recital (of the
Qur'ān). In the eclipse prayer there are four rukū's and four sajdahs in
two rak'ahs.3

(B. 16:19.)

**4** Abd Allāh reported,

I saw the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, on the day he
went out to pray for rain. He said, He (the Prophet) turned his back to
the people and faced the Qiblah praying, then he turned over his outer
wrapping garment, then he said with us two rak'ahs of prayer reciting
therein the qirā'at aloud.4

(B. 15:17.)

3\. The eclipse prayer is a congregational service in which both men and
women take part (B. 16:10). The particular eclipse which is spoken of in
this hadīth occurred on the very day on which Ibrāhīm, the Holy
Prophet's eighteen months old son, died (B. 16:17).

4\. This was a special service for rain held in an open place. Prayer
may also be offered for rain without holding a special service (H xi.
13, B. 11:35).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV: Burial Service](had18.md)
