[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had30)  [Next](had32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

# CHAPTER XXVIII

### FOODS AND DRINKS

1\. "O men! Eat the lawful and good things out of what is in the earth"
(2:168).

2 "And eat and drink and be not immoderate, for He does not love the
immoderate" (7:31).

3\. "O you who believe! Do not forbid yourselves the good things which
Allāh has made lawful for you, and do not exceed the limits" (5:87).

4\. "And do not eat of that on which Allāh's name has not been
mentioned." (6: 122).

5\. "Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh
of swine, and that on which any other name than that of Allāh has been
invoked, and the strangled animal, and that beaten to death, and that
killed by a fall, and that killed by being smitten with the horn, and
that which wild beasts have eaten--except what you slaughter--and what
is sacrificed on stones set up for idols" (5:3).

6\. "Lawful to you is the game of the sea and its food ... and the game
of the land is forbidden to you so long as you are on pilgrimage"
(5:96).

7\. "And the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for
you and your food is lawful for them" (5:5).

8\. "It is no sin in you that you eat together or separately (24:61).

9\. "O you who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance are only an
uncleanness, the devil's work; shun them, therefore, that you may be
successful" (5:90).

There are some general principles laid down by the Holy Qur'ān regarding
food. The first condition is that it should be lawful (*halāl*) (v. 1),
which carries the double significance of being earned lawfully and not
being prohibited by Law. The second is that it should be good (*tayyih*)
(v. 1) or fit for eating, not unclean or such as offends the taste. It
is further stated that the golden rule regarding what one eats and
drinks is moderation (v. 2). As underfeeding affects the build-up of
man, so does also the overloading of the stomach. Moderation also
requires that no food should be used to excess. Self-denying practices
by which a man deprives himself of certain kinds of food are

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

expressly denounced (v. 3). Flesh is allowed if the animal is
slaughtered in the name of Allāh (v. 4). Prohibited foods are detailed
in v. 5. Game of land and sea is allowed with one exception (v. 6),
Inter-dining with non-Muslims is allowed (v. 7). One may eat in the
company of others or separately (v. 8), Intoxicants are prohibited (v.
9).

Further details are laid down in Hadīth. The name of Allāh must be
mentioned when an animal is slaughtered (h. 1). It may be slaughtered
with any sharp instrument which makes the blood flow (h. 2),
Slaughtering consists in cutting the jugular vein of the throat, but the
spinal cord must not be cut (hh. 3, 4). An afflicted animal may be
slaughtered (h. 5). An animal properly slaughtered by a non-Muslim is
allowed (h. 6). In a doubtful case the utterance of Allāh's name is
sufficient (h. 7). Game is allowed subject to certain conditions (hh. 8,
9). Beasts of prey with teeth are prohibited (h. 10). Intoxicants are
prohibited (hh. 11, 12), and they cannot be taken even in small
quantities which may not intoxicate (h. 13). The hands must be washed
before taking meals and again after it, when the mouth must also be
rinsed (h. 14, 15). The utterance of *Bismillāh* when taking food and a
short prayer after it was the Holy Prophet's practice (hh. 16, 17).
Drink and food must not be blown into and must be kept covered (hh.
18-20). In eating, one may help oneself with a knife (h. 21), or a
spoon. Vessels of gold and silver are a luxury which Islām does not
allow (h. 22). When a person is invited to a meal he should not refuse;
nor should one go to a feast to which one has not been invited (h. 23).
A servant may eat at the same table with his master (h. 24). Eating
together is recommended (h. 25); but when doing so, one should have
regard for others (hh. 26, 27). The guest must be accompanied to the
door of the house (h. 28).

**1** Anas said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, sacrificed two rams
of a white colour mixed with black; I saw him with his foot placed on
one side of their face, uttering *Bismillāh*, *Allāh-u-Akbar*, and he
slaughtered them with his own hand.1

(B. 73:9.)

1\. The concluding portion of this hadīth relates the exact words that
must be uttered when an animal is slaughtered. The condition that
Allāh's name must <span id="page_345">p. 345</span> be mentioned over
the slaughtered animal is laid down to make man realize that the taking
of a life, even though it be an animal, is a serious matter, and that it
is by Divine permission that man does it, not by his superior might. If
a man forgets to mention the name of Allāh, the meat is still allowed
(B. 72:15).

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

**2** Rāfi' said,

We were with the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, in
Dhu-l-Hulaifah. . . . . .

So Rāfi said, We expect or we fear the enemy tomorrow and we have no
knives; may we slaughter with (the thin edge of) cane? He (the Prophet)
said: "What makes the blood flow, not the teeth and the nail, and the
name of Allāh is mentioned on it, eat it."2

(B. 47:1)

**3** Nāfi' said,

Ibn 'Umar forbade (the cutting of) the spinal cord, saying, Cut what is
above the bone, then leave (it) until it dies.

(B. 72:24)

2\. This hadīth shows that an animal may be slaughtered with any sharp
instrument that makes the blood flow out. The object is that blood which
contains poisons should not form part of human food.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

**4** Ibn Abbās said, Slaughtering is in the throat and in the pit above
the breast between the collar bones.3

(B. 72:24.)

**5** Mu'ādh ibn Sa'd reported,

A slave girl of Ka'b ibn Mālik was pasturing sheep in Sal', and one of
the goats was afflicted, so she caught hold of it and slaughtered it
with a stone. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was
asked about it, and he said, "Eat it."

(B. 72:19.)

**6** Zuhrī said, There is no harm in (eating) an animal slaughtered by
a Christian of Arabia; if thou hearest

3\. There are two ways of slaughtering; *dhabh* in which the throat is
cut from beneath at the part next to the head. while the animal is made
to lie down under one's foot, and *nahr*, in which the animal is
stabbed, while in a standing posture, in the *nahr* (the place where the
wind-pipe commences in the uppermost part of the breast). The latter
practice is resorted to in the case of bigger animals. such as camels
and cows, on account of the difficulty of making them lie down. But an
animal that may be stabbed may also be slaughtered. In both cases, it is
a necessary condition that the spinal cord is not cut. If, however. the
head is cut off by mistake, it does not make the meat unlawful (B.
72:24).

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

him invoking another name than that of Allāh, do not eat it, and if thou
dost not hear him, Allāh has made it lawful, and He knew their
unbelief.6

(B. 72:22.)

**7** 'Ā'ishah said, Some people said to the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, People5 bring to us meat about which we do
not know whether the name of Allāh was mentioned over it or not. He
said, "Mention the name of Allāh over it and eat it." She said, and they
had just emerged from unbelief.

(B. 72:21)

4\. The view expressed here by Zuhrī is supported by Ibn 'Abbās (Ah, I,
302), who explains the word food in 5:5--The food of those who have been
given the Book is lawful for you--"as meaning the animal slaughtered by
them. Only if it is known for certain that a name other than that of
Allāh has been invoked, would it be unlawful.

5\. These people, as 'Ā'ishah explains, were recent converts to Islām,
and therefore it was doubtful whether they observed the details of the
Law.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

**8** Abū Th'labah said,

I said, O Prophet of Allāh! We live in the land of the followers of the
Book; may we eat in their vessels? And (we live) in a land where there
is game,--I hunt with my bow and with my dog which is untaught and with
my dog that has been taught, so what is right for me? He said: "As to
what thou askest about the followers of the Book, if you can find
(vessels) other than these, do not eat in them; and if you do not find
(other vessels), wash them and eat in them." And what thou huntest with
thy bow, and thou hast mentioned the name of Allāh, eat (it)7;

6\. Washing was required because they were also used for prohibited
foods.

7\. The same rule would apply to game shot with a gun. The Bismillāh
should be uttered at the time of loading the gun or when firing it. If a
Muslim <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> forgets to mention the name of
Allāh, the same rule would apply as in slaughtering. *i.e.*, the game is
allowed as food.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

and what thou huntest with the dog that thou hast taught, and thou hast
mentioned the name of Allāh, eat (it); and what thou huntest with thy
untaught dog and thou art able to slaughter it, eat it."

(B. 72:4.)

**9** 'Umar said,

'The game of the sea is that which has been hunted, and its food
(*ta'ām*) is that which it casts forth . . . . . . . . And Ibn 'Abbās
said, Eat of the game of the sea whether it is (killed) by a Christian
or a Jew or a Magian.6

(B. 72:12.)

**10** Abū Tha'labah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, forbade
all beasts of prey with canine teeth.9

(B. 72:29.)

8\. The reference here is to v. 6 quoted above. The *ta'ām* (lit. *food*
) of the sea is distinguished from its game, and means *what is found*,
the sea having thrown it on dry land, or *what is left by the water
having receded from it, for the catching of which no struggle is
needed*. Fish, even it caught alive, is not required to be slaughtered.
Eel, frog or tortoise may be eaten, according to some.

9\. Muslim adds, birds of prey with claw 19:2).

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

**11** Anas said,

I was giving drink to people in the abode of Abu Talhah, and their wine
at that time was made of dates. Then the Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, ordered a crier to make it known that wine
was forbidden. He said. So Abu Talhah said to me, Get out and pour it
out. I poured it out, and it flowed in the streets of Madīnah.10

(B. 46:21.)

**12** 'Ā'ishah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was
asked about *bit'*--it is a

10\. The Arabic word for wine is *khamr*, from *khamara* meaning *he
covered* or *veiled* a thing; and wine is so called because it veils
(obscures) the intellect (LL). It is not only *the expressed juice of
grapes* when it has fermented but the *intoxicating expressed juice of
anything* (LL). In Arabia, at that time, wine was generally made of
grapes, dates, wheat, barley and honey (B. 74: 4). Fresh juice of grapes
or dates is not prohibited (B. 67:72).

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

drink made of honey and the people of Yaman used to drink it. So the
Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Every drink that intoxicates is prohibited."11

(B. 74:1)

**13** Jābir said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Of whatever thing a large quantity intoxicates, even a small quantity
is prohibited."12

(AD. 25:5.)

**14** Salmān reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said
"The blessing of food is the washing of hands before it, and the washing
of hands after it."13

(Tr-Msh. 20.)

11\. Everything which intoxicates is prohibited, whether it is a drink
or any other drug cannot, therefore, be used even in small quantities

12\. An intoxicant unless, of course, it is used as a medicine to save
life, for which purpose the Holy Qur'ān expressly allows the use of
prohibited foods: "Whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring nor
exceeding the limit, no sin shall be upon him" (2:173, 6:146).

13\. The word used here is *wudzū'*, but it means only the washing of
hands.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

**15** Suwaid Ibn al-Nu'mān said:

We went forth with the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him, to Khaibar. When we reached Sahbā', he ordered the food to be
served; and there was brought to him nothing but meal of parched barley,
and we ate (of it); then he got up for the prayer and he rinsed his
mouth and we rinsed our mouths.14

(B. 70:51.)

**16** 'Umar ibn Abū Salamah said,

I was a boy being brought up in the care of the Messenger of Allāh,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, and my hand was active in the
bowl, taking from every side. So the Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, said to me, "Boy! Say Bismillāh and eat
with thy

14\. Rinsing of the mouth after taking food is necessary, so that
particles of food may not be left in the mouth to rot.

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

right hand and cat from the side nearest to thee." So this was my manner
of eating afterwards.

(B. 70:2.)

**17** Abū Sa'īd al-Khudrī said,

When the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
finished his meal, he used to say: "All praise is due to Allāh Who has
given us to eat and to drink, and male us Muslims."15

(Tr-2 Msh. 20.)

**18** Abū Qatādah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"When one of you drinks, he should not blow into the vessel."16

(B. 4:18.)

15\. A Muslim is taught to start food with the mention of the name of
Allāh, and to give thanks to God after having finished it. He thus feels
the Divine presence when satisfying his physical desires.

16\. The words of another hadīth (Ah, I. 309) are that the Holy Prophet
forbade blowing on food and drink.

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

**19** Jābir said,

Abū Humaid brought a cup of milk from Naqī', and the Messenger of Allāh,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said to him:

"Why didst thou not cover it? Thou shouldst have placed a piece of wood
on it."

(B. 74:11.)

**20** Jābir reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"When you go to sleep, put out the lamp and shut the doors and cover the
mouths of water-skins and cover food and drink."

(B. 74:21.)

**21** Ja'far ibn Amr reported,

His father informed him that he saw the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him,

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

cutting (meat) from the shoulder of a goat. Then he was invited to
prayer, so he threw away the knife and said prayers and did not perform
ablutions."17

(B. 4:51.)

**22** Hudhaifah said, I heard the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him, say: "Do not wear silk or silk brocade, and do not drink in
vessels of gold and silver, and do not eat in bowls made of them; for
they are for them in this life and for us in the next."18

(B. 70:29)

**23** 'Abd Allāh ibn 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:
"When a person is invited (to a

17\. It is not forbidden to help oneself in eating with a spoon or a
fork, as the Holy Prophet helped himself with a knife in this case.

18\. These are luxuries which can be enjoyed by the rich at the expense
of the poor; hence they are forbidden to a Muslim.

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

meal) and he does not accept (or reply), he disobeys Allāh and His
Messenger; and he who goes (to a feast) without being invited enters as
a thief and goes forth as a raider."

(AD. 26:l.)

**24** Abū Hurairah reported on the authority of the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him:

"When the servant brings to one of you his food, then if he does not
make him sit with him (to eat at the same table), let him give him a
morsel or two morsels, for he has laboured to prepare it."19

(B. 49:18.)

**25** 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Eat together and do not eat separately, for the blessing is with the
company"20

(IM-Msh. 20:l.)

19\. To make the servant sit at the same table with his master shows the
extent to which the Islamic brotherhood minimizes differences of rank
and wealth.

20\. Islām thus requires even the people of a household to take their
food together.

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

**26** Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported on the authority of his father,

When the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, ate
in the company of (other) people, he was the last of them (to finish)
eating.21

(Msh. 20:1.)

**27** Ibn 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"When food is placed (before a company), no one should get up until the
food is removed; nor should any one raise up his hand (from the food),
though he may have satisfied his hunger, until the people have
finished--and he should offer an excuse--for this causes his companion
to become ashamed, so he withholds his hand though he may still need
food."

(IM-Msh. 20:1.)

21\. This hadīth and the one that follows relate to good manners in
eating. <span id="page_358">p. 358</span>The man who eats less than his
companion should eat slowly, so that he finishes along with his
companions.

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

Abū Hurairah said,

**28** The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
said:

"It is the sunnah that a man should accompany his guest to the door of
the house."

(IM-Msh. 20:l.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX: Toilet](had32)
