[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had31)  [Next](had33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

# CHAPTER XXIX

### TOILET

1\. "O thou who art clothed! Arise and warn, and thy Lord do magnify,
and thy garments keep purified, and uncleanness do shun" (74:1-5).

2\. "Say, Who has prohibited the adornment of Allāh which He has brought
forth for His servants and the goodly provisions" (7: 32).

3\. "O children of Adam! Attend to your embellishment at every time of
prayer" (7:31).

The order to keep the garments pure and shun uncleanness of every kind
is combined with the order to warn the people and magnify the Lord (v.
1). This shows the importance which is given to cleanliness in dress as
well as in general habits. Adornment is not prohibited; it is, in fact,
a thanksgiving for Divine blessings (v. 2). The word adornment (Ar.
*zinah*), which is generally taken to mean apparel, includes both the
dress and the make-up of a person. A good toilet is recommended even
when going to prayer (v. 3). No limitations are placed upon the form or
quality of clothing but extravagance and vanity must be avoided (h. 1 ).
To be naked is forbidden (h. 2 ). Men are prohibited to wear silk except
for a good reason, but women may wear it (hh. 3-6). Men may wear a
silver ring but not a gold one, but women may wear any ornaments (hh.
7-10). The personal make-up of a man, the wearing of a moustache, beard
and hair, and the use of perfumes are spoken of in hh. 11-16, while, hh.
17-20 relate to pictures or decorations.

**1** The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

"Eat and drink and wear clothes and be charitable,

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

not being extravagant or self- conceited."1

(B. 77:1.)

**2** Miswar said,

I took up a heavy stone, and whilst I was going along (with it), my
garment fell down. So the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, said to me: "Don on thy garment, and you should not
walk naked."2

(AD. 30:2.)

**3** Abū 'Uthmān reported, A letter from 'Umar came to us that the
Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, forbade us
(wearing of) silk except this much,

1\. Those who wear long garments, or trail the train of the garment, in
order to be looked at or for vanity are censured (B. 77:4, 5), but the
mere wearing of a long garment is not forbidden (B. 77:2).

2\. The parts of the body which must be covered are called the *'aurah*,
which is thus defined: The part or parts of the body which it is
indecent to expose; in a man what is between the navel and the knee, and
in a free woman all the person except the face and the hands as far as
the wrist" (LL).

To be naked even in private (except in case of necessity) is forbidden,
as the Holy Prophet is reported to have said in answer to such a
question "Allāh has a greater right than men that one should be ashamed
of Him" (AD. 30: 2).

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

and he pointed with his two fingers that are next to the thumb. He said,
According to our knowledge, he meant *a'lām*.3

(B. 77:25.)

**4** Anas said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, allowed the wearing
of silk to Zubair and 'Abd al-Rahmān on account of itching.

(B. 77:29.)

**5** Anas reported, He saw Umm Kulthūm, the daughter of the Messenger
of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, wearing a striped
garment of silk.

(B. 77:30.)

3\. *'A'lām* is the plural of *'alam* which means an impression or a
trace, and the *a'lām* of a garment is the *ornamental* or *variegated
border thereof* (LL). The wearing of silk is prohibited for men, except
for special reasons, but not for women, because men must be accustomed
to lead a hard life. The wearing of *khazz* (a cloth woven of wool and
silk) is allowed (Ah. iv, 233)

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

**6** 'Uqbah ibn 'Āmir said,

A tunic of silk4 was presented to the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, and he wore it, and said his prayers while wearing it;
then he pulled it off, doffing it severely, like one hating it. and
said: "This is not fit for the righteous.5

(B. 8:16.)

**7** Abū Hurairah reported on the authority of the Prophet, of Allāh,
peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,

That he forbade the wearing of a gold ring.

(B. 77:45.)

**8** Anas said, When the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on
him, intended to write to the Romans, it was said to him that they would
not read his letter

4\. *Farrūj* is a garment of the kind called *qabā'* (a kind of tunic),
*having a slit in its hinder part* (LL).

5\. Only the righteous among males are meant, as women are allowed to
wear silk, as the above hadīth shows.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

if it did not bear a seal. So he ordered a ring of silver to be made and
its impress was Muhammad the Messenger of Allāh.6

(B. 77:52 )

**9** Ibn 'Abbās said, I bear witness regarding the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, that the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, went out and Bilāl was with him, and he thought that he
had not made the women hear; so he exhorted them and ordered them to
give in charity, and the women began to throw (their) earrings and
rings, and Bilāl gathered them in a side of his garment.

(B. 3:32.)

6\. The Holy Prophet had a ring made for him when letters were written
to the neighbouring potentates in the year 6 A.H., and upon the signet
of it were engraved the words *Muhammad Rasūl Allāh*. These three words
were written as another hadīth shows, in three lines, Allāh being at the
top, *Rasūl* in the middle and *Muhammad* at the bottom.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

**10** Umm Salamah said,

I used to wear ornaments of gold, so I said, "Is it hoarding up, O
Messenger of Allāh?" He said: "What reaches the limit of zakāt, and
zakāt is paid therefrom, it is not hoarding up."7

(AD. 9:4.)

**11** Abu Hurairah reported,

Five things are according to nature: Circumcision, and the removal of
superfluous hair,8 and the removal of hair in the armpit, and the paring
of nails, and the clipping of the moustache.

(B. 77:63.)

7\. These hadīth show that ornaments of all kinds are allowed for women.
Umm Salamah was the Holy Prophet's wife.

8\. Superfluous hair below the navel is meant. Istihdād means shaving
with a razor.

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

**12** Ibn 'Umar reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said: "Oppose the
polytheists--leave the beard to grow abundant and clip the moustaches."9
And when Ibn 'Umar performed the pilgrimage or the *'umrah*, he used to
grasp his beard with his hand; what exceeded, he had it cut off.

(B. 77:64.)

**13** Ibn 'Abbās reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, used to
let down his hair (on his forehead), the polytheists combing their hair
into two parts throwing them on the two sides, while the followers of
the Book used to let down their hair (on their foreheads). The Messenger
of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, preferred agreement
with the followers of the Book in matters in which he was not ordered
(to follow) a

9\. It shows that the polytheists generally shaved the beard.

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

particular course. Then (afterwards) the Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, combed his hair into two parts.' 10

(B. 61:21)

**14** 'Ā'ishah said,

I used to comb the hair of the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings
of Allāh be on him.

(B. 6:2.)

**15** 'Ā'ishah reported,

It was pleasing to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
to begin on the right side, so far as he was able, in his combing (of
the hair) and in his ablutions.11

(B. 77:77.)

**16** 'Ā'ishah said, I used to perfume the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allāh be on him, with

10\. This hadīth shows that the Holy Prophet wore his hair in different
ways at different times, and he never forbade a particular way of
wearing one's hair. *Sadl* (or the Christian way of wearing one's hair)
was leaving a lock of hair on the forehead, while *farq* (or the Arab
way) was letting down of the hair on the two sides with a line between
them. The Holy Prophet did it in both ways at different times. Another
hadīth speaks of the *dhawā'ib* (tuft of hair on the forehead) of Ibn
'Abbās (B. 77: 71.)

11\. These hadīth show that the Holy Prophet was careful about his
toilet.

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

the best fragrant substance which he could find, so much so that I could
discern the brightness of the fragrance in his head and in his beard.

(B. 77:74.)

**17** Busr ibn Sa'id related,

Zaid ibn Khālid spoke to him, while with Busr ibn Sa'id was 'Ubaid
Allāh, that Abū Talhah related to him that the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, said: "Angels do not enter a house in
which is an image."12 Busr said, After this Zaid ibn Khālid fell ill and
we paid

12\. 'Sūrah means an image or a picture. According to another version
(B. 59: 7), the Holy Prophet is reported to have said that "Angels do
not enter a house in which is a dog or a sūrah." But the Holy Qur'ān
allows the keeping of dogs for hunting (5: 4), and so does Hadīth (H.
xxviii:8); and the keeping of watchdogs is also allowed. Similarly, the
Holy Qur'ān speaks of *tamāthīl* ( images ) being made for Solomon, and
it would not be right to say that angels did not on this account come
into the house of Solomon, a prophet of God. The hadīth, therefore,
which speaks of angels not visiting a place where images (or pictures)
and dogs are to be found cannot be accepted in a literal sense. It is
for this reason that an authority like Rāghib interprets the word *bait*
(*house*) occurring <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> in this Hadīth as
meaning the heart, the significance being that the man in whose heart
images or idols have a place, and who bows before them, does not receive
the angels of Divine mercy. The concluding words of this hadīth, making
an exception in favour of *raqm fi-l-thaub*--(figures on a cloth)--and
the same would be the case with regard to figures on a paper--confirm
the conclusion arrived at above. What is forbidden is the keeping of
images or pictures for paying them Divine honours.

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

a visit to him, and when we were in his house we saw a curtain on which
were pictures. So I said to 'Ubaid Allāh, Did he not relate to us about
pictures? He said, He had said, Except figures on a cloth; didst thou
not hear him? I said, No. He said, Yea! He mentioned this.

(B. 59:7.)

**18** Abd Allāh Ibn 'Umar ' reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:
"Those who make these images (*suwar*) will be punished on the day of
resurrection it will be said to them,

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

Put life into what you made."13

(B. 77:89.)

**19** 'Ā'ishah reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, did not leave in
his house anything on which were figures but he broke it.14

(B. 77:90.)

**20** Ibn 'Umar said.

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, came to the house
of Fātimah but did not enter it. When 'Alī came, she mentioned it to
him. He spoke about it to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be
on him, and he (the Prophet) said: "I saw on her door a figured
curtain." And he said: "I

13\. As made clear in the previous note, only such people could be
threatened with punishment as made images for worship.

14\. It may be due simply to his love for simplicity and hatred of
decorations, This is made clear in the next hadīth which states that the
Holy Prophet disliked a figured curtain on the door of his daughter
Fātimah, and asked her to send the same to people who stood in need of
it. It did not mean that he prohibited the use of decorated or figured
cloth; otherwise he would not have sent the same to others. Perhaps he
only wanted his daughter to live a simple life like himself.

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

have nothing to do with (decorations of) this world." So 'Alī came to
her and mentioned this to her. She said, Let him command me about it as
he likes. He (the Prophet) said: "Send it to such and such people; they
are in need."

(B. 51:27.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Ethics (Adab)](had33)
