[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm06) [Next](cm08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. (Contest with the Ke´let.)

*Free Translation.*

 One time there was a man whose sons were all dying. He became old, and
was left without sons. Then in his old age a male child was born to him.
The child grew, and began to construct a boat. While the father was
sleeping, the boy would work on the boat.

 Then he set off, departed far yonder.<span
id="page_42_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_42_note_3) On his journey he saw a
man <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> who was on an island. "Here, come
hither!" — "I will." He came. While he was travelling, he had caught a
small seal.

 "Oh, let us play, let us have some fun!" — "Yes!" Oh, then the little
man hid in a boot. The other one was searching for him. He was nowhere.
Then he fell out (of the boot). "Oh, here I am! Now it is your turn."
The other one became a house. "Where is he, the source of trouble?" —
"Oh, here I am!" He found him.

 "Now let us eat some liver!" — "Oh, all right! but I will go and bring
my knife from the boat." He brought the knife, and at the same time he
put into his bosom the little seal lately killed by him. He put it into
his bosom, together with some blood. "Oh, I will be first!" He pretended
to rip open his abdomen with the knife and to eat (his own) liver. He
cut the seal's liver and ate it. "Now it is your turn." All at once the
other one ripped open his abdomen, and so died, perished, killed
himself.

 The man set off, and saw another jaw-bone house. There an old
ke´lẹ-woman <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> was cooking heads. He
entered. "What is the matter? Who has pushed his way into our house?
Then he entered, and sat down on a pillow. When he sat down the
ke´lẹ-woman came to meet him. She carried her woman's knife, which was
covered with coagulated blood, and began to whet it. All at once he
rushed upon the one who was whetting the knife, snatched away her
\[woman's\] knife, hit her on the head, and so she perished. He murdered
her.

 Then he went out, set off again, and saw a house. He came to that
house. Clothes were scattered about in it. Then suddenly a voice came
from the hearth. "Oh, there he is! \[Also\] this one murders the
procurers of game. Those whom he murdered were also procurers of our
food and of game."

 Then a head appeared. He hit the head with a harpoon. Then a ke´lẹ-man
from underground pulled it down, together with the thong, and made it go
underground. He was moving along underground. Another small jaw-bone
<span id="page_45">p. 45</span> house stood directly opposite. There he
set the ke´lẹ free. The latter passed on, and he entered the jaw-bone
house.

 Two eyeless old women were sitting there. He drew out his penis,
directed it toward the nose of one of them, and swung it. The old woman
said, "Halloo" — "Ho!" — "Really, something made me think of the time
when I had a husband!" — "Is that so?"

 He killed one of the old women, and flayed her, beginning at the anus.
The body he threw on a dung-hill. The skin he put on.

 The people came, looking for a shaman. "What do you want?" — "Oh, (you
have said) enough! A man's head (is aching). . . . By the way, why has
your jaw become so long?" — "Oh, has it really become so long? Well,
now, you go home. I will come quick enough."

 Shortly afterwards he departed. "Let the one whose head aches sit up!
Oh, this here!" And all at once he hit him on the head with a
harpoon-point and killed him. so he died. He killed many more, destroyed
a houseful. Then he came out and departed far yonder. He went home.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

 He reached home, and his parents rejoiced. He said, "Oh, indeed! I have
destroyed some of the murderers." Ended. I have killed the wind.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, in October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_3"></span>[3](#page_42_fr_3) Ġä´nqan refers to
the motion to an indefinite, very distant place.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
