[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm07) [Next](cm09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. (The Ai´wan and the Reindeer-Breeder.)

 In olden times there was an Ai´wan warrior who hunted whales. He had
killed a whale. He had a reindeer-breeding neighbor. The son of this
neighbor said to his old father, "Now, then, go to the whale-hunter (and
ask for some meat)." — "All right!" The Ai´wan said to the old man, "Oh,
what do you want?" — "My son sent me." — "Did he?" He turned out the
upper part of his trousers. Then he filled it full with blubber. The old
man came home. "What result?" But he felt angry. "Why did you not go
yourself?"

 Then the son went, in his turn. He came to the Ai´wan. The latter was
cutting the whale (in the shallow water). One of his companions said to
him, "The reindeer-breeder has come to you." Then he came to the shore.
A walrus-hide destined to be split, with the blubber not yet scraped
away, <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> lay buried in the sand. He dug for
it with his nails. Somehow then he took it by the holes in the edge with
two fingers, and, ceasing to dig any more, shook off the sand. He pulled
it out, so strong was he. He spread it upon the ground, the blubber
upwards, to serve as a wrestling-place.

 Then they took off their clothes, the Ai´wan and the reindeer-breeder,
and they wrestled. It was quite slippery just to tread upon that
blubber. The Ai´wan extended his hands. Then he was attacked by the
reindeer-breeder. The latter, catching him by the head, caused it to
spring off. The head rolled down upon the ground. He is still standing
with extended hands, headless. Then only did the others say, "Oh, how
wonderful! the head has sprung off!" The Ai´wan fell down and died. The
reindeer-breeder took possession of the whale and went home. His father
asked him, "Eh?" — "I came back." — "What result?" — "Indeed, I took the
whole whale." — "Oh, you are wonderful! Still we have remained without
maritime neighbors."

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

 They went for the whale with a train of pack-sledges. He stood on the
seashore. That Ai´wan who was killed had sons; and while the
reindeer-breeder, the victor of yesterday, was standing on the shore,
the son of the Ai´wan concealed a long thong in the sand (across his
path). He tugged at the thong, (tripped up the reindeer-breeder,) and
made him fall into the water.

 So he was drowned and died. The Ai´wan took the wife of the
reindeer-breeder (and also his herd). Nevertheless he did not care very
much about the reindeer, only slaughtered them all the time in great
numbers. Still he ate no meat, only the tongues of the reindeer. Every
morning he slaughtered reindeer. On waking up, he would say to his wife,
that of the reindeer-breeder, "Put my clothes on me!" On her refusal, he
would beat her so hard that her head would become all swollen from the
blows of his stick. "Oh, bring the herd to the house!" Then again he
slaughters reindeer. The wife cried, sorrowing for the reindeer, "Why
are you crying?" — "So!" — <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> "You are
mourning for your husband?" — "No!" — "Then why are you crying?" He was
ready for violence.

 A small Spider-Woman visited this one who was secretly crying. She came
down to that place. "You are married to the Ai´wan?" — "Oh, yes! . . .
And he is all the time exterminating the herd. The whole time he is
slaughtering, but he eats only tongues, and consumes no meat." — "Oh,
right away prepare some clothes. When you are ready with them, when you
have finished them, promise to the sea a shy reindeer-buck. Then offer
to the sea those clothes." She promised. Then she threw those clothes in
the direction of the sea. The Ai´wan was asleep. The wife remained
outside, and continued to cry. All at once her husband appeared in the
distance from the direction of the sea, the one who was drowned the
other day. The wife brushed away her tears. "What is there? Methinks, my
husband." Then he came, "Oh, my! you have come!" — "Yes. Why are you
crying?" — "Why, this Ai´wan here, who stays with us, has almost
exterminated our whole herd." Her husband questioned her, and said to
her, "Oh, let us seize him!"

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

 They seized him and carried him outside. Then they laid him, stretched
out on his back, on a dung-hill. They fastened his hands (to the ground)
with spikes. And every morning all the neighbors, on awakening, would
pour (the contents of) their chamber-vessels into his mouth. Still he
lived. Thus they poured into his mouth urine and excrement. "Oh, let me
go! I shall give you my wives. Have them for slaves." — "Oh, but we do
not (want them)." — "I shall give you my riches." — "I do not believe
you!" — "Indeed, I shall give you my wives and children. And you shall
have (my) children for slaves." And, indeed, he was a rich Ai´wan. So
they unbound him. The reindeer-breeder followed him. He gave his wives,
and his children for reindeer-herdsmen.

 Then he brought to his home the small old woman, the Ai´wan old woman,
the mother of this one, who before that used to employ evil charms. He
took a reindeer, a quite unbroken one; then he undressed her, and
attached her (to it) by the ankle. Thus he tied her to the unbroken
reindeer. The reindeer ran away. It was winter-time. Then the reindeer
dragged her <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> away, at first to the
reindeer-herd, then to the open country. After that the reindeer brought
her back, and her backbone was all (torn off) and destroyed. From there
the reindeer took her to the reindeer-herd again, running. After a while
it brought her back, and her whole body was destroyed. Merely her legs
were left unbroken. After that, before (the time when) only her legs
were left, he unharnessed the reindeer.

 Before he freed it, it fell down and died. Then the master began to
cough in the manner of a reindeer; and he was tearing (the ground) all
the time, reindeer-like. After that he fell, swooning. Then he died. The
end.<span id="page_51_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_51_note_1.md)

 

<span class="small">Told by Qo´tirġịn. a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village Mị´s·qạn, in March, 1901.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="page_51_note_1"></span>[1](#page_51_fr_1.md) Most of the episodes
contained in this story are borrowed from well-known Chukchee Stories, —
"Ele´ndi and his Song," "The Shaman with Warts," etc. These were
published in my Russian edition of Chukchee Materials, collected in the
Kolyma country. Here the episodes in question appear in an abbreviated
form. Still they prove the uniformity of Chukchee folk-lore from the
Kolyma River to the Pacific Ocean.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
