[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm12) [Next](cm13)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. (The Adventures of the Brothers.)<span id="page_64_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_64_note_1)

 A company of brothers went to sea in a boat. They were caught by a foul
wind and carried away to another land. They lost their way in a dense
fog, but at last they sighted land. It was an extraordinary land, a
quite dark one. They spoke thus: "Oh, my! we have come to a strange
land." They walked for a while, and saw people that were gulls. The
gulls could also speak in the manner of men.

 "Oh, here are those people from the mainland!" — "Yes!" — "What is the
matter with you?" — "We were badly treated by the wind." — "Oh, how
terrible!" — "But we are dying!" The Gull people said, "You shall not
die. Go down slowly along that sea-beach yonder, then you will not die.
Indeed, \[on your way\] there is a stranded carcass (lying on the
beach). You must not eat of it. Otherwise you will die. When you shall
have passed it by, then you will see the carcass of a hunch-backed whale
(*Megaptera boöps*) stranded (on the beach). You may eat some of its
liver."

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

 They were quite hungry when they found the carcass of the hunch-backed
whale. They ate of its liver. One of the brothers was \[a fool, even\]
quite foolish. (He said,) "I wish we could eat a little more!" The
eldest brother said, "(What you have eaten) is enough. You would die."

 They departed again, and saw people that were gulls (*Larus glaucus*).
"Oh, where are you from?" — "We were badly treated by the sea. We have
lost our country. And so we are dying." — "Indeed, you shall not die. Go
down again slowly along the seashore. There you will see the stranded
carcass of a whale (*Balænoptera velifera*). You must pass it by. Then
you will see another carcass, that of a sea-lion (*Eumetopias
Stelleri*). Of that you may eat your fill."

 They departed from there, and saw the stranded carcass of a whale. They
passed by it; and the foolish brother said again, "Oh, let us eat of
it!" The eldest brother said, "Such is he, the quite foolish one. — You
(actually) want to die." They left there again, and saw people that were
gulls of a smaller size.

 "Oh, here are those people from the mainland!" — "Yes!" — "What is the
matter with you?" — "We were badly treated by the sea." — "Oh, then move
on slowly. You will see the stranded carcass of a white whale. Do not
eat of it. After that you will find the stranded carcass of a walrus.
You may eat your fill of that. That place is near to a settlement. A
strong man lives in it."

 They departed, and saw the stranded <span id="page_66">p. 66</span>
carcass of a white whale. They passed it by. The foolish brother said
again, "Let us eat!" The eldest brother again gave him a scolding, and
said thus \[spoke to him\]: "What do you want, you greedy one?" They
passed by it again. Then they found the stranded carcass of a walrus.
They ate a full meal of it.

 After that they travelled a little longer, and then landed. They
brought their boat to the shore and buried it in the sand, so that it
was not to be seen. Then they slept. They awoke (in the morning), and,
lo! a man was walking along the shore. He was full of fear. Now he would
come near, and again he would flee.

 The foolish brother was quite eager. He said, "Let me catch him!" The
eldest one said, "Wait, wait!" They were keeping him back like a dog.
Then the other man approached again. The foolish one rushed at him. This
foolish brother was also very strong. "Oh, let us kill him!" — "Wait a
bit! We will question him first." They kept him down on the ground. Then
they asked him, "Are your people numerous?" — "Yes!" — "Have you strong
men?" — "Yes, one strong man, and he does much violence. He takes away
everybody's provisions." — "Oh, do not tell him about us! We will visit
him."

 Evening came again. They sent the foolish one to get provisions. He
went, and stole provisions from a cache. He came back and brought a load
of whale-skin, ever so big. "Eġeġeġei´, I was almost up to their
houses!" — "What did you do that for? Do you <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> want to die?" Thus spoke the eldest brother, as before.

 Morning came. A man from that place paddled out in a canoe. The canoe
was quite large. He caught many seals. They looked into his canoe, and
the canoe was filled \[separate boat\] (with seals), among them
thong-seals. "Halloo! haul me up on shore!" The people did not hear. So
he landed. He was very angry. He carried a walrus-penis. With this he
began to strike about among all the people there, the neighbors.

 Then he went back to the canoe. "Haul me up on shore!" Of course the
people knew better now. So the entire number went to the seashore. He
was taking the thong-seals with one hand, \[with a single hand,\] and,
sitting in the canoe, was hurling them ashore. So strong was he.

 The foolish one said, "Oh, indeed! I shall be able to manage him all
right." — "Now, there! be quiet, will you?" They came there in the
evening. A big jaw-bone house was standing there. The house-master was
squirming upon his back in the inner room. Then he saw them. "O guests!"
— "Yes!" — "To-morrow we will arrange a thanks-giving ceremonial."

 They passed a night there, and the people were arranging the
ceremonial. The master brought in a big stone. They entered, and the
entrance was closed. The foolish one spoke to the other brothers. "Oh,
but they are going to kill us!" All these men had ermine-skins hanging
down from their belts.

 Meanwhile the lamps were put out. <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> That
stone was a very old one. It was covered all over with dried blood. They
brought it in. The guests put on their ermine-skins (in the dark). After
that they burrowed \[themselves\] in holes under the bases of the
house-poles. Meanwhile the master was swaying in the dark in a
ceremonial dance, and the stone was clattering all around in the house,
"Pịw, pịw!"

 He ceased swaying, and said, "Oh, where are the guests?" and in a
moment they were in their former places upon the pillow. Light the
lamp!" The foolish one said, "Oh, oh! but it is a good merry house for
thanksgiving ceremonials." — "Oh, oh, how wonderful! Oh, my! which way
have they gone? Oh, there! let us try it again!"

 They brought in some slabs of whalebone. They were covered with dried
blood. They were really murderous. Then, again, "Oh, put out the lamp!"
They put out the lamp. Those men again concealed themselves in the same
place. The master swayed again in his dance; and those slabs of
whalebone were doing thus: "Cịġ, Cịġ!" Thus they clicked. If these men
had remained on the surface, they would have been cut down by the
whalebone slabs.

 Again he called, "Oh, eġeġeġeġei´!" They were sitting in their former
places. "Oh, where are the guests?" — "Here we are!" — "Oh, oh,
wonderful!" Again the foolish one said, "Oh, oh, my! but it is a good
merry house for thanksgiving ceremonials!" — "Oh, again!" They put out
the lamp again. This time they fled upwards, close to the vent-hole.

 Then a sling began to hurl stones <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> about
in the sleeping-room, so that the jaw-bone house was shaking. Again the
master ceased swaying. Oh, they were sitting in their former places.
"Oh, where are the guests? Probably this time (they are killed)." — "Oh,
indeed, here we are!" — "How wonderful! Light the lamps!" Again the
foolish one said, while the lamps were being lighted, "Oh, my! what a
good merry house for a thanksgiving ceremonial! We feel merry."

 "Oh, bring the Maritime woman for a dance!" They brought her. Again,
"Oh, put out the lamp," The old woman danced. They hid themselves under
the stone. Oh, oh! the jawbone house swayed to one side, and even the
ground bent to one side. This time the foolish one was hit upon the
head.

 Then again, "Enough! Light the lamp!" Oh, they appeared, and the head
of that one was covered with blood. Then one of the guests, the eldest
brother, said, "Oh, now it is our turn. Listen! And so also put out the
lamp!" He began swaying in a ceremonial dance, and a big stone from a
mountain rolled into the jawbone house. And it crushed even all the
(stands made of) ribs of whale. There was a great clatter. The stone
rolled about like thunder, and still more thunder approached.

 "There, enough! You will hit the children upon the head!" Still it
continued. And as to the strong man, the present performer of the
ceremonial, the stones that were rolling around in his house also broke
his bones and killed him.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

 Then a little old man, a neighbor of his, called out, "Oġoġoġoi´, now
the people will have a rest from game-robbing in a quite different
manner for this one was robbing from his neighbors all their provisions.

 The people were very glad. The brothers ceased (killing). The old man
said, "On the seashore (on your way) lies a big thong-seal: it lies on
the shore with half of its body out of the water. Do not pass by it at a
distance, but go quite close to it, just by the tip of its nose. If you
pass at a distance, it will right away kill you. When you shall have
passed it, farther on there is a young seal lying on the shore, out of
the water up to the middle of its body. Do not attack it, only pass it
by. When you have passed it, you will see there a young thong-seal. You
may attack that."

 Oh, indeed, they departed. They passed the first one close to the tip
of its nose, and saw the young seal. The foolish one spoke again: "Oh,
we are too hungry! I wish we might kill this one!" The eldest brother
said, "You are so greedy!" — "But it is because we are hungry." — "Such
a one are you, that you cannot keep your big greedy jaws quiet."

 They passed it, and saw the young thong-seal. They slew it and had a
meal. Just then they saw that a man was coming down the river. This was
the master of the first thong-seal (they had passed) on their road. He
asked them, "Have you met nothing on the way?" — "Nothing." — "Oh,
there! he has not seen them!"

 They departed again. This time <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> they saw
the Giant Bird.<span id="page_71_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_71_note_1) It
sat crouching on the sea-beach. They passed it from the water-side. When
they were moving at a great distance, (the bird stretched out its neck)
and swallowed them, together with the boat. \[They made promises,\] they
were so frightened. They promised (to the spirits) a white-haired dog in
their house. Then they came out through the anus (quite safe), only
their heads had become bald (and they had lost) their hair.

 They departed again, and saw some people who were mice, who were
digging earth. They dug out underground houses. They passed a night
there. One old woman was still sleeping, — an old mouse-woman. The
foolish one said, "Oh, we are suffering from thirst! I will go and have
a drink in the house!" The eldest brother said, "(Go,) but do not play
any foolish tricks!"

 Oh, he came to that house, and saw the old woman. She had her eyes
closed, and had not hailed him at all. Then that man, the foolish one,
stood (there for a while). Then he came near the old woman. He took out
his penis and directed it toward her nose. Then she stirred up and
snuffed around. She spoke thus, quite alone: "Oh, indeed! where does
this smell here of husbands come from?"

 She moved on and snuffed around. Then the other one laughed. He laughed
on the sly when going out of the house. "Oh, oh! Who has made me a
laughing-stock (of the people)?" She, however, heard this low laugh of
<span id="page_72">p. 72</span> his. "Let his penis grow in length!" He
went to the boat. His penis was growing very fast, his trousers were
soon quite filled with it. He came to the boat, and his eldest brother
scolded him. "I told you not to play silly tricks!" — "Indeed, I played
no tricks! I only saw an old woman who had not hailed me at all. All at
once I took out my penis and directed it toward her nose. She snuffed
around, and then said, 'Whence, again, comes this smell here of
husbands?' Then, on going out, I laughed a little. She said, 'Who has
made me a laughing-stock? Let his penis grow in length!'"

 "Oh, sorrows! Quick! let us push off!" The boat was very soon filled
with the penis. They tried to cut it off, but the remaining piece still
continued to grow. At last they were coming home. The eldest brother was
a shaman. So the eldest brother addressed that old woman, the
mischievous one.

 "Oh, you old woman! thrust something between your own legs!" Then the
old woman (sat) down upon the ground undressed, and began to shove her
posterior parts to and fro. She thrust into her vulva a splinter of
wood, and so killed herself.

 Those men came home. They brought out into the open a shaggy dog and
slaughtered it. Their wives had become decrepit from age. The foolish
one, on landing, was already quite bloodless, because they were cutting
off his penis all the time.

 As soon as they landed, they went to sleep. Then they turned to stone,
<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> and never again awoke. Oh, the end! The
wind has been killed.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm13)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_64">p. 64</span>

<span id="page_64_note_1"></span>[1](#page_64_fr_1) This tale represents
a clever intermixture of some elements of Russian or Turko-Mongol origin
with others which are genuine Chukchee.

<span id="footnotes_page_71">p. 71</span>

<span id="page_71_note_1"></span>[1](#page_71_fr_1) Concerning the Giant
Bird of Chukchee mythology, cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 328.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
