[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm12) [Next](cm14.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. (The Children carried away by a Giant.)

 One time a man was hunting whales. And he killed a great number of
whales. They departed in skin boats. Two children were playing on the
seashore, — one a girl, the other a boy. The father was hunting whales.

 From the open there came a man in a canoe. He was quite big. He said to
them, "Father said, 'Go and fetch them!'" His paddle was very large. So
he moved, (working) with the paddle, right ahead of the children, who
were walking along the shore. Then he said to them, "Sit down here upon
my paddle!" They sat down. But he deceived them.

 He carried them away to the middle of the sea, putting them inside of
his canoe. At last they saw a jaw-bone house, which for a long time had
remained uninhabited. He put them in there. He also stopped up the
vent-hole, and so left them quite in the dark.

 The young brother began to cry. The little sister was lulling him to
sleep. They were thirsty. There was also no food. Then the little
sister, groping around, found some old boot-soles. These she took, and
put some of the stuff into the mouth of her young brother. Then the
jaw-bone house became hoary with frost. It grew quite cold. She
continued to rock her brother. At last he fell asleep.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

 The little sister was singing. And while she was singing, a small
bright hole appeared on high. Then it approached. Then it grew larger.
She wakened her young brother. Then she put him outside (of the house)
first. After that both escaped. The exit suddenly vanished. They looked
around. They were outside. Open land was all around them.

 Then they saw some gull travellers. "Oh, do carry us away!" — "Let
those who are behind carry you!" And really two gulls were moving in the
rear. They called again, "Oh, do carry us away!" They carried them. They
said, "We will take you away," and they took them.

 The father was all the time going around their former playground. So
they took them to that playground.

 The father came to the playground and saw the children "Oh, where have
you appeared from? What became of you?" — "Oh, a canoe-paddler took us
away. He said, 'Your father bade you come.'" Oh, he is kissing them all
the time! Then they said, "Gulls brought us."

 They went to the store-room and took out plenty of blubber, and with
that they rewarded the gulls. The father simply ripped open a large
blubber bag on the seashore. Then the gulls ate their fill of blubber.
In the end they anointed both children, — one with ochre, the other with
graphite. The one anointed with ochre lived. The one anointed with
graphite died. Oh, the end!

<span class="small">Told by Qo´tirġịn, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village of Mị´s·qạn, November, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm14.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
