[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm13) [Next](cm15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### 13. The Raven and the Girls (Valvị´yñị-lŭ´mñịl).

 One time a company of little girls found upon the seashore a little
seal. Then Raven saw them. Therefore they put the little seal under
their bodies. "What is that?" — "A splinter of wood." — "Still it has
whiskers." — "It is a whiskered splinter." — "Still it has eyes." — "It
is a splinter with eyes." — "Still it has paws." — "It is a splinter
with paws."

 Then he pushed them apart. He took the seal and brought it home. (His
house-mates) skinned it, had supper, and then went to sleep. Some cooked
meat was left in the kettle. The little girls (came in the night-time),
ate up (the meat), then they defecated into the kettle.

 After a while the (Raven) husband awoke, and said to his wife, who was
sleeping, "Eh, I am hungry! Give me some cooked (meat)." The wife, with
eyes shut, stretched her hand toward the kettle and took the fæces.
"Oho! it is fæces."

 The company of girls staid outside. Raven put on his clothes, and
called to his wife, "Give me my wretched bow, give me my wretched
arrow!" They, however, were only the fire-drill and its bow.

 Oh, the little girls fled! "Grandpa, grandpa! we shall louse you, we
shall louse you!" — "Oh, what have I done to my little grand-daughters!
I have frightened them!" Then they loused him. When he fell asleep, they
fastened a bladder under his anus, and then wakened him. "Oh, now wake
up! <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> You must defecate yonder on that
good dry place." He obeyed and defecated. The fæces fell down into the
bladder, pat, pat! He turned back toward them, and saw nothing.

 Then he came home and said to his wife, "How very strange! I defecated
over yonder, but I could not see my fæces. Still they clattered down." —
"Well, now, turn to this side!" And there his anus had a bladder (tied
to it).

 He called again, "Here, give me my wretched bow! I will shoot them
down. Give me my wretched arrow!" He visited them again. "Grandpa,
grandpa, eat some diarrhœa excrement!" — "I do not want it." — "Then let
us louse you!" — "Oh, what have I done to my little grand-daughters!" He
threw away the bow and slept again. They loused him and made him go to
sleep.

 This time they fastened over his eyes some red tassels. Then they
wakened him again. "Oh, go there and look at your house!" He obeyed
again. He looked upon the house, and began to cry, "Oh, oh! the house is
ablaze!" His wife went out and walked around the house, but saw nothing.
" Look up here! Oh, your eyes have things fastened on them!"

 Again (he grew angry, and the girls called to him,) "Grandpa, grandpa,
let us louse you, let us louse you!" They loused him, and he went to
sleep. Then they tattooed his face. After that they wakened him again.
"Wake up, there! Have a drink of this clear water!" Then he saw in the
water his own tattooed face. "I will marry <span id="page_77">p.
77</span> you, eh!" Still it was (no woman), but his own body and
tattooed face.

 "Shall I bring my tent, eh?" Then he called out to himself, "She
consents, she consents!" After that he went home. He began to break down
his tent. His wife said, "What are you doing?" — "Be silent!" — "Oh, but
it is only your (own) face, that is tattooed!" — "Oh, you are jealous,
you are jealous!" — "Really, your face is tattooed!" — "What do you
want, what do you want?"

 Oh, he carried away the flat stone (anvil), together with the stone
hammer.<span id="page_77_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_77_note_1) Again he came
and looked down. "Here you are!" Still it is his own former face. He put
down the flat stone. It went under. Then the stone hammer. It also went
under. "Oh, I have married a wife from the Reindeer tribe! She accepted
them!" Oh, now the poles, they floated on the surface. "Those she has
refused! Now the tent-cover!" It was carried down by the stream. "Now it
is my turn."

 When he was in the water, his head grew giddy, and he also floated on
the surface. The stream carried him down the river. "Oh, the skies are
moving!" Still it was the stream that was carrying him away. "Oh, oh!
the skies are swinging!" Then he was drowned.

<span class="small">Told by Qo´tirġịn, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village of Mị´s·qạn, November, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_77">p. 77</span>

<span id="page_77_note_1"></span>[1](#page_77_fr_1) These are the
appurtenances of the Chukchee hearth and home (cf. Vol. VII of this
series, p. 188).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
