[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm22) [Next](cm24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

## III. — INCANTATIONS.

### 1. (Incantation on Behalf of a Sick Person.<span id="page_124_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_124_note_1))

 When a man is suffering, they call the Man from the Upper Region, and
they speak thus: "Well, then, come down! I want to use you for my
assistant. Indeed, what shall I do? Shall I find him myself? I am
ignorant. With your permission, I will take you for my assistant. Search
for me. It is too bad. Here I am, without any help at all."

 Then the man uttering the incantation picks up any small thing, — for
instance, a splinter of wood, — and pretends that this is the Man from
the Upper Region. Then he demands the reindeer from Front-Head (the star
Arcturus), and says, "O Front-Head! give me your reindeer-bucks! This
man wishes to use them for his driving-team." He demands also from
Rulte´nnin (the constellation Orion) his whip. Then the Man from the
Upper Region <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> starts on his journey of
search. First of all, he visits the Ground-Beings.<span
id="page_125_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_125_note_1) He comes there, and they
say, "You have come?" (but in reality he remains motionless, as before.)
"Yes, I have come!" — "And who are you?" — "Oh, I am employed only as an
assistant. I come to find out where that man is. He is here probably?" —
"But I do not know anything. It is wholly unknown. He is not here. I
cannot tell." Then he goes away from there (of course, the man is
standing motionless) and begins to talk again, and he says, "Oh, where
shall I go? Where is he?" He goes to the Upper Beings. "Oh, you have
come?" — "Yes!" — "What do you want?" — "I am an assistant of these
people. I come only in search (of some one)." — "Indeed, but we do not
know. That man did not come to us. It is quite unknown (to us where he
is)." — "You say so! But where may he be?"

 He comes home and finds the patient, who meanwhile has died. He says,
"Oh, he is not there! The people yonder do not know about him. Oh, it is
hard! Where shall I find him? I will go and look among the people of
Darkness." He arrives at the Darkness. " You have come?" — "Yes! Oh, oh,
there he is!" Here at last he is found by the seeker. "Then <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> you are here?" — "Yes! I have come here.
Here I am abiding!" — "Oh, let us go home! I am assisting these people.
Indeed, for that they have called me. Let us return! I will take you
with me." And he really takes him along. (For this the man picks up
another small splinter, holding it with his left hand. This means that
the man from the Upper Region brings back the soul, and makes it retrace
its way.) At the same time the father pretends to blow into the ear of
the patient, or scratches his head. The splinter of wood is put under
the pillow. The man uttering the incantation is also called the father
of the patient. At last the dead one recovers his breath, then his voice
comes back to him, and he even assumes a sitting posture. Then he (the
man practising the incantation) demands from the Morning Dawn some
clothes for the patient. He says, "See here! This one is without
clothes, this little son of mine. Give me some clothes, and I will put
them on his body" (he stretches his hand upwards, as if taking clothes
from above). Then he pretends to put the clothes on the man, and says,
"I have put clothes on you which are unassailable (by the ke´let)."
After that he causes the patient to be carried back mto the
sleeping-room (because <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> for the last
performance he was taken out of it). Before entering there, his whole
body must be smeared over with ochre. After that he recovers completely.
The end.

<span class="small">Told by Qo´tirġịn, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village of Mị´s·qạn, November, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_124">p. 124</span>

<span id="page_124_note_1"></span>[1](#page_124_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 502, no. 8, *c*.

<span id="footnotes_page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="page_125_note_1"></span>[1](#page_125_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 293.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
