[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm26) [Next](cm28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. Fortifying Incantation against the Coming of Ke´let (Tanomña´tkên ê´wġan).<span id="page_130_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_130_note_1)

 I make the house of human people into a (closed) iron ball \[house\].
It has no entrance and no windows, and there is only a small vent-hole
(on the top). I put around (this hole) a knife-blade, a sharp
knife-blade. No ke´lẹ can enter through it, no source of death knows
(anything about it).

 In the evening, in the time for sleep, something bad will try to attack
the house. One will say, "Let us enter this house!" — "Yes, (let us do
it!)." <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> They go around (the house),
looking for the entrance. There is no entrance, and they cannot find it,
"Oh, which side shall we try? It is wonderful! We cannot find the
entrance. Let us do it from below! We will enter it through the ground
of the outer tent."

 They dive into the ground, but have to re-appear on the other side.
There is no entrance, because the house is all iron.

 They come again (to the front). "Where shall we try it? Oh, (I) hear
the people's voices inside! There, now! Let me try and climb (to the
roof)!" One of them climbs (to the roof), and sees the vent-hole, "Oh,
here! From here we will begin. Come, now! lower me (down this hole) upon
a rope!"

 They lower him, legs down, (upon a rope). He enters (the vent-hole),
But the vent-hole is narrow and (armed) with a sharp blade, it cuts him
all over. The blood spurts out, (even) the bowels and the intestines
(are all out). And (he cannot endure) the pain.

 "Oh, oh! Haul me up! (It is too) bad! I am dying. I am bruised. I have
lacerated (my whole) body." They haul him up. His bowels and intestines
are hanging out. "Oh, (it is too) bad! Let us give in! Leave them alone!
My body is all cut to pieces. I have nearly met my death (here). We do
not want it." They leave (the game).

<span class="small">Told by Ke<sup>ɛ</sup>´ulin, a Maritime Chukchee
man, in the village of Mị´s·qạn, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_130">p. 130</span>

<span id="page_130_note_1"></span>[1](#page_130_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 499, No. 5, *b*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
