[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm31) [Next](cm33.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. Incantation (used by) a Woman rejected by her Husband and Jealous of her Rival (Ê´wġan ñe´us·qätä uwä<sup>ɛ</sup>´qučitä ẹ´nku lị´nyo).<span id="page_136_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_136_note_1.md)

 Then you are this woman! You have so much of my husband's love, that he
begins to reject me. But you are not a human being. I make you into
carrion lying on the pebbly shore, — old carrion inflated (with
rottenness).

 I make my husband into a (male) bear. The bear comes from a distant
land. He has been starving for a long time, he is very hungry. He sees
the carrion. Seeing it, he eats of it. After a while he vomits it up. I
make you into the stuff vomited. My husband sees it, and it is of no use
to him. He rejects it on the mere seeing (of it).

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

 At the same time I make this body of mine into a young beaver that has
just shed his hair. I make smooth every hair of mine. This woman, object
of (my husband's) liking, he leaves her, and desires me, because she is
repugnant to look upon.

 (She spits, and with the saliva smears her whole body from head to
foot. Indeed, the husband begins to have liking for her.)

 I, who was neglected recently, I turn myself towards him, I make myself
into a deadly pain for him. Let him be attracted by the smell from here,
and have a desire for me. Though I reject him, let him be still more
persistent.

 And really the husband leaves off his former love.

<span class="small">Told by A<sup>ɛ</sup>qa´ñña, a Maritime Chukchee
woman, in the village of Če´čin, May, 1901.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm33.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_136">p. 136</span>

<span id="page_136_note_1"></span>[1](#page_136_fr_1.md) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 507, No. 12.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
