[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm33) [Next](cm35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

## V. — PROVERBS, RIDDLES, SAYINGS.

 The riddles contained in this section were collected among the River
Chukchee living on the Middle Anadyr River. They probably arose under
Russian influence. Some of them have even been translated from the
Russian. On the whole, the Chukchee have no riddles. Of short
productions of this kind, they have only a very few proverbs and brief
sayings, some of which are given here, while others were published in my
"Chukchee Materials." They have also some so-called "comic tales," and
word-games, a few of which are given here.

### Proverbs (Va´irġu-wê´t·hau<span id="page_146_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_146_note_1)).

 1. Listening to a liar is like drinking warm water one can get no
satisfaction from it.

 2. A desire to defecate is more imperious than any great officer.

 3. Even a small mouse has anger.

 4. My temper is as smooth as tallow.

 5. He repented of it even to his very buttocks.

 6. A small herd is like a short lasso.

 7. To a lazy camp-assistant an old reindeer for slaughter (and food).

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

### Riddles (Qolo´-wêthau´tê<span id="page_147_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_147_note_1)).

 1. Once an old one with nine holes. — Man.

 2. Once outside, it is coming down, down; it enters; it lies down. — An
axe.

 3. It enters from outside with clothes; it is undressed in the outer
tent. — The alder tree.<span
id="page_147_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_147_note_2)

 4. An old woman is made to break wind by an angry old man. — Bears
copulating.

 5. A grass-bound shoulder-blade. — A ring on the finger.<span
id="page_147_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_147_note_3)

 6. I have four holes and only one road. — A wooden house.<span
id="page_147_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_147_note_4)

 7. I move along — but without trace; I cut — but draw no blood. — A
moving boat.

 8. It is round, has an eye, is used by women. After use it is thrown
away. — Iron scraper.<span
id="page_147_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_147_note_5)

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

 9. Its eye is poked by women; it gets angry, bites its lip, and ascends
skyward. — The lamp.<span
id="page_148_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_148_note_1)

 10. I have a headache, my nose bleeds. Stop my nose bleeding! —
Fly-agaric.<span id="page_148_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_148_note_2)

### Word-Games (Qêu´rê-yê´lị-ra´čvuñkên wê´t·hau<span id="page_148_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_148_note_3)).

 1. I raced down from a hill-top and nearly fell down.

 2. Right-hand double antler-blade reindeer-buck, left-hand double-blade
reindeer-buck.

 3. A dried scar left by a reindeer-halter, an instrument (hatchet) for
working on sledge-runners, — such eyes had the little old man.

 4. Like a she-dog with tufts of old hair on her ears, so was he in the
foot-race.

 5. A quite young woman, in running fast, caught her boot-strings on an
excrescence of a tree-trunk, and, stumbling over a hummock, nearly
struck her nose against the ground.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### Short Comic Tales.

 1. Once the root of *Polygonum viviparum* scratched its head on the
ice.

 2. Once a great raven performed the thanksgiving ceremonial in a narrow
house, and his tendons became cramped.

 3. A little bird married the hole in the edge of a walrus-hide, and its
penis was skinned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_146">p. 146</span>

<span id="page_146_note_1"></span>[1](#page_146_fr_1) Literally,
"being-words."

<span id="footnotes_page_147">p. 147</span>

<span id="page_147_note_1"></span>[1](#page_147_fr_1) Literally, "hard
words;" i. e., riddles.

<span id="page_147_note_2"></span>[2](#page_147_fr_2) Alder-bark is
peeled off and used for tanning-purposes.

<span id="page_147_note_3"></span>[3](#page_147_fr_3) A bone of a
reindeer or seal shoulder-blade bound around with grass is used in
divination.

<span id="page_147_note_4"></span>[4](#page_147_fr_4) The River Chukchee
live in wooden huts of simple construction. Each hut has a chimney,
smoke-hole, and one window. These, with the entrance, make the four
holes of the riddle. Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 180.

<span id="page_147_note_5"></span>[5](#page_147_fr_5) The iron blade of
the scraper is round with a hole in the centre.

<span id="footnotes_page_148">p. 148</span>

<span id="page_148_note_1"></span>[1](#page_148_fr_1) When the lamp
burns badly, the woman pokes it (in the eye). Then when it is "angry"
and still refuses to burn brightly, it is lifted up on the stand.

<span id="page_148_note_2"></span>[2](#page_148_fr_2) The eating of
fly-agaric causes, after the intoxication assuaged by a new dose of the
same drug.

<span id="page_148_note_3"></span>[3](#page_148_fr_3) Literally,
"hurry-tongue-competition words."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
