[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm34) [Next](cm36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

# C<span class="small">HUKCHEE</span> T<span class="small">ALES</span>.

## I. — CREATION TALES.<span id="page_151_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_151_note_1)

### 1. Raven Tale.<span id="page_151_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_151_note_2)

#### *First Version.*

 Raven and his wife live together, — the first one, not created by any
one, Raven, the one self-created. The ground upon which they live is
quite small, corresponding only to their wants, sufficient for their
place of abode. Moreover, there are no people on it, nor is there any
other living creature, nothing at all, — no reindeer, no walrus, no
whale, no seal, no fish, not a single living being. The woman says,
"Ku´urkịl."<span id="page_151_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_151_note_3) —
"What?" — "But we shall feel dull, being quite alone. This is an
unpleasant sort of life. Better go and try to create the earth!" — "I
cannot, truly!" — "Indeed, you can!" — "I assure you, I cannot!" — "Oh,
well I since you cannot create the earth, then I, at least, shall try to
create a 'spleen-companion.'"<span
id="page_151_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_151_note_4) — "Well, we shall see!"
said Raven.

 "I will go to sleep," said his wife. "I shall not sleep," said
Ku´urkịl. "I shall keep watch over you. I shall look and see how you are
going to be." — "All right!" She lay down and was asleep. Ku´urkịl is
not asleep. He keeps watch, and looks on. Nothing! she is as before. His
wife, of course, had the body of a raven, just like himself. He looked
from the other side: the same as before. He looked from the front, and
there her feet had ten human fingers, moving slowly. "Oh, my!" He
stretches out his own feet, — the same raven's talons. "Oh," says he, "I
cannot change my body!" Then he looks on again, and his wife's body is
already white and without feathers, like ours. "Oh, my!" He tries to
change his own body, but how can he do so? Although he chafes it, and
pulls at the feathers, how can he do such a thing? The same raven's body
and raven's feathers! Again he looks at his wife. Her abdomen has
enlarged. In her sleep she creates without any effort. He is frightened,
and turns his face away. He is afraid to look any more. He <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> says, "Let me remain thus, not looking on!"
After a little while he wants to look again, and cannot abstain any
longer. Then he looked again, and, lo! there are already three of them.
His wife was delivered in a moment. She brought forth male twins. Then
only did she awake from her sleep. All three have bodies like ours, only
Raven has the same raven's body. The children laugh at Raven, and ask
the mother, "Mamma, what is that?" — "It is the father." — "Oh, the
father! Indeed! Ha, ha, ha!" They come nearer, push him with their feet.
He flies off, crying, "Qa, qa!" They laugh again. "What is that?" — "The
father." — "Ha, ha, ha! the father!" They laugh all the time. The mother
says, "O children! you are still foolish. You must speak only when you
are asked to. It is better for us, the full-grown ones, to speak here.
You must laugh only when you are permitted to. You have to listen and
obey." They obeyed and stopped laughing.

 Raven said, "There, you have created men! Now I shall go and try to
create the earth. If I do not come back, you may say, 'He has been
drowned in the water, let him stay there!' I am going to make an
attempt." He flew away. First he visited all the benevolent Beings
(va´ịrġịt<span id="page_152_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_152_note_1)), and
asked them for advice, but nobody gave it. He asked the Dawn, — no
advice. He asked Sunset, Evening, Mid-day, Zenith, — no answer and no
advice. At last he came to the place where sky and ground come together.
There, in a hollow, where the sky and the ground join, he saw a tent. It
seemed full of men. They were making a great noise. He peeped in through
a hole burnt by a spark, and saw a large number of naked backs. He
jumped away, frightened, ran aside, and stood there trembling. In his
fear he forgot all his pride in his recent intentions.

 One naked one goes out. "Oh! it seemed that we heard some one passing
by, but where is he!" — "No, it is I," came an answer from one side. "
Oh, how wonderful! Who are you?" — "Indeed, I am going to become a
creator. I am Ku´urkịl, the self-created one." — "Oh, is that so?" "And
who are you?" — "We have been created from the dust resulting from the
friction of the sky meeting the ground. We are going to multiply and to
become the first seed of all the peoples upon the earth. But there is no
earth. Could not somebody create the earth for us?" — "Oh, I will try!"
Raven and the man who spoke flew off together. Raven flies and
defecates. Every piece of excrement falls upon water, grows quickly, and
becomes land. Every piece of excrement becomes land, — the continent and
islands, plenty of land. "Well," says Raven, "Look on, and say, is this
not enough?" — "Not yet," answers his companion. "Still not sufficient.
Also there is no fresh water; and the land is too even. Mountains there
are none." — "Oh," says Raven, "shall I try again?" He began to pass
water. Where one drop falls, it becomes a lake; where a jet falls, it
becomes a river. After that <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> he began
to defecate a very hard substance. Large pieces of that excrement became
mountains, smaller pieces became hills. The whole earth became as it is
now.

 Then he asks, "Well, how is it now?" The other one looked. "It seems
still not enough. Perhaps it would have been sufficient if there had not
been so much water. Now some day the water shall increase and submerge
the whole land, even the mountain-tops will not be visible."

 Oh, Raven, the good fellow, flew farther on. He strains himself to the
utmost, creates ground, exhausts himself, and creates water for the
rivers and lakes. "Well, now, look down! Is this not enough?" — "Perhaps
it is enough. If a flood comes, at least the mountain-tops will remain
above water. Yes, it is enough! Still, what shall we feed upon?"

 Oh, Raven, the good fellow, flew off, found some trees, many of them,
of various kinds, — birch, pine, poplar, aspen, willow, stone-pine, oak.
He took his hatchet and began to chop. He threw the chips into the
water, and they were carried off by the water to the sea. When he hewed
pine, and threw the chips into the water, they became mere walrus; when
he hewed oak, the chips became seals. From the stone-pine the chips
became polar bears; from small creeping black birch, however, the chips
became large whales. Then also the chips from all the other trees became
fish, crabs, worms, every kind of beings living in the sea; then,
moreover, wild reindeer, foxes, bears, and all the game of the land. He
created them all, and then he said, "Now you have food! hm!" His
children, moreover, became men, and they separated and went in various
directions. They made houses, hunted game, procured plenty of food,
became people. Nevertheless they were all males only. Women there were
none, and the people could not multiply. Raven began to think, 'What is
to be done?' A small Spider-Woman ( Ku´rġu-ñe´ut<span
id="page_153_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_153_note_1)) is descending from
above on a very slender thread. "Who are you?" — "I am a Spider-Woman!"
— "Oh, for what are you coming here?" — "Well, I thought, 'How will the
people live, being only males, without females?' Therefore I am coming
here." — "But you are too small." — "That is nothing. Look here!" Her
abdomen enlarged, she became pregnant, and then gave birth to four
daughters. They grew quite fast and became women. "Now, you shall see!"

 A man came, — that one who was flying around with Raven. He saw them,
and said, "What beings are these, so like myself and at the same time
quite different? Oh, I should like to have one of them for a companion!
We have separated, and live singly. This is uncomfortable. I am dull,
being alone. I want to take one of these for a companion." — "But
perhaps it will starve!" — "Why should it starve? I have plenty of food.
We are hunters, all of us. No, I will have it fed abundantly. It shall
not know hunger at all."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

 He took away one woman. The next day Raven went to visit them, made a
hole in the tent-cover, and peeped through. "Oh," says he, "they are
sleeping separately in opposite corners of the sleeping-room. Oh, that
is bad! How can they multiply?"

 He called softly, "Halloo!" — "Halloo!" The man awoke and answered him.
"Come out here! I shall enter." He entered. The woman lay quite naked.
He drew nearer. He inhaled the odor<span
id="page_154_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_154_note_1) of her arm. His sharp
beak pricked her. "Oh, oh, oh!" — "Be silent! We shall be heard." He
pushed her legs apart and copulated with her. Then he repeated it again.
The other one was standing outside. He felt cold, and said, "It seems to
me that you are mocking me." — "Now, come in! You shall know it too.
This is the way for you to multiply." The other one entered. The woman
said, "It is a good thing. I should like to repeat it once more." The
man answered, "I do not know how." — "Oh, draw nearer!" He says, "Oh,
wonderful!" — "Do this way, and thus and thus." They copulated.
Therefore girls understand earlier than boys how to copulate. In this
manner human kind multiplied.

<span class="small">Told by A<sup>ɛ</sup>´ttin·qeu, a Maritime Chukchee
man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

#### *(Second Version.)*

 The Creator lived with his wife. There was nothing, no land, no
mountains, only water and above it the sky; also a little piece of
ground, just large enough for them to sleep on at night. Creator said to
his wife, "Certainly, we feel downcast. We must create something to be
company for us." — "All right!" They each took a spade and started to
dig the ground, and to throw it in all directions. They dug a ditch so
large and deep, that all water flowed down to it. Only the lakes
remained in deep hollows, and the rivers in clefts and ravines. The
large ditch became the sea. After that they created various animals and
also men. Then they went away. Only the Raven they forgot to create.
They left on their camping-place a large outer garment (nị´ġlon<span
id="page_154_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_154_note_2)). Raven came out from it
in the night-time. He went to visit the Creator. "Oh, who are you?" — "I
am Ku´urkịl, the self-created one." — "How strange! Self-created! I
thought I had created everything, and now it appears that you are of
separate origin." — "Yes, yes! I am Ku´urkịl, the self-created one." —
"All right! — Here, you, bring a few pieces of fly-agaric. Let him eat
them, and be full of their force!" Raven ate the fly-agaric. "Oh, oh, I
am Ku´urkịl! I am the son of the nị´ġlon. I am Ku´urkịl! I am the son of
the nị´ġlon." — "Ah, indeed! And I believed <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> that you were self-created. And now it appears that you are
the son of the nị´ġlon, you are one of mine, created by me, you liar!"
The end.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

#### *(Third Version.)*

 When Raven was arranging the earth, one time he carried in his lap a
heap of stones. He felt fatigued, and threw down the stones one by one.
The stones turned into islands and cliffs on the main shore. Then he set
his stone house in the western part of Mị´s·qạn Bay (Holy Cross Bay) and
crossed to Kị´ịmịn (Cape Prince of Wales on the American shore).

<span class="small">Told by Va´lẹ, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky
Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_151">p. 151</span>

<span id="page_151_note_1"></span>[1](#page_151_fr_1)
Tɵt-tɵmwa´t-ta´ġnịkên pị´ñịltê (literally,
"new-creation-limits-tidings").

<span id="page_151_note_2"></span>[2](#page_151_fr_2) Variations of this
tale, with several different episodes, are to be met with everywhere
among the Chukchee. Some were published in my Chukchee Materials, Nos.
49-61, pp. 159, 169. At the same time some notion or the Flood is also
present. This was probably borrowed from the Russian.

<span id="page_151_note_3"></span>[3](#page_151_fr_3) Ku´urkịl is the
name of the Raven (see Vol. VII of this series, p. 315).

<span id="page_151_note_4"></span>[4](#page_151_fr_4) Êmño´l-tɵ´mġịn
(see Vol. VII of this series, p. 503, Footnote 2).

<span id="footnotes_page_152">p. 152</span>

<span id="page_152_note_1"></span>[1](#page_152_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 303.

<span id="footnotes_page_153">p. 153</span>

<span id="page_153_note_1"></span>[1](#page_153_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 330.

<span id="footnotes_page_154">p. 154</span>

<span id="page_154_note_1"></span>[1](#page_154_fr_1) Instead of kissing
(compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 38).

<span id="page_154_note_2"></span>[2](#page_154_fr_2) A winter garment,
loose and broad, made of thick autumn skins of full-grown reindeer.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
