[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm41) [Next](cm43)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. (The Orphan.<span id="page_165_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_165_note_1))

 The parents of an only daughter, being very old, are living with her.
The daughter, who is very able-bodied, goes hunting, and brings home
wild reindeer. At the same time she refuses all suitors. No matter how
many suitors come, and they are many, she invites them to have a
running-match. Leaving them behind, she says, "There is no need of them.
They are bad." Altogether, she is too light-footed for them. An orphan
boy, clad in dog-skin, born from a dog-woman, lives with an old woman,
and grows up very fast. He made a small bow. With this bow he kills
small birds. With these birds he feeds the old woman. But every time the
neighbors' children meet him, they shout, "Oh, oh! it stuck in his
teeth! (i. e., the meat of the small birds). They notice the meat
sticking in his teeth, and pick it out from there.

 He made dead-falls, caught hares, and fed the old woman. Meanwhile he
grew up quickly, and soon became full-grown. Then he caught wild
reindeer. The old woman said, "When will you become a full-grown man?
Begone, and look for a wife!" — "All right!" He came to the people with
an only daughter. "For what do you come?" — "I come looking for a
bride!" — "It is useless. She will leave you behind." — "No, I am able
(to outrun her)." — "Then wait a while. She is not here. She will come
in the evening." In the evening she did come, and brought a
reindeer-carcass. "Oh," say the old people, "one more suitor has come!"
— "I do not want him. Let him go away!" — "Why so? I have come to you
with an honest heart." — "Well, then, to-morrow morning we will see what
sort of a man you are." — "Very well! I shall win. I shall take you for
a wife." The next morning they awoke before daybreak. They started
running. They were to mount a high <span id="page_166">p. 166</span>
hill on their way, then to come back. The girl put on her racing-dress,
but the young man put on his armor. The girl runs far ahead, because she
is very swift; but when halfway along, he began to catch up with her,
this small orphan boy clad in dog-skin. She was tired from the exertion.
Then he passed her, brushing her on the way with the wind from the skirt
of his armor.<span id="page_166_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_166_note_1) She
staggered and sat down. He said, "Eh, eh! let her rest a while! — I will
finish the hill alone. Yes, surely, I am able (to do it). When I show
myself on the top, coming back, then you begin again." Indeed, when he
appeared on the top, she jumped up and ran ahead. With fresh energy she
ran very fast, but the young man ran still faster. He overtook her
halfway, caught her in his arms, and carried her onwards. He carried her
thus toward her house, put her into the sleeping-room, and copulated
with her. So he made her his wife. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm43)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_165">p. 165</span>

<span id="page_165_note_1"></span>[1](#page_165_fr_1) A similar tale was
collected among the Kolyma Chukchee (cf. Bogoras, Chukchee Materials, p.
250).

<span id="footnotes_page_166">p. 166</span>

<span id="page_166_note_1"></span>[1](#page_166_fr_1) The lower part of
the Chukchee armor is similar in form to a skirt. Sometimes it hangs
down more or less loose (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 161). The
swiftness of the young man must have been very great, since the movement
of that heavy armor produced wind.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
