[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm46) [Next](cm48.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. (Sacrifice to the Sea.)

 There lived one time a Maritime man. He had eight children. The
youngest was a girl. One day he went to hunt walrus. A storm came up,
and he was carried out to sea. He was tossed about and nearly drowned.
Then he said to the sea, "Oh sea! calm yourself! Do so, that I may still
look upon the world! I will give you the best that I have, the nearest
to my heart, the foremost dog, the leader of the team, one with a
spotted skin I will give you." The sea did not calm itself. "Oh, then,
my youngest daughter, unmarried, a good one, clad in spotted skins! I
will give her to you!" After that the sea smoothed down. He landed on
the shore. Then he went up the shore, and entered the house. All the
children were with him except the daughter, who still remained on the
shore. The mother came out from the house. "Oh, oh, my child! you have
roughed the storm!" She was quite sad. She looked down at the ground,
and said, "Yes!" — "Come in, change your clothes, put on some dry ones."
She entered, downcast, as before. Just as she changed her clothes, the
father entered. He took her by the hand, took his spear, and went to the
seashore. Then he turned to the sea, and said, "O sea! do not be angry.
That which I promised, I give you now." He pierced her with the spear,
and left the body lying there on the shore. An abundance of blood
covered the whole beach. It grew dark. She is lying on the sand
lifeless. A certain man, a kind of Sea-Being (A´ñqa-va´ịrġịn<span
id="page_171_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_171_note_1).md) came to her and pushed
her lightly with his toe. "Halloo! Get up! Let us go home!" Then after a
little while, again, "Halloo! Get up! Let us go home!" At last she awoke
and sat up: "Eġeġeġeġei´. I have slept quite long." He took her to his
house and married her. They lived quite well and contented. They had a
large reindeer-herd.

 The daughter, of course, did not return home. Since the father said
nothing, her mother thought, "Let me go and look for her! Where may she
be?" She arrived at the place. The blood-stains were on the ground, but
the body had disappeared. She found and followed some footprints along
the seashore. At last she came to a cliff. The tracks ran upward to the
very top. She climbed up, and found a settlement on the very top. Her
daughter was busy scraping skins. "Oh, it is here you are staying?" —
"Yes." She lived for some time with her daughter; then the daughter
said, "Go and fetch father. I should like to see him also." The old man
was <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> brought and pampered with food.
The next morning the sea was rough again. She said to her father, "Let
us go and have a look at the sea!" They went to the very edge of the
cliff. She said to him, "Look down upon the sea! How rough it is again!"
He looked down upon the sea. She pushed him from behind, and he fell
down, broke his back, and was taken by the sea. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Ai´wan, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm48.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_171">p. 171</span>

<span id="page_171_note_1"></span>[1](#page_171_fr_1.md) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 315.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
