[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm47) [Next](cm49.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. (The Monster-Woman.)

 A man who had a wife went to hunt wild reindeer. He walked around all
day, and could not find anything. Evening came. He felt cold. His house
was too far away. So he thought, "Where shall I find a suitable place
for the night? There is no fuel, nor a human dwelling." At last he saw
traces of a sledge. He followed these. The trail became harder. A dog
barked. He saw an underground house. A woman is cooking seal-meat over a
lamp, — a strange-looking woman, with one eye in her forehead and her
mouth quite big and all awry, still a stout person, with large breasts.
She said, "All right! Till now I have not seen a man. Now I have found a
husband." He thinks, "Certainly, she is plump and full-breasted, but her
face looks too strange. I will not marry her." They ate supper, then the
lamp was put out. The woman moves toward him, he moves away. They
reached the corner. "Sleep with me!" — "No, I refuse!" — "Yes, do sleep
with me!" He listens. Something in her body is grinding its teeth like a
dog. "I say, sleep with me!" — "No, I am tired. Let it be to-morrow
morning." — "Well! Then at least louse me." She lighted the lamp again.
He loused her, and made her sleep on his lap. He thinks, "What is it in
her body that grinds its teeth like a dog? Let me have a look at it." He
looked, and saw that she had plenty of teeth there, as in a wolf's
mouth. "Oh, oh!" says he. He crept out noiselessly. The seashore was
full of stones. He took two stones, long and round, of just the size of
the membrum virile. Then he went back into the sleeping-room and fell
asleep. In the morning she wakened him. "Oh, get up! Make me a wife!
Copulate with me!" — "All right!" he says. One of the stones he put
between his legs and thrust it into her vulva. Oh, it clashed and ground
the teeth. He tore it out. Almost all the teeth were sticking in the
stone. Then he used the other one, and drew it back, together with the
membrane in which grew the roots of the teeth. Then her vulva became
like any woman's. "Well," he said, now let us try!" He put his own
membrum in there and copulated with her one time and another. She became
quite peaceful. He took her home and made her a house-slave.

<span class="small">Told by Enmu´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village Uñi´sak, at Indian Point, May, 1901.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm49.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
