[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm52) [Next](cm54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

## III. — WAR TALES<span id="page_182_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_182_note_1)

(Äqälịle´tkin pị´ñịltê, "\[Of those\] who led war tidings").

### 1. Ma´nê and Mana´qton.

 There were two brothers, Ma´nê and Mana´qton. In war times Mana´qton
was taken captive by the Russians, and put into a dark prison. They fed
him and gave him to drink. But he was not permitted to undress to
satisfy his natural wants. Therefore his breeches became full of
excrement, and in the end he could no longer move. A great Russian
commander was moving along the shore in a large heavy boat. He went
up-stream. Several young men were walking on the shore, towing the boat.
Ma´nê concealed himself behind the bushes and watched them. They came
nearer. They were making great efforts, because the boat was heavy; and
of course they were unarmed, because all the arms were in the boat. When
they came quite close, Ma´nê sprang out and attacked them. He stabbed
all of them with his spear. They did not resist, because they were too
weary from towing. When all were killed, Ma´nê seized the tow-line. The
commander was alone in the boat, holding the rudder. Ma´nê tugged at the
tow-line. "You there! All the arms that you have in the boat! throw them
into the water! Otherwise I shall let go the tow-line!<span
id="page_182_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_182_note_2) The commander took up
the rifles and long knives (swords), and threw them into the water.
Ma´nê drew the boat close to himself. "Why have you put my brother into
the dark prison? Set him free!" — "All right!" says the commander. "Come
to Markova!" They moved on. Ma´nê was towing the boat all alone.<span
id="page_182_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_182_note_3) They came to Markova.
The commander said, "Set Mana´qton free from prison!"

 But the Russian "transformed shaman"<span
id="page_182_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_182_note_4) opposed it. He said, "I
do not believe that you were able to tow the boat all alone; but if you
really did do it, I propose a test. Two Russian men shall hold a long
knife as high as their heads. You must jump over that knife." They held
that knife high over their heads. He thought, "I shall not be able to do
it. I shall die. Still my brother is also dying. Let me try!" — "Oh, oh,
oh!" He drew a deep breath, almost with a moan, then made a bound, and
jumped over the <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> knife. He returned and
jumped back over the knife. To and fro he kept jumping over the Russian
knife poised on high.

 "Oh, oh!" says the Russian shaman, "You are very nimble. Bring
Mana´qton here!" They brought Mana´qton. He was so weak, he could not
walk. They carried him in. They ripped open his breeches with a knife,
washed him, and made him clean. Then he rose to his feet. Ma´nê said to
the brother, "Go to the shore!" He asked the Russians for tea and sugar
and tobacco. They gave him nothing. He struck the shaman in the face and
killed him. Then he fled toward the river. The Russian young men shot
with theirs rifles, and hit him on the head. So he was killed and died
there. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Ä<sup>ɛ</sup>mu´lịn, a Reindeer Chukchee
man, in a camp near the middle course of the Anadyr River, November,
1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_182">p. 182</span>

<span id="page_182_note_1"></span>[1](#page_182_fr_1) Compare Bogoras,
Chukchee Materials, Nos. 130-133 and Nos. 145-152.

<span id="page_182_note_2"></span>[2](#page_182_fr_2) In explanation of
this threat, the teller of the story said that the current was strong,
and the boat, set free, would probably have capsized.

<span id="page_182_note_3"></span>[3](#page_182_fr_3) A quite similar
episode is to be met in Russian tales referring to Yermak, the Conqueror
of Siberia. It was probably borrowed by the Chukchee from the Cossacks.

<span id="page_182_note_4"></span>[4](#page_182_fr_4) Yịrka´-la´ul, most
probably a Russian pope, who is equivalent here to a "transformed
shaman" of the Chukchee, because his upper garment resembles a woman's
robe.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
