[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm53) [Next](cm55.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. (Qolênto´.)

 A man lived at the village of Kiġi´ni. He had two sons. The Sun-Chief
(Tirk-e´rem<span id="page_183_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_183_note_1).md) sent
his men to this country. The people came to the man, and said, "The
Sun-Chief wants one of your sons in his employ." He had him for a while;
then he became displeased with him, and caused his head to be cut off.
Two years passed, and then a third year. The elder son does not come
back; and of course he could not come, since his head had been cut off.
The younger brother grew to manhood. All the time he was exercising, —
running and jumping up with a load upon his shoulders. So he became
quite strong, and made a spear for himself. Its point was as long as the
blade of a paddle. The shaft was as thick as a tent-pole. In the spring
other people came, sent by the Sun-Chief, and said to the old man, "The
Sun-Chief wants your other son in his service." — "I will not give him.
I am quite old, and have no other children. And where is my first son?
He does not appear anymore." They went away. The son said, "Why have you
refused their request? Since my elder brother took this road, let me
take it also. Why have you refused? Better send me along with them." In
due time they came again. "The Sun-Chief wants to have your other son,
at least as his guest." — "All right! take him!" They went away.

 On the road there lived another Sun-Chief, nearer than the first one.
They came to him. He had a large house, strongly fortified. His daughter
came out and immediately returned home. "A guest has come!" The father
came out and said, "Well, now, show us your skill in fencing!" Qolênto´
began to brandish his spear. He brandished it, and made various passes
and side-strokes. The sun was on the left hand, then it came over to the
right hand, <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> and then was near setting.
He still brandished his spear. "Oh," said the Sun-Chief, "you are quite
good! I want to take you for my son-in-law." He was quite kind to him.
So in the night he lay down with the girl and made her his wife. The
next morning he departed, and took along the spear of his father-in-law,
since the shaft of his own became too pliable from mere exercise. They
came to the first Sun-Chief. He was lying on his back and snoring
lustily. His arms and legs were spread wide apart. Near his penis was a
small dog attached to a tying-stick. It was small and slender, but for
all that watchful. Its ears pricked up at every noise, howsoever slight.
Qolênto´ opened a window and crept through it. The dog attacked him; but
he jumped upward, and the dog missed and fell down. He began to trample
upon the dog, intending to kill it.

 Then the dog spoke in the manner of men, "Do not trample upon me! I am
ready to serve you henceforward as my master." — "All right! then you
must awaken this one." — "Oh, oh!" It sprang towards the sleeping man
and bit his right hand. The man said, "How strange! This dog is biting
his own master." Then he saw the visitor. "Oh, it is you? Why did you
come when I was sleeping? Did you want to attack me in my sleep? Come,
now!" They came out. Near the houses there were a number of
driving-sledges piled up quite high one on another. They jumped upon the
pile and began to fight. They fought the whole day with their spears.
The Sun-Chief grew tired. His eyes became white, and on the corners of
his mouth there was thin foam. Then at last the young man caught him on
the spear-point between his legs and hurled him off. He jumped after him
from behind, and kicked him with all his might. Then he ran after him
and jumped over him. The Sun-Chief fell down and swooned. As soon as he
came to consciousness, he filled a pipe with tobacco and had a smoke.
"Oh, my! but why do you deride me? Cut off my head, since you are the
victor!" — "I will not." — "Oh, oh!" He smoked another pipe. "Enough of
this! Kill me!" — "I will not!" — "This house of mine, and all the
wealth in this trading-hut (i. e., storehouse) of mine, you may take it
all." — "I do not want all this." — "Oh, well, hurry up! Enough of your
derision! Despatch me quick!" — "Oh, oh! All right!" He struck him twice
with his spear and put his eyes out. "There, you have it!"

 All around upon staffs human heads were elevated, all of them Chukchee.
He took them all and went away. He took along also the dog and his newly
married wife. He led away a long train of pack-horses and of
driving-reindeer. All were loaded with tea, tobacco, sugar, rifles,
lead, ammunition, etc. He took all this home. They lived. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Nuten·qeu´, a Maritime Chukchee man from the
village of Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, in the village of Uñi´sak, at Indian
Point, May, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm55.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_183">p. 183</span>

<span id="page_183_note_1"></span>[1](#page_183_fr_1.md) The Czar (cf. Vol.
VII of this series, p. 292).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
