[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot30.md) 
[Next](laot32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

When he ended, all turned their eyes upon Apollonius; his own followers
knowing well that he would reply, while Thespesion's friends wondered
what he could say in answer. But he, after praising the fluency and
vigor of the Egyptian, merely said: "Have you anything more to say?"
"No, by Zeus," said the other, "for I have said all I have to say." Then
he asked afresh: "And has not any one of the rest of the Egyptians
anything to say?" "I am their spokesman," answered his antagonist, "and
you have heard them all." Apollonius accordingly paused for a minute and
then, fixing his eyes, as it were, on the discourse he had heard, he
spoke as follows: "You have very well described and in a sound
philosophic spirit the choice which Prodicus declares Heracles to have
made as a young man; but, ye wise men of the Egyptians, it does not
apply in the least to myself. For I am not come here to ask your advice
about how to live, insomuch as I long ago made choice of the life which
seemed best to myself; and as I am older than any of you, except
Thespesion, I myself am better qualified, now I have got here, to advise
you how to choose wisdom, if I did

<span id="page_2:38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_2:39">p. 39</span>

not find that you had already made the choice. Being, however, as old as
I am, and so far advanced in wisdom as I am, I shall not hesitate as it
were to make you the auditors of my life and motives, and teach you that
I rightly chose this life of mine, than which no better one has ever
suggested itself to me. For I discerned a certain sublimity in the
discipline of Pythagoras, and how a certain secret wisdom enabled him to
know, not only who he was himself, but also who he had been; and I saw
that he approached the altars in purity, and suffered not his belly to
be polluted by partaking of the flesh of animals and that he kept his
body pure of all garments woven of dead animal refuse; and that he was
the first of mankind to restrain his tongue, inventing a discipline of
silence described in the proverbial phrase, "An ox sits upon it." I also
saw that his philosophical system was in other respects oracular and
true. So I ran to embrace his teachings, not choosing one form of wisdom
rather than another of two presented me, as you, my excellent
Thespesion, advise me to do. For philosophy marshaled before me her
various points of view, investing them with the adornment proper to each
and she commanded me to look upon them and make a sound choice. Now they
were all possessed of an august and divine beauty; and some of them were
of such dazzling brightness that you might well have closed your eyes.
However I fixed my eyes firmly upon all of them, for they themselves
encouraged me to do so by moving towards me, and telling me beforehand
how much they would give me. Well, one of them professed that she would
shower upon me a swarm of pleasures without any toil on my part and
another

<span id="page_2:40">p. 40</span> <span id="page_2:41">p. 41</span>

that she would give me rest after toil; and a third that she would
mingle mirth and merriment in my toil; and everywhere I had glimpses of
pleasures and of unrestrained indulgence in the pleasures of the table;
and it seemed that I had only to stretch out my hand to be rich, and
that I needed not to set any bridle upon my eyes, but love and loose
desire and such-like feelings were freely allowed me. One of them,
however, boasted that she would restrain me from such things, but she
was bold and abusive and in an unabashed manner elbowed all others
aside; and I beheld the ineffable form of wisdom which long ago
conquered the soul of Pythagoras; and she stood, I may tell you, not
among the many, but kept herself apart and in silence; and when she saw
that I ranged not myself with the rest, though as yet I knew not what
were her wares, she said: 'Young man, I am unpleasing and a lady full of
sorrows; for, if anyone betakes himself to my abode, he must of his own
choice put away all dishes which contain the flesh of living animals,
and he must forget wine, nor make muddy therewith the cup of wisdom
which is set in the souls of those that drink no wine; nor shall blanket
keep him warm, nor wool shorn from a living animal. But I allow him
shoes of bark, and he must sleep anywhere and anyhow, and if I find my
votaries yielding to sensual pleasures, I have precipices to which
justice that waits upon wisdom carries them and pushes them over; and I
am so harsh to those who make choice of my discipline that I have bits
ready to restrain their tongues. But learn from me what rewards you
shall reap by enduring all this: Temperance and justice unsought and

<span id="page_2:42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_2:43">p. 43</span>

at once, and the faculty to regard no man with envy, and to be dreaded
by tyrants rather than cringe to them, and to have your humble offerings
appear sweeter to the gods than the offerings of those who pour out
before them the blood of bulls. And when you are pure I will grant you
the faculty of foreknowledge, and I will so fill your eyes with light,
that you shall distinguish a god, and recognize a hero, and detect and
put to shame the shadowy phantoms which disguise themselves in the form
of men.' This was the life I chose, ye wise of the Egyptians; it was a
sound choice and in the spirit of Pythagoras, and in making it I neither
deceived myself, nor was deceived; for I have become all that a
philosopher should become, and all that she promised to bestow upon the
philosopher, that is mine. For I have studied profoundly the problem of
the rise of the art and whence it draws its first principles; and I have
realized that it belongs to men of transcendent religious gifts, who
have thoroughly investigated the nature of the soul, the well-springs of
whose existence lie back in the immortal and in the unbegotten.

Now I agree that this doctrine was wholly alien to the Athenians; for
when Plato in their city lifted up his voice and discoursed upon the
soul, full of inspiration and wisdom, they caviled against him and
adopted opinions of the soul opposed thereto and altogether false. And
one may well ask whether there is any city, or any race of men, where
not one more and another less, but wherein men of all ages alike, will
enunciate the same doctrine of the soul. And I myself, because my youth
and inexperience so inclined me, began by looking up to

<span id="page_2:44">p. 44</span> <span id="page_2:45">p. 45</span>

yourselves, because you had the reputation of an extraordinary knowledge
of most things; but when I explained my views to my own teacher, he
interrupted me, and said as follows: 'Supposing you were in a passionate
mood and being of an impressionable age were inclined to form a
friendship; and suppose you met a handsome youth and admired his looks,
and you asked whose son he was, and suppose he were the son of a knight
or a general, and that his grand-parents had been furnishers of a
chorus—if then you dubbed him the child of some skipper or policeman, do
you suppose that you would thereby be the more likely to captivate his
affections, and that you would not rather make yourself odious to him by
refusing to call him by his father's name, and giving him instead that
of some ignoble and spurious parent? If then you were enamored of the
wisdom which the Indians discovered, would you call it not by the name
which its natural parents bore, but by the name of its adoptive sires;
and so confer upon the Egyptians a greater boon, than if that were to
happen over again which their own poets relate, namely if the Nile on
reaching its full were found to be with honey blent?' It was this which
turned my steps to the Indians rather than to yourselves; for I
reflected that they were more subtle in their understanding, because
such men as they live in contact with a purer daylight, and entertain
truer opinions of nature and of the gods, because they are near unto the
latter, and live on the edge and confines of that thermal essence which
quickens all unto life. And when I came among them, their message made
the same impression

<span id="page_2:46">p. 46</span> <span id="page_2:47">p. 47</span>

upon me as the talent of Aeschylus is said to have made upon the
Athenians. For he was a poet of tragedy, and finding the art to be rude
and inchoate and as yet not in the least elaborated, he went to work,
and curtailed the prolixity of the chorus <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md), and invented dialogues for the actors,
discarding the long monodies of the earlier time; and he hit upon a plan
of killing people behind the stage instead of their being slain before
the eyes of the audience. Well, if we cannot deny his talent in making
all these improvements, we must nevertheless admit that they might have
suggested themselves equally well to an inferior dramatist. But his
talent was twofold. On the one hand as a poet he set himself to make his
diction worthy of tragedy, on the other hand as a manager, to adapt his
stage to sublime, rather than to humble and groveling themes.
Accordingly he devised masks which represented the forms of the heroes,
and he mounted his actors on buskins so that their gait might correspond
to the characters they played; and he was the first to devise stage
dresses, which might convey an adequate impression to the audience of
the heroes and heroines they saw. For all these reasons the Athenians
accounted him to be the father of tragedy; and even after his death they
continued to invite him to represent his plays at the Dionysiac
festival, for in accordance with public decree the plays of Aeschylus
continued to be put upon the stage and win the prize anew. And yet the
gratification of a well-staged tragedy is insignificant, for its
pleasures last a brief day, as brief as is the season of the Dionysiac
festival; but

<span id="page_2:48">p. 48</span> <span id="page_2:49">p. 49</span>

the gratification of a philosophic system devised to meet the
requirements of a Pythagoras, and also breathing the inspiration in
which Pythagoras was anticipated by the Indians, lasts not for a brief
time, but for an endless and incalculable period. It is then not
unreasonable on my part, I think, to have devoted myself to a philosophy
so highly elaborated, and to one which, to use a metaphor from the
stage, the Indians mount, as it deserves to be mounted, upon a lofty and
divine mechanism, and then wheel it forth upon the stage. And that I was
right to admire them, and that I am right in considering them to be wise
and blessed, it is now time to convince you. I beheld men dwelling upon
the earth, and yet not upon it, I beheld them fortified without
fortifications, I beheld them possessed of nothing, and yet possessed of
all things. You will say that I have taken to riddles, but the wisdom of
Pythagoras allows of this; for he taught us to speak in riddles, when he
discovered that the word is the teacher of silence. And there was a time
when you yourselves took counsel with Pythagoras, and were advocates of
this same wisdom; that was in the time when you could say nothing too
good of the Indian philosophy, for to begin with and of old you were
Indians. Subsequently because your soil was wrath with you, you came
hither; and then ashamed of the reasons owing to which you quitted it,
you tried to get men to regard you as anything rather than Ethiopians
who had come from India hither, and you took every pains to efface your
past. This is why you stripped yourselves of the apparel in which you
came thence, as if you were anxious to doff along with it your Ethiopian
nationality. This is why you

<span id="page_2:50">p. 50</span> <span id="page_2:51">p. 51</span>

have resolved to worship the gods in the Egyptian rather than in your
own fashion, and why you have set yourselves to disseminate unflattering
stories of the Indians, as if in maligning them you did not foul your
own nest. And in this respect you have not yet altered your tone for the
better; for only today you have given here an exhibition of your
propensities for abuse and satire, pretending that the Indians are no
better employed than in startling people and in pandering to their eyes
and ears. And because as yet you are ignorant of my wisdom, you show
yourself indifferent to the fame which crowns it. Well, in defense of
myself I do not mean to say anything, for I am content to be what the
Indians think me; but I will not allow them to be attacked. And if you
are so sound and sane as to possess any tincture of the wisdom of the
man of Himera, who composed in honor of Helen a poem which contradicted
a former one and called it a palinode, it is high time for you also to
use the words he used and say: 'This discourse of ours is not true,' so
changing your opinion and adopting one better than you at present
entertain about these people. But if you have not the wit to recant, you
must at least spare men to whom the gods vouchsafe, as worthy of them,
their own prerogatives, and whose possessions they do not disdain for
themselves.

“You have also, Thespesion, made some remarks about the simplicity and
freedom from pomp which characterizes the Pythian oracle; and by way of
example you instanced the temple composed of wax and feathers; but I do
not myself find that

<span id="page_2:52">p. 52</span> <span id="page_2:53">p. 53</span>

even this was devoid of pomp, for we have the line

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'O bird bring hither your wings, and bees your wax.'

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such language
betokens a carefully prepared home and the form of house. And the god I
believe regarded even this as too humble and below the dignity of
wisdom, and therefore desired to have another and yet another temple,
big ones these and a hundred feet in breadth; and from one of them it is
said that golden figures of the wryneck were hung up which possessed in
a manner the charm of the Sirens; and the god collected the most
precious of the offerings into the Pythian temple for ornament; nor did
he reject works of statuary, when their authors brought him to his
temple colossal figures of gods and men, and also of horses, oxen and
other animals; nor did he refuse the gift of Glaucus brought thither of
a stand for a goblet, nor the picture of the taking of the citadel of
Ilium which Polygnotus painted there. For I imagine he did not consider
that the gold of Lydia really beautified the Pythian fane, but he
admitted it on behalf of the Hellenes themselves, by way of pointing out
to them, I believe, the immense riches of the barbarians, and inducing
them to covet that rather than continue to ravage one another's lands.
And he accordingly adopted the Greek fashion of art which suited his
particular wisdom, and adorned his shrine therewith. And I believe that
it was by way of adornment that he also puts his oracles in metrical
form. For if he did not wish to make a show in this matter, he would
surely

<span id="page_2:54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_2:55">p. 55</span>

make his responses in such forms as the following: 'Do this, or do not
do that'; and 'go, or do not go,' or 'choose allies, or do not choose
them.' For here are short formulas, or as you call it naked ones. But in
order to display his mastery of the grand style, and in order to please
those who came to consult his oracle, he adopted the poetical form; and
he does not allow that anything exists which he does not know, but
claims to have counted the sands of the sea and to know their number,
and also to have fathomed the depths of the sea.

“But I suppose you will call it miracle-monging, that Apollo dictates
his oracles with such proud dignity and elation of spirit? But if you
will not be annoyed, Thespesion, at what I say, there are certain old
women who go about with sieves in their hands to shepherds, sometimes to
cow-herds, pretending to heal their flocks, when they are sick, by
divination, as they call it, and they claim to be called wise women, yea
wiser than those who are unfeignedly prophets. It seems to me that you
are in the same case, when I contrast your wisdom with that of the
Indians; for they are divine, and have trimmed and adorned their science
after the matter of the Pythian oracle; but you—however I will say no
more, for modesty in speech is as dear to me as it is dear to the
Indians, and I would be glad to have it at once to attend upon and to
guide my tongue, seeking to compass what is in my power when I am
praising those to whom I am so devoted, but leaving alone what is too
high for me to attain unto, without bespattering it with petty
disapproval. But you no doubt delight in the story which you have read
in

<span id="page_2:56">p. 56</span> <span id="page_2:57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Homer about the
Cyclopes, how their land, all unsown and unploughed, nourished the most
fearless and lawless of beings; and if it is some Edoni or Lydians who
are conducting bacchic revels, you are quite ready to believe that the
earth will supply them with fountains of milk and wine, and give them to
drink thereof; but you would deny to these Indians, lovers of all wisdom
as enthusiastic as ever bacchants were, the unsought bounties which
earth offers them. Moreover tripods, gifted with will of their own,
attend the banquets of the gods also; and Ares, ignorant and hostile as
he was to Hephaestus, yet never accused him merely for making them; nor
is it conceivable that the gods ever listened to such an indictment as
this: 'You commit an injustice, O Hephaestus, in adorning the banquet of
the gods, and encompassing it with miracles.' Nor was Hephaestus ever
sued for constructing handmaids of gold, nor accused of debasing the
metals because he made the gold to breath. For ever art is interested to
adorn, and the very existence of the arts was a discovery made in behalf
of ornament. Moreover a man who goes without shoes and wears a
philosopher's cloak and hangs a wallet on his back is a creature of
ornament; nay, more even the nakedness which you affect, in spite of its
rough and plain appearance, has for its object ornament and decoration,
and it is not even exempt from the proverbial "pride of your own sort to
match" <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md). We must judge by their own
standard the religion of the Sun and the national rites of the Indians
and any cult in which that god delights; for the subterranean gods will
always prefer deep trenches and ceremonies conducted in the hollows of
the earth, but the air is

<span id="page_2:58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_2:59">p. 59</span>

the chariot of the sun; and those who would sing his praise in a fitting
manner must rise from the earth and soar aloft with god; and this
everyone would like to do, but the Indians alone are able to do it."

Damis says that he breathed afresh when he heard this address; for that
the Egyptians were so impressed by Apollonius' words, that Thespesion,
in spite of the blackness of his complexion, visibly blushed, while the
rest of them seemed in some way stunned by the vigorous and fluent
discourse which they listened to; but the youngest of them, whose name
was Nilus, leapt up from the ground, he says, in admiration, and passing
over to Apollonius shook hands with him, and besought him to tell him
about the interviews which he had had with the Indians. And Apollonius,
he says, replied: "I should not grudge you anything, for you are ready
to listen, as I see, and are ready to welcome wisdom of every kind; but
I should not care to pour out the teachings I gathered there upon
Thespesion or on anyone else who regards the lore of the Indians as so
much nonsense." Whereupon Thespesion said: "But if you were a merchant
or a seafarer, and you brought to us some cargo or other from over
there, would you claim, merely because it came from India, to dispose of
it untested and unexamined, refusing us either the liberty of looking at
it or tasting it?" But Apollonius repled as follows: "I should furnish
it to those who asked for it; but if the moment my ship had reached the
harbor, someone came

<span id="page_2:60">p. 60</span> <span id="page_2:61">p. 61</span>

down the beach and began to run down my cargo and abuse myself, and say
that I came from a country which produces nothing worth having, and if
he reproached me for sailing with a cargo of shoddy goods, and tried to
persuade the rest to think like himself, do you suppose that one would,
after entering such a harbor, cast anchor or make his cables fast, and
not rather hoist his sails and put to sea afresh, entrusting his goods
more gladly to the winds than to such undiscerning and inhospitable
people?" "Well, I anyhow," said Nilus, "lay hold on your cables, and
entreat you, my skipper, to let me share your goods that you bring
hither; and I would gladly embark with you in your ship as a super-cargo
and a clerk to check your merchandise."

### CHAPTER XIII

Thespesion, however, was anxious to put a stop to such propositions, so
he said: "I am glad, Apollonius, that you are annoyed at what we said to
you; for you can the more readily condone our annoyance at the
misrepresentation you made of our local wisdom, long before you had
gained any experience of its quality." Apollonius was for a moment
astonished at these words, for he had heard nothing as yet of the
intrigues of Thrasybulus and Euphrates; but as was his wont, he guessed
the truth and said: "The Indians, O Thespesion, would never have behaved
as you have, nor have given ear to these insinuation dropped by
Euphrates, for they have a gift of prescience. Now I never have had any
quarrel of my own with Euphrates; I only tried to wean him of his

<span id="page_2:62">p. 62</span> <span id="page_2:63">p. 63</span>

passion for money and cure his propensity to value everything by what he
could make out of it; but I found that my advice was not congenial to
him, nor in his case practicable; nay he merely takes it as a tacit
reproach, and never loses any opportunity of intriguing against me. But
since you have found his attacks upon my character so plausible, I may
as well tell you that it is you, rather than myself, that he has
calumniated. For though, as is clear to me, the victims of calumny incur
considerable dangers, since they are, I suppose, sure to be disliked
without having done any wrong, yet neither are those who incline to
listen to the calumnies free from danger; for in the first place they
will be convicted of paying respect to lies and giving them as much
attention as they would to the truth, and secondly they are convicted of
levity and credulity, faults which it is disgraceful even for a
stripling to fall into. And they will be thought envious, because they
allow envy to teach them to listen to unjust tittle-tattle; and they
expose themselves all the more to calumny, because they think it true of
others. For man is by nature inclined to commit a fault which he does
not discredit when he hears it related to others. Heaven forbid that a
man of these inclinations should become a tyrant, or even president of a
popular state; for in his hands even a democracy would become a tyranny;
nor let him be made a judge, for surely he will not ever discern the
truth. Nor let him be captain of a ship, for the crew would mutiny, nor
general of an army, for that would bring luck to the adversary; nor let
one of his disposition attempt philosophy, for he would not consider the
truth in forming his opinions. But Euphrates has deprived you of even

<span id="page_2:64">p. 64</span> <span id="page_2:65">p. 65</span>

the quality of wisdom; for how can those on whom he has imposed with his
falsehoods claim wisdom for themselves? have they not deserted from it
to take sides with one who has persuaded them of improbabilities?" Here
Thespesion tried to calm him, and remarked: "Enough of Euphrates and of
his small-minded affairs; for we are quite ready even to reconcile you
with him, since we consider it the proper work of a sage to be umpire in
the disputes of other sages." "But," said Apollonius, "who shall
reconcile me with you? For the victim of lies must surely be driven into
hostility by the falsehood." … "Be it so," said Apollonius, "and let us
hold a conversation, for that will be the best way of reconciling us."

### CHAPTER XIV

And Nilus, as he was passionately anxious to listen to Apollonius, said:
"And what's more, it behoves you to begin the conversation, and to tell
us all about the journey which you made to the people of India, and
about the conversations which you held there, I have no doubt, on the
most brilliant topics." "And I too," said Thespesion, "long to hear
about the wisdom of Phraotes, for you are said to have brought from
India some examples of his arguments." Apollonius accordingly began by
telling them about the events which occurred in Babylon, and told them
everything, and they gladly listened to him, spellbound by his words.
But when it was midday, they broke of the conversations, for at this
time of day the naked sages, like others, attend to the ceremonies of
religion.

<span id="page_2:66">p. 66</span> <span id="page_2:67">p. 67</span>

### CHAPTER XV

Apollonius and his comrades were about to dine, when Nilus presented
himself with vegetables and bread and dried fruits, some of which he
carried himself, while his friends carried the rest; and very politely
he said: "The sages send these gifts of hospitality, not only to
yourselves but to me; for I mean to share in your repast, not uninvited,
as they say, but inviting myself." "It is a delightful gift of
hospitality," said Apollonius, "which you bring to us, O youth, in the
shape of yourself and your disposition, for you are evidently a
philosopher without guile, and an enthusiastic lover of the doctrines of
the Indians and of Pythagoras. So lie down here and eat with us." "I
will do so," said the other, "but your dishes will not be ample enough
to satisfy me." "It seems to me," said the other, "that you are a
gourmand and an appalling eater." "None like me," said the other, "for
although you have set before me so ample and so brilliant a repast, I am
not sated; and after a little time I am come back again to eat afresh.
What then can you call me but an insatiable cormorant?" "Eat your fill,"
said Apollonius, "and as for topics of conversation, some you must
yourself supply, and I will give you others."

### CHAPTER XVI

So when they had dined, "I," said Nilus, "until now have been camping
together with the naked sages, and joined my forces with them as

<span id="page_2:68">p. 68</span> <span id="page_2:69">p. 69</span>

with certain light armed troops or slingers. But now I intend to put on
my heavy armor, and it is your shield that shall adorn me." "But," said
Apollonius, "I think, my good Egyptian, that you will incur the censure
of Thespesion and his society for two reasons; firstly, that after no
further examination and testing of ourselves you have left them, and
secondly that you give the preference to our manners and discipline with
more precipitancy than is admissible where a man is making choice of how
he shall live." "I agree with you," said the young man, "but if I am to
blame for making this choice, I might also be to blame if I did not make
it; and anyhow they will be most open to rebuke, if they make the same
choice as myself. For it will be more justly reprehensible in them, as
they are both older and wiser than myself, not to have made the choice
long ago which I make now; for with all their advantages they will have
failed to choose what in practice would so much redound to their
advantage." "A very generous sentiment indeed, my good youth, is this
which you have expressed," said Apollonius; "but beware lest the mere
fact of their being so wise and aged should give them an appearance, at
any rate, of being right in choosing as they have done, and of having
good reason for rejecting my doctrine; and lest you should seem to take
up a very bold position in setting them to rights rather than in
following them." But the Egyptian turned short round upon Apollonius and
countering his opinion said: "So far as it was right for a young man to
agree with his elders, I have been careful to do so; for so long as I
thought that these gentlemen were possessed of a

<span id="page_2:70">p. 70</span> <span id="page_2:71">p. 71</span>

wisdom which belonged to no other set of men, I attached myself to them;
and the motive which actuated me to do so was the following: My father
once made a voyage on his own initiative to the Red Sea, for he was, I
may tell you, captain of the ship which the Egyptians send to the
Indies. And after he had had intercourse with the Indians of the
seaboard, he brought home stories of the wise men of that region,
closely similar to those which you have told us. And his account which I
heard was somewhat as follows, namely that the Indians are the wisest of
mankind, but that the Ethiopians are colonists sent from India, who
follow their forefathers in matters of wisdom, and fix their eyes on the
institutions of their home. Well, I, having reached my teens,
surrendered my patrimony to those who wanted it more than myself, and
frequented the society of these naked sages, naked myself as they, in
the hope of picking up the teaching of the Indians, or at any rate
teaching allied to theirs. And they certainly appeared to me to be wise,
though not after the manner of India; but when I asked them point blank
why they did not teach the philosophy of India, they plunged into abuse
of the natives of that country very much as you have heard them do in
their speeches this very day. Now I was still young, as you see, so they
made me a member of their society, because I imagine they were afraid I
might hastily quit them and undertake a voyage to the Red Sea, as my
father did before me. And I should certainly have done so, yes, by
Heaven, I would have pushed on until I reached the hill of the sages,
unless someone of the gods had sent you hither to help me and enabled me
without either

<span id="page_2:72">p. 72</span> <span id="page_2:73">p. 73</span>

making any voyage over the Red Sea or adventuring to the inhabitants of
the Gulf, to taste the wisdom of India. It is not today therefore for
the first time that I shall make my choice, but I made it long ago,
though I did not obtain what I hoped to obtain. For what is there to
wonder at if a man who has missed what he was looking for, returns to
the search? And if I should convert my friends yonder to this point of
view, and persuade them to adopt the convictions which I have adopted
myself, should I, tell me, be guilty of any hardihood? For you must not
reject the claim that youth makes, that in some way it assimilates an
idea more easily than old age; and anyone who counsels another to adopt
the wisdom and teaching which he himself has chosen, anyhow escapes the
imputation of trying to persuade others of things he does not believe
himself. And anyone who takes the blessings bestowed upon him by fortune
into a corner and there enjoys them by himself, violates their character
as blessings, for he prevents their sweetness from being enjoyed by as
many as possible."

### CHAPTER XVII

When Nilus had finished these arguments, and juvenile enough they were,
Apollonius took him up and said: "If you were in love with my wisdom,
had you not better, before I begin, discuss with me the question of my
reward?" "Let us discuss it," answered Nilus, "and do you ask whatever
you like." "I ask you," he said, "to be content with the choice you have
made, and not to annoy the naked sages by giving them advice which they

<span id="page_2:74">p. 74</span> <span id="page_2:75">p. 75</span>

will not take." "I consent," he said, "and let this be agreed upon as
your reward." This then was the substance of their conversation, and
when Nilus at its close asked him how long a time he would stay among
the nakes sages he replied: "So long as the quality of their wisdom
justifies anyone in remaining in their company; and after that I shall
take my way to the cataracts, in order to see the springs of the Nile,
for it will be delightful not only to behold the sources of the Nile,
but also to listen to the roar of its waterfalls."

### CHAPTER XVIII

After they had held this discussion and listened to some recollections
of India, they lay down to sleep upon the grass; but at daybreak, having
offered their accustomed prayers, they followed Nilus, who led them into
the presence of Thespesion. They accordingly greeted one another, and
sitting down together in the grove they began a conversation in which
Apollonius led as follows: "How important it is," said he, "not to
conceal wisdom, is proved by our conversation of yesterday; for because
the Indians taught me as much of their wisdom as I thought it proper for
me to know, I not only remember my teachers, but I go about instilling
into others what I heard from them. And you too will be richly rewarded
by me, if you send me away with a knowledge of your wisdom as well; for
I shall not cease to go about and repeat your teachings to the Greeks,
while to the Indians I shall write them."

<span id="page_2:76">p. 76</span> <span id="page_2:77">p. 77</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

"Ask," they said, "for you know question comes first and argument
follows on it." "It is about the gods that I would like to ask you a
question first, namely, what induced you to impart, as your tradition,
to the people of this country forms of the gods that are absurd and
grotesque in all but a few cases? In a few cases, do I say? I would
rather say that in very few are the gods’ images fashioned in a wise and
god-like manner, for the mass of your shrines seem to have been erected
in honor rather of irrational and ignoble animals than of gods."
Thespesion, resenting these remarks, said: "And your own images in
Greece, how are they fashioned?" "In the way," he replied, "in which it
is best and most reverent to construct images of the gods." "I suppose
you allude," said the other, "to the statue of Zeus in Olympia, and to
the image of Athena and to that of the Cnidian goddess and to that of
the Argive goddess and to other images equally beautiful and full of
charm?" "Not only to these," replied Apollonius, "but without exception
I maintain, that whereas in other lands statuary has scrupulously
observed decency and fitness, you rather make ridicule of the gods than
really believe in them." "Your artists, then, like Phidias," said the
other, "and like Praxiteles, went up, I suppose, to heaven and took a
copy of the forms of the gods, and then reproduced these by their art or
was there any other influence which presided over and guided their
molding?" "There was," said Apollonius, "and

<span id="page_2:78">p. 78</span> <span id="page_2:79">p. 79</span>

an influence pregnant with wisdom and genius." "What was that?" said the
other, "for I do not think you can adduce any except imitation."
"Imagination," said Apollonius, "wrought these works, a wiser and
subtler artist by far than imitation; for imitation can only create as
its handiwork what it has seen, but imagination equally what it has not
seen; for it will conceive of its ideal with reference to the reality,
and imitation is often baffled by terror, but imagination by nothing;
for it marches undismayed to the goal which it has itself laid down.
When you entertain a notion of Zeus you must, I suppose, envisage him
along with heaven and seasons and stars, as Phidias in his day
endeavoured to do, and if you would fashion an image of Athena you must
imagine in your mind armies and cunning, and handicrafts, and how she
leapt out of Zeus himself. But if you make a hawk or an owl or a wolf or
a dog, and put it in your temples instead of Hermes or Athena or Apollo,
your animals and your birds may be esteemed and of much price as
likenesses, but the gods will be very much lowered in their dignity." "I
think," said the other, "that you criticize our religion very
superficially; for if the Egyptians have any wisdom, they show it by
their deep respect and reverence in the representation of the gods, and
by the circumstance that they fashion their forms as symbols of a
profound inner meaning, so as to enhance their solemnity and august
character." Apollonius thereon merely laughed and said: "My good
friends, you have indeed greatly profited by the wisdom of Egypt and
Ethiopia, if your dog and your ibis and your goat seem particularly
august and god-like, for this is what I learn from Thespesion the sage.

<span id="page_2:80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_2:81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But what is there
that is august or awe-inspiring in these images? Is it not likely that
perjurers and temple-thieves and all the rabble of low jesters will
despise such holy objects rather than dread them; and if they are to be
held for the hidden meanings which they convey, surely the gods in Egypt
would have met with much greater reverence, if no images of them had
ever been set up at all, and if you had planned your theology along
other lines wiser and more mysterious. For I imagine you might have
built temples for them, and have fixed the altars and laid down rules
about what to sacrifice and what not, and when and on what scale, and
with what liturgies and rites, without introducing any image at all, but
leaving it to those who frequented the temples to imagine the images of
the gods; for the mind can more or less delineate and figure them to
itself better than can any artist; but you have denied to the gods the
privilege of beauty both of the outer eye and of an inner suggestion."
Thespesion replied and said: "There was a certain Athenian, called
Socrates, a foolish old man like ourselves, who thought that the dog and
the goose and the plane tree were gods and used to swear by them." "He
was not foolish," said Apollonius, "but a divine and unfeignedly wise
man; for he did not swear by these objects on the understanding that
they were gods, but to save himself from swearing by the gods."

### CHAPTER XX

Thereupon Thespesion as if anxious to drop the subject, put some
questions to Apollonius, about the

<span id="page_2:82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_2:83">p. 83</span>

scourging in Sparta, and asked if the Lacedaemonians were smitten with
rods in public. "Yes," answered the other, "as hard, O Thespesion, as
men can smite them; and it is especially men of noble birth among them
that are so treated." "Then what do they do to menials," he asked, "when
they do wrong?" "They do not kill them nowadays," said Apollonius, "as
Lycurgus formerly allowed, but the same whip is used to them too." "And
what judgment does Hellas pass upon the matter?" "They flock," he
answered, "to see the spectacle with pleasure and utmost enthusiasm, as
if to the festival of Hyacinthus, or to that of the naked boys." "Then
these excellent Hellenes are not ashamed, either to behold those
publicly whipped who erewhile governed them or to reflect that they were
governed by men who are whipped by men who are whipped before the eyes
of all? And how is it that you did not reform this abuse? For they say
that you interested yourself in the affairs of the Lacedaemonians, as of
other people." "So far as anything could be reformed, I gave them my
advice, and they readily adopted it; for they are the freest of the
Hellenes; but at the same time they will only listen to one who gives
them good advice. Now the custom of scourging is a ceremony in honor of
the Scythian Artemis, so they say, and was prescribed by oracles, and to
oppose the regulations of the gods is in my opinion utter madness."
"’Tis a poor wisdom, Apollonius," he replied, "which you attribute to
the gods of the Hellenes, if they countenance scourging as a part of the
discipline of freedom." "It's not the scourging," he said, "but the
sprinkling of the altar with human blood that is important, for the
Scythians too held

<span id="page_2:84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_2:85">p. 85</span>

the altar to be worthy thereof; but the Lacedaemonians modified the
ceremony of sacrifice because of its implacable cruelty, and turned it
into a contest of endurance, undergone without any loss of life, and yet
securing to the goddess as first fruits an offering of their own blood."
"Why then," said the other, "do they not sacrifice strangers right out
to Artemis, as the Scythians formerly considered right to do?"
"Because," he answered, "it is not congenial to any of the Greeks to
adopt in full rigor the manners and customs of barbarians." "And yet,"
said the other, "it seems to me that it would be more humane to
sacrifice one or two of them than to enforce as they do a policy of
exclusion against all foreigners."

"Let us not assail," said the other, "O Thespesion, the law-giver
Lycurgus; but we must understand him, and then we shall see that his
prohibition to strangers to settle in Sparta and live there was not
inspired on his part by mere boorish exclusiveness, but by a desire to
keep the institutions of Sparta in their original purity by preventing
outsiders from mingling in her life." "Well," said the other, "I should
allow the men of Sparta to be what they claim to be, if they had ever
lived with strangers, and yet had faithfully adhered to their home
principles; for it was not by keeping true to themselves in the absence
of strangers, but by doing so in spite of their presence, that they
needed to show their superiority. But they, although they enforced his
policy of excluding strangers, corrupted their institutions, and were
found doing exactly the same as did those of the Greeks whom they most
detested. Anyhow, their

<span id="page_2:86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_2:87">p. 87</span>

subsequent naval program and policy of imposing tribute was modelled
entirely upon that of Athens, and they themselves ended by committing
acts which they had themselves regarded as a just *casus belli* against
the Athenians, whom they had no sooner beaten in the field than they
humbly adopted, as if they were the beaten party, their pet institution.
And the very fact that the goddess was introduced from Taurus and
Scythia was the action of men who embraced alien customs. But if an
oracle prescribed this, what want was there of the scourge? What need to
feign an endurance fit for slaves? Had they wanted to prove the disdain
that Lacedaemonians felt for death, they had I think done better to
sacrifice a youth of Sparta with his own consent upon the altar. For
this would have been a real proof of the superior courage of the
Spartans, and would have disinclined Hellas from ranging herself in the
opposite camp to them. But you will say that they had to save their
young men for the battlefield; well, in that case the law which prevails
among the Scythians, and sentences all men of sixty years of age to
death, would have been more suitably introduced and followed among the
Lacedaemonians then among the Scythians, supposing that they embrace
death in its grim reality and not as a mere parade. These remarks of
mine are directed not so much against the Lacedaemonians, as against
yourself, O Apollonius. For if ancient institutions, whose hoary age
defies our understanding of their origins, are to be examined in an
unsympathetic spirit, and the reason why they are pleasing to heaven
subjected to cold criticism, such a line of speculation will produce a
crop of odd conclusions;

<span id="page_2:88">p. 88</span> <span id="page_2:89">p. 89</span>

for we could attack the mystery rite of Eleusis in the same way and ask,
why it is this and not that; and the same with the rites of the
Samothracians, for in their ritual they avoid one thing and insist on
another; and the same with the Dionysiac ceremonies and the phallic
symbol, and the figure erected in Cyllene, and before we know where we
are we shall be picking holes in everything. Let us choose, therefore,
any other topic you like, but respect the sentiment of Pythagoras, which
is also our own; for it is better, if we can't hold our tongues about
everything, at any rate to preserve silence about such matters as
these." Apollonius replied and said, "If, O Thespesion, you had wished
to discuss the topic seriously, you would have found that the
Lacedaemonians have many excellent arguments to advance in favor of
their institutions, proving that they are sound and superior to those of
other Hellenes; but since you are so averse to continue the discussion,
and even regard it as impious to talk about such things, let us proceed
to another subject, of great importance, as I am convinced, for it is
about justice that I shall now put a question."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[2:47:1](laot31.htm#fr_16.md) or "reduced in size
the unduly large choruses."

<span id="fn_17"></span>[2:57:1](laot31.htm#fr_17.md) See Plato's retort in
Diogenes Laertius, 6. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 21-30](laot32.md)
