[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot32) 
[Next](laot34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI

"And for myself, O man of Tyana," answered Titus, "can you give me any
precepts as to how

<span id="page_2:116">p. 116</span> <span id="page_2:117">p. 117</span>

to rule and exercise the authority of a sovereign?" "Only such rules,"
replied the other, "as you have laid upon yourself; for in so submitting
yourself to your father's will, it is, I think, certain that you will
grow like him. And I should like to repeat to you on this occasion a
saying of Archytas, which is a noble one and worth committing to memory.
Archytas was a man of Tarentum who was learned in the lore of
Pythagoras, and he wrote a treatise on the education of children, in
which he says: Let the father be an example of virtue to his children,
for fathers also will the more resolutely walk in the path of virtue
because their children are coming to resemble them. But for myself, I
propose to associate with you my own companion Demetrius, who will
attend you as much as you like and instruct you in the whole duty of a
good ruler." "And what sort of wisdom, O Apollonius, does this person
possess?" "Courage," he replied, "to speak the truth unabashed by
anyone, for he possesses the constancy and strength of character of a
cynic." And as Titus did not seem very pleased to hear the name of
dog <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20), he continued: "And yet in
Homer, Telemachus, when he was young, required, it appears, two dogs,
and the poet sends these to accompany the youth to the market place of
Ithaca, in spite of their being irrational animals; but you will have a
dog to accompany you who will bark in your behalf not only at other
people, but at yourself in case you go wrong, and he will bark withal
wisely, and never irrationally." "Well," said the other, "give me your
dog to accompany me, and I will even let him bite me, in case he

<span id="page_2:118">p. 118</span> <span id="page_2:119">p. 119</span>

feels I am committing injustice." "I will write him a letter, for he
teaches philosophy in Rome." "Pray do so," said Titus, "and I wish I
could get someone to write to you in my behalf, and induce you to share
with me my journey to Rome." "I will come there," said the other,
"whenever it is best for both of us."

### CHAPTER XXXII

Then Titus dismissed the company, and said: "Now that we are alone, O
man of Tyana, you will allow me perhaps to ask you a question upon
matters of grave importance to myself." "Pray do so," said the other,
"and do so all the more readily because the matter is so important." "It
is about my own life," said the other, "and I would feign know whom I
ought most to be on my guard against. That is my question, and I hope
you will not think me cowardly for already being anxious about it."
"Nay, you are only cautious," said the other, "and circumspect; for a
man ought to be more careful about this than about anything else." And
glancing at the Sun he swore by that god that he had himself intended to
address Titus about this matter even if he had not asked him. "For," he
said, "the gods have told me to warn you, so long as your father is
alive, to be on your guard against his bitterest enemies, but after his
death against your own kith and kin." "And," said Titus, "in what way am
I to die?" "In the same way," said the other, "as Odysseus is said to
have died, for

<span id="page_2:120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_2:121">p. 121</span>

they say that he too met with his death by the sea." Damis interprets
the above utterance as follows: Namely, that he was to be on his guard
against the cusp of the fish called the trygon, with which they say
Odysseus was wounded. Anyhow, after he had occupied the throne for two
years, in succession of his father, he died through eating the fish
called the sea-hare; and this fish, according to Damis, causes secret
humors in the body worse and more fatal than anything else either in the
sea or on land. And Nero, he says, introduced this sea-hare in his
dishes to poison his worst enemies; and so did Domitian in order to
remove his brother Titus, not because he objected to sharing his throne
with his brother, but to sharing it with one who was both gentle and
good. Such was their conversation in private, after which they embraced
one another in public, and as Titus departed Apollonius greeted him with
these last words: "Pray you, my King, overcome your enemies by your
arms, but your father by your virtues."

### CHAPTER XXXIII

But the letter to Demetrius ran as follows: “Apollonius, the
Philosopher, sends greeting to Demetrius the cynic.

“I have made a present of you to the Emperor Titus, that you may
instruct him how to behave as a sovereign, and take care that you
confirm the truth of my words to him, and make yourself, anger apart,
everything to him. Farewell.”

<span id="page_2:122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_2:123">p. 123</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIV

Now the inhabitants of Tarsus had previously detested Apollonius,
because of the violent reproaches which he addressed to them, owing to
the fact that through their languid indifference and sensual indolence
they could not put up with the vigor of his remarks. But on this
occasion they became such devoted admirers of our hero as to regard him
as their second founder and the mainstay of their city. For on one
occasion the Emperor was offering a sacrifice in public, when the whole
body of citizens met and presented a petition to him asking for certain
great favors; and he replied that he would mention the matter to his
father, and be himself their ambassador to procure them what they
wanted; whereupon Apollonius stepped forward and said: "Supposing I
convicted some who are standing here of being your own and your father's
enemies, and of having sent legates to Jerusalem to excite a rebellion,
and of being the secret allies of your most open enemies, what would
happen to them?" "Why, what else," said the Emperor, "than instant
death?" "Then is it not disgraceful," replied Apollonius, "that you
should be instant in demanding their punishment, and yet dilatory in
conferring a boon; and be ready yourself to undertake the punishment,
but reserve the benefaction until you can see and consult your father?"
But the king, over-delighted with this remark, said: "I grant the favors
they ask for, for my father will not be annoyed at my yielding to truth
and to yourself."

<span id="page_2:124">p. 124</span> <span id="page_2:125">p. 125</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV

So many were the races which they say Apollonius had visited until then,
eager and zealous for others as they for him. But his subsequent
journeys abroad, though they were numerous, were yet not so many as
before, nor did he go to fresh districts which he was not already
acquainted with; for when he came down from Ethiopia he made a long stay
on the sea-board of Egypt, and then he returned to Phoenicia and
Cilicia, and to Ionia and Achaea, and Italy, never failing anywhere to
show himself the same as ever. For, hard as it is to know oneself, I
myself consider it still harder for the sage to remain always himself;
for he cannot ever reform evil natures and improve them, unless he has
first trained himself never to alter in his own person. Now about these
matters I have discoursed at length in other treatises, and shown those
of my readers who were careful and hard students, that a man who is
really a man will never alter his nature nor become a slave. But lest I
should unduly prolong this work by giving a minute account of the
several teachings which he addressed to individuals, and lest on the
other hand I should skip over any important chapter of a life, which I
am taking so much pains to transmit to those who never knew Apollonius,
I think it time to record more important incidents and matters which
will repay the remembering; for we must consider that such episodes are
comparable to the visits to mankind paid by the sons of Asclepius.

<span id="page_2:126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_2:127">p. 127</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVI

There was a youth who, without having any education of his own,
undertook to educate birds, which he kept in his home to make them
clever; and he taught them to talk like human beings and to whistle
tunes like flute-players. Apollonius met him and asked: "How are you
occupying yourself?" And when he replied, and told him all about his
nightingales and his blackbirds, and how he trained the tongues of stone
curlews—as he had himself a very uneducated accent—Apollonius said: "I
think you are spoiling the accents of the birds, in the first place
because you don't let them utter their own notes, which are so sweet
that not even the best musical instruments could rival or imitate them,
and in the second place because you yourself talk the vilest Greek
dialects and are only teaching them to stutter like yourself. And what
is more, my good youth, you are also wasting your own substance; for
when I look at all your hangers-on, and at your get-up, I should say
that you are a delicately bred and somewhat wealthy man; but sycophants
steal honey from people like yourself, being ready with tongue poised
against them for a sting. And what will be the use to you of all this
bird-fancying when the time comes? For if you collected all the
songbirds in the world, it would not help you to shake off the parasites
that cling to you and oppress you; nay you are forced to shower your
wealth upon them and cast your gold before them, and you scatter tidbits
before dogs; and to stop their

<span id="page_2:128">p. 128</span> <span id="page_2:129">p. 129</span>

barking you must give again and again, until at last you will find
yourself reduced to hunger and to poverty.

"What you want is some splendid diversion which will instantly make some
alteration in your character, otherwise you will wake up one day and
find that you have been plucked of your wealth as if it were plumage,
and that you are a fitter subject to excite the birds to lament than to
sing. The remedy you need to effect such a change is not a very great
one; for there is in all cities a class of men, whose acquaintance you
have never made, but who are called schoolmasters. You give them a
little of your substance with the certainty of getting it back with
interest; for they will teach you the rhetoric of the Forum, and it is
not a difficult art to acquire. I may add that, if I had known you as a
child, and come across you then, I should have advised you assiduously
to attend at the doors of the philosophers and sophists, so as to be
able to hedge round your habitation with a wider learning; but, since it
is too late for you to manage that, at any rate learn to plead for
yourself; for remember, if you had acquired a more complete training and
education, you would have resembled a man who is heavy-armed and
therefore formidable; yet, if you thoroughly learn this branch, you will
at any rate be equipped like a light-armed soldier or a slinger, for you
will be able to fling words at your sycophants, as you would stones at
dogs." The young man took to heart this advice, and he gave up wasting
his time over birds and betook himself to school, much to the
improvement both of his judgment and oh his tongue.

<span id="page_2:130">p. 130</span> <span id="page_2:131">p. 131</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVII

Two stories are told in Sardes, one that the River Pactolus used to
bring down gold dust to Croesus, and the other that trees are older than
earth. The former story Apollonius said he accepted because it was
probable, for that there had once been a sand of gold on mount Tmolus,
and that the showers of rain had swept it down into the river Pactolus;
although subsequently, as is generally the case in such matters, it had
given out, being all washed away. But the second story he ridiculed and
said: "You pretend that trees were created before the earth; well, I
have been studying all this time, yet never heard of the stars being
created before the heaven." The inference he wished to convey was that
nothing could be created as long as that in which it grows does not
exist.

### CHAPTER XXXVIII

The ruler of Syria had plunged into a feud, by disseminating among the
citizens suspicions such that when they met in assembly they all
quarreled with one another. But a violent earthquake happening to occur,
they were all cowering, and as is usual in the case of heavenly
portents, praying for one another. Apollonius accordingly stepped
forward and remarked: "It is God who is clearly anxious to reconcile you
to one another, and you will not revive these feuds since you cherish
the same fears." And so he implanted in them a sense of what was to
happen to them, and made each faction entertain the same fears as the
other.

<span id="page_2:132">p. 132</span> <span id="page_2:133">p. 133</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX

Here is another incident worth recording. A certain man was sacrificing
to mother Earth in hope of finding a treasure, and he did not hesitate
to offer a prayer to Apollonius with that intent. He, perceiving what he
was after, said: "I see that you are a formidable man in business."
"Nay, but an unlucky one," remarked the other, "that have nothing except
a few pence, and not enough to feed my family." "You seem," said the
other, "to keep a large household of idle servants, for you yourself
seem not to be wanting in wits." But the man shed a quiet tear and
answered: "I have four daughters, who want four dowries, and, when my
daughters have had their dowries assigned to them, my capital, which is
now only 20,000 drachmas, will have vanished; and they will think that
they have got all too little, while I shall perish because I shall have
nothing at all." Therefore Apollonius took compassion on him and said:
"We will provide for you, myself and mother Earth, for I hear that you
are sacrificing to her." With these words he conducted the man into the
suburbs, as if he were going to buy some fruit, and there he saw an
estate planted with olive-trees; and being delighted with the trees, for
they were very good ones and well grown, and there was a little garden
in the place, in which he saw bee-hives and flowers, he went into the
garden as if he had important business to examine into, and then, having
put up a prayer to Pandora, he returned to the city. Then he proceeded
to the owner of the field, who had

<span id="page_2:134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_2:135">p. 135</span>

amassed a fortune in the most unrighteous manner, by informing against
the estates of Phoenicians, and said: "For how much did you purchase
such and such an estate, and how much labor have you spent upon it?" The
other replied that he had bought the estate a year before for the sum of
15,000 drachmas, but that as yet he had spent no labor upon it,
whereupon Apollonius persuaded him to sell it to him for 20,000
drachmas, which he did, esteeming the 5,000 a great windfall. Now the
man who wanted to find the treasure did not in the least understand the
gift that was made him, indeed he hardly considered it a fair bargain,
because, whereas he might have kept the 20,000 drachmas that he had in
hand, he now reflected that the estate which he purchased for the sum
might suffer from frost and hailstorms and from other influences ruinous
to the crops. But when he found a jar almost at once in the field
containing 3,000 darics, close by the beehive in the little garden, and
when he got a very large yield from the olive-trees, when everywhere
else the crops had failed, he began to hymn the praises of the sage, and
his house was crowded with suitors for the hand of his daughters urging
their suits upon him.

### CHAPTER XL

Here is another story which I came upon about Apollonius, and which
deserves to be put upon record: There was a man who was in love with a
nude statue of Aphrodite which is erected in the

<span id="page_2:136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_2:137">p. 137</span>

island of Cnidus; and he was making offerings to it, and said that he
would make yet others with a view to marrying the statue. But
Apollonius, though on other grounds he thought his conduct absurd, yet
as the islanders were not averse of the idea, but said that the fame of
the goddess would be greatly enhanced if she had a lover, determined to
purge the temple of all this nonsense; and when the Cnidians asked him
if he would reform their system of sacrifice or their litanies in any
way, he replied: "I will reform your eyes, but let the ancestral service
of your temple as it is." Accordingly he called to him the languishing
lover and asked him if he believed in the existence of the gods: and
when he replied that he believed in their existence so firmly that he
was actually in love with them, and mentioned a marriage with one of
them which he hoped to celebrate shortly, Apollonius replied: "The poets
have turned your poor head by their talk of unions of Anchises and
Peleus and other heroes with goddess; but I know this much about loving
and being loved: gods fall in love with gods, and human beings with
human beings, and animals with animals, and in a word like with like,
and they have true issue of their own kind; but when two beings of
different kinds contract a union, there is no true marriage or love. And
if only you would bear in mind the fate of Ixion, you would never have
dreamed of falling in love with beings so much above you. For he, you
remember, is portrayed across the heaven tortured upon a wheel; and you,
unless you get out of this shrine, will perish wherever you are upon
earth, nor will you be able to say that the gods have been unjust in
their sentence upon

<span id="page_2:138">p. 138</span> <span id="page_2:139">p. 139</span>

you." Thus he put a stop to this mad freak, and the man went away who
said he was in love, after sacrificing in order to gain forgiveness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[2:117:1](laot33.htm#fr_20) A cynic means
literally a canine philosopher.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 41-43](laot34)
