[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot11.md) 
[Next](laot13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:230">p. 230</span> <span id="page_1:231">p. 231</span>

# BOOK III

<span id="page_1:232">p. 232</span> <span id="page_1:233">p. 233</span>

### CHAPTER I

It is now time to notice the river Hyphasis, and to ask what is its size
as it traverses India, and, what remarkable features it possesses. The
springs of this river well forth out of the plain, and close to its
source its streams are navigable, but as they advance they soon become
impossible for boats, because spits of rock alternating with one
another, rise up just below the surface; round these the current winds
of necessity, so rendering the river unnavigable. And in breadth it
approaches to the river Ister, and this is allowed to be the greatest of
all the rivers which flow through Europe. Now the woods along the bank
closely resemble those of the river in question, and a balm also is
distilled from the trees, out of which the Indians make a nuptial
ointment; and unless the people attending the wedding have besprinkled
the young couple with this balm, the union is not considered complete
nor compatible with Aphrodite bestowing her grace upon it. Now they say
that the grove in the neighborhood of the river is dedicated to this
goddess, as also the fishes called peacock fish which are bred in this
river alone, and which have been given the same name as the bird,
because their fins

<span id="page_1:234">p. 234</span> <span id="page_1:235">p. 235</span>

are blue, and their scales spotty, and their tails golden, and because
they can fold and spread the latter at will. There is also a creature in
this river which resembles a white worm. By melting down they make an
oil, and from this oil, it appears, there is given off a flame such that
nothing but glass can contain it. And this creature may be caught by the
king alone, who utilizes it for the capture of cities; for as soon as
the fat in question touches the battlements, a fire is kindled which
defies all the ordinary means devised by men against combustibles.

### CHAPTER II

AND they say that wild asses are also to be captured in these marshes,
and these creatures have a horn upon the forehead, with which they butt
like a bull and make a noble fight of it; the Indians make this horn
into a cup, for they declare that no one can ever fall sick on the day
on which he has drunk out of it, nor will any one who has done so be the
worse for being wounded, and he will be able to pass through fire
unscathed, and he is even immune from poisonous draughts which others
would drink to their harm. Accordingly, this goblet is reserved for
kings, and the king alone may indulge in the chase of this creature. And
Apollonius says that he saw this animal, and admired its natural
features; but when Damis asked him if he believed the story about the
goblet, he answered: "I will believe it, if I find the king of the
Indians hereabout to be immortal; for surely a man who can offer me or
anyone else a

<span id="page_1:236">p. 236</span> <span id="page_1:237">p. 237</span>

draught potent against disease and so wholesome, will he not be much
more likely to imbibe it himself, and take a drink out of this horn
every day even at the risk of intoxication? For no one, I conceive,
would blame him for exceeding in such cups."

### CHAPTER III

AT this place they say that they also fell in with a woman who was black
from her head to her bosom, but was altogether white from her bosom down
to her feet; and the rest of the party fled from her believing her to be
a monster, but Apollonius clasped the woman by the hand and understood
what she was; for in fact such a woman in India is consecrated to
Aphrodite, and a woman is born piebald in honor of this goddess, just as
is Apis among the Egyptians.

### CHAPTER IV

THEY say that from this point they crossed the part of the Caucasus
which stretches down to the Red Sea; and this range is thickly overgrown
with aromatic shrubs. The spurs then of the mountain bear the cinnamon
tree, which resembles the young tendrils of the vine, and the goat gives
sure indication of this aromatic shrub; for if you hold out a bit of
cinnamon to a goat, she will whine and whimper after your hand like a
dog, and will follow you when you go away, pressing her nose against it;
and if the goat herd drags her away, she will moan as if she were being
torn away from the lotus. But on the steeps of

<span id="page_1:238">p. 238</span> <span id="page_1:239">p. 239</span>

this mountain there grow very lofty frankincense trees, as well as many
other species, for example the pepper trees which are cultivated by the
apes. Nor did they neglect to record the look and appearance of this
tree, and I will repeat exactly their account of it. The pepper tree
resembles in general the willow of the Greeks, and particularly in
regard to the berry of the fruit; and it grows in steep ravines where it
cannot be got at by men, and where a community of apes is said to live
in the recesses of the mountain and in any of its glens; and these apes
are held in great esteem by the Indians, because they harvest the pepper
for them, and they drive the lions off them with dogs and weapons. For
the lion, when he is sick, attacks the ape in order to get a remedy, for
the flesh of the ape stays the course of his disease; and he attacks it
when he is grown old to get a meal, for the lions when they are past
hunting stags and wild boars gobble up the apes, and husband for their
pursuit whatever strength they have left. The inhabitants of the
country, however, are not disposed to allow this, because they regard
these animals as their benefactors, and so make war against the lions in
behalf of them. For this is the way they go to work in collecting the
pepper; the Indians go up to the lower trees and pluck off the fruit,
and they make little round shallow pits around the trees, into which
they collect the pepper, carelessly tossing it in, as if it had no value
and was of no serious use to mankind. Then the monkeys mark their
actions from above out of their fastnesses, and when the night comes on
they imitate the action of the Indians, and twisting off the twigs of
the trees, they bring and throw them into the pits in question; then the

<span id="page_1:240">p. 240</span> <span id="page_1:241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indians at
daybreak carry away the heaps of the spice which they have thus got
without any trouble, and indeed during the repose of slumber.

### CHAPTER V

AFTER crossing the top of the mountain, they say they saw a smooth plain
seamed with cuts and ditches full of water, some of which were carried
crosswise, whilst others were straight; these are derived from the river
Ganges, and serve both for boundaries and also are distributed over the
plain, when the soil is dry. But they say that this soil is the best in
India, and constitutes the greatest of the territorial divisions of that
country, extending in length towards the Ganges a journey of fifteen
days and of eighteen from the sea to the mountain of the apes along
which it skirts. The whole soil of the plain is a dead level, black and
fertile of everything; for you can see on it standing grain as high as
reeds and you can also see beans three times as large as the Egyptian
kind, as well as sesame and millet of enormous size. And they say that
nuts also grow there, of which many are treasured up in our temples here
as objects of curiosity. But the vines which grow there are small, like
those of the Lydians and Maeones; their vintage however is not only
drinkable, but has a fine bouquet from the first. They also say that
they came upon a tree there resembling the laurel, upon which there grew
a cup or husk resembling a very large pomegranate; and inside the cup
there was a kernel as blue as the cups of the hyacinth, but sweeter to
the taste than any of the fruits the seasons bring.

<span id="page_1:242">p. 242</span> <span id="page_1:243">p. 243</span>

### CHAPTER VI

NOW as they descended the mountain, they say they came in for a dragon
hunt, which I must needs describe. For it is utterly absurd for those
who are amateurs of hare-hunting to spin yarns about the hare as to how
it is caught or ought to be caught, and yet that we should omit to
describe a chase as bold as it is wonderful, and in which the sage, of
whom I have written this account, was careful to set on record: The
whole of India is girt with dragons of enormous size; for not only the
marshes are full of them, but the mountains as well, and there is not a
single ridge without one. Now the marsh kind are sluggish in their
habits and are thirty cubits long, and they have no crest standing up on
their heads, but in this respect resemble the she-dragons. Their backs
however are very black, with fewer scales on them than the other kinds;
and Homer has described them with deeper insight than have most poets,
for he says that the dragon that lived hard by the spring in Aulis had a
tawny back<span class="margnote">Iliad II. 308</span>; but other poets
declare that the congener of this one in the grove of Nemea also had a
crest, a feature which we could not verify in regard to the marsh
dragons.

### CHAPTER VII

AND the dragons along the foothills and the mountain crests make their
way into the plains after their quarry, and get the better all round of
those in the marshes; for indeed they reach a greater length, and move
faster than the swiftest rivers, so

<span id="page_1:244">p. 244</span> <span id="page_1:245">p. 245</span>

that nothing escapes them. These actually have a crest, of moderate
extent and height when they are young; but as they reach their full
size, it grows with them and extends to a considerable height, at which
time also they turn red and get serrated backs. This kind also have
beards, and lift their necks on high, while their scales glitter like
silver; and the pupils of their eyes consist of a fiery stone, and they
say that this has an uncanny power for many secret purposes. The plain
specimen falls the prize of the hunters whenever it draws into its folds
an elephant; for the destruction of both creatures is the result, and
those who capture the dragons are rewarded by getting the eyes and skin
and teeth. In most respects the tusks resemble the largest swine's, but
they are slighter in build and twisted, and have a point as unabraded as
sharks’ teeth.

### CHAPTER VIII

Now the dragons of the mountains have scales of a golden color, and in
length excel those of the plain, and they have bushy beards, which also
are of a golden hue; and their eyebrows are more prominent than those of
the plain, and their eye is sunk deep under the eyebrow, and emits a
terrible and ruthless glance. And they give off a noise like the
clashing of brass whenever they are burrowing under the earth, and from
their crests, which are all fiery red, there flashes a fire brighter
than a torch. They also can catch the elephants, though they are
themselves caught by the Indians in the following

<span id="page_1:246">p. 246</span> <span id="page_1:247">p. 247</span>

manner. They embroider golden runes on a scarlet cloak, which they lay
in front of the animal's burrow after charming them the runes to cause
sleep; for this is the only way to overcome the eyes of the dragon,
which are otherwise inflexible, and much mysterious lore is sung by them
to overcome him. These runes induce the dragon to stretch his neck out
of his burrow and fall asleep over them: then the Indians fall upon him
as he lies there, and dispatch him with blows of their axes, and having
cut off the head they despoil it of its gems. And they say that in the
heads of the mountain dragons there are stored away stones of flowery
color, which flash out all kinds of hues, and possess a mystical power
as resided in the ring, which they say belonged to Gyges. But often the
Indian, in spite of his axe and his cunning, is caught by the dragon,
who carries him off into his burrow, and almost shakes the mountains as
he disappears. These are also said to inhabit the mountains in the
neighborhood of the Red Sea, and they say that they heard them hissing
terribly and that they saw them go down to the shore and swim far out
into the sea. It was impossible however to ascertain the number of years
that this creature lives, nor would my statements be believed. This is
all I know about dragons.

### CHAPTER IX

THEY tell us that the city under the mountain is of great size and is
called Paraca, and that in the center of it are enshrined a great many
heads of dragons, for the Indians who inhabit it are trained from their
boyhood in this form of sport. And they

<span id="page_1:248">p. 248</span> <span id="page_1:249">p. 249</span>

are also said to acquire an understanding of the language and ideas of
animals by feeding either on the heart or the liver of the dragon. And
as they advanced they thought they heard the pipe of some shepherd
marshaling his flock, but it turned out to be a man looking after a herd
of white hinds, for the Indians use these for milking, and find their
milk very nutritious.

### CHAPTER X

FROM this point their road led for four days across a rich and well
cultivated country, till they approached the castle of the sages, when
their guide bade his camel crouch down, and leapt off it in such an
agony of fear that he was bathed in perspiration. Apollonius however
quite understood where he was come to, and smiling at the panic of the
Indian, said: "It seems to me that this fellow, were he a mariner who
had reached harbor after a long sea voyage, would worry at being on land
and tremble at being in dock." And as he said this he ordered his camel
to kneel down, for indeed he was by now well accustomed to do so. And it
seems that what scared the guide so much was that he was now close to
the sages; for the Indians fear these people more than they do their own
king, because the very king to whom the land is subject consults them
about everything that he has to say or do, just as people who send to an
oracle of a god; and the sages indicate to him what it is expedient for
him to do, and what is inexpedient, and dissuade and warn him off with
signs from what is inexpedient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 11-20](laot13.md)
