[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot14) 
[Next](laot16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI

WHILE they were thus conversing, the king kept trying to interrupt them,
constantly breaking off their every sentence by his silly and ignorant
remarks. He accordingly again asked them what they were conversing
about, and Apollonius replied: "We are discussing matters important and
held in great repute among the Hellenes; though you would think of them
but slightly, for you say that you detest everything Hellenic." "I do
certainly detest them," he said, "but nevertheless I want to hear; for I
imagine you are talking about those Athenians the slaves of Xerxes." But
Apollonius replied: "Nay we are discussing other things; but since you
have alluded to the Athenians in a manner both absurd and false, answer
me this question: Have you, O King, any slaves?" "Twenty thousand," said
the other, "and not a single one of them did I buy myself, but they were
all born in my household." Thereupon Apollonius, using Iarchas as his
interpreter, asked him afresh whether he was in the habit of running
away from his slaves or his slaves from

<span id="page_1:300">p. 300</span> <span id="page_1:301">p. 301</span>

him. And the king by way of insult answered him: "Your very question is
worthy of a slave, nevertheless I will answer it: a man who runs away is
not only a slave but a bad one to boot, and his master would never run
away from him, when he can if he likes both torture and card him." "In
that case," said Apollonius, "O king, Xerxes has been proved out of your
mouth to have been a slave of the Athenians, and like a bad slave to
have run away from them; for when he was defeated by them in the naval
action in the Straits, he was so anxious about his bridge of boats over
the Hellespont that he fled in a single ship." "Yes, but he anyhow
burned Athens with his own hands," said the king. And Apollonius
answered: "And for that act of audacity, O king, he was punished as
never yet was any other man. For he had to run away from those whom he
imagined he had destroyed; and when I contemplate the ambitions with
which Xerxes set out on his campaign I can conceive that some were
justified in exalting him and saying that he was Zeus; but when I
contemplate his flight, I arrive at the conviction that he was the most
ill-starred of men. For if he had fallen at the hands of the Hellenes,
no one would have earned a brighter fame than he. For to whom would the
Hellenes have raised and dedicated a loftier tomb? What jousts of armed
men, what contests of musicians would not have been instituted in honor
of him? For, if men like Melicertes and Palaemon and Pelops the Lydian
immigrant, the former of whom died in childhood at the breast, while
Pelops enslaved Arcadia and Argolis and the land within the Isthmus,—if
these were commemorated by the Greeks as Gods, what would not

<span id="page_1:302">p. 302</span> <span id="page_1:303">p. 303</span>

have been done for Xerxes by men who are by nature more enthusiastic
admirers of the virtues, and who consider that they praise themselves in
praising those whom they have defeated?"

### CHAPTER XXXII

THESE words of Apollonius caused the king to burst into tears, and he
said: "Dearest friend, in what an heroic light do you represent these
Hellenes to me." "Why then, O king, were you so hard upon them?" "The
visitors who come hither from Egypt, O guest," replied the king, "malign
the race of Hellenes, and while declaring that they themselves are holy
men and wise, and the true law-givers who fixed all the sacrifices and
rites of initiation which are in vogue among the Greeks, they deny to
the latter any and every sort of good quality, declaring them to be
ruffians, and a mixed herd addicted to every sort of anarchy, and lovers
of legend and miracle mongers, and though indeed poor, yet making their
poverty not a title of dignity, but a mere excuse for stealing. But now
that I have heard this from you and understand how fond of honor and how
worthy the Hellenes are, I am reconciled for the future to them and I
engage both that they shall have my praise and that I will pray all I
can for them, and will never set trust in another Egyptian." But Iarchas
remarked: "I too, O king, was aware that your mind had been poisoned by
these Egyptians; but I would not take the part of the Hellenes until you
met some such counselor as this. But since you have been put right by a
wise man, let us

<span id="page_1:304">p. 304</span> <span id="page_1:305">p. 305</span>

now proceed to quaff the good cheer provided by Tantalus, and let us
sleep over the serious issues which we have to discuss tonight. But at
another time I will fill you full with Hellenic arguments, and no other
race is so rich in them; and you will delight in them whenever you come
hither." And forthwith he set an example to this fellow guests, by
stooping the first of them all to the goblet which indeed furnished an
ample draught for all; for the stream refilled itself plenteously, as if
with spring waters welling up from the ground; and Apollonius also
drank, for this cup is instituted by the Indians as a cup of friendship;
and they feign that Tantalus is the wine-bearer who supplies it, because
he is considered to have been the most friendly of men.

### CHAPTER XXXIII

AND when they had drunk, the earth received them on the couches which
she had spread for them; but when it was midnight they rose up and first
they sang a hymn to the ray of light, suspended aloft in the air as they
had been at midday; and then they attended the king, as much as he
desired. Damis, however, says that Apollonius was not present at the
king's conversation with them, because he thought that the interview had
to do with secrets of state. Having then at daybreak offered his
sacrifice, the king approached Apollonius and offered him the
hospitality of his palace, declaring that he would send him back to
Greece an object of envy to all. But he commended him for his kindness,
nevertheless he excused himself from

<span id="page_1:306">p. 306</span> <span id="page_1:307">p. 307</span>

inflicting himself upon one with whom he was on no sort of equality;
moreover, he said that he had been longer abroad than he liked, and that
he scrupled to give his friends at home cause to think they were being
neglected. The king thereupon said that he entreated him, and assumed
such an undignified attitude in urging his request, that Apollonius
said: "A king who insists upon his request in such terms at the expense
of his dignity, is laying a trap." Thereupon Iarchas intervened and
said: "You wrong, O king, this sacred abode by trying to drag away from
it a man against his will; and moreover, being one of those who can read
the future, he is aware that his staying with you would not conduce to
his own good, and would probably not be in any way profitable to
yourself."

### CHAPTER XXXIV

THE king accordingly went down into the village, for the law of the
sages did not allow a king to be with them more than one day; but
Iarchas said to the messenger: "We admit Damis also hither to our
mysteries; so let him come, but do you look after the rest of them in
the village." And when Damis arrived, they sat down together, as they
were wont to do, and they allowed Apollonius to ask questions; and he
asked them of what they thought the cosmos was composed; but they
replied: "Of elements." "Are there then four?" he asked. "Not four,"
said Iarchas, "but five." "And how can there be a fifth," said
Apollonius, "alongside of water and air

<span id="page_1:308">p. 308</span> <span id="page_1:309">p. 309</span>

and earth and fire?" "There is the ether," replied the other, "which we
must regard as the stuff of which gods are made; for just as all mortal
creatures inhale the air, so do immortal and divine natures inhale the
ether." Apollonius again asked which of the elements came first into
being, and Iarchas answered: "All are simultaneous, for a living
creature is not born bit by bit." "Am I," said Apollonius, "to regard
the universe as a living creature?" "Yes," said the other, "if you have
a sound knowledge of it, for it engenders all living things." "Shall I
then," said Apollonius, "call the universe female, or of both the male
and the opposite gender?" "Of both genders," said the other, "for by
commerce with itself it fulfills the role both of mother and father in
bringing forth living creatures; and it is possessed by a love for
itself more intense than any separate being has for its fellow, a
passion which knits it together into harmony. And it is not illogical to
suppose that it cleaves unto itself; for as the movement of an animal
dictates the function of its hands and feet, in co-operation with a soul
in it by which it is set in motion, so we must regard the parts of the
universe also as adapting themselves through its inherent soul to all
creatures which are brought forth or conceived. For example, the
sufferings so often caused by drought are visited on us in accordance
with the soul of the universe, whenever justice has fallen into
disrepute and is disowned by men; and this animal shepherds itself not
with a single hand only, but with many mysterious ones, which it has at
its disposal; and though from its immense size it is controlled by no
other, yet it moves obediently to the rein and is easily guided.

<span id="page_1:310">p. 310</span> <span id="page_1:311">p. 311</span>

### CHAPTER 35

"AND the subject is so vast and so far transcends our mental powers,
that I do not know any example adequate to illustrate it; but we will
take that of a ship, such as the Egyptians construct for our seas and
launch for the exchange of Egyptian goods against Indian wares. For
there is an ancient law in regard to the Red Sea, which the king
Erythras laid down, when he held sway over that sea, to the effect that
the Egyptians should not enter it with a vessel of war, and indeed
should employ only a single merchant ship. This regulation obliged the
Egyptians to contrive a ship equivalent to several at once of those
which other races have; and they ribbed the sides of this ship with
bolts such as hold a ship together, and they raised its bulwarks and its
mast to a great height, and they constructed several compartments, such
as are built upon the timber balks which run athwart a ship, and they
set several pilots in this boat and subordinated them to the oldest and
wisest of their number, to conduct the voyage; and there were several
officers on the prow and excellent and handy sailors to man the sails;
and in the crew of this ship there was a detachment of armed men, for it
is necessary to equip the ship and protect it against the savages of the
Gulf that live on the right hand as you enter it, in case they should
ever attack and plunder it on the high seas. Let us apply this imagery
to the universe, and regard it in the light of a naval construction; for
then you must apportion the first and supreme position to God the
begetter of this animal, and subordinate posts to the gods

<span id="page_1:312">p. 312</span> <span id="page_1:313">p. 313</span>

who govern its parts; and we may well assent to the statements of the
poets, when they say that there are many gods in heaven and many in the
sea, and many in the fountains and streams, and many round about the
earth, and that there are some even under the earth. But we shall do
well to separate from the universe the region under the earth, if there
is one, because the poets represent it as an abode of terror and
corruption."

### CHAPTER XXXVI

AS the Indian concluded this discourse, Damis says that he was
transported with admiration and applauded loudly; for he could never
have thought that a native of India could show such mastery of the Greek
tongue, nor even that, supposing he understood that language, he could
have used it with so much ease and elegance. And he praises the look and
smile of Iarchas, and the inspired air with which he expressed his
ideas, admitting that Apollonius, although he had a delivery as graceful
as it was free from bombast, nevertheless gained a great deal by contact
with this Indian, and he says that whenever he sat down to discuss a
theme, as he very often did, he resembled Iarchas.

### CHAPTER XXXVII

AS the rest of the company praised, no less, the contents of Iarchas’
speech than the tone in which he spoke, Apollonius resumed by asking him
which they considered the bigger, the sea or the land; and

<span id="page_1:314">p. 314</span> <span id="page_1:315">p. 315</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Iarchas replied:
"If the land be compared with the sea it will be found to be bigger, for
it includes the sea in itself; but if it be considered in relation to
the entire mass of water, we can show that the earth is the lesser of
the two, for it is upheld by the water."

### CHAPTER XXXVIII

THIS discussion was interrupted by the appearance among the sages of the
messenger bringing in certain Indians who were in want of succor. And he
brought forward a poor woman who interceded in behalf of her child, who
was, she said, a boy of sixteen years of age, but had been for two years
possessed by a devil. Now the character of the devil was that of a
mocker and a liar. Here one of the sages asked, why she said this, and
she replied: "This child of mine is extremely good-looking, and
therefore the devil is amorous of him and will not allow him to retain
his reason, nor will he permit him to go to school, or to learn archery,
nor even to remain at home, but drives him out into desert places. And
the boy does not even retain his own voice, but speaks in a deep hollow
tone, as men do; and he looks at you with other eyes rather than with
his own. As for myself I weep over all this and I tear my cheeks, and I
rebuke my son so far as I well may; but he does not know me. And I made
my mind to repair hither, indeed I planned to do so a year ago; only the
demon discovered himself using my child as a mask, and what he told me
was this, that he was the ghost of man, who fell long ago in battle, but
that at death he was passionately

<span id="page_1:316">p. 316</span> <span id="page_1:317">p. 317</span>

attached to his wife. Now he had been dead for only three days when his
wife insulted their union by marrying another man, and the consequence
was that he had come to detest the love of women, and had transferred
himself wholly into this boy. But he promised, if I would only not
denounce him to yourselves, to endow the child with many noble
blessings. As for myself, I was influenced by these promises; but he has
put me off and off for such a long time now, that he has got sole
control of my household, yet has no honest or true intentions." Here the
sage asked afresh, if the boy was at hand; and she said not, for,
although she had done all she could to get him to come with her, the
demon had threatened her with steep places and precipices and declared
that he would kill her son, "in case," she added, "I haled him hither
for trial." "Take courage," said the sage, "for he will not slay him
when he has read this." And so saying he drew a letter out of his bosom
and gave it to the woman; and the letter, it appears, was addressed to
the ghost and contained threats of an alarming kind.

### CHAPTER XXXIX

THERE also arrived a man who was lame. He already thirty years old and
was a keen hunter of lions; but a lion had sprung upon him and
dislocated his hip so that he limped with one leg. However when they
massaged with their hands his hip, the youth immediately recovered his
upright gait. And another man had had his eyes put out, and he went away
having recovered the sight of both of them.

<span id="page_1:318">p. 318</span> <span id="page_1:319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet another man
had his hand paralyzed; but left their presence in full possession of
the limb. And a certain woman had suffered in labor already seven times,
but was healed in the following way through the intercession of her
husband. He bade the man, whenever his wife should be about to bring
forth her next child, to enter her chamber carrying in his bosom a live
hare; then he was to walk once round her and at the same moment to
release the hare; for that the womb would be extruded together with the
fetus, unless the hare was at once driven out.

### CHAPTER XL

AND again a certain man who was a father said that he had had several
sons, but that they had died the moment they began to drink wine.
Iarchas took him up and said: "Yes, and it is just as well they did die;
for they would inevitably have gone mad, having inherited, as it
appears, from their parents too warm a temperament. Your children," he
added, "must therefore abstain from wine, but in order that they may be
never led even to desire wine, supposing you should have another boy,
and I perceive you had one only six days ago, you must carefully watch
the hen owl and find where it builds its nest; then you must snatch its
eggs and give them to the child to chew after boiling them properly; for
if it is fed upon these, before it tastes wine, a distaste for wine will
be bred in it, and it will keep sober by your excluding from its
temperament any but natural warmth."

With such lore as this then they surfeited

<span id="page_1:320">p. 320</span> <span id="page_1:321">p. 321</span>

themselves, and they were astonished at the many-sided wisdom of the
company, and day after day they asked all sorts of questions, and were
themselves asked many in turn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 41-50](laot16)
