[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot12.md) 
[Next](laot14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:250">p. 250</span> <span id="page_1:251">p. 251</span>

### CHAPTER XI

AND they were about to halt in the neighboring village, which is hardly
distant a single stade from the eminence occupied by the sages, when
they saw a youth run up to them, the blackest Indian they ever saw; and
between his eyebrows was a crescent shaped spot which shone brightly.
But I learn that at a later time the same feature was remarked in the
case of Menon the pupil of Herod the Sophist, who was an Ethiop; it
showed while he was a youth, but as he grew up to man's estate its
splendor waned and finally disappeared with his youth. But the Indian
also wore, they say, a golden anchor, which is affected by Indians as a
herald's badge, because it holds all things fast.

### CHAPTER XII

THEN he ran up to Apollonius and addressed him in the Greek tongue; and
so far this did not seem so remarkable, because all the inhabitants of
the village spoke the Greek tongue. But when he addressed him by name
and said " Hail so and so," the rest of the party were filled with
astonishment, though our sage only felt the more confidence in his
mission: for he looked to Damis and said: "We have reached men who are
unfeignedly wise, for they seem to have the gift of foreknowledge." And
he at once asked the Indian what he must do, because he was already
eager for an interview: and the Indian replied:

<span id="page_1:252">p. 252</span> <span id="page_1:253">p. 253</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Your party must
halt here, but you must come on just as you are, for the Masters
themselves issue this command."

### CHAPTER XIII

THE word *Masters* at once had a Pythagorean ring for the ears of
Apollonius and he gladly followed the messenger.

Now the hill the summit of which is inhabited by the sages is, according
to the account of our travelers, of about the same height as the
Acropolis of Athens; and it rises straight up from the plain, though its
natural position equally secures it from attack, for the rock surrounds
it on all sides. On many parts of this rock you see traces of cloven
feet and outlines of beards and of faces, and here and there impressions
of backs as of persons who had slipped and rolled down. For they say
that Dionysus, when he was trying to storm the place together with
Heracles, ordered the Pans to attack it, thinking that they would be
strong enough to stand the shock; but they were thunderstruck by the
sages and fell one, one way, and another, another; and the rocks as it
were took the print of the various postures in which they fell and
failed. And they say that they saw a cloud floating round the eminence
on which the Indians live and render themselves visible or invisible at
will. Whether there were any other gates to the eminence they say they
did not know; for the cloud around it did not anywhere allow them to be
seen, whether there was an opening in the rampart, or whether on the
other hand it was a close-shut fortress.

<span id="page_1:254">p. 254</span> <span id="page_1:255">p. 255</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

APOLLONIUS says that he himself ascended mostly on the south side of the
ridge, following the Indian, and that the first thing he saw was a well
four fathoms deep, above the mouth of which there rose a sheen of deep
blue light; and at midday when the sun was stationary about it, the
sheen of light was always drawn up on high by the rays, and in its
ascent assumed the look of a glowing rainbow. But he learnt afterwards
that the soil underneath the well was composed of realgar, but that they
regarded the water as holy and mysterious, and no one either drank it or
drew it up, but it was regarded by the whole land of India all around as
binding in oaths. And near this there was a crater, he says, of fire,
which sent up a lead-colored flame, though it emitted no smoke or any
smell, nor did this crater ever overflow, but emitted just matter enough
not to bubble over the edges of the pit. It is here that the Indians
purify themselves of involuntary sins, wherefore the sages call the
well, the well of testing, and the fire, the fire of pardon. And they
say that they saw there two jars of black stone, of the rains and of the
winds respectively. The jar of the rains, they say, is opened in case
the land of India is suffering from drought, and sends up clouds to
moisten the whole country; but if the rains should be in excess they are
stopped by the jar being shut up. But the jar of the winds plays, I
imagine, the same role as the bag of Aeolus: for when they open this jar
ever so little, they let out one of the winds, which creates a
seasonable breeze by which the

<span id="page_1:256">p. 256</span> <span id="page_1:257">p. 257</span>

country is refreshed. And they say that they came upon statues of Gods,
and they were not nearly so much astonished at finding Indian or
Egyptian Gods as they were by finding the most ancient of the Greek
Gods, a statue of Athena Polias and of Apollo of Delos and of Dionysus
of Limnae and another of him of Amyclae, and others of similar age.
These were set up by these Indians and worshipped with Greek rites. And
they say that they are inhabiting the heart of India, as they regard the
mound as the navel of this hill, and on it they worship fire with
mysterious rites, deriving the fire, according to their own account,
from the rays of the sun; and to the Sun they sing a hymn every day at
midday.

### CHAPTER XV

APOLLONIUS himself describes the character of these sages and of their
settlement upon the hill; for in one of his addresses to the Egyptians
he says, "I saw Indian Brahmans living upon the earth and yet not on it,
and fortified without fortifications, and possessing nothing, yet having
the riches of all men." He may indeed be thought to have here written
with too much subtlety; but we have anyhow the account of Damis to
effect that they made a practice of sleeping the ground, and that they
strewed the ground with such grass as they might themselves prefer; and,
what is more, he says that he saw them levitating themselves two cubits
high from the ground, not for the sake of miraculous display, for they
disdain any such ambition; but they

<span id="page_1:258">p. 258</span> <span id="page_1:259">p. 259</span>

regard any rites they perform, in thus quitting earth and walking with
the Sun, as acts of homage acceptable to the God. Moreover, they neither
burn upon an altar nor keep in stoves the fire which they extract from
the sun's rays, although it is a material fire; but like the rays of
sunlight when they are refracted in water, so this fire is seen raised
aloft in the air and dancing in the ether. And further they pray to the
Sun who governs the seasons by his might, that the latter may succeed
duly in the land, so that India may prosper; but of a night they intreat
the ray of light not to take the night amiss, but. to stay with them
just as they have brought it down. Such then was the meaning of the
phrase of Apollonius, that "the Brahmans are upon earth and yet not upon
earth." And his phrase "fortified without fortifications or walls,"
refers to the air or vapor under which they bivouac, for though they
seem to live in the open air, yet they raise up a shadow and veil
themselves in it, so that they are not made wet when it rains and they
enjoy the sunlight whenever they choose. And the phrase "without
possessing anything they had the riches of all men," is thus explained
by Damis: All the springs which the Bacchanals see leaping up from the
ground under their feet, whenever Dionysus stirs them and earth in a
common convulsion, spring up in plenty for these Indians also when they
are entertaining or being entertained. Apollonius therefore was right in
saying that people provided as they are with all they want offhand and
without having prepared anything, possess what they do not possess. And
on principle they grow their hair long, as the

<span id="page_1:260">p. 260</span> <span id="page_1:261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lacedaemonians did
of old and the people of Thurium and Tarentum, as well as the Melians
and all who set store by the fashions of Sparta; and they bind a white
turban on their heads, and their feet are naked for walking and they cut
their garments to resemble the *exomis* <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md). But the material of which they make their
raiment is a wool that springs wild from the ground, white like that of
the Pamphylians, though it is of softer growth, and a grease like olive
oil distills from off it. This is what they make their sacred vesture
of, and if anyone else except these Indians tries to pluck it up, the
earth refuses to surrender its wool. And they all carry both a ring and
a staff of which the peculiar virtues can effect all things, and the one
and the other, so we learn, are prized as secrets.

### CHAPTER XVI

WHEN Apollonius approached, the rest of the sages welcomed him and shook
hands; but Iarchas sat down on a high stool—and this was of black copper
and chased with golden figures, while the seats of the others were of
copper, but plain and not so high, for they sat lower down than
Iarchas—and when he saw Apollonius, Iarchas greeted him in the Greek
tongue and asked for the Indian's letter. And as Apollonius showed
astonishment at his gift of prescience, he took pains to add that a
single letter was missing in the epistle, namely a *delta*, which had
escaped the writer; and this was found

<span id="page_1:262">p. 262</span> <span id="page_1:263">p. 263</span>

to be the case. Then having read the epistle, he said " What do you
think of us, O Apollonius? " "Why," replied the latter, "how can you
ask, when it is sufficiently shown by the fact that I have taken a Jamey
to see you which was never till now accomplished by any of the
inhabitants of my country." "And what do you think we know more than
yourself?" "I," replied the other, "consider that your lore is
profounder and much more divine than our own; and if I add nothing to my
present stock of knowledge while I am with you, I shall at least have
learned that I have nothing more to learn." Thereupon the Indian replied
and said: "Other people ask those who arrive among them, who they are
that come, and why, but the first display we make of our wisdom consists
in showing that we are not ignorant who it is that comes. And you may
test this point to begin with." And to suit his word he forthwith
recounted the whole story of Apollonius’ family both on his father's and
his mother's side, and he related all his life in Aegae, and how Damis
had joined him, and any conversations that they had had on the road, and
anything they had found out through the conversation of others with
them. All this, just as if he had shared their voyage with them, the
Indian recounted straight off, quite clearly and without pausing for
breath. And when Apollonius was astounded and asked him how he came to
know it all, he replied: "And you too are come to share in this wisdom,
but you are not yet an adept." "Will you teach me, then," said the
other, "all this wisdom?" "Aye, and gladly, for that is a wiser course
than grudging and hiding matters of interest; and moreover, O
Apollonius, I

<span id="page_1:264">p. 264</span> <span id="page_1:265">p. 265</span>

perceive that you are well endowed with memory, a goddess whom we love
more than any other of the divine beings." "Well," said the other, "you
have certainly discerned by your penetration my exact disposition."
"We," said the other, "O Apollonius, can see all spiritual traits, for
we trace and detect them by a thousand signs. But as it is nearly
midday, and we must get ready our offerings for the Gods, let us now
employ ourselves with that, and afterwards let us converse as much as
you like; but you must take part in all our religious rites." "By Zeus,"
said Apollonius, "I should be wronging the Caucasus and the Indus, both
of which I have crossed in order to reach you, if I did not feast myself
on your rites to the full." "Do so," said the other, "and let us
depart."

### CHAPTER XVII

ACCORDINGLY they betook themselves to a spring of water, which Damis,
who saw it subsequently, says resembles that of Dirce in Boeotia; and
first they stripped, and then they anointed their heads with an
amber-like drug, which imparted such a warmth to these Indians, that
their bodies steamed and the sweat ran off them as profusely as if they
were washing themselves with fire; next they threw themselves into the
water and, having so taken their bath, they betook themselves to the
temple with wreaths upon their heads and full of sacred song. And they
stood round in the form of a chorus, and having chosen Iarchas as
conductor they struck the earth, uplifting their rods, and the earth
arched itself

<span id="page_1:266">p. 266</span> <span id="page_1:267">p. 267</span>

like a billow of the sea and raised them up two cubits high into the
air. But they sang a song resembling the paean of Sophocles which they
sing at Athens in honor of Asclepius. But when they had alighted upon
the ground, Iarchas called the stripling who carried the anchor and
said: "Do you look after the companions of Apollonius." And he went off
swifter than the quickest of the birds, and coming back again said: "I
have looked after them." Having fulfilled then the most of their
religious rites, they sat down to rest upon their seats, but Iarchas
said to the stripling: "Bring out the throne of Phraotes for the wise
Apollonius that he may sit upon it to converse with us."

### CHAPTER XVIII

And when he had taken his seat, he said: "Ask whatever you like, for you
find yourself among people who know everything." Apollonius then asked
him whether they knew themselves also, thinking that he, like the
Greeks, would regard self-knowledge as a difficult matter. But the
other, contrary to Apollonius’ expectations, corrected him and said: "We
know everything, just because we begin by knowing ourselves; for no one
of us would be admitted to this philosophy unless he first knew
himself." And Apollonius remembered what he had heard Phraotes say, and
how he who would become a philosopher must examine himself before he
undertakes the task; and he therefore acquiesced in this answer, for he
was convinced of its truth in his own case also. He accordingly asked a
fresh question,

<span id="page_1:268">p. 268</span> <span id="page_1:269">p. 269</span>

namely, who they considered themselves to be; and the other answered "We
consider ourselves to be Gods." Apollonius asked afresh: "Why?"
"Because," said the other, "we are good men." This reply struck
Apollonius as so instinct with trained good sense that he subsequently
mentioned it to Domitian in his defense of himself.

### CHAPTER XIX

HE therefore resumed his questions and said: "And what view do you take
of the soul?" "That," replied the other, "which Pythagoras imparted to
you, and which we imparted to the Egyptians." "Would you then say," said
Apollonius, "that as Pythagoras declared himself to be Euphorbus, so you
yourself, before you entered your present body, were one of the Trojans
or Achaeans or someone else?" And the Indian replied: "Those Achaean
sailors were the ruin of Troy, and your talking so much about it is the
ruin of you Greeks. For you imagine that the campaigners against Troy
were the only heroes that ever were, and you forget other heroes both
more numerous and more divine, whom your own country and that of the
Egyptians and that of the Indians have produced. Since then you have
asked me about my earlier incarnation, tell me, whom you regard as the
most remarkable of the assailants or defenders of Troy." "I," replied
Apollonius, "regard Achilles, the son of Peleus and Thetis, as such, for
he and no other is celebrated by Homer as excelling all the Achaeans in
personal

<span id="page_1:270">p. 270</span> <span id="page_1:271">p. 271</span>

beauty and size, and he knows of mighty deeds of his. And he also rates
very highly such men as Ajax and Nireus, who were only second to him in
beauty and courage, and are celebrated as such in his poems." "With
him," said the other, "O Apollonius, I would have you compare my own
ancestor, or rather my ancestral body, for that was the light in which
Pythagoras regarded Euphorbus.

### CHAPTER XX

"THERE was then," he said, "a time when the Ethiopians, an Indian race,
dwelt in this country, and when Ethiopia as yet was not; but Egypt
stretched its borders beyond Meroe and the cataracts, and on the one
side included in itself the fountains of the Nile, and on the other was
only bounded by the mouths of the river. Well, at that time of which I
speak, the Ethiopians lived here, and were subject to King Ganges, and
the land was sufficient for their sustenance, and the gods watched over
them; but when they slew this king, neither did the rest of the Indians
regard them as pure, nor did the land permit them to remain upon it; for
it spoiled the seed which they sowed in it before it came into ear, and
it inflicted miscarriages on their women, and it gave a miserable feed
to their flocks; and wherever they tried to found a city, it would give
way sink down under their feet. Nay more, the ghost of Ganges drove them
forward on their path, a haunting terror to their multitude, and it did
not quit them until they atoned to earth by sacrificing

<span id="page_1:272">p. 272</span> <span id="page_1:273">p. 273</span>

the murderers who had shed the king's blood with their hands. Now this
Ganges it seems, was ten cubits high, and in personal beauty excelled
any man the world had yet seen, and he was the son of the river Ganges;
and when his own father inundated India, he himself turned the flood
into the Red Sea, and effected a reconciliation between his father and
the land, with the result that the latter brought forth fruits in
abundance for him when living, and also avenged him after death. And
since Homer brings Achilles to Troy in Helen's behalf, and relates how
he took twelve cities by sea and eleven on land, and how he was carried
away by wrath because he had been robbed of a woman by the king, on
which occasion, in my opinion, he showed himself merciless and cruel,
let us contrast the Indian in similar circumstances. He on the contrary
set himself to found sixty cities, which are the most considerable of
those hereabouts—and I would like to know who would regard the
destruction of cities as a better title to fame than the rebuilding of
them—and he also repulsed the Scythians who once invaded this land
across the Caucasus. Surely it is better to prove yourself a good man by
liberating your country than to bring slavery upon a city, and that too
on behalf of a woman who probably was never really carried off against
her will. And he had formed an alliance with the king of the country,
over which Phraotes now rules, although that other had violated every
law and principle of morality by carrying of his wife, he yet did not
break his oath, and so stable, he said, was his pledged word, that, in
spite of the injury he had suffered, he would not do anything to harm
that other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1:261:1](laot13.htm#fr_6.md) An overmantle leaving
one arm and shoulder bare. Buddhist monks still wear a similar garment.
The so-called wool was asbestos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 21-30](laot14.md)
