[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot19.md) 
[Next](laot21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI

And he is said to have rebuked the Athenians for their conduct of the
festival of Dionysus, which they hold at the season of the month
Anthesterion. For when he saw them flocking to the theater he imagined
that the were going to listen to solos and compositions in the way of
processional and rhythmic hymns, such as are sung in comedies and
tragedies; but when he heard them dancing lascivious jigs to the rondos
of a pipe, and in the midst of the sacred epic of Orpheus striking
attitudes as the Hours, or as nymphs, or as bacchants, he set himself to
rebuke their proceedings and said: "Stop dancing away the reputations of
the victors of Salamis as well as of many other good men deported this
life. For if indeed this were a Lacedaemonian form of dance, I would
say, 'Bravo, soldiers; for you are training yourselves for war, and I
will join in your dance';

<span id="page_1:394">p. 394</span> <span id="page_1:395">p. 395</span>

but as it is a soft dance and one of effeminate tendency, what am I to
say of your national trophies? Not as monuments of shame to the Medians
or Persians, but to your own shame they will have been raised, should
you degenerate so much from those who set them up. And what do you mean
by your saffron robes and your purple and scarlet raiment? For surely
the Acharnians never dressed themselves up in this way, nor ever the
knights of Colonus rode in such garb. A woman commanded a ship from
Caria and sailed against you with Xerxes, and about her there was
nothing womanly, but she wore the garb and armor of a man; but you are
softer than the women of Xerxes’ day, and you are dressing yourselves up
to your own despite, old and young and striplings alike, all those who
of old flocked to the temple of Agraulus in order to swear to die in
battle on behalf of the fatherland. And now it seems that the same
people are ready to swear to become bacchants and don the thyrsus in
behalf of their country; and no one bears a helmet, but "disguised as
female harlequins," to use the phrase of Euripides, they shine in shame
alone. Nay more, I hear that you turn yourselves into winds, and wave
your skirts, and pretend that you are ships bellying their sails aloft.
But surely you might at least have some respect for the winds that were
your allies and once blew mightily to protect you, instead of turning
Boreas who was your patron, and who of all the winds is the most
masculine, into a woman; for Boreas would never have become the lover of
Oreithya, if he had seen her executing, like you, a skirt dance."

<span id="page_1:396">p. 396</span> <span id="page_1:397">p. 397</span>

### CHAPTER XXII

He also corrected the following abuse at Athens. The Athenians ran in
crowds to the theater beneath the Acropolis to witness human slaughter,
and the passion for such sports was stronger there than it is in Corinth
today; for they would buy for large sums adulterers and fornicators and
burglars and cut-purses and kidnappers and such-like rabble, and then
they took them and armed them and set them to fight with one another.
Apollonius then attacked these practices, and when the Athenians invited
him to attend their assembly, he refused to enter a place so impure and
reeking with gore. And this he said in an epistle to them; he said that
he was surprised "that the goddess had not already quitted the
Acropolis, when you shed such blood under her eyes. For I suspect that
presently, when you are conducting the pan-Athenaic procession, you will
no longer be content with bull, but will be sacrificing hecatombs of men
to the goddess. And thou, O Dionysus, dost thou after such bloodshed
frequent their theater? And do the wise among the Athenians pour
libations to thee there? Nay do thou depart, O Dionysus. Holier and
purer is thy Cithaeron."

Such were the more serious of the subjects which I have found he treated
of at that time in Athens in his philosophical discourses.

### CHAPTER XXIII

And he also went as envoy to the Thessalians in behalf of Achilles at
the time of the conferences

<span id="page_1:398">p. 398</span> <span id="page_1:399">p. 399</span>

held in Pylaea, at which the Thessalians transact the Amphictyonic
business. And they were so frightened that they passed a resolution for
the resumption of the ceremonies at the tomb. As for the monument of
Leonidas the Spartan, he almost clasped it in his arms, so great was his
admiration for the hero; and as he was coming to the mound where the
Lacedaemonians are said to have been overwhelmed by the bolts which the
enemy rained upon them, he heard his companions discussing with one
another which was the loftiest hill in Hellas, this topic being
suggested it seems by the sight of Oeta which rose before their eyes; so
ascending the mound, he said: "I consider this the loftiest spot of all,
for those who fell here in defense of freedom raised it to a level with
Oeta and carried it to a height surpassing many mountains like Olympus.
It is these men that I admire, and beyond any of them Megistias the
Acarnanian; for he knew the death that they were about to die, and
deliberately made up his mind to share in it with these heroes, fearing
not so much death, as the prospect that he should miss death in such
company."

### CHAPTER XXIV

And he also visited all the Greek shrines, namely that of Dodona, and
the Pythian temple, and the one at Abae, and he betook himself to those
of Amphiaraus and of Trophonius, and he went up to the shrine of the
Muses on Mount Helicon. And when he visited these temples and corrected
the rites, the priests went in his company, and the

<span id="page_1:400">p. 400</span> <span id="page_1:401">p. 401</span>

votaries followed in his steps, and goblets were set up flowing with
rational discourse and the thirsty quaffed their wine. And as the
Olympic Games were coming on, and the people of Elis invited him to take
part in the contest, he answered: "You seem to me to tarnish the glory
of the Olympic Games, if you need to send special invitations to those
who intend to visit you at their own promptings." And as he was at the
Isthmus, when the sea was roaring around Lechaeum and hearing it, he
said: "This neck of land shall be cut through, or rather it shall not be
cut." And herein he uttered a prediction of the cutting of the Isthmus
which was attempted soon afterwards, when Nero after seven years
projected it. For the latter left his imperial palace and came to
Hellas, with the intention of submitting himself to the heralds'
commands, in the Olympic and Pythian festivals; and he also won the
prize at the Isthmus, his victories being won in the contest of singing
to the harp and in that of the heralds. And he also won the prize for
the tragedians at Olympia. It is said that he then formed the novel
project of cutting through the Isthmus, in order to make a canal of it
for ships to sail through and not right round, uniting the Aegean with
the Adriatic Sea. So instead of every ship having to round Cape Malea ,
most by passing through the canal so cut could abridge an otherwise
circuitous voyage. But mark the upshot of the oracle of Apollonius. They
began to dig the canal at Lechaeum, but they had not advanced more than
about four stadia of continuous excavation, when Nero stopped the work
of cutting it. Some say because Egyptian men of science

<span id="page_1:402">p. 402</span> <span id="page_1:403">p. 403</span>

explained him the nature of the seas, and declared that the sea above
Lechaeum would flood and obliterate the island of Aegina, and others
because he apprehended a revolution in the empire. Such then was the
meaning of Apollonius’ prediction that the Isthmus would be cut through
and would not be cut through.

### CHAPTER XXV

Now there was in Corinth at that time a man named Demetrius, who studied
philosophy and had embraced in his system all the masculine vigor of the
Cynics. Of him Favorinus in several of his works subsequently made the
most generous mention, and his attitude towards Apollonius was exactly
that which they say Antisthenes took up towards the system of Socrates:
for he followed him and was anxious to be his disciple, and was devoted
to his doctrines, and converted to the side of Apollonius the more
esteemed of his own pupils. Among the latter was Menippus a Lycian of
twenty-five years of age, well endowed with good judgment, and of a
physique so beautifully proportioned that in mien he resembled a fine
and gentlemanly athlete. Now this Menippus was supposed by most people
to be loved by a foreign woman, who was good-looking and extremely
dainty, and said that she was rich; although she was really, as it
turned out, not one of these things, but was only so in semblance. For
as he was walking all alone along the road towards Cenchraea, he met
with an apparition, and it was a woman who clasped his hand and declared
that she had been long in love with him, and that she was a

<span id="page_1:404">p. 404</span> <span id="page_1:405">p. 405</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Phoenician woman
and lived in a suburb of Corinth, and she mentioned the name of the
particular suburb, and said: "When you reach the place this evening, you
will hear my voice as I sing to you, and you shall have wine such as you
never before drank, and there will be no rival to disturb you; and we
two beautiful beings will live together." The youth consented to this,
for although he was in general a strenuous philosopher, he was
nevertheless susceptible to the tender passion; and he visited her in
the evening, and for the future constantly sought her company as his
darling, for he did not yet realize that she was a mere apparition.

Then Apollonius looked over Menippus as a sculptor might do, and he
sketched an outline of the youth and examined him, and having observed
his foibles, he said: "You are a fine youth and are hunted by fine
women, but in this case you are cherishing a serpent, and a serpent
cherishes you." And when Menippus expressed his surprise, he added: "For
this lady is of a kind you cannot marry. Why should you? Do you think
that she loves you?" "Indeed I do," said the youth, "since she behaves
to me as if she loves me." "And would you then marry her?" said
Apollonius. "Why, yes, for it would be delightful to marry a woman who
loves you." Thereupon Apollonius asked when the wedding was to be.
"Perhaps tomorrow," said the other, "for it brooks no delay." Apollonius
therefore waited for the occasion of the wedding breakfast, and then,
presenting himself before the guests who had just arrived, he said:
"Where is the dainty lady at whose instance ye are come?" "Here she is,"
replied Menippus, and at the same moment he

<span id="page_1:406">p. 406</span> <span id="page_1:407">p. 407</span>

rose slightly from his seat, blushing. "And to which of you belong the
silver and gold and all the rest of the decorations of the banqueting
hall?" "To the lady," replied the youth, "for this is all I have of my
own," pointing to the philosopher's cloak which he wore.

And Apollonius said: "Have you heard of the gardens of Tantalus, how
they exist and yet do not exist?" "Yes," they answered, "in the poems of
Homer, for we certainly never went down to Hades." "As such," replied
Apollonius, "you must regard this adornment, for it is not reality but
the semblance of reality. And that you may realize the truth of what I
say, this fine bride is one of the vampires, that is to say of those
beings whom the many regard as lamias and hobgoblins. These beings fall
in love, and they are devoted to the delights of Aphrodite, but
especially to the flesh of human beings, and they decoy with such
delights those whom they mean to devour in their feasts." And the lady
said: "Cease your ill-omened talk and begone"; and she pretended to be
disgusted at what she heard, and in fact she was inclined to rail at
philosophers and say that they always talked nonsense. When, however,
the goblets of gold and the show of silver were proved as light as air
and all fluttered away out of their sight, while the wine-bearers and
the cooks and all the retinue of servants vanished before the rebukes of
Apollonius, the phantom pretended to weep, and prayed him not to torture
her nor to compel her to confess what she really was. But Apollonius
insisted and would not let her off, and then she admitted that she was a
vampire, and was fattening up Menippus with

<span id="page_1:408">p. 408</span> <span id="page_1:409">p. 409</span>

pleasures before devouring his body, for it was her habit to feed upon
young and beautiful bodies, because their blood is pure and strong. I
have related at length, because it was necessary to do so, this the
best-known story of Apollonius; for many people are aware of it and know
that he incident occurred in the center of Hellas; but they have only
heard in a general and vague manner that he once caught and overcame a
lamia in Corinth, but they have never learned what she was about, nor
that he did it to save Menippus, but I owe my own account to Damis and
to the work which he wrote.

### CHAPTER XXVI

It was at this time also that he had a difference with Bassus of
Corinth; for the latter was regarded as a parricide and believed to be
such. But he feigned a wisdom of his own, and no bridle could be set
upon his tongue. However, Apollonius put a stop to his reviling himself,
both by the letters which he sent him, and the harangues which he
delivered against him. For everything which he said about his being a
parricide was held to be true; for it was felt that such a man would
never have condensed to mere personal abuse, not to have said what was
not true.

### CHAPTER XXVII

The career of our sage in Olympia was as follows: when Apollonius was on
his way up to Olympia,

<span id="page_1:410">p. 410</span> <span id="page_1:411">p. 411</span>

some envoys of the Lacedaemonians met him and asked him to visit their
city; there seemed, however, to be no appearance of Sparta about them,
for they conducted themselves in a very effeminate manner and reeked of
luxury. And seeing them to have smooth legs, and sleek hair, and that
they did not even wear beards, nay were even dressed in soft raiment, he
sent such a letter to the Ephors that the latter issued a public
proclamation and forbade the use of pitch plasters in the baths <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md), and drove out of the city the men who
professed to rejuvenate dandies <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md), and
they restored the ancient régime in every respect. The consequence was
that the wrestling grounds were filled once more with the youth, and the
jousts and the common meals were restored, and Lacedaemon became once
more like herself. And when he learned that they had set their house in
order, he sent them an epistle from Olympia, briefer than any cipher
dispatch of ancient Sparta; and it ran as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“Apollonius to the Ephors sends salutation.

</div>

“It is the duty of men not to fall into sin, but of noble men, to
recognize that they are doing so.”

### CHAPTER XXVIII

And looking at the statue set up at Olympia, he said: "Hail, O thou good
Zeus, for thou art so good that thou dost impart thine own nature unto
mankind."

<span id="page_1:412">p. 412</span> <span id="page_1:413">p. 413</span>

And he also gave them an account of the brazen statue of Milo and
explained the attitude of this figure. For this Milo is seen standing on
a disk with his two feet close together, and in his left hand he grasps
a pomegranate, whole of his right hand the fingers are extended and
pressed together as if to pass through a chink. Now among the people of
Olympia and Arcadia the story told about this athlete is, that he was so
inflexible that he could never be induced to leave the spot on which he
stood; and they infer the grip of the clenched fingers from the way he
grasps the pomegranate, and that they could never be separated from
another, however much you struggled with any one of them, because the
intervals between the extended fingers are very close; and they say that
the fillet with which his head is bound is a symbol of temperance and
sobriety. Apollonius while admitting that this account was wisely
conceived, said that the truth was still wiser. "In order that you may
know," said he, "the meaning of the statue of Milo, the people of Croton
made this athlete a priest of Hera. As to the meaning then of this
mitre, I need not explain it further than by reminding you that the hero
was a priest. But the pomegranate is the only fruit which is grown in
honor of Hera; and the disk beneath his feet means that the priest is
standing on a small shield to offer his prayer to Hera; and this is also
indicated by his right hand. As for the artist's rendering the fingers
and feet, between which he has left no interval, that you may ascribe to
the antique style of the sculpture."

<span id="page_1:414">p. 414</span> <span id="page_1:415">p. 415</span>

### CHAPTER XXIX

He was present at the rites, and he commended the solicitude with which
the people of Elis administered them, and the good order with which they
conducted them, as if they considered themselves to be as much on trial
as the athletes who were contending for the prizes, anxious neither
willing nor unwillingly to commit any error. And when his companions
asked him what he thought of the Eleans in respect of their management
of the Olympic games, he replied: "Whether they are wise, I do not know,
but of their cleverness I am quite sure."

### CHAPTER XXX

How great a dislike he entertained of people who imagine they can write,
and how senseless he considered those to be who essay a literary task
beyond their powers, we can learn from the following incident: A young
man who thought he had talent met him in the precincts of the temple and
said: "Pray honor me with your presence tomorrow, for I am going to
recite something." When Apollonius asked him what he was going to
recite, he replied: "I have composed a treatise upon Zeus." And as he
said these words he showed, with no little pride at its stoutness, a
book which he was carrying under his garments. "And," said Apollonius,
"what are you going to praise about Zeus? Is it the Zeus of this fane,
and are you going to say that there is nothing like him on the whole
earth?"

<span id="page_1:416">p. 416</span> <span id="page_1:417">p. 417</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Why that, of
course," said the other, "and a great deal more that comes before that
and also follows it. For I shall say how the seasons and how everything
on earth and above the earth, and how the winds and all the stars belong
to Zeus." And Apollonius said: "It seems to me that you are a
past-master of encomium." "Yes," said the other, "and that is why I have
composed an encomium of gout and of blindness and deafness." "And why
not of dropsy too," said Apollonius; "for surely you won't rule out
influenza from the sphere of your cleverness, since you are minded to
praise such things? And while you are about it, you do as well to attend
funerals and detail the praises of the various diseases of which the
people died; for so you will somewhat soothe the regrets of the fathers
and children and the near relations of the deceased." And as he saw that
the effect of his words was to put a bridle on the young man's tongue,
he added: "My dear author, which is the author of a panegyric likely
best to praise, things which he knows or things which he does not?"
"Things which he knows," said the youth. "For how can a man praise
things which he does not know?" "I conclude then that you have already
written a panegyric of your own father?" "I wanted to," said the other,
"but as he appears to me rather a big man and a noble one, and the
fairest of men I know, and a very clever housekeeper, and a paragon of
wisdom all round, I gave up the attempt to compose a panegyric upon him,
lest I should disgrace my father by a discourse which would not do him
justice." Thereupon Apollonius was incensed, as he often was against
trivial and vulgar people. "Then," said he,

<span id="page_1:418">p. 418</span> <span id="page_1:419">p. 419</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "you wretch, you
are not sure that you can ever sufficiently praise your own father whom
you know as well as you do yourself, and yet you set out in this
light-hearted fashion to write an encomium of the father of men and of
gods and of the creator of everything around us and above us; and you
have no reverence for him whom you praise, nor have you the least idea
that you are embarking on a subject which transcends the power of man."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[1:411:1](laot20.htm#fr_8.md) Adhesive plasters were
used to remove superfluous hair from the body.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[1:411:2](laot20.htm#fr_9.md) Literally
"hair-pluckers."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 31-40](laot21.md)
