[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot24) 
[Next](laot26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:508">p. 508</span> <span id="page_1:509">p. 509</span>

### CHAPTER XXI

And when he had sailed as far as Chios, without even setting foot on the
shore, he leapt across into another ship hard by, which was advertised
to go to Rhodes; and without a word his companions jumped after him, for
it was an essential part of their philosophic discipline to imitate his
every word and action. With a favorable wind Apollonius made the passage
and held the following conversation in Rhodes. As he approached the
statue of the Colossus, Damis asked him, if he thought anything could be
greater than that; and he replied, "Yes, a man who loves wisdom in a
sound and innocent spirit." At that time Canus was living in Rhodes, who
was esteemed to be the best of all pipe-players of his age. He therefore
called him and said: "What is the business of a pipe-player?" "To do,"
replied the other, "everything which his audience wants him to." "Well,
but many," replied Apollonius, "in the audience want to be rich rather
than to hear a pipe played; I gather then that what you find them
desiring this, namely to be rich, you turn them into rich men." "Not at
all," replied the other, "though I would like to do so." "Well, then,
perhaps you make the young people in your audience good-looking? For all
who are still enjoying youth wish to be handsome." "Nor that either,"
replied the other, "although I can play many an air of Aphrodite on my
instrument." "What then is it," said Apollonius, "which you think your
audience want?" "Why, what else," replied Canus, "except that the
mourner

<span id="page_1:510">p. 510</span> <span id="page_1:511">p. 511</span>

may have his sorrow lulled to sleep by the pipe, and that they that
rejoice may have their cheerfulness enhanced, and the lover may wax
warmer in his passion, and that the lover of sacrifice may become more
inspired and full of sacred song?" "This then," he said, "O Canus,
"would you allow to be the effect of the pipe itself, because it is
constructed of gold or brass and of the shin of a stag, or perhaps of
the shin of a donkey, or is it something else which has these effects?"
"It is something else," he replied, "O Apollonius; for the music and the
modes and the blending of strains and the easy variations of the pipe
and the characters of the harmonies, it is all this that composes the
souls of listeners and brings them to such a state of contentment as
they want." "I understand," he replied, "O Canus, what it is that your
art performs; for you cultivate and exhibit to those who come to learn
of you the changefulness of your music and the variety of its modes. But
as for myself, I think that your pipe wants other resources in addition
to those you have mentioned, namely reserves of breath, and a right use
of the lips, and manual skill on the part of the player; and facility of
breath consists in its being clear and distinct, unmarred by any husky
click in the throat, for that would rob the sound of its musical
character. And facility with the lips consists in their taking in the
reed of the pipe and blowing without blowing out the cheeks; and manual
skill I consider very important, for the wrist must not weary from being
bent, nor must the fingers be slow in fluttering over the notes, and
manual skill is especially shown in the swift transition from mode to
mode. If then you have

<span id="page_1:512">p. 512</span> <span id="page_1:513">p. 513</span>

all these facilities, you may play with confidence, O Canus, for the
Muse Euterpe will be with you."

### CHAPTER XXII

It happened that a young man was building a house in Rhodes who was a
nouveau riche without any education, and he collected in his house rare
pictures and gems from different countries. Apollonius then asked him
how much money he had spent upon teachers and education. "Not a
farthing," he replied. "And how much upon your house?" "Twelve talents,"
he replied, "and I mean to spend as much again upon it." "And what,"
said the other, "is the good of your house to you?" "Why, as a
residence, it is splendidly suited to my bodily training, for there are
colonnades in it and groves, and I shall seldom need to walk out into
the market place, but people will come in and talk to me with all the
more pleasure, just as if they were visiting a temple." "And," said
Apollonius, "are men to be valued more for themselves or for their
belongings?" "For their wealth," said the other, "for wealth has the
most influence." "And," said Apollonius, "my good youth, which is the
best able to keep his money, an educated person or an uneducated?" And
as the other made no answer, he added: "My good boy, it seems to me that
it is not you that own the house, but the house rather that owns you. As
for myself I would far rather enter a temple, no matter how small, and
behold in it a statue of ivory and gold, than behold one of pottery and
bad workmanship in a vastly larger one."

<span id="page_1:514">p. 514</span> <span id="page_1:515">p. 515</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

And meeting a young man who was young and fat and prided himself upon
eating more than anybody else, he remarked: "Then you, it seems are the
glutton." "Yes, and I sacrifice to the gods out of gratitude for the
same." "And what pleasure," said Apollonius, "do you get by gorging
yourself in this way?" "Why, everyone admires me and stares at me; for
you have probably heard of Heracles, how people took as much pains to
celebrate what he ate as what labors he performed." "Yes, for he was
Heracles," said Apollonius; "but as for yourself, you scum, what good
points are there about you? There is nothing left for you but to burst,
if you want to be stared at."

### CHAPTER XXIV

Such were his experiences in Rhodes, and others ensued in Alexandria, so
soon as his voyage ended there. Even before he arrived Alexandria was in
love with him, and its inhabitants longed to see Apollonius with the
unique devotion of one friend for another; and as the people of Upper
Egypt are intensely religious they too prayed him to visit their several
societies. For owing to the fact that so many come hither and mix with
us from Egypt, while an equal number pass hence to visit Egypt,
Apollonius was already celebrated among them and the ears of the
Egyptians were literally pricked up to hear him. It is no exaggeration
to say that, as he advanced from

<span id="page_1:516">p. 516</span> <span id="page_1:517">p. 517</span>

the ship into the city, they gazed upon him as if he was a god, and made
way for him in the alleys, as they would for priests carrying the
sacraments. As he was being thus escorted with more pomp than if he had
been a governor of the country, he met twelve men who were being led to
execution on the charge of being bandits, he looked at them and said:
"They are not all guilty, for this one," and he gave his name, "has been
falsely accused and will escape." And to the executioners by whom they
were being led, he said: "I order you to relax your pace and bring them
to the ditch a little more leisurely, and to put this one to death last
of all, for he is guiltless of the charge; but you would anyhow act with
more piety, if you spared them for a brief portion of the day, since it
were better not to slay them at all." And withal he dwelt upon this
theme at what was for him unusual length. And the reason for his doing
so was immediately shown; for when eight of them had had their heads cut
off, a man on horseback rode up to the ditch, and shouted: "Spare
Pharion; for," he added, "he is no robber, but he gave false evidence
against himself from fear of being racked, and others of them in their
examination under torture have acknowledged that he is guiltless." I
need not describe the exultation of Egypt, nor how the people, who were
anyhow ready to admire him, applauded him for this action.

### CHAPTER XXV

And when he had gone up into the temple, he was struck by the
orderliness of its arrangements, and

<span id="page_1:518">p. 518</span> <span id="page_1:519">p. 519</span>

thought the reason given for everything thoroughly religious and wisely
framed. But as for the blood of bulls and the sacrifices of geese and
other animals, he disapproved of them nor would he bring them to repasts
of the gods. And when a priest asked him what induced him not to
sacrifice like the rest: "Nay, you," he replied," should rather answer
me what induces you to sacrifice in this way." The priest replied: "And.
who is so clever that he can make corrections in the rites of the
Egyptians?" "Anyone," he answered, "with a little wisdom, if only he
comes from India." "And," he added, "I will roast a bull to ashes this
very day, and you shall hold communion with us in the smoke it makes;
for you cannot complain, if you only get the same portion which is
thought enough of a repast for the gods." And as his image <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) was being melted in the fire he said:
"Look at the sacrifice." "What sacrifice," said the Egyptian, "for I do
not see anything there." And Apollonius said: "The Iamidae and the
Telliadae and the Clytiadae and the oracle of the black-footed ones,
have they talked a lot of nonsense, most excellent priest, when they
went on at such length about fire, and pretended to gather so many
oracles from it? For as to the fire from pine wood and from the cedar,
do you think it is really fraught with prophecy and capable of revealing
anything, and yet not esteem a fire lit from the richest and purest gum
to be much preferable? If then you had really any acquaintance with the
lore of fire worship, you would see that many things are revealed in the
disc of the sun at the moment of its rising."

<span id="page_1:520">p. 520</span> <span id="page_1:521">p. 521</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI

With these words he rebuked and silenced the Egyptian, showing that he
was ignorant of religion. But because the Alexandrians are devoted to
horses, and flock into the racecourse to see the spectacle, and murder
one another in their partisanship, he therefore administered a grave
rebuke to them over these matters, and entering the temple, he said:
"How long will you persist in meeting your deaths, not in behalf of your
families or of your shrines, but because you are determined to pollute
the sacred precincts by entering them reeking with gore and to slaughter
one another within the walls? And Troy it seems was ravaged and
destroyed by a single horse, which the Achaeans of that day had
contrived; but your chariots and horses are yoked to your own despite
and leave you no chance of living in submission to the reins of law. You
are being destroyed therefore not by the sons of Atreus nor by the sons
of Ajax, but by one another, a thing that the Trojans would not have
done even when they were drunk. At Olympia, however, where there are
prizes for wrestling and boxing and for the mixes athletic contests, no
one is slain in behalf of the athletes, though it were quite excusable
if one should show an excess of zeal in the rivalry of human beings like
himself. But here I see you rushing at one another with drawn swords,
and ready to hurl stones, all over a horse race. I would like to call
down fire upon a city as this, where amidst the groans and insulting
shouts 'of the destroyers and the destroyers the earth runs with blood.'
Can you not

<span id="page_1:522">p. 522</span> <span id="page_1:523">p. 523</span>

feel reference for the Nile, the common mixing bowl of Egypt? But why
mention the Nile to men whose gauges measure a rising tide of blood
rather than of water?" And many other rebukes of the same kind he
addressed to him, as Damis informs us.

### CHAPTER XXVII

Vespasian was harboring thoughts of seizing the absolute power, and was
at this time in the countries bordering upon Egypt; and when he advanced
as far as Egypt, people like Dion and Euphrates, of whom I shall have
something to say lower down, urged that a welcome should be given to
him. For the first autocrat, by whom the Roman state was organized, was
succeeded for the space of fifty years by tyrants so harsh and cruel,
that not even Claudius, who reigned thirteen years in the interval
between them, could be regarded as a good ruler, and that, although he
was fifty years of age when he succeeded to the throne, an age when a
man's judgment is most likely to be sane, and though he had the
reputation of being fond of culture of all kinds; nevertheless he too in
spite of his advanced age committed many youthful follies, and gave up
the empire to be devoured, as sheep devour a pasture, by silly women,
who murdered him, because he was so indolent that, though he knew
beforehand what was in store for him, he would not be on his guard even
against what he foresaw. Apollonius no less than Euphrates and Dion
rejoiced in the new turn of events; but he did not make use of them as a
theme in his public utterances,

<span id="page_1:524">p. 524</span> <span id="page_1:525">p. 525</span>

because he considered such an argument too much in the style of a
rhetor. When the autocrat approached the city, the priests met him
before the gates, together with the magistrates of Egypt and the
representatives of the different provinces into which Egypt is divided.
The philosophers also were present and all their schools. Apollonius
however did not put himself forward in this way, but remained conversing
in the temple. The autocrat delivered himself of noble and gentle
sentiments, and after making a short speech, said: "Is the man of Tyana
living here?" "Yes," they replied, "and he has much improved us
thereby." "Can he then be induced to give us an interview?" said the
emperor. "For I am very much in want of him." "He will meet you," said
Dion, "at the temple, for he admitted as much to me when I was on my way
here." "Let us go on," said the king, "at once to offer our prayers to
the gods, and to meet so noble a man." This is how the story grew up,
that it was during his conduct of the siege of Jerusalem that the idea
of making himself emperor suggested itself to him; and that he sent for
Apollonius to ask his advice on the point; but that the latter declined
to enter a country which its inhabitants polluted both by what they did
and by what they suffered, which was the reason why Vespasian came in
person to Egypt, as well because he now had possession of the throne, as
in order to hold with our sage the conversations which I shall relate.

### CHAPTER XXVIII

For after he had sacrificed, and before he gave official audiences to
the cities, he addressed himself

<span id="page_1:526">p. 526</span> <span id="page_1:527">p. 527</span>

to Apollonius, and as if making prayer he said to him: "Do thou make me
king." And he answered: "I have done so already, for I have already
offered a prayer for a king who should be just and noble and temperate,
endowed with the wisdom of grey hairs, and the father of legitimate
sons; and surely in my prayer I was asking from the gods for none other
but thyself." The emperor was delighted with this answer, for the crowd
too in the temple shouted their agreement with it. "What then," said the
emperor, "did you think of the reign of Nero?" And Apollonius answered:
"Nero perhaps understood how to tune a lyre, but he disgraced the empire
both by letting the strings go too slack and by drawing them too tight."
"Then," said the other, "you would like a ruler to observe the mean?"
"Not I," said Apollonius, "but God himself, who has defined equity as
consisting in the mean. And these gentlemen here, they too are good
advisers in this matter," he added, pointing to Dion and Euphrates, for
the latter had not yet quarreled with him. Thereupon the king held up
his hand and said: "O Zeus, may I hold sway over wise men, and wise men
hold sway over me." And turning himself round towards the Egyptians he
said: "You shall draw as liberally upon me as you do upon the Nile."

### CHAPTER XXIX

The result as that the Egyptians regained their prosperity, for they
were already exhausted by the oppressions they suffered; but as he went
down

<span id="page_1:528">p. 528</span> <span id="page_1:529">p. 529</span>

from the temple he grasped the hand of Apollonius, and taking him with
him into the palace, said: "Perhaps some will think me young and foolish
because I assume the reins of kingship nigh on the sixtieth year of my
life. I will then communicate to you my reasons for doing so, in order
that you may justify my actions to others. For I was never the slave of
wealth that I know of, even in my youth; and in the matter of the
magistracies and honors in the gift of the Roman sovereign, I bore
myself with so much soberness and moderation as to avoid being thought
either overbearing or, on the other hand, craven and cowardly. Nor did I
cherish any but loyal feelings towards Nero; but, inasmuch as he had
received the crown, if not in strict accordance with the law, at any
rate from an autocrat, I submitted to him for the sake of Claudius, who
made me consul and sharer of his counsels. And, by Athena, I never saw
Nero demeaning himself without shedding tears, when I thought of
Claudius, and contrasted with him the wretch who had inherited the
greatest of his possessions. And now when I see that even the
disappearance from the scene of Nero has brought no change for the
better in the fortunes of humanity, and that the throne has fallen into
such dishonor as to be assigned to Vitellius, I boldly advance to take
it myself; firstly, because I wish to endear myself to men and win their
esteem, and secondly, because the man I have to contend with is a mere
drunkard. For Vitellius uses more ointment in his bath than I do water,
and I believe that if you ran a sword into him, more ointment would
issue from the wound than blood; and his continuous bouts of drinking
have made him mad, and one who were he

<span id="page_1:530">p. 530</span> <span id="page_1:531">p. 531</span>

dicing would be full of apprehension lest the pieces should play him
false, is yet hazarding the empire in play; and though he is the slave
of mistresses, he nevertheless insults married women, and says that he
likes to spice his amours with a little danger. His worst excesses I
will not mention for I would rather not allude to such matters in your
presence. May I then never submit tamely, while the Romans are ruled by
such a man as he; let me rather ask the gods to guide me so that I may
be true to myself. And this, Apollonius, is why I, as it were, make fast
my cable to yourself, for they say that you have the amplest insight
into the will of the gods, and why I ask you to share with me in my
anxieties and aid me in my plans on which rests the safety of sea and
land; to the end that, supposing the goodwill of heaven show itself on
my side, I may fulfill my task; but if heaven opposes and favors neither
myself nor the Romans, that I may not trouble the gods against their
wills."

### CHAPTER XXX

Apollonius clinched his words with an appeal to heaven: "O Zeus," said
he, "of the Capitol, for thou art he whom I know to be the arbiter of
the present issue, do thou preserve thyself for this man and this man
for thyself. For this man who stands before thee is destined to raise
afresh unto thee the temple which only yesterday the hands of
malefactors set on fire." And on the emperor expressing astonishment at
his words: "The facts themselves," he said, "will reveal, so do thou ask
nothing of me; but continue and

<span id="page_1:532">p. 532</span> <span id="page_1:533">p. 533</span>

complete that which thou hast so rightly purposed." Now it happened that
just then as a matter of fact that in Rome Domitian, the son of
Vespasian, was matched with Vitellius in the struggle to gain the empire
for his father, and was besieged in the Capitol, with the result that
although he escaped the fury of the besiegers, the temple was burnt
down; and all this was revealed to Apollonius more quickly than if it
had taken place in Egypt. When they had held their conversation, he left
the emperor's presence, saying that it was not permitted him by the
religion of the Indians to proceed at midday in any other way than the
Indians do themselves; at the same time the emperor brightened up, and
with fresh enthusiasm, instead of allowing matters to slip through his
hands, persevered in his policy, convinced by Apollonius’ words that his
future was stable and assured to him by heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[1:519:1](laot25.htm#fr_13) A frankincense model
of a bull.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 31-40](laot26)
