[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot33.md) 
[Next](laot35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLI

At one time the cities on the left side of the Hellespont were visited
by earthquakes, and Egyptians and Chaldaeans went begging about through
them to collect money, pretending that they wanted ten talents with
which to offer sacrifices to earth and to Poseidon. And the cities began
to contribute under the stress of fear, partly out of their common funds
and partly out of private. But the imposters refused to offer the
sacrifices in behalf of their dupes unless the money was deposited in
the banks. Now the sage determined not to allow the peoples of the
Hellespont to be imposed upon; so he visited their cities, and drove out
the quacks who were making money out of the misfortunes of others, and
when he divined the causes of the supernatural wrath, and by making such
offerings as suited each case averted the visitation at small cost, and
the land was at rest.

### CHAPTER XLII

The emperor Domitian about the same time passed a law against making men
eunuchs, and against planting fresh vineyards, and also in favor of
cutting down vineyards already planted, whereon

<span id="page_2:140">p. 140</span> <span id="page_2:141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Apollonius, who
was visiting the Ionians, remarked: "These rescripts do not concern me,
for I, alone perhaps of mankind, require neither to beget my kind nor to
drink wine; but our egregious sovereign seems not aware that he is
sparing mankind, while he eunuchises the earth." This witticism
emboldened the Ionians to send a deputation to the emperor in behalf of
their vines, and ask for a repeal of the law which ordered the earth to
be laid waste and not planted.

### CHAPTER XLIII

Here too is a story which they tell of him in Tarsus. A mad dog had
attacked a lad, and as a result of the bite the lad behaved exactly like
a dog, for he barked and howled and went on all four feet using his
hands as such, and ran about in that manner. And he had been ill in this
way for thirty days, when Apollonius, who had recently come to Tarsus,
met him and ordered a search to be made for the dog which had done the
harm. But they said that the dog had not been found, because the youth
had been attacked outside the wall when he was practicing with javelins,
nor could they learn from the patient what the dog was like, for he did
not even know himself any more. Then Apollonius reflected for a moment
and said: "O Damis, the dog is a white shaggy sheep-dog, as big as an
Amphilochian hound, and he is standing at a certain fountain trembling
all over, for he is longing to drink the water, but at the same time is
afraid of it. Bring him to me to the bank of the river, where there are

<span id="page_2:142">p. 142</span> <span id="page_2:143">p. 143</span>

the wrestling grounds, merely telling that it is I who call him." So
Damis dragged the dog along, and it crouched at the feet of Apollonius,
crying out as a suppliant might do before an altar. But he quite tamed
it by stroking it with his hand, and then he stood the lad close by,
holding him with his hand; and in order that the multitude might be
cognizant of so great a mystery, he said: "The soul of Telephus of Mysia
has been transferred into this boy, and the Fates impose the same things
upon him as upon Telephus." And with these words he bade the dog lick
the wound all round where he had bitten the boy, so that the agent of
the wound might in turn be its physician and healer. After that the boy
returned to his father and recognized his mother, and saluted his
comrades as before, and drank of the waters of the Cydnus. Nor did the
sage neglect the dog either, but after offering a prayer to the river he
sent the dog across it; and when the dog had crossed the river, he took
his stand on the opposite bank, and began to bark, a thing which mad
dogs rarely do, and he folded back his ears and wagged his tail, because
he knew that he was all right again, for a draught of water cures a mad
dog, if he has only the courage to take it.

Such were the exploits of our sage in behalf of both temples and cities;
such were the discourses he delivered to the public or in behalf of
different communities, and in behalf of those who were dead or who were
sick; and such were the harangues he delivered to wise and unwise alike,
and to the sovereigns who consulted him about moral virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 1-10](laot35.md)
