[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot31.md) 
[Next](laot33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI

"Let us," said Thespesion, tackle the subject; for it is one very
suitable to men, whether they are wise or not wise. But lest we should
drag in the opinions of Indians, and so confuse our discussion, and go
off without having formed any conclusions, do you first impart to us the
views held by the Indians concerning justice, for you probably examined

<span id="page_2:90">p. 90</span> <span id="page_2:91">p. 91</span>

their views on the spot; and if their opinion is proved to be correct we
will adopt it; but if we have something wiser to put in its place, you
must adopt our view, for that too is plain justice." Said Apollonius:
"Your plan is excellent and most satisfactory to me; so do listen to the
conversation which I held there. For I related to them how I had once
been captain of a large ship, in the period when my soul was in command
of another body, and how I thought myself extremely just because, when
robbers offered me a reward, if I would betray my ship by running it
into roads where they were going to lie in wait for it, in order to
seize its cargo, I agreed and made the promise, just to save them from
attacking us, but intending to slip by them and get beyond the place
agreed upon." "And," said Thespesion, "did the Indians agree that this
was justice?" "No, they laughed at the idea," he said, "for they said
that justice was something more than not being unjust." "It was very
sensible," said the other, "of the Indians to reject such a view; for
good sense is something more than not entertaining nonsense, just as
courage is something more than not running away from the ranks; and so
temperance is something more than the avoidance of adultery, and no one
reserves his praise for a man who has simply shown himself to be not
bad. For because a thing, no matter what, is equidistant between praise
and punishment, it is not on that account to be reckoned off-hand to be
virtue" "How then. O Thespesion," said Apollonius, "are we to crown the
just man and for what actions?" "Could you have discussed justice more
completely and more opportunely," said the other, "than when

<span id="page_2:92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_2:93">p. 93</span>

the sovereign of so large and flourishing a country intervened in your
philosophic discussion of the art of kingship, a thing intimately
connected with justice?" "If it had been Phraotes," said Apollonius,
"who turned up on that occasion, you might rightly blame me for not
gravely discussing the subject of justice in his presence. But you from
the account which I gave of him yesterday that the man is a drunkard and
an enemy of all philosophy. What need therefore was there to inflict on
him the trouble? Why should we try to win credit for ourselves in the
presence of a sybarite who thinks of nothing but his own pleasures? But
inasmuch as it is incumbent upon wise men like ourselves to explore and
trace out justice, more so than on kings and generals, let us proceed to
examine the absolutely just man. For though I thought myself just in the
affair of the ship, and thought others just too because they do not
practice injustice, you deny that this in itself constitutes them just
or worthy of honor." "And rightly so," said the other, " for whoever
heard of a decree drafted by Athenians or Lacedaemonians in favor of
crowning so and so, because he is not a libertine, or of granting the
freedom of the city to so and so, because the temples have not been
robbed by him? Who then is the just man and what are is actions? For
neither did I ever hear of anyone being crowned merely for his justice,
nor of a decree being proposed over a just man to the effect that so and
so shall be crowned, because such and such actions of his show him to be
just. For anyone who considers the fate of Palamedes in Troy or Socrates
in Athens, will discover that even justice is not sure of success

<span id="page_2:94">p. 94</span> <span id="page_2:95">p. 95</span>

among men, for assuredly these men suffered most unjustly being
themselves most just. Still they at least were put to death on the score
of acts of injustice imputed on them, and the verdict was a distortion
of the truth; whereas in the case of Aristides the son of Lysimachus, it
was very justice that was the undoing of him, for he in spite of his
integrity was banished merely because of his reputation for this very
virtue. And I am sure that justice will appear in a very ridiculous
light; for having been appointed by Zeus and by the Fates to prevent men
being unjust to one another, she has never been able to defend herself
against injustice.

And the history of Aristides is sufficient to me to show the difference
between one who is nor unjust and one who is really just. For, tell me,
is not this the same Aristides of whom your Hellenic compatriots when
they come here tell us that he undertook a voyage to the islands to fix
the tribute of the allies, and after settling it on a fair basis,
returned again to his country still wearing the same cloak in which he
left it?" "It is he," answered Apollonius, "who made the love of poverty
once to flourish." "Now," said the other, "let us suppose that there
were at Athens two public orators passing an encomium upon Aristides,
just after he had returned from the allies; one of the proposes that he
shall be crowned, because he has come back again without enriching
himself or amassing any fortune, but the poorest of the Athenians,
poorer than he was before; and the other orator, we will suppose, drafts
his motion somewhat as follows: 'Whereas Aristides has fixed the tribute
of the allies according

<span id="page_2:96">p. 96</span> <span id="page_2:97">p. 97</span>

to their ability to pay, and not in excess of the resources of their
respective countries; and whereas he has endeavored to keep them loyal
to the Athenians, and to see that they shall feel it no grievance to pay
upon this scale, it is hereby resolved to crown him for justice.' Do you
not suppose that Aristides himself would have opposed the first of these
resolutions, as an indignity to his entire life, seeing that it only
honored him for not doing injustice; whereas, he might perhaps have
supported the other resolution as a fair attempt to express his
intentions and policy? For I imagine it was with an eye to the interest
of Athenians and subject states alike, that he took care to fix the
tribute on a fair and moderate basis, and in fact his wisdom in this
matter was conclusively proved after his death. For when the Athenians
exceeded his valuations and imposed heavier tributes upon the islands,
their naval supremacy at once went to pieces, though it more than
anything else had made them formidable; on the other hand the prowess of
the Lacedaemonians passed on to the sea itself; and nothing was left of
Athenian supremacy, for the whole of the subject states rushed into
revolution and made good their escape. It follows then, O Apollonius,
that rightly judged, it is not the man who abstains from injustice that
is just, but the man who himself does what is just, and also influences
others not to be unjust; and from such justice as his there will spring
up a crop of other virtues, especially those of the law-court and of the
legislative chamber. For such a man as he will make a much fairer judge
than people who take their oaths upon the dissected parts of victims,
and his

<span id="page_2:98">p. 98</span> <span id="page_2:99">p. 99</span>

legislation will be similar to that of Solon and of Lycurgus; for
assuredly these great legislators were inspired by justice to undertake
their work."

### CHAPTER XXII

Such, according to Damis, was the discussion held by them with regard to
the just man, and Apollonius, he says, assented to their argument, for
he always agreed with what was reasonably put. They also had a
philosophic talk about the soul, proving its immortality, and about
nature, along much the same lines which Plato follows in his Timaeus;
and after some further remarks and discussions of the laws of the
Hellenes, Apollonius said: "For myself I have come all this way to see
yourselves and visit the springs of the Nile; for a person who only
comes as far as Egypt may be excused if he ignores the latter, but if he
advances as far as Ethiopia, as I have done, he will be rightly
reproached if he neglects to visit them, and to draw as it were from
their well-springs some arguments of his own." "Farewell then," said the
other, "and pray to the springs for whatever you desire, for they are
divine. But I imagine you will take as your guide Timasion, who formerly
lived at Naucratis, but is now of Memphis; for he is well acquainted
with the springs of the Nile and he is not so impure as to stand in need
of further lustrations. But as for you, O Nilus, we would like to have a
talk to you by ourselves." The meaning of this sally was clear enough to
Apollonius, for he well understood their annoyance at Nilus’ preference
for himself; but to give them an

<span id="page_2:100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_2:101">p. 101</span>

opportunity of speaking him apart, he left them to prepare and pack up
for his journey, for he meant to start at daybreak. And after a little
time Nilus returned, but did not tell them anything of what they had
said to him, though he laughed a good deal to himself. And no one asked
him what he was laughing about, but they respected his secret.

### CHAPTER XXIII

They then took their supper and after a discussion of certain trifles
they laid them down to sleep where they were; but at daybreak they said
goodbye to the naked sages, and started off along the road which leads
to the mountains, keeping the Nile on their right hand, and they saw the
following spectacles deserving of notice. The Catadupi \[the first
cataract\] are mountains formed of good soil, about the same size as the
hill of the Lydians called Tmolus; and from them the Nile flows rapidly
down, washing with it the soil of which it creates Egypt; but the roar
of the stream, as it breaks down in a cataract from the mountains and
hurls itself into the Nile, is terrible and intolerable to the ears, and
many of those have approached it too close have returned with the loss
of their hearing.

### CHAPTER XXIV

Apollonius, however, and his party pushed on till they saw some
round-shaped hills covered with trees, the leaves and bark and gum of
which the Ethiopians

<span id="page_2:102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_2:103">p. 103</span>

regard as of great value; and they also saw lions close to the path, and
leopards and other such wild animals; but they were not attracted by any
of them, for they fled from them in haste as if they were scared at the
sight of men. And they also saw stags and gazelles, and ostriches an
asses, the latter in great numbers, and also many wild bulls and
ox-goats, the former of these two animals being a mixture of the stag
and the ox, that latter of the creatures from which its name is taken.
They found moreover on the road the bones and half-eaten carcases of
these; for the lions, when they have gorged themselves with fresh prey,
care little for what is left over of it, because, I think, they feel
sure of catching fresh quarry whenever they want it.

### CHAPTER XXV

It is here that the nomad Ethiopians live in a sort of colony upon
wagons, and not far from them the elephant-hunters, who cut up these
animals and sell the flesh, and are accordingly called by a name which
signifies the selling of elephants. And the Nasamones and the man-eaters
and the pigmies and the shadow-footed people are also tribes of
Ethiopia, and they extend as far as the Ethiopian ocean, which no
mariners ever enter except castaways who do so against their will.

### CHAPTER XXVI

As our company were discussing these animals and talking learnedly about
the food which nature

<span id="page_2:104">p. 104</span> <span id="page_2:105">p. 105</span>

supplies in their different cases, they heard a sound as of thunder; not
a crashing sound, but of thunder as it is when it is still hollow and
concealed in the cloud. And Timasion said: "A cataract is at hand,
gentlemen, the last for those who are descending the river, but the
first to meet you on your way up." And after they had advanced about ten
stades, he says that they saw a river discharging itself from the
hill-side as big as the Marsyas and the Meander at their first
confluence; and he says that after they had put up a prayer to the Nile,
they went on till they no longer saw any animals at all; for the latter
are naturally afraid of noise, and therefore live by calm waters rather
than by those which rush headlong with a noise. And after fifteen stades
they heard another cataract which this time was horrible and unbearable
to the senses, for it was twice as loud as the first one and it fell
from much higher mountains. And Damis relates that his own ears and
those of one of his companions were so stunned by the noise, that he
himself turned back and besought Apollonius not to go further; however
he, along with Timasion and Nilus, boldly pressed on to the third
cataract, of which he made the following report on their return. Peaks
overhang the Nile, at the most eight stades in height; but the eminence
faces the mountains, namely a beetling brow of rocks mysteriously cut
away, as if in a quarry, and the fountains of the Nile cling to the edge
of the mountain, till they overbalance and fall on to the rocky
eminence, from which they pour into the Nile as an expanse of whitening
billows. But the effect produced upon the senses by this cataract, which
is many times greater than the earlier ones,

<span id="page_2:106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_2:107">p. 107</span>

and the echo which leaps up therefrom against the mountains render it
impossible to hear what your companion tells you about the river <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md). But the further road which leads up to
the first springs of the river was impracticable, they tell us, and
impossible to think of; for they tell many stories of the demons which
haunt it, stories similar to those which Pindar in his wisdom puts into
verse about the demon whom he sets over these springs to preserve the
due proportions of the Nile.

### CHAPTER XXVII

After passing the cataracts they halted in a village of the Ethiopians
of no great size, and they were dining, towards the evening, mingling in
their conversation the grave with the gay, when all on a sudden they
heard the women of the village screaming and calling to one another to
join in the pursuit and catch the thing; and they also summoned their
husbands to help them in the matter. And the latter caught up sticks and
stones and anything which came handy, and called upon one another to
avenge the insult to their wives. And it appears that for ten months the
ghost of a satyr had been haunting the village, who was mad after the
women and was said to have killed two of them to whom he was supposed to
be specially attached. The companions, then, of Apollonius were
frightened out of their wits till Apollonius said: "You need not be
afraid, for it's only a satyr that is

<span id="page_2:108">p. 108</span> <span id="page_2:109">p. 109</span>

running amuck here." "Yes, by Zeus," said Nilus, "it's the one that we
naked sages have found insulting us for a long time past and we could
never stop his jumps and leaps." "But," said Apollonius, "I have a
remedy against these hell-hounds, which Midas is said once to have
employed; for Midas himself had some of the blood of satyrs in his
veins, as was clear from the shape of his ears; and a satyr once,
trespassing on his kinship with Midas, made merry at the expense of his
ears, not only singing about them, but piping about them. Well, Midas, I
understand, had heard from his mother that when a satyr is overcome by
wine he falls asleep, and at such times comes to his senses and will
make friends with you; so he mixed wine which he had in his palace in a
fountain and let the satyr get at it, and the latter drank it up and was
overcome. And to show that the story is true, let us go to the head man
of the village, and if the villagers have any wine, we will mix it with
water for the satyr and he will share the fate of Midas’ satyr." They
thought it a good plan, so he poured four Egyptian jars of wine into the
trough out of which the village cattle drank, and then called the satyr
by means of some secret rebuke or threat; and though as yet the latter
was not visible, the wine sensibly diminished as if it was being drunk
up. And when it was quite finished, Apollonius said: "Let us make peace
with the satyr, for he is fast asleep." And with these words he led the
villagers to the cave of the nymphs, which was not quite a furlong away
from the village; and he showed them a satyr lying fast asleep in it,
but he told them not to hit him or abuse him, "For," he said, "his
nonsense is stopped for ever." Such was

<span id="page_2:110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_2:111">p. 111</span>

this exploit of Apollonius, and, by heavens, we may call it not an
incidental work in passing, but a masterwork of his passing by <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md); and if you read the sage's epistle, in
which he wrote to an insolent young man that he had sobered even a satyr
demon in Ethiopia, you will perforce call to mind the above story. But
we must not disbelieve that satyrs both exist and are susceptible to the
passion of love; for I knew a youth of my own age in Lemnos whose mother
was said to be visited by a satyr, as he well might to judge by this
story; for he was represented as wearing in his back a fawn-skin that
exactly fitted him, the front paws of which were drawn around his neck
and fastened over his chest. But I must not go further into this
subject; but, anyhow, credit is due as much to experience of facts as it
is to myself.

### CHAPTER XXVIII

When he had come down from Ethiopia the breach with Euphrates grew wider
and wider, especially on account of the daily disputes and discussions;
though he left them to Menippus and Nilus to conduct, and seldom himself
attacked Euphrates, being much too busy with the training of Nilus.

After Titus had taken Jerusalem, and when the country all round was
filled with corpses, the neighboring races offered him a crown; but he
disclaimed any such honor to himself, saying that it

<span id="page_2:112">p. 112</span> <span id="page_2:113">p. 113</span>

was not himself that had accomplished this exploit, but that he had
merely lent his arms to God, who had so manifested his wrath; and
Apollonius praised his action, for therein he displayed a great deal of
judgment and understanding of things human and divine, and it showed
great moderation on his part that he refused to be crowned because he
had shed blood. Accordingly Apollonius indited to him a letter which he
sent by the hands of Damis and of which the text was as follows:

"Apollonius sends greetings to Titus the Roman general. Whereas you have
refused to be proclaimed for success in war and for shedding the blood
of your enemies, I myself assign to you the crown of temperance and
moderation, because you thoroughly understand what deeds really merit a
crown. Farewell."

Now Titus was overjoyed with this epistle, and replied: "In my own
behalf I thank you, no less then in behalf of my father, and I will not
forget your kindness; for although I have captured Jerusalem, you have
captured me."

### CHAPTER XXX

And after Titus had been proclaimed autocrat in Rome and rewarded with
the meed of his valor, he went away to become the colleague in empire of
his father; but he did not forget Apollonius, and thinking that even a
short interview with him would be precious to himself, he besought him
to come to Tarsus; and when he arrived he embraced him, saying: "My
father has told me by letter everything

<span id="page_2:114">p. 114</span> <span id="page_2:115">p. 115</span>

in respect of which he consulted you; and lo, here is his letter, in
which you are described as his benefactor and the being to whom we owe
all that we are. Now though I am only just thirty years of age, I am
held worthy of the same privileges which my father only attained at the
age of sixty. I am called to the throne and to rule, perhaps before I
have learned myself to obey, and I therefore dread lest I am undertaking
a task beyond my powers." Thereupon Apollonius, after stroking his neck,
said (for had as stout a neck as any athlete in training): "And who will
force so sturdy a bull-neck as yours under the yoke?" "He that from my
youth up reared me as calf," answered Titus, meaning his own father, and
implying that he could only be controlled by the latter, who had
accustomed him from childhood to obey himself. "I am delighted then,"
said Apollonius, "in the first place to see you prepared to subordinate
yourself to your father, whom without being his natural children so many
are delighted to obey, and next to see you rendering to his court a
homage in which others will associate yourself. When youth and age are
paired in authority, is there any lyre or any flute that will produce so
sweet a harmony and so nicely blended? For the qualities of old age will
be associated with those of youth, with the result that old age will
gain in strength and youth in discipline."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[2:107:1](laot32.htm#fr_18.md) *Or* "render
investigation of the stream a trial to the ears."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[2:111:1](laot32.htm#fr_19.md) I try to render the
pun of the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 31-40](laot33.md)
