[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot21.md) 
[Next](laot23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:448">p. 448</span> <span id="page_1:449">p. 449</span>

### CHAPTER XLI

The result of his discourses about religion was that the gods were
worshipped with more zeal, and that men flocked to the temples where he
was, in the belief that by doing so they would obtain an increase of
divine blessings. And our sage's conversations were so far not objected
to, because he held them in public and addressed himself to all men
alike; for he did not hover about rich men's doors, nor hang about the
mighty, though he welcomed them if they resorted to him, and he talked
with them just as much as he did to the common people.

### CHAPTER XLII

Now Demetrius being attracted to Apollonius, as I have said above in my
account of the events at Corinth, betook himself subsequently to Rome,
and proceeded to court Apollonius, at the same time that he launched out
against Nero. In consequence our sage's profession was looked at
askance, and he was thought to have set Demetrius on to proceed thus,
and the suspicion was increased on the occasion of Nero's completion of
the most magnificent gymnasium in Rome: for the auspicious day was being
celebrated therein by Nero himself and the great Senate and all the
knights of Rome, when Demetrius made his way into the gymnasium itself
and delivered himself of a philippic against people who bathed,
declaring that they enfeebled and polluted themselves; and he showed
that such institutions were a useless expense. He

<span id="page_1:450">p. 450</span> <span id="page_1:451">p. 451</span>

was only saved from immediate death as the penalty of such language by
the fact that Nero was in extra good voice when he sang on that day, and
he sang in the tavern which adjoined the gymnasium, naked except for a
girdle round his waste, like any low tapster. Demetrius, however, did
not wholly escape the risk which he had courted by his language; for
Tigellinus, to whom Nero had committed the power of life and death,
proceeded to banish him from Rome, on the plea that he had ruined and
overthrown the bath by the words he used; and he began to dog the steps
of Apollonius secretly, in the hope that he would catch him out too in
some compromising utterance.

### CHAPTER XLIII

The latter, however, showed no disposition to ridicule the government,
nor on the other hand did he display any of the anxiety usually felt by
those who are on their guard against some danger. He merely continued to
discuss in simple and adequate terms the topics laid before him; and
Telesinus and others continued to study philosophy in his company, for
although philosophy was just then in a perilous condition, they did not
dream that they would imperil themselves with his studies. Yet he was
suspected as I have said, and the suspicion was intensified by words he
uttered in connection to a prodigy. For presently when there was an
eclipse of the sun and a clap of thunder was heard, a thing that very
rarely occurs at the moment of an eclipse, he glanced up to heaven

<span id="page_1:452">p. 452</span> <span id="page_1:453">p. 453</span>

and said: "There shall be some great event and there shall not be." Now
at the time those who heard these words were unable to comprehend their
meaning; but on the third day after the eclipse, everyone understood
what was meant: for while Nero sat at meat a thunderbolt fell on the
table, and clove asunder the cup that was in his hand and was close to
his lips. And the fact that he so narrowly escaped being struck was
intended by the words that a great event would happen and yet should not
happen. Tigellinus when he heard this story began to dread Apollonius as
one who was wise in supernatural matters; and though he felt that he had
better not prefer any open charges against him, lest he should incur at
his hands some mysterious disaster, nevertheless he used all the eyes
with which the government sees, to watch Apollonius, whether he was
talking or holding his tongue, or sitting down or walking about, and to
mark what he ate, and in whose houses, and whether he offered sacrifice
or not.

### CHAPTER XLIV

Just then a distemper broke out in Rome, called by the physicians
influenza; and it was attended, it seems, by coughings, and the voice of
speakers was affected by it. Now the temples were full of people
supplicating the gods, because Nero had a swollen throat, and his voice
was hoarse. But Apollonius vehemently denounced the folly of the crowd,
though without rebuking anyone in particular; nay, he even restrained
Menippus, who was irritated by such goings

<span id="page_1:454">p. 454</span> <span id="page_1:455">p. 455</span>

on, and persuaded him to moderate his indignation, urging him to pardon
the gods if they did show pleasure in the mimes of buffoons. This
utterance was reported to Tigellinus, who immediately sent police to
take him to prison, and summoned him to defend himself from the charge
of impiety against Nero. And an accuser was retained against him who had
already undone a great many people, and won a number of such Olympic
victories. This accuser too held in his hands a scroll of paper on which
the charge was written out, and he brandished it like a sword against
the sage, and declared that it was so sharp that it would slay and ruin
him. But when Tigellinus unrolled the scroll, and did not find upon it
the trace of a single word or letter, and his eyes fell on a perfectly
blank book, he came to the conclusion that he had to do with a demon;
and this is said also subsequently to have been the feeling which
Domitian afterwards entertained towards Apollonius. Tigellinus then took
his victim apart into a secret tribunal, in which this class of
magistrate tries in private the most important charges; and having
ordered all to leave the court he plied him with questions, asking who
he was. Apollonius gave his father's name and that of his country, and
explained his motive in practicing wisdom, declaring that the sole use
he had made of it was to gain knowledge of the gods and an understanding
of human affairs, for that the difficulty of knowing another man
exceeded that of knowing oneself. "And about the demons," said
Tigellinus, "and the apparitions of specters, how, O Apollonius, do you
exorcise them?" "In the same way," he answered, "as I should murderers
and impious men." This was a sarcastic allusion to Tigellinus himself,

<span id="page_1:456">p. 456</span> <span id="page_1:457">p. 457</span>

for he taught and encouraged in Nero every excess of cruelty and wanton
violence. "And," said the other, "could you prophesy, if I asked you
to?" "How," said Apollonius, "can I, being no prophet?" "And yet,"
replied the other, "they say that it is you who predicted that some
great event would come to pass and yet not come to pass." "Quite true,"
said Apollonius, "is what you heard; but you must not put this down to
any prophetic gift, but rather to the wisdom which God reveals to wise
men." "And," said the other, "why are you not afraid of Nero?"
"Because," said Apollonius, "the same God who allows him to seem
formidable, has also granted to me to feel no fear." "And what do you
think," said the other, "about Nero?" And Apollonius answered: "Much
better than you do; for you think it dignified for him to sing, but I
think it dignified for him to keep silent." Tigellinus was astonished
and said: "You may go, but you must give sureties for your person." And
Apollonius answered: "And who can go surety for a body that no one can
bind?" This answer struck Tigellinus as inspired and above the wit of
man; and as he was careful not to fight with a god, he said: "You may go
wherever you choose, for you are too powerful to be controlled by me."

### CHAPTER XLV

Here too is a miracle which Apollonius worked: A girl had died just in
the hour of her marriage, and the

<span id="page_1:458">p. 458</span> <span id="page_1:459">p. 459</span>

bridegroom was following her bier lamenting as was natural his marriage
left unfulfilled, and the whole of Rome was mourning with him, for the
maiden belonged to a consular family. Apollonius then witnessing their
grief, said: "Put down the bier, for I will stay the tears that you are
shedding for this maiden." And withal he asked what was her name. The
crowd accordingly thought that he was about to deliver such an oration
as is commonly delivered to grace the funeral as to stir up lamentation;
but he did nothing of the kind, but merely touching her and whispering
in secret some spell over her, at once woke up the maiden from her
seeming death; and the girl spoke out loud, and returned to her father's
house, just as Alcestis did when she was brought back to life by
Heracles. And the relations of the maiden wanted to present him with the
sum of 150,000 sesterces, but he said that he would freely present the
money to the young lady by way of dowry. Now whether he detected some
spark of life in her, which those who were nursing her had not
noticed—for it is said that although it was raining at the time, a vapor
went up from her face—or whether her life was really extinct, and he
restored it by the warmth of his touch, is a mysterious problem which
neither I myself nor those who were present could decide.

### CHAPTER XLVI

About this time Musonius lay confined in the dungeons of Nero, a man who
they say was unsurpassed in philosophic ability by anyone. Now they did
not openly converse with one another, because Musonius declined to do
so, in order that both their lives might not be endangered; but they
carried on

<span id="page_1:460">p. 460</span> <span id="page_1:461">p. 461</span>

a correspondence through Menippus and Damis, who went to and fro the
prison. Such of their letters as did not handle greater themes I will
take no notice of, and only set before my reader the indispensable ones
in which we get glimpses of lofty topics:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“Apollonius to Musonius the philosopher, greeting.

</div>

”I would fain came unto you, to share your conversation and lodgings, in
the hope of being some use to you; unless indeed you are disinclined to
believe that Heracles once released Theseus from hell; write what you
would like me to do. Farewell.”

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

”Musonius to Apollonius the philosopher, greeting.

</div>

”For your solicitude on my behalf, I shall never do anything but commend
you: but he who has strength of mind to defend himself, and has proved
that he has done no wrong, is a true man. Farewell.”

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

”Apollonius to Musonius the philosopher sends greeting.

</div>

”Socrates of Athens, because he refused to be released by his own
friends, went before the tribunal and was put to death. Farewell.”

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

”Musonius to Apollonius the philosopher sends greeting.

</div>

”Socrates was put to death, because he would not take the trouble to
defend himself; but I shall defend myself. Farewell.”

<span id="page_1:462">p. 462</span> <span id="page_1:463">p. 463</span>

### CHAPTER XLVII

When Nero took his departure for Greece, after issuing a proclamation
that no one should teach philosophy in public at Rome, Apollonius turned
his steps to the Western regions of the earth, which they say are
bounded by the Pillars, because he wished to visit and behold the ebb
and flow of the ocean, and the city of Gadeira. For he had heard
something of the love of wisdom entertained by the inhabitants of that
country, and of how great an advance they had made in religion; and he
was accompanied by all his pupils, who approved no less of the
expedition than they did of the sage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 1-10](laot23.md)
