[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot39) 
[Next](laot41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2:270">p. 270</span> <span id="page_2:271">p. 271</span>

# BOOK VIII

<span id="page_2:272">p. 272</span> <span id="page_2:273">p. 273</span>

### CHAPTER I

Let us now repair to the law court to listen to the sage pleading his
cause; for it is already sunrise and the doors are thrown open to admit
the celebrities. And the companions of the Emperor say that he had taken
no food today, because, I imagine, he was so absorbed in examining the
documents of the case. For they say he was holding in his hands a roll
of writing of some sort, sometimes reading it with anger, and sometimes
more calmly. And we must needs figure him as one who was angry with the
law for having invented such things as courts of justice.

### CHAPTER II

But Apollonius, as we meet him in this conjuncture seems to regard the
trial as a dialectical discussion, rather than as a race to be run for
his life; and this we may infer from the way he behaved before he
entered the court. For on his way thither he asked the secretary who was
conducting him, where they were going; and when the latter answered that
he was leading him to the

<span id="page_2:274">p. 274</span> <span id="page_2:275">p. 275</span>

court, he said: "Whom am I going to plead against?" "Why," said the
other, "against the accuser of course, and the Emperor will be judge."
"And," said Apollonius, "who is going to judge between myself and the
Emperor? For I shall prove that he is wronging philosophy." "And what
concern," said the other, "has the Emperor for philosophy, even if he
does happen to be wrong?" "Nay, but philosophy," said Apollonius, "is
much concerned about the Emperor, that he should govern as he should."
The secretary commanded this sentiment, for indeed he was already
favorably disposed to Apollonius, as he proved from the very beginning.
"And how long will your pleading last by the water-clock's reckoning?
For I must know this before the trial begins." "If," said Apollonius, "I
am allowed to plead as long as the necessities of the suit require me
to, the whole of the Tiber might run through the meter before I should
have done; but if I am only to answer the questions put to me, then it
depends on the cross-examiner how long I shall be making my answers."
"You have cultivated," remarked the other, "contrary talents when you
thus engage to talk about one and the same matter both with brevity and
with prolixity." "They are not contrary talents," said Apollonius, "but
resemble each other. And moreover there is a mean composed between the
two, which I should not myself allege to be a third, but a first
requisite for a pleader; and for my own part I am sure that silence
constitutes a fourth excellence much required in a law-court." "Anyhow,"
said the other, "it will do you no good

<span id="page_2:276">p. 276</span> <span id="page_2:277">p. 277</span>

nor anyone who stands in great peril." "And yet," said Apollonius, "it
was of great service to Socrates of Athens, when he was prosecuted."
"And what good did it do him," said the other, "seeing that he died just
because he would say nothing?" "He did not die," said Apollonius,
"though the Athenians thought he did."

### CHAPTER III

This was how he prepared himself to confront the despot's maneuvers; and
as he waited before the court another secretary came up and said: "Man
of Tyana, you must enter the court with nothing on you." "Are we then to
take a bath," said Apollonius, "or to plead?" "The rule," said the
other, "does not apply to dress, but the Emperor only forbids you to
bring in here either amulet, or book, or any papers of any kind." "And
not even a cane," said Apollonius, "for the back of the idiots who gave
him such advice as this?" Whereat the accuser burst into shouts: "O my
Emperor," he said, "this wizard threatens to beat me, for it was I who
gave you this advice." "Then," said Apollonius, "it is you who are a
wizard rather than myself; for you say that you have persuaded the
Emperor of my being that which so far I have failed to persuade him that
I am not." While the accuser was indulging in this abuse, one of the
freedmen of Euphrates was at his side, whom the latter was said to have
sent from Ionia with news of what Apollonius had there said in his
conversations, and also with a sum of money which was presented to the
accuser.

<span id="page_2:278">p. 278</span> <span id="page_2:279">p. 279</span>

### CHAPTER IV

Such were the preliminary skirmishes which preceded the trial, but the
conduct of the trial itself was as follows: The court was fitted up as
if for an audience listening to a panegyrical discourse; and all the
illustrious men of the city were present at the trial, because the
Emperor was intent upon proving before as many people as possible that
Apollonius was an accomplice of Nerva and his friends. Apollonius,
however, ignored the Emperor's presence so completely as not even to
glance at him; and when his accuser upbraided him for want of respect,
and bade him turn his eyes upon the god of all mankind, Apollonius
raised his eyes to the ceiling, by way of giving a hint that he was
looking up to Zeus, and that he regarded the recipient of such profane
flattery as worse than he who administered it. Whereupon the accuser
began to bellow and spoke somewhat as follows: "’tis time, my sovereign,
to apportion the water, for if you allow him to talk as long as he
chooses, he will choke us. Moreover I have a roll here which contains
the heads of the charges against him, and to these he must answer, so
let him defend himself against them one by one."

### CHAPTER V

The Emperor approved of this plan of procedure and ordered Apollonius to
make his defense according to the informer's advice; however, he dropped
out other accusations, as not worth discussion, and confined himself to
four questions which he thought were

<span id="page_2:280">p. 280</span> <span id="page_2:281">p. 281</span>

embarrassing and difficult to answer. "What induces you, he said,
"Apollonius, to dress yourself differently from everybody else, and to
wear this peculiar and singular garb?" "Because," said Apollonius, "the
earth which feeds me also clothes me, and I do not like to bother the
poor animals." The emperor next asked the question: "Why is it that men
call you a god?" "Because," answered Apollonius, "every man that is
thought to be good, is honored by the title of god." I have shown in my
narrative of India how this tenet passed into our hero's philosophy. The
third question related to the plague in Ephesus: "What motived," he
said, "or suggested your prediction to the Ephesians that they would
suffer from a plague?" "I used," he said, "O my sovereign, a lighter
diet than others, and so I was the first to be sensible of the danger;
and if you like, I will enumerate the causes of pestilences." But the
Emperor, fearful, I imagine, lest Apollonius should reckon among the
causes of such epidemics his own wrong-doing, and his incestuous
marriage, and his other misdemeanors, replied: "Oh, I do not want any
such answers as that." And when he came to the fourth question which
related to Nerva and his friends, instead of hurrying straight on to it,
he allowed a certain interval to elapse, and after long reflection, and
with the air of one who felt dizzy, he put his question in a way which
surprised them all; for they expected him to throw off all disguise and
blurt out the names of the persons in question without any reserve,
complaining loudly and bitterly of the sacrifice; but instead of putting
the question in this way, he beat about the bush, and said: "Tell me,
you went out of your house on a certain day,

<span id="page_2:282">p. 282</span> <span id="page_2:283">p. 283</span>

and you traveled into the country, and sacrificed the boy—I would like
to know for whom?" And Apollonius as if he were rebuking a child
replied: "Good words, I beseech you; for I did leave my house, I was in
the country; and if this was so, then I offered sacrifice: and if I
offered it, then I ate of it. But let these assertions be proved by
trustworthy witnesses." Such a reply on the part of the sage aroused
louder applause than beseemed the court of an Emperor; and the latter
deeming the audience to have borne witness in favor of the accused, and
also not a little impressed himself by the answers he had received, for
they were both firm and sensible, said: "I acquit you of the charges;
but you must remain here until we have had a private interview." Thereat
Apollonius was much encouraged and said: "I thank you indeed, my
sovereign, but I would fain tell you that by reason of these miscreants
your cities are in ruin, and the islands full of exiles, and the
mainland of lamentations, and your armies of cowardice, and the Senate
of suspicion. Accord me also, if you will, opportunity to speak; but if
not, then send someone to take my body, for my soul you cannot take.
Nay, you cannot take even my body,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"For thou shalt not slay me, since—I tell thee—I am not mortal."<span
class="margnote">Iliad 22. 13</span>

</div>

And with these words he vanished from the court, which was the best
thing he could do under the circumstances, for the Emperor clearly
intended not to question him sincerely about the case, but about all
sorts of irrelevant matters. For he took great credit to himself for not
having put Apollonius to

<span id="page_2:284">p. 284</span> <span id="page_2:285">p. 285</span>

death, nor was the latter anxious to be drawn into such discussions. And
he thought that he would best effect his end if he left no one in
ignorance of his true nature, but allowed it to be known to all to be
such that he had it in him never to be taken prisoner against his own
will. Moreover he had no longer any cause for anxiety about his friends;
for as the despot had not the courage to ask any questions about them,
how could he possibly put them to death with any color of justice upon
charges for which no evidence had been presented in court? Such was the
account of the proceedings of the trial which I found.

### CHAPTER VI

But inasmuch as he had composed an oration which he would have delivered
by the clock in defense of himself, only the tyrant confined him to the
questions which I have enumerated, I have determined to publish this
oration also. For I am well aware, indeed, that those who highly esteem
the style of buffoons will find fault in it, as being less chaste and
severe in its style than they consider it should be, and as too
bombastic in language and tone. However, when I consider that Apollonius
was a sage, it seems to me that he would have unworthily concealed his
true character if he had merely studied symmetry of endings, and
antithesis, clicking his tongue as if it had been a castanet. For these
tricks suit the genius of rhetoricians, though they are not necessary
even to them. For forensic art, if it be too obvious, is apt to

<span id="page_2:286">p. 286</span> <span id="page_2:287">p. 287</span>

betray him who resorts to it as anxious to impose upon the judges;
whereas if it is well concealed, it is likely to carry off a favorable
verdict; for true cleverness consists in concealing from the judges the
very cleverness of the pleader. But when a wise man is defending his
cause—and I need not say that a wise man will not arraign another for
faults which he has the will and strength to rebuke—he requires quite
another style than that of the hacks of the law-court; and though his
oration must be well-prepared, it must not seem to be so, and it should
possess a certain elevation almost amounting to scorn, and he must take
care in speaking not to throw himself on the pity of the judges. For how
can he appeal to the pity of others who would not condescend to solicit
anything? Such an oration will my hero's seem to those who shall
diligently study both myself and him; for it was composed by him in the
following manner:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](laot41)
