[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff04)  [Next](fff06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="305"><p><span class="small">The whole creation groaneth and travaileth together waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God.<br />
                   PAUL (according to Gnostic tradition.)</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="img_00300"></span> ![](img/00300.jpg)

### Prolegomena

MYSTERIOUS Time is once more big with child and labouring to bring forth
her twentieth babe, as the <span class="margnote">The Creed of
Christendom.</span> Western world counts her progeny; for, according to
the books, just nineteen children of her centenarian brood have lived
and died since He appeared to whom all Christians look as Teacher of the
Way to God. The common conscience of the General Church flows not only
from the fact that all believe He is the Teacher of the Way, but from
the faith, He is that Way itself. This is the common bond of Christians
the world over, and this has been the symbol of their union throughout
the centuries. Some nineteen hundred years ago the Illuminator appeared
and light streamed forth into the world--such is the common creed of the
adherents of the great religion of the Western world.

As the honorific inscriptions said of the birthday of the Roman Emperor
Augustus, so said after them all Christians of the natal day of Jesus:

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

"This day has given the earth an entirely new aspect. The world would
have gone to destruction <span class="margnote">The New Era Two Thousand
Years Ago.</span> had there not streamed forth from him who is now born
a common blessing.

"Rightly does he judge who recognises in this birth-day the beginning of
life and of all the I powers of life; now is that time ended when men
pitied themselves for being born.

"From no other day does the individual or the community receive such
benefit as from this natal day, full of blessing to all.

"The Providence which rules over all has filled this man with such gifts
for the salvation of the world as designate him as Saviour for us and
for the coming generations; of wars he will make an end, and establish
all things worthily.

"By his appearing are the hopes of our forefathers fulfilled; not only
has he surpassed the good deeds of earlier time, but it is impossible
that one greater than he can ever appear.

"The birth-day of God has brought to the world glad tidings that are
bound up in him.

"From his birth-day a new era begins."

 

So runs the most perfect of a number of inscriptions lately found in
Asia Minor and set up to commemorate the introduction of the Julian
Calendar by the Emperor Augustus. It bears a date corresponding to our
<span class="small">B.C.</span> 9 (See Harnack's article in *Die
christliche Welt*, Dec. 1899).

The hope of the adherents of the Emperor-cult was speedily shattered;
the expectation of

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christendom
remains in great part unfulfilled, for the nineteen centuries which have
passed away have <span class="margnote">The New Hope of To-day.</span>
severally grown old in years of bitter strife, of internecine and most
bloody wars, of persecution and intolerance in things religious which no
other period in the world's known history can, parallel. Will the
twentieth century witness the fulfilment of this so great expectation;
can it be said of the present time that "the whole nature travaileth
together waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God"?

Can any who keenly survey the signs of the times, doubt but that now, at
the dawn of the twentieth century, among Christian nations, the general
nature of thought and feeling in things religious is being quickened and
expanded, and as it were is labouring in the pains of some new birth?
And if this be so, why should not the twentieth century witness some
general realization of the long deferred hope by the souls that are to
be born into it? Never in the Western world has the general mind been
more ripe for the birth of understanding in things religious than it is
to-day; never have conditions been more favourable for the wide holding
of a wise view of the real nature of the Christ and the task He is
working to achieve in the evolution of His world-faith.

Our present task will be to attempt, however imperfectly, to point to
certain considerations which <span class="margnote">Our Present
Task.</span> may tend to restore the grand figure of the Great Teacher
to its natural environment in history and tradition, and disclose the
intimate points of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

contact which the true ideal of the Christian religion has with the one
world-faith of the most advanced souls of our common humanity--in brief,
to restore the teaching of the Christ to its true spirit of
universality. Not for one instant would we try to lessen the reverence
and the love of any single soul for that Great Soul who watches over
Christendom; our task will rather be to point to a soil in which that
love can flourish ever more abundantly, and ever more confidently open
its heart to the rational rays of the Spiritual Sun. That soil is rich
enough for the full growth of the man-plant; it is part of the original
soil, and gives nourishment to every branch of man's nature, emotional
and moral, rational and spiritual.

With many others we hold there is but One <span class="margnote">The One
Religion.</span> Religion for humanity; the many faiths and creeds are
all streams or streamlets of this great river. This may perhaps seem a
hard saying to some, but let us briefly consider its meaning. The Sun of
Truth is one. His rays stream forth into the minds and hearts of men;
surely if we believe anything at all, we hold this faith in the
Fatherhood of God! Must we not then believe that our common Father is no
respecter of persons and that at all times, in all lands, He has loved
and loves and will love His children? We should be dull scholars indeed
if nineteen hundred years of the teaching of the Christ had not taught
us this. And yet how few *really* believe it? The whole history of the
Churches g of Christendom is a record of disbelief in this

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

fundamental dogma of universal religion, and no greater foe has dogged
the footsteps of [Christianity](errata.htm#0.md) than the evil genius of
Jewish particularism, which has ever instigated it to every outbreak of
intolerance and persecution. This same spirit also infused itself into
Mohammedanism, and we can trace the results in the bloody pages of its
history.

It may possibly be that this crude particularism and exclusiveness in
religion is a necessary factor <span class="margnote">The Sunshine of
its Doctrine.</span> in the development of certain classes of souls, and
that it is used for ultimate good purpose by the Wisdom that guides the
world; but is not a greater portion of our Father's blessing possible to
us now? Can we not see that it matters not whether a man have learned of
the Path from the teaching of Krishna or of the Buddha, of Mohammed or
Zoroaster, or of the Christ,--provided he but set his foot upon that
Path, it is all one to our common Father? He it was who sent Them all
forth and illumined Them, that all might through Them have the spiritual
food suited to their needs. Words fail even to hint at the sublimity of
this conception, at the glorious glimpse into the stupendous reality of
God's providence which this illuminating doctrine opens up. And to
*realise* this--not to believe it in some half-hearted way and
practically deny it by our other beliefs--how great the growth of the
heart! It is in the sunshine of this most blessed doctrine of all the
world-saviours that we would ask our readers to approach the
consideration of the many forms of faith of earliest Christendom with
which we shall have to deal in these pages. In this sunshine

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "heresy" and
"false religion" frequently wear so changed an aspect that they seem
quite beautiful alongside of the "orthodoxy" and "true religion" of
their unsympathetic opponents.

But let us be on our guard against all exaggeration and strive to get
things in their true proportions, <span class="margnote">The Comparative
Science of Religion. </span> for it is only thus that we can realise the
eternal providence of God, who by His Messengers in His own good time
ever adjusts the balance. It has been said by Professor Max Müller that
we should not speak of the comparative science of religion, but should
rather employ the phrase, comparative science of theology. This is quite
true of the work that has so far been done, and done well, by official
scholarship; the main effort has been to discover differences, and
exaggerate the analysis of details. So far there has been, outside of a
small circle of writers, little attempt at synthesis.

We are not, however, prepared to abandon the term comparative science of
religion; we believe there is such a science--the noblest perchance to
which any man can set his hand. But it is one of the most difficult. It
requires not only an intimate experience of human nature as well as a
wide knowledge of history, but also a deep sympathy with the hopes and
fears of the religious conscience, and above all things an unshakable
faith in the unwinking providence of God in all human affairs.

Supposing it possible that a man could love and revere all the great
Teachers known to history as deeply and earnestly as each exclusive
religionist reveres and loves his own particular Master;

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

supposing that he could really believe in the truth of each of the great
religions in as full <span class="margnote">The True Scholar of
Religion.</span> measure, though without exclusiveness, as the orthodox
of each great faith believes in the truth of his own revelation;
supposing finally he could sense the Wisdom of Deity in active operation
in all these manifestations,--what a glorious Religion would then be
his! How vast and strong his Faith when supported by the evidences of
all the world-bibles and the exhortations of all the world-teachers!
Persuaded of the fact of re-birth, he would feel himself a true citizen
of the world and heir presumptive to all the treasures of the sacred
books. Little would he care for the gibes of "eclectic" or "syncretist"
flung at him by the analysers of externals and seekers after difference,
for he would be bathing in the life-stream of Religion, and would gladly
leave them to survey its bed and channels, and scrutinize the mud of its
bottom and the soil of its banks; least of all would he notice the cry
of "heretic" hurled after him by some paddlers in a pool on the shore.
Not, however, that he would think little of analysis or less of
orthodoxy, but his analysis would be from within as well as from
without, and he would find his orthodoxy in the life of the stream and
not in the shape of the banks.

The One Religion flows in the hearts of men and the Light-stream pours
its rays into the <span class="margnote">The Just Method of
Comparison.</span> soil of human nature. The analysis of a religion is
therefore an analysis of human-kind. Every great religion has
expressions as manifold as

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the minds and hearts of its adherents. The manifestation of its truth in
the life and words of a great sage must differ widely from the feeble
reflection of its light which is all the dull intellect I and unclean
life of the ignorant and immoral can express. It is true that its light
and life are free for all; but as there are grades of souls, all at
different stages of evolution, how can it be that all can equally
reflect that light? How unwise is it then to compare the most
enlightened views of one set of religionists with the most ignorant
beliefs and most superstitious practices of another set! And yet this is
a very favourite pastime with those who seek to gratify themselves with
the persuasion that their own faith is superior to that of every other
creature. This method will never lead us to a comprehension of true
Religion or an understanding of our brother man.

Analyse any of the great religions, and you find <span
class="margnote">The Analysis of Religion.</span> the same factors at
work, the same problems of human imperfection to be studied, the many
who are "called" and the few who are "chosen,"--there are in each
religion, as there ever have been, "many Thyrsus-bearers but few
Bacchi." To compare the Bacchi of one religion with the Thyrus-bearers
of another is mere foolishness. All Hindus, for instance, are not
unintelligent worshipers of idols and all Christians fervent imitators
of the Christ. If we compare the two at all, let us put the
image-adoration of the Roman Church or eikon-worship of the Greek Church
alongside of the worship of four-faced

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahmā and the
rest of the figures of the pantheon; but if we would find the proper
parallel to the holy life and best theology of Christendom, then we must
go to the best theology and holiest livers among the Brahmans.

So then if we analyse a religion, we find that the lowest of the people
know little of it and cling desperately to many misconceptions and
superstitions, and that from this travesty of what it really is, rises
grade after grade of higher intelligence and less erroneous expression
of it, until we arrive at that class of souls who consciously seek to
welcome the light in all its fulness and make this the one object of
their lives. It is within this class of minds that we must seek for the
true nature of a religion. Here then we expect to find the real points
of contact between the religion and its sister-faiths, and here we sense
the presence of the glorious Spiritual Sun, the parent of all the Rays
of Light poured into the world.

Now of all the great religions none can be of greater interest to any
student of the comparative <span class="margnote">The Beginnings of
Christianity.</span> science of religion in the West than the Christian
Faith. It presses on him at every turn; it is a problem he cannot
escape. He is amazed at the general ignorance of everything connected
with its history and origins. How few are there who have ever really
studied the subject, outside of the comparatively small body of scholars
whose profession is to deal with such researches--and even among them
how few have thrown any real light on the subject, in spite of their
admirable industry.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Indeed it is difficult for any one possessed of <span
class="margnote">The First Two Centuries.</span> the ideas we have
endeavoured to express above, filled with enthusiasm for the unity of
religion and with a living faith in the truly universal nature of the
Christ's teaching, to gain much real help from the studies of either
rationalists or apologists. For long he is confronted with libraries of
books filled with mutually contradictory opinions, and only valuable as
a means of sifting out material for future use. He finds as he
prosecutes his studies, that every one of his preconceptions as to early
times has to be considerably modified, and most of them indeed to be
entirely rejected. He gradually works his way to a point whence he can
obtain an unimpeded view of the remains of the first two centuries, and
gazes round on a world that he has never heard of at school, and of
which no word is breathed from the pulpit.

Is this the world of the Primitive Church of which he has read in the
accepted manuals and been told of by pastors and masters? Is this the
picture of the single and simple community of the followers of Jesus;
this the one doctrine which he had been led to believe has been handed
down in unbroken succession and in one form since the beginnings? He
gazes round on a religious world of immense activity, a vast upheaval of
thought and a strenuousness of religious endeavour to which the history
of the Western world gives no [parallel](errata.htm#1.md). Thousands of
schools and communities on every hand, striving and contending, a vast
freedom of

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

thought, a mighty effort to live the religious life. Here he finds
innumerable points of contact with other religions; he moves in an
atmosphere of freedom of which he has previously had no experience in
Christian tradition. Who are all these people--not fishermen and slaves 
and the poor and destitute, though those are striving too--but these men
of learning and ascetic life, saints and sages as much as many others to
whom the name has been given with far less reason? They are all
heretics, say later Church writers, very pestilent folk and enemies of
the True Faith which we have now established by our decrees and
councils.

But the student prefers to look to the first two centuries themselves
instead of listening to the opinions and decisions of those who come
after, who, as farther away from the origins, can hardly be expected to
know more of them than those they anathematised after their death.

Now it is remarkable that, though such abundantly minute and laborious
research has been expended on the problem of the origins of Christianity
by the analysis of canonical documents, so little critical attention has
been bestowed on the writings of these "heretics," although by their
means great light may be thrown on many of the obscure problems
connected with the history of the beginnings; it is only of
comparatively late years that the utility of their evidence has been
recognised and that attempts have been made to bring them into court.
The "general voice" of the Catholic Church since its ascendancy has
stigmatised these "heretics" as the "first-born

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

sons of Satan," and the faithful have believed unquestioningly that that
voice was "*Sancto Spiritu suggerente*." But for Protestantism at least
such crude opinions can no longer satisfy the liberal mind in things
religious at the beginning of the twentieth century.

For upwards of one hundred years liberal the Christendom has witnessed
the most strenuous and <span class="margnote">The "Higher
Criticism."</span> courageous efforts to rescue the Bible from the hands
of an ignorant obscurantism which had in many ways degraded it to the
level of a literary fetish and deprived it of the light of reason. This
policy of obscurantism is really one of despair, of want of confidence
in the living and persisting presence of inspiration in the Church, a
tacit confession that inspiration had ceased in the infancy of the
Faith.

As is well known, the dogma of the verbal and literal inspiration by the
Holy Ghost, in the fullest sense of the terms, of every canonical
document was but lately universally held, and is still held by the
majority of Christians to-day. The famous encyclical of Leo XIII.
("Providentissimus Deus "1893) formulates the orthodoxy of Roman
Catholic Christendom in the following counsel of despair:

"It is absolutely wrong and forbidden, either to <span
class="margnote">"Providentissimus Deus."</span> narrow inspiration to
certain parts only of Holy Scripture, or to admit that the sacred writer
has erred. For the system of those who, in order to rid themselves of
these difficulties, do not hesitate to concede that Divine inspiration
regards the things of faith and morals, and nothing beyond, because (as
they wrongly think) in

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the question of the truth or falsehood of a passage, we should consider
not so much what God has said as the reason and purpose which He had in
mind in saying it--this system cannot be tolerated, for all the books
which the Church receives as sacred and canonical are written wholly and
entirely, with all their parts, at the dictation of the Holy Ghost; and
so far is it from being possible that any error can co-exist with
inspiration, that inspiration not only is essentially incompatible with
error, but excludes and rejects it as absolutely and necessarily as it
is impossible that God Himself, the supreme truth, can utter that which
is not true. This is the ancient and unchanging faith of the Church,
solemnly defined in the Councils of Florence and Trent, and finally
confirmed and more expressly formulated by the Council of the Vatican. .
. . Hence because the Holy Ghost employed men as His instruments, we
cannot therefore say that it was these inspired instruments who,
perchance, have fallen into error, and not the primary author. For, by
supernatural power, He so moved and impelled them to write--He was so
present to them--that the things which He ordered, and those only, they,
first rightly understood, then willed faithfully to write down, and
finally expressed in apt words and with infallible truth. Otherwise it
could not be said that He was the author of the entire Scripture. Such
has always been the persuasion of the Fathers. . . . It follows that
those who maintain that an error is possible in any genuine passage of
the sacred writings, either pervert the Catholic notion

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of inspiration, or make God the author of such error."

This encyclical is not a curious literary relic of mediævalism; it is
the most solemn and authoritative voice of the Head of by far the
largest and most powerful Church of Christendom, binding on all the
faithful, and circulated broadcast at the end of the nineteenth century,
in which we boasted ourselves to be so much better than our fathers.

It is, of course, perfectly patent that such a pronouncement is
unavoidable by the Head of a <span class="margnote">Its Immediate
Result.</span> Church which has given in its adhesion to the dogma of
infallibility, and whose life depends on the maintenance of its
unquestioned authority. The consequence, however, is that in order to
reconcile this dogma with reason, its scholars have to resort to a
casuistical method which is exceedingly distasteful to those who are
nurtured in the free air of scientific research, and which unfortunately
renders the writings of Roman Catholic critics open to the charge of
insincerity. We need not, however, necessarily, doubt their sincerity,
for in the domain of religion the commonest phenomenon is faith doing
violence to reason; as students of life, therefore, we watch with
keenest interest this tragedy of the human reason struggling in the
bonds of a self-imposed authority, and as believers in Providence have
confidence that the force thus generated will eventually be used for
good, though at present it seems to many of us an unmixed evil.

This is one side of the picture, and indeed a

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

most interesting one for the student of human nature. Indubitably many
millions still believe <span class="margnote">The Force of
Reaction.</span> most firmly as they are bidden to believe by the Holy
Father, and with a slight difference of contents and edition many
millions of Protestants, who spurn the Pope's authority far from them,
believe as blindly in this view of inspiration and are even more fervent
bibliolaters than their Roman Catholic brethren. This conservative and
reactionary force is apparently still necessary; it is the pressure
which insists on ever greater and greater thoroughness from those who
are clearing a way for the acceptance of a living doctrine of
inspiration, to replace what for an ever-growing number appears to be
the fossil of a lifeless dogma. This conservatism, we believe, will not
prove an evil for Christendom in the long run, for it is largely
dictated by a faith--though a blind one--in the reality of inspiration,
in the sublimity of the "things not seen," which refuses to have its
positive place in the human heart filled by what seems to it at present.
a negation of its most cherished convictions. But could such believers
open the eyes of their understanding, they would see that the busy souls
who are clearing away the obscurations of centuries of misunderstanding,
are filled with as lively a faith as their own----and by their devotion
to truth are doing God's work in preparing the way for a fuller
realization of His eternal Wisdom and a deeper understanding of human
nature. True, in order to achieve this task these energetic souls are
filled with an enthusiasm for criticism which is perhaps exaggerated,
but which nevertheless is the necessary

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

yoke-fellow of blind conservatism. It is the child of these twain that
will bring light.

For if we turn to the other side of the picture, we find the keen and
trained mind of the scientific <span class="margnote">The Force of
Progress.</span> intellect scrutinizing every word and letter of
Scripture to test the assertions of blind faith. Textual or the Lower
Criticism has for ever shattered the pretension of the Council of Trent,
to settle the question of a "Textus Receptus." The Received Text is
proved to have suffered in its tradition so many misfortunes at the
hands of ignorant scribes and dogmatic editors that the human reason
stands amazed at the spectacle. Can it be possible, it asks, that any
soul possessed of God's good gift of reason can believe the literal
inspiration of such a collection of protean changes of words?

It is perhaps a mistake to have given the name Criticism to such
research, because the ordinary <span class="margnote">The Nature of
Criticism.</span> person looks on the term as implying something hostile
and inimical; the original meaning of the word, however, did not convey
such an idea, but simply the sense of examining and judging well. But
the wise man will not be dismayed by a term; he will look at the thing
itself, and so far from finding anything impious in so admirable an art
as that of textual criticism, will regard it as a most potent means for
removing human error.

But Criticism does not end with the investigation of the text; it
proceeds to a higher branch and busies itself with research into the
date and history of the sacred books, the analysis and comparison of
their several contents, and their relations with other

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

writings; in brief, it surveys the whole field of Biblical literature as
to contents in all its parts. The results of this investigation are so
stupendous, that we seem to enter a new religious land. But before we
enter the sun-lit waters of the harbour of this new country, we must
have battled through many storms which no bark of blind faith will ever
survive; the only vessel that can live through them' is the ship of a
rational faith.

In brief, the method of criticism is rational, it is that of private
judgment; though indeed I doubt if there be any class of men who have
sought more earnestly for help and guidance in their task than the great
Critics of Christendom. It is this fact, the high moral worth of our
Critics and their deep religious sense, which makes their work so
valuable. It is the best in Christendom criticising itself--not a band
of enemies without, trying to compass its discomfiture. A religion whose
adherents can do this, is alive, and so long as this spirit exists
cannot die. This spirit is as much the inspiration of the Holy Ghost as
is the conviction of blind faith in the "*credo quia absurdum*" of the
Roman tradition of verbal inspiration.

But we must not suppose that Criticism is an end in itself; it is but a
means towards a new definition of the eternal problems of religion--a
<span class="margnote">The Resultant.</span> most potent means indeed,
because these problems can now be defined with an intelligence and a
knowledge of human nature which infinitely adds to their interest, and
demands more pressingly than ever their solution; but Criticism cannot
solve

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

them, their solution depends on a still higher faculty, a faculty that
will pass beyond the science of things seen to the gnosis of things
unseen. This is the child that will come to birth from the congress of
the two great forces of progress and reaction of which we have been
speaking.

For, granting that the Bible is a library of books for the most part
composed of scraps of other documents, of very various dates edited and
re-edited; that the older deposits of the Jewish portion draw largely
from the mythology of other nations and falsify history to an incredible
extent; are in their oldest deposits profuse in unmoral doctrine and
patent absurdities, and paint the picture of a God that revolts all
thinking minds; that the more recent deposits of the Hebrew Scriptures,
though breathing a far loftier spirit, are still open to many
objections; and that the books of the Christian portion are equally
called in question on numerous points;--still there is so much of beauty
and lofty conception in the teachings of the Bible, and it has for so
many centuries been regarded as the vehicle of God's revelation to man,
that the problem of inspiration, instead of being lessened by these
facts, becomes all the more pressing for solution.

What is the nature of this higher faculty which transcends the reason;
and why are the records of its activity marred with imperfection and
absurdities which the reason can so clearly detect?

This the scientist as scientist, the scholar as scholar, can never fully
explain. Equally so the mystic as mystic cannot throw full light on the
problem

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What is required
is the nature born of the union of the two--a nature so hard to find
that it may almost be said to be non-existent. The mystic will not
submit himself to the discipline and training of science; the scholar
refuses to attach any validity to the methods of the mystic. And yet
without the union of the two the child of understanding cannot be born.

For some three hundred years the Western world has been evolving a
wonderful instrument <span class="margnote">Nineteen Centuries Ago and
Now.</span> of natural research, a subtle grade of mind trained in what
we call the scientific method; it has been developing in this instrument
numerous new senses, and chief among them the sense of history. Its
conquests are so brilliant that men are disposed to believe that never
have such things been before; we are scornful of the past, impatient of
its methods, unsympathetic to its ideas, and little inclined to profit
by the lessons it can teach. As has ever been the case with nations in
their prime, we think that "we are the people, and wisdom will die with
us." All this is perfectly natural and even necessary for the proper
development of this keen intellectual instrument, this grade of mind of
which we are all so proud. But the student of human nature and the
scholar of the science of life keeps looking to the past in order that
he may the better forecast the future; his sense of history extends
beyond the domain of the "Higher Criticism" and strives to become
clairvoyant.

We have had three hundred years or so of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

cataloguing and criticism, analysis and scepticism, of most brilliant
physical research in all departments; the pious have feared for the
overthrow of religion, and positivists have longed for the downfall of
superstition. What has it all meant; for what good purpose is this
sifting; how does the strife exemplify the wise providence of God?

Perhaps it may not be so difficult as it appears at first sight, to
point to the direction in which the answers to these questions may be to
some extent anticipated. That similar phenomena recur in the natural
world is the unvarying experience of mankind; that time is the
ever-moving image of eternity, and that the wheel of genesis is ever
turning, is testified to by the wiser minds of humanity. Whither, then,
should we look in the history of human affairs for phenomena similar to
the happenings of these last three hundred years? Whither else more
certainly than to the history of the times which witnessed the birth of
the religion of the Christ? The many striking parallels between the
social and religious aspects of the civilization of that critical epoch
and of our own times have been already sketched by a few writers, but no
general notice has been taken of their endeavours, least of all has any
practical lesson been learned from the review of this experience of the
past. For the experience of humanity is our own experience, if we have
but wit enough to understand.

The soul of man returns again and again to learn the lessons of life in
this great world-school,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

according to one of the great doctrines of general religion. If this be
so, it follows that when similar <span class="margnote">The Return of
Souls.</span> conditions recur a similar class of souls returns to
continue its lessons of experience. It may well be even that many of the
identical souls who were embodied in the early centuries of Christianity
are continuing their experience among ourselves to-day. For why
otherwise do the same ideas recur, why do the same problems arise, the
same ways of looking at things? They cannot fall into our midst from the
"*Ewigkeit*"; must it not be that they have been brought back by minds
to whom they have already been familiar?

It would of course be exceedingly unwise to stretch even a single one of
our parallels into an <span class="margnote">The Conditions of the
Comparison.</span> identity; we must bear in mind that though many of 
the conditions are strikingly resemblant, some factors in great
prominence in the civilization of the Græco-Roman world are only very
faintly outlined in our present civilization, while some strongly marked
features of our own times are but imperfectly traceable in that age.

We must further remember that the records of that time are frequently
very imperfect, while the history of our own is inscribed in painful
detail; and that though we can review the main outlines of the whole of
that phase of civilization, we can only survey a portion of our own, for
its cycle is not ended and the records of the future are not yet open to
our understanding.

Finally, we must remember that the general quality of the life and
mind-texture of our own age

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

is generally far more subtle than it was nineteen hundred years ago--for
humanity evolves.

All these considerations must be kept in mind if we would anticipate the
future from a survey of the history of the past. But indeed it requires
no great effort of the imagination for even the most superficial student
of history to see a marked similarity between the general unrest and
searching after a new ideal that marked the period of brilliant
intellectual development which preceded the birth of Christianity, and
the uncertainty and eager curiosity of the public mind in the closing
years of the nineteenth century.

The tendency is the same in kind though not in <span
class="margnote">The Intensified Present.</span> degree; the
achievements of the scientists and scholars of Alexandria (to take the
most conspicuous example) during the three hundred years which preceded
the Christian era, have been vastly transcended by the conquests of
their successors in our own time. To-day life is more intense, thought
more active, experience more extended, the need of the solution of the
problem more pressing. The modern mind took birth in Greece some two
thousand five hundred years ago, and developed itself by intimate
contact with the ancient East, a contact made physically possible by the
"world-conquest" of Alexander, and subsequently by the organising genius
of Rome.

But to-day it is not the conquests of an Alexander or the power of Rome
which have built the ways of communication between the nations; it is
the conquests of physical science which have in truth

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

united the ends of the earth, and built up an arterial and nervous
system for our common <span class="margnote">Occident and Orient.</span>
mother which she has never previously possessed. It is no longer the
speculative mind of Greece and the practical genius of Rome that meet
together, it is not even the mind of the then confined Occident meeting
with the enthusiasm and mysticism of the then Orient; it is the meeting
of the great waters, the developed thought and industrious observation
of the whole Western world of to-day meeting with the old slow stream of
the ancient and modern East.

The great impetus which the study of oriental languages and tongues long
since dead has received <span class="margnote">The Reconciliation of
Science and Theology.</span> during the last hundred years, has led to
the initiation of a comparative science of ancient literature--of the
world-bibles--and of religion which is slowly but surely modifying all
our preconceptions. To-day it is not a Porphyry who disproves the
authenticity of the Book of Daniel or a Marcion who makes havoc of what
afterwards became the New Testament canon, but it is the "Higher
Criticism" which has struck the death blow to unreasoning bibliolatry.
The conflict between religion (or, if you will, theology) and science
has produced a generation that longs and searches for a reconciliation.
That reconciliation will come; Heaven and Earth will once more kiss each
other. It came in the past for those souls who were searching for it,
and it will come for those who seek it to-day. If the human heart seek
the Light the Light will pour into it. It was so nineteen hundred

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

years ago; men sought for the Light and the Light came in answer to
their prayers. And if this view may at first appear strange to those who
have been taught to regard the state of affairs before the coming of the
Christ as one of unmixed depravity, the reading of these pages may
perhaps lead them to a more reasonable view of the conditions which
called for the coming of so great a Soul for the helping of mankind.

The Light was received by men in proportion to their capacity to
understand it, and the Life was poured into them as their natures were
capable of expansion. And if the subsequent history of the times, when
the dark cloud of ignorance and intolerance settled down on Christendom
for so many centuries, makes it appear as if that Life had been poured
out in vain, and that Light radiated to no purpose, we should remember
that they were lavished on souls and not on bodies; that the path of
individual souls is not to be traced in the evolution of racial bodies.
The souls incarnated into the civilisation of Greece and Rome who were
capable of receiving the Light, were far different from the souls who
were incarnated into the half barbarous hordes which destroyed that
civilization, and out of which the new races were to be developed. The
old races which supplied the conditions for the experience of the more
advanced souls, were to disappear gradually, and new races were to be
developed, which in their childhood could not supply the necessary
conditions for the incarnation of such subtle intellects, but which in
their

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

manhood would attract to them still higher souls perchance. This of
course did not take place with suddenness, it was all very gradual,
there was much overlapping of races, as the old units and atoms were
slowly replaced by new ones.

But how is it to be expected that Vandal and Goth could understand the
great problems which <span class="margnote">The Birth and Death of
Races.</span> delighted the minds of the philosophers and mystics of
Greece and Rome? And further, must it not all have been foreseen and
provided for by the Wisdom that watches over human affairs?

Races and nations are born, and die, as men are born and die; they may
be long-lived or short-lived, they may be good, bad, or indifferent. But
whatever their characters and characteristics as compared with other
races, their early period is that of childhood, their middle period that
of manhood, and their later period that of old age.

It follows then that as a general rule the class of souls which seeks
experience in them in their childhood, is not the same as the grade of
souls which incarnates in them in their middle age, or in their old age.
Of course there are numerous individual exceptions, for the above is the
merest outline of the elements of the problem; the details are so
complicated, the permutations and combinations so innumerable, that no
mind can fully grasp them.

Moreover races and nations so overlap and blend, their origins and
disappearings so shade off into other nations and races, that the
analogy of their

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

lives with the lives of men must not be overstrained. The moment of
birth and the moment of death is very hard to detect in the case of a
race, and the embryonic period and stages of disintegration cannot be
clearly defined. Nevertheless we can trace the main moments of their
evolution and perceive the differences in their main periods of age.

Our Western world, the vehicle of the modern <span class="margnote">The
Manhood of the Western World.</span> mind, has had its period of
childhood; it was born  of the from the womb of Greek and Roman
civilisation, and its lusty childhood was a natural period of ignorance
and passion. Such considerations will enable us better to understand the
otherwise sad spectacle of the dark and middle ages in Europe; they were
the natural concomitants of childhood, and were followed by the
intellectual development of youth and early manhood. The Western world
is apparently just coming of age, and in the future we may hope it will
think and act as a man and put away childish things.

The problems which will in future occupy the attention of its developed
intelligence were foreshadowed in the womb of its parent, and our more
immediate task will be to deal with some of the outlines of that
foreshadowing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preliminary Considerations](fff06.md)
