[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff12)  [Next](fff14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### THE EBIONITES.

<span class="margnote">The Nazoræans.</span>Epiphanius would have it
that the Christians were first called Iessæi, and says they are
mentioned under this name in the writings of Philo. The followers of the
earliest converts of Jesus are also said to have been called Nazoræi.
Even towards the end of the fourth century the Nazoræans were still
found scattered throughout Cœle-Syria, Decapolis, Pella (whither they
fled at the destruction of Jerusalem), the region beyond Jordan, and far
away to Mesopotamia. Their collection of the *logoi* was called *The
Gospel according to the Hebrews*, and differed greatly from the synoptic
accounts of the Canon. Even to this day a remnant of the Nazoræans is
said by some to survive in the Mandaïtes, a strange sect dwelling in the
marshes of Southern Babylonia, but their curious scripture, *The Book of
Adam*, as preserved in the *Codex Nasaræus*, bears no resemblance
whatever to the known fragments of The Gospel according to the Hebrews,
though some of their rites are very similar to the rites of some
communities of the "Righteous" referred to in that strange Jewish
pseudepigraph *The Sibylline Oracles*.

Who the original Iessæans or Nazoræans were, is wrapped in the greatest
obscurity; under another of their designations, however, the Ebionites
or "Poor Men," we can obtain some further information. These early outer
followers of Jesus were finally ostracized from the orthodox fold, and
so completely

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

were their origin and history obscured by the subsequent industry of
heresy-hunters, that we finally find them fathered on a certain Ebion,
who is as non-existent as several other heretics, such as Epiphanes,
Kolarbasus and Elkesai, who were invented by the zeal and ignorance of
fourth-century hæresiologists and "historians." Epiphanes is the later
personification of an unnamed "distinguished" (*epiphanes*) teacher;
Kolarbasus is the personification of the "sacred four" (*kol-arba*), and
Elkesai the personification of the "hidden power" (*elkesai*). So eager
were the later refutators to add to their list of heretics, that they
invented the names of persons from epithets and doctrines. So with
Ebion.

The Ebionites were originally so called because they were "poor"; the
later orthodox subsequently <span class="margnote">The Poor Men.</span>
added "in intelligence" or "in their ideas about Christ." And this may
very well have been the case, and doubtless many grossly misunderstood
the public teaching of Jesus, for it should not be forgotten that one of
the main factors to be taken into account in reviewing the subsequent
rapid progress of the new religion was the social revolution. In the
minds of the most ignorant of the earliest followers of the public
teaching, the greatest hope aroused may well have been the near approach
of the day when the "poor" should be elevated above the "rich." But this
was the view of the most ignorant only; though doubtless they were
numerous enough.

Nevertheless it was Ebionism which preserved the tradition of the
earliest converts of the public teaching, and the Ebionite communities
doubtless

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

possessed a collection of the public Sayings and based their lives upon
them.

It was against these original followers of the public teaching of Jesus
that Paul contended in his efforts to gentilize Christianity. For many a
long year this Petro-Pauline controversy was waged with great
bitterness, and the Canon of the New Testament is thought by some to
have been the means adopted to form the basis of a future
reconciliation; the Petrine and Pauline documents were carefully edited,
and between the Gospel portion and the Pauline letters was inserted the
new-forged link of the *Acts of the Apostles*, a carefully edited
selection from a huge mass of legendary *Acts*, welded together into a
narrative and embellished with speeches after the manner of Thucydides.

<span class="margnote">The Ebionite Tradition of Jesus.</span>How then
did the original Ebionites view the person and teaching of Jesus? They
regarded their leader as a wise man, a prophet, a Jonas, nay even a
Solomon. Moreover, he was a manifestation of the Messiah, the Anointed,
who was to come, but he had not yet appeared as the Messiah; that would
only be at his second coming. In his birth as Jesus, he was a prophet
simply. The New Dispensation was but the continuation of the Old Law;
all was essentially Jewish. They therefore expected the coming of the
Messiah as literally prophesied by their men of old. He was to come as
king, and then all the nations would be subjected to the power of the
Chosen People, and for a thousand years there would be peace and
prosperity and plenty on earth.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Jesus was a man, born as all men, the human son of Joseph and Mary. It
was only at his baptism, at thirty years of age, that the Spirit
descended upon him and he became a prophet. They, therefore, guarded his
Sayings as a precious deposit, handing them down by word of mouth. The
Ebionites knew nothing of the pre-existence or divinity of their revered
prophet. It is true that Jesus was "christ," but so also would all be
who fulfilled the Law. Thus they naturally repudiated Paul and his new
doctrine entirely; for them Paul was a deceiver and an apostate from the
Law, they even denied that he was a Jew.

It was only later that they used *The Gospel according to the Hebrews*,
which Jerome says was the same as *The Gospel of the Twelve Apostles*
and *The Gospel of the Nazarenes*, that is to say, of the Nazoræans. It
should be remembered that these Nazoræans knew nothing of the Nazareth
legend, which was subsequently developed by the "in order that it might
be fulfilled" school of historicizers.

The Ebionites did not return to Jerusalem when the emperor permitted the
new colony of Ælia Capitolina to be established in 138, for no Jew was
allowed to return. The new town was Gentile. Therefore, when we read of
"the re-constitution of the mother church" at Ælia Colonia, in Church
historians, little reliance can be placed upon such assertions. The
"mother church," based on the public teaching, was Ebionite and remained
Ebionite, the community at Ælia Colonia was Gentile and therefore
Pauline.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

Christianity, as understood by the Ebionites, being an essentially
national doctrine, Paulinism was a necessity if any public attempt at
universality was to be made; therefore it was that the true historical
side of popular Christianity (the [original](errata.htm#19.md) Ebionite
tradition) became more and more obscured, until finally it had so
completely disappeared from the area of such tradition, that a new
"history" could with safety be developed to suit the dogmatic evolution
inaugurated by Paul.

The later forms of Ebionism, however, which survived for several
centuries, were of a Gnostic nature, and reveal the contact of these
outer communities of primitive Christendom based on the public teaching
with an inner Jewish tradition, which evidently existed
contemporaneously with Paul, and may have existed far earlier.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Essenes](fff14.md)
