[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff11)  [Next](fff13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="img_12100"></span> ![](img/12100.jpg)

# General and Gnostic Christianity

### THE EVOLUTION OF CATHOLIC CHRISTIANITY.

THE historical origins of Christianity are hidden in impenetrable
obscurity. Of the actual history of <span class="margnote">The
Canon.</span> the first half of the first century we have no knowledge.
Of the history of the next hundred years also we have for the most part
to rely on conjecture. The now universally received canonical account
was a selection from a mass of tradition and legend; it is only in the
second half of the second century that the idea of a Canon of the New
Testament makes its appearance, and is gradually developed by the Church
of Rome and the Western Fathers. The early Alexandrian theologians, such
as Clement, are still ignorant of a precise Canon. Following on the
lines of the earliest apologists of a special view of Christianity,
such. as Justin, and using this evolving Canon as the sole test of
orthodoxy, Irenæus, Tertullian and Hippolytus, supported by the Roman
Church, lay the foundations of "catholicity,"

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and begin to raise the first courses of that enormous edifice of dogma
which is to-day regarded as the only authentic view of the Church of
Christ.

The first two centuries, however, instead of confirming the boast of the
later orthodox, "one church, one faith, always and everywhere," on the
contrary present us with the picture of many lines of evolution of
belief, practice, and organisation. The struggle for life was being
fiercely waged, and though the "survival of the fittest" resulted as
usual, there were frequent crises in which the final "fittest" is hardly
discernible and at times disappears from view.

<span class="margnote">The Gospels.</span>The view of the Christian
origins which eventually became the orthodox tradition based itself
mainly upon Gospel-documents composed, in all probability, some time in
the reign of Hadrian (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 117-138). The
skeleton of three of these Gospels was presumably a collection of
Sayings and a narrative of Doings in the form of an ideal life, a sketch
composed by one of the "Apostles" of the inner communities and designed
for public circulation. Round this nucleus the compilers of the three
documents wove other matter selected from a vast mass of myth, legend,
and tradition; they were evidently men of great piety, and their
selection of material produced narratives of great dignity, and cast
aside much in circulation that was foolish and fantastic, the remains of
which we have still preserved in some of the apocryphal Gospels. The
writer of the fourth document was a natural mystic who adorned his
account with a beauty of conception

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

and a charm of feeling that reflect the highest inspiration.

At the same time the canonical selection most fortunately preserved for
us documents of far greater historic value.

In the Letters of Paul, the majority of which are in the main, I
believe, authentic, we have the earliest <span class="margnote">The
Letters of Paul.</span> historic records of Christianity which we
possess. The Pauline Letters date back to the middle of the first
century, and are the true point of departure for any really historic
research into the origins. On reading these Letters it is almost
impossible to persuade ourselves that Paul was acquainted with the
statements of the later historicized account of the four canonical
Gospels; all his conceptions breathe a totally different atmosphere.

Instead of preaching the Jesus of the historicized Gospels, he preaches
the doctrine of the mystic Christ. He not only seems to be ignorant of
the Doings but even of the Sayings in any form known to us; nevertheless
it is almost certain that some collection of Sayings must have existed
and been used by the followers of the public teaching in his time.
Though innumerable opportunities occur in his writings for reference to
the canonical Sayings and Doings, whereby the power of his exhortations
would have been enormously increased, he abstains from making any. On
the other hand, we find his Letters replete with conceptions and
technical terms which receive no explanation in the traditions of
General Christianity, but are fundamental with the handers-on of the
Gnosis.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

The picture which the letters of Paul give us of the actual state of
affairs in the middle of the first century is that of an independent
propagandist, with his own illumination, in contact with the ideas of an
inner school on the one hand, and with outer communities of various
kinds on the other. Whatever the inner schools may have been, the outer
communities among which Paul laboured were Jewish, synagogues of the
orthodox Jews, synagogues of the outer communities of the Essenes,
communities which had received some tradition of the public teaching of
Jesus as well, and understood or misunderstood it as the case may have
been.

<span class="margnote">The Gentilisation of Christianity.</span>Paul's
mission was to break down Jewish exclusiveness and pioneer the way for
the gentilization of Christianity. The century which followed this
propaganda of Paul (50-150) is, according to Harnack, characterised by
the following features:

\(i\) The rapid disappearance of Jewish (that is to say, primitive and
original) \[popular\] Christianity.

\(ii\) Every member of the community was supposed to have received the
"Spirit of God"; the teaching was "charismatic," that is to say, of the
nature of "spiritual gifts."

\(iii\) The expectation of the approaching end of the age, and the reign
of Christ on earth for a thousand years--"chiliasm"--was in universal
favour.

\(iv\) Christianity was a mode of life, not a dogma.

\(v\) There were no fixed doctrinal forms, and accordingly the greatest
freedom in Christian preaching.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

\(vi\) The Sayings of the Lord and the Old Testament were not as yet
absolute authorities; the "Spirit" could set them aside.

\(vii\) There was no fixed political union of the Churches; each
community was independent.

\(viii\) This period gave rise to "a quite unique literature, in which
were manufactured facts for the past and for the future, and which did
not submit to the usual literary rules and forms, but came forward with
the loftiest pretensions."

\(ix\) Particular sayings and arguments of assumed "Apostolic Teachers"
were brought forward as being of great authority.

At the same time, besides this gentilizing tendency, which was always
really subordinated to the Jewish original impulse, though flattering
itself that it had entirely shaken off the fetters of the
"circumcision," there was a truly universalizing tendency at work in the
background; and it is this endeavour to universalize Christianity which
is the grand inspiration underlying the best of the Gnostic efforts we
have to review. But this universalizing does not belong to the line of
the origins along which General [Christianity](errata.htm#18.md)
subsequently traced its descent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ebionites](fff13.md)
