[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff14)  [Next](fff16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TENDENCIES OF GNOSTICISM.

<span class="margnote">The "Secularizing" of Christianity.</span>BUT
here again accurate historical data are out of the question, and we have
for the most part to deal with what the Germans call "*Tendenz*."
Harnack speaks of the tendency, which by long convention is generally
called Gnostic, as the "acute secularizing of Christianity." What then
is the meaning of this phrase? Catholic dogma is said to be the outcome
of the gradual hellenizing of general Christianity, that is to say, the
modification of popular tradition by the philosophical and theological
method. All evolution of popular beliefs takes time, and the results
arrived at by the general mind only after centuries, are invariably
anticipated by minds of greater instruction generations before. The
Galileos of the world are invariably condemned by their contemporaries.
The Gnostic mind rapidly arrived on the one hand at many conclusions
which the Catholics gradually adopted only after generations of
hesitation, and on the other at a number of conclusions which even to
our present generation seem too premature. All theosophic students are,
in matters of religion, centuries before their time, for the simple
reason that they are endeavouring by every means in their power to
shorten the time of normal evolution and reach the mystic goal, which at
every moment of time is near at hand *within*, but

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

for the majority is far distant along the normal path of external
evolution.

The phrase "acute secularizing of Christianity," then, represents the
rapid theologizing and systematizing of Christianity; but I doubt
whether this altogether accounts for the facts. The Gnosis was
pre-Christian; the Christ illumined its tradition, and by His public
teaching practically threw open to all what had previously been kept
"secret from the creation of the world"--to speak more accurately, the
intermediate grades of the Mysteries. The leaven worked, and in course
of time much that had been previously kept for the "worthy" alone, was
forced into publicity and made common property. It was forced out by the
stress of circumstances, inaugurated by the propaganda of Paul, and
intensified by subsequent hæresiological controversy. The Gnostics
claimed that there were two lines of tradition--the public sayings, and
the inner teachings which dealt with things that the people in the world
could not understand. This side of their teaching they kept at first
entirely to themselves, and only gradually put forth a small portion of
it; the rest they kept in closest secrecy, as they knew it could not
possibly be understood.

The Gnostics were, then, the first Christian theologists, and if it is a
cause for reprehension that the real historical side of the new movement
was obscured in order to suit the necessities of a religion which
aspired to universality, then the Gnostics are the chief culprits.

Catholicism finally, by accepting the Old Testament

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Yahweh not "the Father" of Jesus.</span>Canon in its
literal interpretation, adopted the beliefs of popular Judaism and the
Yahweh-cult, but in the earlier years it had been inclined to seek for
an allegorical interpretation. Gnosticism, on the contrary, whenever it
did not entirely reject the Old Covenant documents, invariably adopted
not only the allegorical method, but also a canon of criticism which
minutely classified the "inspiration" and so sifted out most of the
objectionable passages from the Jewish Canon.

Thus, in [pursuit](errata.htm#20) of a universal ideal, the tribal
God--or rather, the crude views of the uninstructed Jewish populace as
to Yahweh--was, when not entirely rejected, placed in a very subordinate
position. In brief, the Yahweh of the Elohīm was not the Father of
Jesus; the Demiurgos, or creative power of the world, was not the
Mystery God over all.

<span class="margnote">The Inner Teaching.</span>And just as this idea
of the true God transcended the popular notions of deity, so did the
true teaching of the Gnosis illumine the enigmatical sayings or
parables. The ethical teachings, or "Words of the Lord," and the
parables, required interpretation; the literal meaning was sufficient
for the people, but for the truly spiritual minded there was an infinite
vista of inner meaning which could be revealed to the eye of the true
Gnostic. Thus the plain ethical teaching and the unintelligible dark
sayings were for the uninstructed; but there was a further instruction,
an esoteric or inner doctrine, which was imparted to the worthy alone.
Many gospels and apocalypses were thus

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

compiled under the inspiration of the "Spirit," as it was claimed--all
purporting to be the instruction vouchsafed by Jesus to His disciples
after the "resurrection from the dead," which mystical phrase they
mostly represented as meaning the new birth or Gnostic illumination, the
coming to life of the soul from its previous dead state. But even these
Gnostic treatises did not reveal the whole matter; true, they explained
many things in terms of internal states and spiritual processes; but
they still left much unexplained, and the final revelation was only
communicated by word of mouth in the body, and by vision out of the
body.

Thus it was a custom with them to divide mankind into three classes:
(*a*) the lowest, or <span class="margnote">Various Classes of
souls.</span> "hylics," were those who were so entirely dead to
spiritual things that they were as the *hylē*, or unperceptive matter of
the world; (*b*) the intermediate class were called "phychics," for
though believers in things spiritual, they were believers simply, and
required miracles and signs to strengthen their faith; (*c*) whereas the
"pneumatics," or spiritual, the highest class, were those capable of
knowledge of spiritual matters, those who could receive the Gnosis.

It is somewhat the custom in our days in extreme circles to claim that
all men are "equal." The modern theologian wisely qualifies this claim
by the adverb "morally." Thus stated the idea is by no means a
peculiarly Christian view--for the doctrine is common to all the great
religions, seeing that it simply asserts the great principle of justice
as one

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of the manifestations of [Deity](errata.htm#21). The Gnostic view,
however, is far clearer, and more in accord with the facts of evolution;
it admits the "morally equal," but it further asserts difference of
degree, not only in body and soul, but also in spirit, in order to make
the morality proportional, and so to carry out the inner meaning of the
parable of the talents.

This classification obtained not only among men, but also among powers;
and the prophets of the Old Testament as instruments of such powers
were, as stated above, thus sorted out into an order of dignity.

<span class="margnote">The Person of Jesus.</span>The personality of
Jesus, the prophet of the new tidings proved, however, a very difficult
problem for the Gnostic doctors, and we can find examples of every shade
of opinion among them--from the original Ebionite view that he was
simply a good and holy man, to the very antipodes of belief; that he was
not only a descent of the Logos of God--a familiar idea to Oriental
antiquity--but in deed and in his person very God of very God, a
necessity forced upon faith by the boastful spirit of an enthusiasm
which sought to transcend the claims of every existing religion.

The person of Jesus was thus made to bear the burden of every
possibility of the occult world and every hidden power of human nature.
In their endeavours to reconcile the ideas of a suffering man and of a
triumphant initiator and king of the universe (both sensible and
intellectual), they had recourse to the expedient of Docetism, a theory
which could cover every phase of contradiction in the sharp
juxtaposition of the divine and human natures of their ideal. The

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

docetic theory is the theory of "appearance." A sharp distinction was
made between Christ, the divine æon or perfected "man," and Jesus the
personality. The God, or rather God, in Christ, did not suffer, but
appeared to suffer; the lower man, Jesus, alone suffered. Or again,
Christ was not really incarnated in a man Jesus, but took to himself a
phantasmal body called Jesus. But these were subsequent doctrinal
developments on the ground of certain inner facts: (*a*) that a
phantasmal body can be used by the "perfect," be made to appear and
disappear at will, and become dense or materialised, so as to be felt
physically; and (*b*) that the physical body of another, usually a
pupil, can be used by a master of wisdom as a medium for instruction.
Such underlying ideas occur in Gnostic treatises and form an important
part of their christology, especially with regard to the period of
instruction after the "resurrection."

In fact no problem appeared too lofty for the intuition of the Gnostic
philosopher; the whence, <span class="margnote">The Main
Doctrines.</span> whither, why, and how of things, were searched into
with amazing daring. Not only was their cosmogony of the most sublime
and complex character, but the limits of the sensible world were too
narrow to contain it, so that they sought for its origins in the
intellectual and spiritual regions of the immanent mind of deity,
wherein they postulated a transcendent æonology which pourtrayed the
energizings of the divine ideation. Equally complex was their
anthropogony, and equally sublime the potentialities which they
postulated of the human soul and spirit.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

As to their soteriology, or theory of the salvation or regeneration of
mankind, they did not confine the idea to the crude and limited notion
of a physical passion by a single individual, but expanded it into a
stupendous cosmical process, wrought by the volition of the Logos in His
own nature.

Their eschatology, or doctrine of the "last things," again painted for
mankind at the end of the world-cycle a future which gave "*nirvāṇa*" to
the "spiritual" and æonian bliss to the "psychic," while the "hylic"
remained in the obscuration of matter until the end of the "Great
Peace"--a picture somewhat different from the crude expectation of the
good feasting time on earth of the "Poor Men," which Harnack technically
refers to as a "sensuous eudæmonistic eschatology."

Finally, the whole of their doctrine revolved round the conception of
cyclic law for both the universal and the individual soul. Thus we find
the Gnostics invariably teaching the doctrine not only of the
preëxistence but also of the rebirth of human souls; and though a chief
feature of their dogmas was the main doctrine of forgiveness of sins,
they nevertheless held rigidly to the infallible working out of the
great law of cause and effect. It is somewhat curious that these two
main doctrines, which explain so much in Gnosticism and throw light on
so many dark places, have been either entirely overlooked or, when not
unintelligently slurred over, despatched with a few hurried remarks in
which the critic is more at pains to apologize for touching on such
ridiculous superstitions as "metempsychosis" and "fate," than to
elucidate tenets which are a key to the whole position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Literature and Sources of Gnosticism](fff16)
