[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff13)  [Next](fff15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### THE ESSENES.

BASING themselves on the Sayings preserved in the canonical Gospels and
on the description of the communities given in the *Acts*, many have
supposed that Jesus was a member of or intimately acquainted with the
doctrines and discipline of the Essene communities. Who then were these
Essenes or Healers?

For centuries before the Christian era Essene communities had dwelt on
the shores of the Dead Sea. These Essenes or Essæans, in the days of
Philo and Josephus, were imbued with the utmost reverence for Moses and
the Law. They believed in God, the creator, in the immortality of the
soul, and in a future state of retribution. Finding it impossible to
carry out in ordinary life the minute regulations of the laws of purity,
they had adopted the life of ascetic communism. Their chief
characteristic was the doctrine of love--love to God, love of virtue,
and love of mankind--and the practical way in which they carried out
their precepts aroused the admiration of all.

Their strict observance of the purificatory discipline enacted by the
Levitical institutions thus compelled them to become a self-supporting
community; all worked at a trade, they cultivated their own fields,
manufactured all the articles of food and dress which they used, and
thus in every way avoided contact with those who did not observe the
same rules. They also appear in their inner circles to have been strict
celibates.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="margnote">Their Manner of Life.</span>Their manner of life
was as follows: they rose before the sun, and no word was uttered until
they had assembled together and, with faces turned towards the dawn,
offered up prayers for the renewal of the light. Each then went to his
appointed task under the supervision of the stewards or overseers
("bishops") elected by universal suffrage. At eleven o'clock they again
assembled and, putting off their working clothes, performed the daily
rite of baptism in cold water; then clothing themselves in white linen
robes, they proceeded to the common meal, which they regarded as a
sacrament; the refectory was a "holy temple." They ate in silence, and
the food was of the plainest--bread and vegetables. Before the meal a
blessing was invoked, and at the end thanks were rendered. The members
took their seats according to seniority. They then went forth to work
again until the evening, when they again assembled for the common meal.
Certain hours of the day, however, were devoted to the study of the
mysteries of nature and of revelation, as well as of the powers of the
celestial hierarchies, the names of the angels, etc.; for they had an
inner instruction, which was guarded with the utmost secrecy.

This was the rule for the week-days, while the Sabbath was kept with
extreme rigour. They had, however, no priests, and any one who was
"moved" to do so, took up the reading of the Law, and the exposition of
the mysteries connected with the Tetragrammaton, or four-lettered
mystery-name of the Creative Power, and the angelic worlds. The

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Essenes,
therefore, were evidently in contact with Chaldæan "kabalism" and the
Zoroastrian tradition of the discipline of purity; logic and
metaphysics, however, were eschewed as injurious to a devotional life.

There were four degrees in the community: (i.) novices; (ii.)
approachers; (iii.) new full members, or associates; (iv.) old members,
or elders.

(i.) After the first year the novice gave all his possessions to the
common treasury, and received a copy of the regulations, a spade (for
the purpose described in Moses’ camp-regulations), and a white robe, the
symbol of purity; but the novice was still excluded from the lustral
rites and common meal..

(ii.) After two years more, the novice shared in the lustral rites, but
was still excluded from the common meal.

(iii.) The associates were bound by the most solemn assurances, and in
case of any delinquency could only be judged by the "assembly,"
consisting of one hundred members.

Essenism is said by some to have been an exaggerated form of Pharisaism;
and it may be a <span class="margnote">The Degrees of Holiness.</span>
matter of surprise to those whose only knowledge of the Pharisees is
derived front canonical documents, to learn that the highest aim of this
enlightened school of Judaism was to attain to such a state of holiness
as to be able to perform miraculous cures and to prophesy. The "degrees
of holiness" practised by the Pharisees are said to have been: (i.) the
study of the Law and circumspection; (ii.) the noviciate, in which the
apron was the symbol of purity; (iii.) external

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

purity, by means of lustrations or baptisms; (iv.) celibacy; (v.) inward
purity, purity of thought; (vi.) a higher stage still, which is not
further defined; (vii.) meekness and holiness; (viii.) dread of every
sin; (ix.) the highest stage of holiness; (x.) the stage which enabled
the adept to heal the sick and raise the dead.

We should, however, remember that the Healers absolutely refused to have
anything to do with the blood-sacrifices of the Temple-worship, and
refused to believe in the resurrection of the physical body, which the
rest of the Pharisees held as a cardinal doctrine.

In this brief sketch it is of course impossible to point out the
striking similarities between the discipline of the Essenes and that of
the Therapeutæ of Egypt and of the Orphic and Pythagorean schools. Every
subject referred to in these essays requires a volume or several volumes
for its proper treatment; we can only set up a few finger-posts, and
leave the reader to make his own investigations.

But before leaving this most interesting theme, it will be necessary to
point to the identity between many of the Essene regulations and the
Gospel teachings and traditions.

<span class="margnote">Points of Contact with
Christianity.</span>Converts were required to sell their possessions and
give to the poor, for the laying up of treasure was regarded as
injurious to a spiritual life. Not only did the Essenes despise riches,
but they lived a life of self-imposed poverty. Love of the brotherhood
and of one's neighbour was the soul of Essene life, and the basis of all
action; and this characteristic of

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

their discipline called forth universal admiration. The members lived
together as in a family, had all things in common, and appointed a
steward to manage the common bag. When travelling they would lodge with
brethren whom they had never seen before, as though with the oldest and
most intimate friends; and thus they took nothing with them when they
went on a journey. All members were set on the same level, and the
authority of one over another was forbidden; nevertheless mutual service
was strictly enjoined. They were also great lovers of peace, and so
refused to take arms or manufacture warlike weapons; moreover they
proscribed slavery. Finally, the end of the Essenes was to be meek and
lowly in spirit, to mortify all sinful lusts, to be pure in heart, to
hate evil but reclaim the evildoer, and to be merciful to all men.
Moreover, their yea was to be yea, and their nay, nay. They were devoted
to the curing of the sick, the healing of both body and soul, and
regarded the power to perform miraculous cures and cast out evil spirits
as the highest stage of discipline. In brief, they strove to be so pure
as to become temples of the Holy Spirit, and thus seers and prophets.

To these inner communities were attached outer circles of pupils living
in the world, and found in all the main centres of the Diaspora.

Philo distinguishes the Essenes from the Therapeuts by saying that the
former were devoted to the "practical" life, while the latter proceeded
to the higher stage of the "contemplative" life, and devoted themselves
to still higher problems of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

religion and philosophy, and it is in this direction that we must look
for the best in Gnosticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tendencies of Gnosticism](fff15.md)
