[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff19)  [Next](fff21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### DOSITHEUS.

<span class="margnote">A Follower of John the Baptist.</span>The
legendary background of the Pseudo-Clementine polemic informs us that
the precursor of "Simon Magus" was a certain Dositheus. He is mentioned
in the lists of the earliest hæresiologists, in a Samaritan Chronicle,
and in the Chronicle of Aboulfatah (fourteenth century); the notices,
however, are all legendary, and nothing of a really reliable character
can be asserted of the man. That however he was not an unimportant
personage is evidenced by the persistence of the sect of the Dositheans
to the sixth century; Aboulfatah says even to the fourteenth. Both
Dositheus and "Simon Magus" were, according to tradition, followers of
John the Baptist; they were, however, said to be inimical to Jesus.
Dositheus is said to have claimed to be the promised prophet, "like unto
Moses," and "Simon" to have made a still higher claim. In fact, like so
many others in those days, both were claimants to the Messiaship. The
Dositheans followed a mode of life closely resembling that of the
Essenes; they had also their own secret volumes, and apparently a not
inconsiderable literature.

Dositheus (Dousis, Dusis, or Dosthai) was apparently an Arab, and in
Arabia, we have every reason to believe, there were many mystic
communities allied to those of the Essenes and Therapeuts. One of the
Gospels used by Justin, under the general title "Memoirs of the
Apostles," states that the "wise

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

men" came from Arabia. One legend even claims Dositheus as the founder
of the sect of the Sadducees! Later tradition assigned to him a group of
thirty disciples, or to be more precise twenty-nine and a-half (the
number of days in a month), one of them being a woman. That is to say,
the system of Dositheus turned on a lunar basis, just as subsequent
systems ascribed to Jesus turned on a solar basis, the twelve disciples
typifying the solar months or zodiacal signs, or rather certain facts of
the wisdom-tradition which underlie that symbolism. Dositheus is said to
have claimed to be a manifestation of the "Standing One" or unchanging
principle, the name also ascribed to the supreme principle of the
"Simonians." The one female disciple was Helena (the name of the moon or
month, Selene, in Greek), who appears also in the legend of Simon.

On the dim screen of Dosithean tradition we can thus see shadows passing
of the sources of a <span class="margnote">The Pre-Christian
Gnosis.</span> pre-Christian Gnosis--Arab, Phœnician, Syrian, Babylonian
shadows. More interesting still, we can thus, perhaps, point to a source
to which may be traced, along another line of descent, the subsequent
thirty æons of the Valentinian plērōma or ideal world, with the divided
thirtieth, Sophia (within and without, above and below), the lower
aspect of which constituted the World-soul or the primordial substance
of a world-system.

It is also to be observed that Aboulfatah places Dositheus 100 years
<span class="small">B.C.</span> Of course only very qualified credence
can be given to this late chronicler, but still it is possible that he
may have drawn from sources

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

no longer accessible to us. The statement is interesting as showing that
the chronicler recognized the fact of a pre-Christian Gnosis; though how
he reconciles this John the Baptist date with the orthodox chronology is
a puzzle. Can he have been influenced by the Talmudic tradition of the
date of Jesus, which places him a century prior to our era? Together
with Dositheus and "Simon," Hegesippus (according to Eusebius) also
mentions Cleobius, Gorthæus, and Masbotheus as prominent leaders of
primitive Christian schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ''Simon Magus.''](fff21.md)
