[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff25)  [Next](fff27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AN EARLY "OPHITE" SYSTEM.

HIPPOLYTUS devotes the fifth book of his Refutation to the "Ophites,"
who, however, all call themselves <span
class="margnote">Justinus.</span> followers of the Gnosis, and not
"Ophites," as explained above; he seems to regard them as the most
ancient stream of the Gnosis. After treating of three great schools, to
which we shall subsequently refer, he specially singles out for notice a
certain Justinus, who is mentioned by no other hæresiologist. This
account of Hippolytus is all the more important, seeing that the system
with which the name of Justinus is associated, represents apparently one
of the oldest forms of the Gnosis of which we have record. This has been
disputed by Salmon, but to my mind his arguments are unconvincing; the
fact that the Justinian school, in its mystical exegesis, makes no
reference to the texts of the New Testament collection, although freely
quoting from the Old, should decide the point. One short saying is
referred to Jesus, but it is nowhere found in the canonical texts.

This circle had a large literature, from which Hippolytus selects a
single volume, *The Book of Baruch*, as giving the most complete form of
the system. The members were bound by an oath of

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

secrecy not to reveal the tenets of the school, and the form of the oath
is given. The cosmogony is based on a Syrian creation-myth, a variant of
which is preserved by Herodotus (iv. 8-10), in which Hercules (the
Sun-god) plays the principal part, and a stratum of which is also found
in Genesis. The myth has intimate points of contact with Chaldæan and
ancient Semitic traditions. The following is the outline of the system.

<span class="margnote">The Book of Baruch.</span>There are three
principles of the Universe: (i.) The Good, or all-wise Deity; (ii.) the
Father, or Spirit, the creative power, called Elohīm; and (iii.) the
World-Soul, symbolized as a woman above the middle and a serpent below,
called Eden. From Elohīm (a plural used as a collective) and Eden
twenty-four cosmic powers or angels come forth, twelve follow the will
of the Father-Spirit, and twelve the nature of the Mother-Soul. The
lower twelve are the World-Trees of the Garden of Eden. The Trees are
divided into four groups, of three each, representing the four Rivers of
Eden. The Trees are evidently of the same nature as the cosmic forces
which are represented by the Hindus as having their roots or sources
above and their branches or streams below. The name Eden means Pleasure
or Desire.

Thus the whole creation comes into existence, and finally from the
animal part of the Mother-Soul are generated animals, and from the human
part men. The upper part of the Garden is called the "most beautiful
Earth"; that is to say, Cosmic Earth, and the body of man is formed of
the finest. Man having thus

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

been formed, Eden and Elohīm depute their powers unto him; the
World-Soul bestows on him the soul, and the World-Spirit infuses into
him the spirit. Thus were men and women constituted.

And all creation was subjected to the four groups of the twelve powers
of the World-Soul, according to their cycles, as they move round as in a
circular dance

But when the man-stage was reached, the turning-point of the
world--process, Elohīm, the Spirit, ascended into the celestial spaces,
taking with him his own twelve powers. And in the highest part of the
heaven he beheld the Great Light shining through the Gate (? the
physical sun), which led to the Light-world of The Good. And he who had
hitherto thought himself Lord of Creation, perceived that there was one
above him, and cried aloud: "Open me the gates that I may acknowledge
the \[true\] Lord; for I considered myself to be the Lord." And a voice
came forth, saying: "This is the Gate of the Lord; through this the
righteous enter in." And leaving his angels in the highest part of the
heavens, the World-Father entered in and sat down at the right hand of
the Good One.

And Elohīm desired to recover by force his spirit which was bound to
men, from further degradation; but the Good Deity restrained him, for
now that he had ascended to the Light-realm he could work no
destruction.

And the Soul (Eden) perceiving herself abandoned by Elohīm, tricked
herself out so as to entice him back; but the Spirit would not return to
the arms of

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mother Nature (now
that the middle point of evolution was passed). Thereupon, the spirit
that was left behind in man, was plagued by the soul; for the spirit or
mind desired to follow its Father into the height, but the soul, incited
by the powers of the Mother--Soul, and especially by the first group who
rule over sexual passion and excess, gave way to adulteries and even
greater vice; and the spirit in man was thereby tormented.

Now the angel, or power, of the World-Soul, which <span
class="margnote">Baruch.</span> especially incited the human soul to
such misdeeds, was the third of the first group, called Naas (Heb.
*Nachash*), the serpent, the symbol of animal passion. And Elohīm,
seeing this, sent forth the third of his own angels, called Baruch, to
succour the spirit in man. And Baruch came and stood in the midst of the
Trees (the powers of the World-Soul), and declared unto man that of all
the Trees of the Garden of Eden he might eat the fruit, but of the Tree
Naas, he might not, for Naas had transgressed the law, and had given
rise to adultery and unnatural intercourse.

And Baruch had also appeared to Moses and the prophets through the
spirit in man, that the people might be converted to the Good One; but
Naas had invariably obscured his precepts through the soul in man. And
not only had Baruch taught the prophets of the Hebrews, but also the
prophets of the uncircumcised. Thus, for instance, Hercules among the
Syrians had been instructed, and his twelve labours were his conflicts
with the twelve powers of the World-Soul. Yet Hercules also had finally
failed,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

for after seeming to accomplish his labours, he is vanquished by
Omphalē, or Venus, who divests him of his power by clothing him with her
own robe, the power of Eden below.

Last of all Baruch appeared unto Jesus, a shepherd boy, son of Joseph
and Mary, a child of <span class="margnote">Christology.</span> twelve
years. And Jesus remained faithful to the teachings of Baruch, in spite
of the enticements of Naas. And Naas in wrath caused him to be
"crucified," but he, leaving on the "tree" the body of Eden--that is to
say, the psychic body or soul, and the gross physical body--and
committing his spirit or mind to the hands of his Father (Elohīm),
ascended to the Good One. And there he beholds "whatever things eye hath
not seen and ear hath not heard, and which have not entered into the
heart of man"; and bathes in the ocean of life-giving water, no longer
in the water below the firmament, the ocean of generation in which the
physical and psychic bodies are bathed. This ocean of generation is, of
course, the same as the Brāhmanical and Buddhistic *saṁsāra*, the ocean
of rebirth.

Hippolytus tries to make out that Justinus was a very vile person,
because he fearlessly pointed out one of the main obstacles to the
spiritual life, and the horrors of animal sensuality; but Justinus
evidently preached a doctrine of rigid asceticism, and ascribed the
success of Jesus to his triumphant purity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Naasseni](fff27.md)
