[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff20)  [Next](fff22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "SIMON MAGUS."

"SIMON MAGUS," as we have already said, is mentioned in the *Acts of the
Apostles*, a document of the New Testament collection, said not to be
quoted prior to 177 <span class="small">A.D.</span> Irenæus and his
successors repeat the *Acts* legend. Justin Martyr (c. 150) speaks of a
certain Simon of Gitta whom nearly all the Samaritans regarded with the
greatest reverence; this Simon, he said, claimed to be an incarnation of
the "Great Power," and had many followers. Justin, however, makes no
reference to the *Acts* story, and so some have assumed two Simons, but
this does not seem to be necessary. The Justin account is the nucleus of
the huge Simonian legend which was mainly developed by the cycle of
Pseudo-Clementine literature of the third century, based on the second
century *Circuits of Peter*.

Hippolytus alone, at the beginning of the third

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

century, has preserved a few scraps from the extensive literature of the
"Simonians"; the bishop of Portus quotes from a work entitled *The Great
Announcement*, and so we are able to form some idea of one of the
systems of these Gnostics. The scheme of the Gnosis contained in this
document, so far from presenting a crude form, or mere germ, of Gnostic
doctrine, hands on to us a highly developed phase of Gnostic tradition,
which, though not so elaborated as the Valentinian system, nevertheless
is almost as mature as the Barbēlō scheme, referred to so cursorily by
Irenæus, and now partly recovered in the newly-discovered *Gospel of
Mary*.

In the earliest times to which Catholic Christians subsequently traced
the origin of their traditions, <span class="margnote">The Ebionite
"Simon."</span> there were, as we know from various sources, numerous
movements in and about Palestine of a prophetical and reformatory
nature, many prophets and teachers of ethical, mystical,
religio-philosophical, and Gnostic doctrines. The Ebionite communities
found themselves in conflict with the followers of these teachers on
many points, and Ebionite tradition handed on a garbled account of these
doctrinal conflicts. Above all things, the Ebionites were in bitterest
strife with the Pauline churches. Later on General Christianity set
itself to work to reconcile the Petrine and Pauline differences,
principally by the *Acts* document; and in course of time Ebionite
tradition was also edited by the light of the new view, and the name of
Simon substituted for the great "heretic" with whom the Ebionites had
striven.

And so the modified Ebionite tradition, which was

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

presumably first committed to writing in the *Circuits of Peter*,
gradually evolved a romance, in which the conflicts between Simon Peter
the Ebionite, and Simon the Magician, are graphically pourtrayed, the
magical arts of the Samaritan are foiled, and his false theology is
exposed, by the doughty champion of the "Poor Men." The latest recension
of this cycle of romance gave the whole a Roman setting, and so we find
Simon finally routed by Peter at Rome (to suit the legend of the Roman
Church that Peter had come to Rome), but in earlier recensions Peter
does not travel beyond the East, and Simon is finally routed at Antioch.

A close inspection of the Pseudo-Clementine literature reveals a number
of literary deposits or strata of legend, one of which is of a very
remarkable nature. Baur was the first to point this out, and his
followers in the Tübingen school elaborated his views into the theory
that Simon Magus is simply the legendary symbol for Paul. The remarkable
similarity of the doctrinal points at issue in both the Petro-Simonian
and Petro-Pauline controversies cannot be denied, and the scholarly
reputation of the Tübingen school puts out of court mere *à priori*
impossibility. Although, of course, it would not be prudent to take the
extreme view that wherever Simon Magus is mentioned, Paul is meant,
nevertheless we may not unclearly distinguish this identity in at least
one of the strata of the legend.

The "Simonian" systems, as described by the Fathers, reveal the main
features of the Gnosis: the Father over all, the Logos-idea, the
æon-world,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

or ideal universe, its emanation, and its positive and negative aspects
represented as pairs or <span class="margnote">The Simonian
Literature.</span> syzygies; the world-soul represented as the thought
or female aspect of the Logos; the descent of the soul; the creation of
the sensible world by the builders; the doctrines of reincarnation,
redemption, etc.

The main characteristic of the "Simonians" is said to have been the
practice of "magic," which "Simon" is reported to have learned in Egypt,
and which gave rise to most of the fantastic stories invented by their
opponents. But it is very probable that the title Magus covers much more
than the story of the Samaritan wonder-worker, and puts us in touch with
a Gnostic link with Persia and the Magi; and indeed the fire-symbolism
used in the MS. quoted from by Hippolytus amply confirms this
hypothesis.

In other respects the "Simonian" Gnosis was on similar lines to the
Barbēlō-Gnostic and Basilido-Valentinian developments; this is to be
clearly seen in the fragments of *The Great Announcement* preserved by
Hippolytus.

The rest of the "Simonian" literature has perished; one of their chief
documents, however, was a book called *The Four Quarters of the World*,
and another famous treatise contained a number of controversial points
(*Refutatorii Sermones*) ascribed to "Simon," which submitted the idea
of the God of the Old Testament to a searching criticism, especially
dealing with the serpent-legend in Genesis.

The main symbolism, which the evolvers of the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Simon-legend
parodied into the myth of Simon and Helen, appears to have been
sidereal; thus the Logos and his Thought, the World-soul, were
symbolized as the Sun (Simon) and Moon (Selēnē, Helen); so with the
microcosm, Helen was the human soul fallen into matter and Simon the
mind which brings about her redemption. Moreover one of the systems
appears to have attempted to interpret the Trojan legend and myth of
Helen in a spiritual and psychological fashion.

This is interesting as showing an attempt to invoke the authority of the
popular Greek "Bible," the cycle of Homeric legend, in support of
Gnostic ideas. It was the extension of the method of the Jewish
allegorizers into the domain of Greek mythology.

The detractors of the "Simonians," among the Church Fathers, however,
evolved the legend, that Helen was a prostitute whom Simon had picked up
at Tyre. The name of this city presumably led Baur to suggest that the
Simon (‏שמש‎, Sun) and Helen (Σελήνη, Moon) terminology is connected
with the Phœnician cult of the sun and moon deities which was still
practised in that ancient city. Doubtless the old Phœnician and Syrian
ideas of cosmogony were familiar to many students of religion at that
period, but we need not be too precise in matters so obscure.

<span class="margnote">The "Simonian" System of Irenæus.</span>Irenæus
gives the following outline of the system he ascribes to the
"Simonians." It is the dramatic myth of the Logos and the World-soul,
the Sophia, or Wisdom. Irenæus, however, would have it that it was the
personal claim of Simon concerning

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Helen; he
evidently bases himself on a MS. in which the Christ, as the Logos, is
represented as speaking in the first person, and we shall therefore
endeavour to restore it partially to its original form.

"'Wisdom was the first Conception (or Thought) of My Mind, the Mother of
All, by whom in the beginning I conceived in My Mind the making of the
Angels and Archangels. This Thought leaping forth from Me, and knowing
what was the will of her Father, descended to the lower regions and
generated the Angels and Powers, by whom also the world was made. And
after she had generated them, she was detained by them through envy, for
they did not wish to be thought the progeny of any other. As for Myself,
I am entirely unknown to them.'

"And Thought," continues Irenæus, summarising from the MS., "was made
prisoner by the Powers and Angels that had been emanated by her. And she
suffered every kind of indignity at their hands, to prevent her
reascending to her Father, even to being imprisoned in the human body
and transmigrating into other female \[?\] bodies, as from one vessel
into another. . . . So she, transmigrating from body to body, and
thereby also continually undergoing indignity, last of all even stood
for hire in a brothel; and she was the 'lost sheep.'

"'Wherefore, also, am I come to take her away for the first time, and
free her from her bonds; to make sure salvation to men by My Gnosis.'

"For as the Angels," writes the Church Father,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "were mismanaging
the world, since each of them desired the sovereignty, He had come to
set matters right; and He had descended, [transforming](errata.htm#24.md)
Himself and being made like to the Powers and Principalities and Angels;
so that He appeared to men as a man, although He was not a man; and was
thought to have suffered in Judæa, although He did not really suffer.
The prophets, moreover, had spoken their prophecies under the
inspiration of the Angels who made the world."

All of these doctrines proceeded from circles who believed in the
mystical Christ, and are common to many other systems; if Irenæus had
only told us the history of the document which he was summarizing and
glossing, if he had but copied it verbally, how much labour would he
have saved posterity! True, he may have been copying from Justin's
controversial writings, and Justin had already done some of the
summarizing and commenting; but in any case a single paragraph of the
original would have given us a better ground on which to form a judgment
than all the paraphrazing and rhetoric of these two ancient worthies who
so cordially detested the Gnostics.

<span class="margnote">The Great Announcement.</span>Fortunately
Hippolytus, who came later, is more correct in his quotations, and
occasionally copies verbally portions of the MSS. which had come into
his hands. One of these he erroneously attributes to "Simon" himself,
presumably because he considered it the oldest Gnostic MS. in his
possession; most critics, however, consider it a later form of the
Gnosis than the system summarized by Irenæus, but there is nothing to
warrant this assumption. By this time

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

the legend that "Simon" was the first heretic had become "history" for
the hæresiologists, and no doubt Hippolytus felt himself fully justified
in ascribing the contents of the MS. to one whom he supposed to be the
oldest leader of the Gnosis.

The title of the MS. was *The Great Announcement*, probably a synonym
for The Gospel, in the Basilidian sense of the term; and it opened with
the following words: "This is the Writing of the Revelation of
Voice-and-Name from Thought, the Great Power, the Boundless. Wherefore
shall it be sealed, hidden, concealed, laid in the Dwelling of which the
Universal Root is the Foundation."

The Dwelling is said to be man, the temple of the Holy Spirit. The
symbol of the Boundless <span class="margnote">The Hidden Fire.</span>
Power and Universal Root was Fire. Fire was conceived as being of a
twofold nature--the concealed and the manifested; the concealed parts of
the Fire are hidden in the manifested, and the manifested produced by
the concealed. The manifested side of the Fire has all things in itself
which a man can perceive of things visible, or which he unconsciously
fails to perceive; whereas the concealed side is everything which one
can conceive as intelligible, even though it escape sensation, or which
a man fails to conceive.

Before we come to the direct quotation, however, Hippolytus treats us to
a lengthy summary of the Gnostic exposition before him, from which we
may take the following as representing the thought of the writer of the
MS. less erroneously than the rest.

"Of all things that are concealed and manifested,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="margnote">The Fire Tree.</span>the Fire which is above the
heavens is the treasure-house, as it were a great Tree from which all
flesh is nourished. The manifested side of the Fire is the trunk,
branches, leaves, and the outside bark. All these parts of the great
Tree are set on fire from the all-devouring flame of the Fire and
destroyed. But the fruit of the Tree, if its imaging has been perfected
and it takes shape of itself, is placed in the store-house (or
treasure), and not cast into the Fire. For the fruit is produced to be
placed in the store-house, but the husk to be committed to the Fire;
that is to say, the trunk, which is generated not for its own sake but
for that of the fruit."

This symbolism is of great interest as revealing points of contact with
the "Trees" and "Treasures" of the elaborate systems recoverable from
the Coptic Gnostic works, and also with the line of tradition of the
Chaldæan and Zoroastrian Logia, which were the favourite study of so
many of the later Platonic school. The fruit of the Fire-tree and the
"Flower of Fire" are the symbols of (among other things) the man
immortal, the garnered spiritual consciousness of the man-plant; but the
full interpretation of this graphic symbolism would include both the
genesis of the cosmos and the divinizing of man.

Man (teaches the Gnosis we are endeavouring to recover from Hippolytus)
is subject to generation and suffering so long as he remains in
potentiality; but, once that his "imaging forth" is accomplished, he
becomes like unto God, and, freed from the bonds of suffering and birth,
he attains perfection. But to our

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

quotation from *The Great Announcement*, taken apparently from the very
beginning of the treatise, immediately following the superscription:

"To you, therefore, I say what I say, and write what I write. And the
writing is this:

"Of the universal Æons there are two growths, without beginning or end,
springing from one <span class="margnote">The Æons.</span> Root, which
is the Power Silence invisible, inapprehensible. Of these one appears
from above, which is the Great Power, the Universal Mind, ordering all
things, male; and the other from below, the Great Thought (or
Conception), female, producing all things.

"Hence matching each other, they unite and manifest the Middle Space,
incomprehensible Air \[Spirit\], without beginning or end. In this
\[Air\] is the \[second\] Father who sustains and nourishes all things
which have beginning and end.

"This \[Father\] is He who has stood, stands and will stand, a
male-female power, like the pre-existing Boundless Power, which has
neither beginning nor end, existing in oneness. It was from this
Boundless Power that Thought, which had previously been hidden in
oneness, first proceeded and became twain.

"He \[the Boundless\] was one; having her in Himself, He was alone. Yet
was He not 'first,' though 'pre-existing,' for it was only when He was
manifested to Himself from Himself that there was a 'second.' Nor was He
called Father before \[Thought\] called Him Father.

"As, therefore, producing Himself by Himself, He manifested to Himself
His own Thought, so

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

also His manifested Thought did not make the \[manifested--the second\]
Father, but contemplating Him hid him--that is, His power--in herself
and is male-female, Power and Thought.

"Hence they match each other, being one; for there is no difference
between Power and Thought. From the things above is discovered Power,
and from those below Thought.

"Thus it comes to pass that that which is manifested from them, though
one, is found to be two, male-female, having the female in itself.
Equally so is Mind in Thought; they really are one, but when separated
from each other they appear as two."

So much for *The Great Announcement* of "Simon." That some document may
yet be discovered which will throw fresh light on the subject is not an
impossibility; in the meantime we can reserve our judgment, and regard
all positive statements that "Simon" was the "first-born son of Satan"
as foreign to the question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Menander](fff22.md)
