[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff28)  [Next](fff30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

### THE SETHIANS.

CLOSELY connected with the Gnostics above described are the Sethians, to
whom Hippolytus next devotes Seth. his attention. He speaks of their
"innumerable commentaries," and refers his readers especially to a
certain treatise, called *The Paraphrase of Seth*, for a digest of their
doctrines. But whether or not Hippolytus quotes from this document
himself, or from some other treatise or treatises, is not apparent. The
title, *Paraphrase of Seth*, is exceedingly puzzling; it is difficult to
say what is the exact meaning of the term "*paraphrasis*," and the
doctrines set forth by Hippolytus have no connection with the
Seth-legend.

The term Sethians, as used by Hippolytus, is not only puzzling on this
account, but also because his summary differs entirely from the scraps
of information on the system of the Sethites supposed to have been
mentioned in his lost Syntagma, and allied to the doctrine of the
Nicolaïtans by the epitomizers. In the latter fragments the hero Seth
was chosen as the type of the good man, the perfect, the prototype of
Christ.

Can it possibly be that there is a connection between the name "Seth"
and the mysterious "Setheus" of the Codex Brucianus? And further, are we
to look for the origin of the Sethians along the Egyptian line of
tradition of the Hyksōs-cult, the Semitic background of which made Seth
the Mystery-God?

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="margnote">An Outline of their System.</span>The Sethians of
whom we are treating begin with a trinity; Light, Spirit and Darkness.
The Spirit is not, however, to be thought of as a breath or wind, but as
it were a subtle odour spreading everywhere. All three principles then
are intermingled one with another. And the Darkness strives to retain
the Light and the Spirit, and imprison the light-sparks in matter; while
the Light and the Spirit, on their side, strive to raise their powers
aloft and rescue them from the Darkness.

All genera and species and individuals, nay the heaven and earth itself,
are images of "seals"; they are produced according to certain
pre-existent types. It was from the first concourse of the three
original principles or powers that the first great form was produced,
the impression of the great seal, namely, heaven and earth. This is
symbolized by the world-egg in the womb of the universe, and the rest of
creation is worked out on the same analogy. The egg is in the waters,
which are thrown into waves by the creative power, and it depends on the
nature of the waves as to what the various creatures will be. Here we
have the whole theory of vibrations and the germ-cell idea in full
activity.

Into the bodies thus brought into existence by the waves of the waters
(the vehicles of subtle matter) the light-spark and the fragrance of the
Spirit descend, and thus "mind or man" is "moulded into various
species."

"And this \[light-spark\] is a perfect god, who from the ingenerable
Light from above, and from the Spirit, is borne down into the natural
man, as into a

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

shrine, by the tide of nature and the motion of the wind \[the creative
power which causes the waves\]. . . . Thus a minute spark, a divided
splinter from above, like the ray of a star, has been mingled in the
much compounded waters \[bodies of various kinds of subtle matter\] of
many (existences). . . . Every thought, then, and solicitude actuating
the Light from above is as to how and in what manner mind may be set
free from death--the evil and dark body--from the 'father' below, the
\[generative impulse\] wind, which with agitation and tumult raised up
the waves, and \[finally\] produced a perfect mind, his own son, and yet
not his own in essence. For he \[the mind\] was a ray from above, from
that perfect Light, overpowered in the dark and fearsome, and bitter,
and blood-stained water; he also is a light-spirit floating on the
water."

The generative power is called not only "wind," but also "beast," and
"serpent," the latter because of the hissing sound it produces, just
like the whirling wind. Now the impure womb, or sphere of generation,
can only produce mortal men, but the virgin or pure womb, the Sphere of
Light, can produce men immortal or gods. It is the descent of the
Perfect Man or Logos into the pure man that alone can still the
birth-pangs of the carnal man.

This natural and spiritual process is shown forth in the Mysteries;
after passing through the Lesser <span class="margnote">The
Mysteries.</span> Mysteries, which pertain to the cycle of generation,
the candidate is washed or baptised, and stripping off the dress of a
servant, puts on a heavenly garment, and drinks of the cup

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

of life-giving water. That is to say, he leaves his servile form, the
body which is subjected to the necessity of generation and is thus a
slave, and ascends in his spiritual body to the state where is the ocean
of immortality.

The Sethian school supported their theosophic tenets by analogies drawn
from natural philosophy, and by the allegorical interpretation of the
Old Testament; but, says Hippolytus, their system is nothing else than
the tenets of the Orphic Mysteries, which were celebrated in Achæa at
Phlium, long before the Eleusinian. No doubt the Sethians based their
theories on one or more of the traditions of the Mystery-cult, but we
need not follow Hippolytus in his selection of only one tradition, and
that too in its grossest and most ignorant phase of vulgar phallicism.

The school seems also to have had affinities with the Hermetic
tradition, and used the analogy of natural and "alchemical" processes
for the explanation of spiritual matters. For instance, after citing the
example of the magnet, one of their books continues: "Thus the light-ray
\[human soul\], mingled with the water \[animal soul\], having obtained
through discipline and instruction its own proper region, hastens
towards the Logos \[divine soul\] that comes down from above in servile
form \[body\]; and along with the Logos becomes Logos there where the
Logos has His being, more speedily than iron \[hastens\] to the magnet."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Docetæ](fff30.md)
