[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff38)  [Next](fff40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### APELLES.

<span class="margnote">His Wide Tolerance.</span>WE owe our most
reliable information on this Gnostic to a certain Rhodon, who opposed
his views some time in the reign of Commodus (180-193 <span
class="small">A.D.</span>); an excerpt from this lost "refutation" has
fortunately been preserved for us by Eusebius. At this time Apelles was
a very old man and refused the controversy, saying that all sincere
believers would ultimately be saved, whatever their theology might be--a
most enlightened doctrine and worthy of the best in Gnosticism. As Hort
says: "The picture which Rhodon unwittingly furnishes of his
\[Apelles’\] old age is pleasant to look upon. We see a man unwearied in
the pursuit of truth, diffident and tolerant, resting in beliefs which
he could not reconcile, but studious to maintain the moral character of
theology."

Apelles seems to have taken up a less exclusive position than Marcion,
though his book of Reasonings, directed against the Mosaic theology,
seems to have been drastic enough; and he is further said by Eusebius to
have written a "multitude of books" of the same nature.

<span class="margnote">Philumēnē.</span>He was, however, specially taken
to task for his belief in the clairvoyant faculty of a certain
Philumēnē, whom he came across in his old age. Her visions were recorded
in a book called The Manifestations, by which Apelles set great store.
Strangely enough, the man who pours on his head the greatest abuse for
this, accompanied

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

with the usual charges of immorality, is Tertullian, who, in his own
treatise *On the Soul*, following out his own Montanist convictions,
confesses his full belief in the prophetical power of a certain voyante
of his own congregation, in a most entertaining and naïve fashion!
Rhodon, on the contrary, who knew Apelles personally at Alexandria, says
that the old gentleman thought himself protected from such slanderous
insinuations, by his age and well-known character.

Philumēnē seems to have enjoyed certain psychic faculties, and also to
have been a "medium" for physical phenomena, as a modern spiritist would
say. She belonged to the class of holy women or "virgins," who were
numerous enough in the early Church, though it is exceedingly doubtful
whether any of them were trained [seeresses](errata.htm#30.md), except in
the most advanced Gnostic circles.

There is an entertaining account of Philumēnē in a curious fragment of
an anonymous author, which was printed in the early editions of
Augustine's work *On Heresies*, in the section devoted to the Severians.
The following is Hort's rendering of the passage:

"He \[Apelles\] moreover used to say that a certain girl named Philumēnē
was divinely inspired to <span class="margnote">Her Visions.</span>
predict future events. He used to refer to her his dreams, and the
perturbations of his mind, and to forewarn himself secretly by her
divinations or presages." \[Here some words appear to be missing.\] "The
same phantom, he said, showed itself to the same Philumēnē in the form
of a boy. This seeming boy sometimes declared himself to be Christ,
sometimes

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Paul. By questioning this phantom she used to supply the answers which
she pronounced to her hearers. He added that she was accustomed to
perform some wonders, of which the following was the chief: she used to
make a large loaf enter a glass vase with a very small mouth, and to
take it out uninjured with the tips of her fingers; and was content with
that food alone, as if it had been given her from above."

All of which is very monkish and very spiritistic, and quite in keeping
with the records of phenomenalism.

We should, however, remember that this account is not from the side of
the Gnostics, but from an unfriendly source. We shall perhaps never know
whether Apelles had a knowledge of the sources of the phenomena he
witnessed; or, like the vast majority of that time, as indeed of all
times, ignorantly assumed that the fact of psychic powers proved the
truth of theological doctrines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Basilidian Gnosis](fff40.md)
