[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff33)  [Next](fff35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "EPIPHANES."

WE next pass on to the contradictory and manifestly absurd legends,
which Patristic writers have woven round the second best-known name of
the Carpocratian circle. We have already referred to the extraordinary
blunder of Epiphanius, who has ascribed a whole system of the Gnosis,
which he found in Irenæus assigned simply to a "distinguished teacher"
(probably the Valentinian Marcus), to this Epiphanes; the Greek for
"distinguished" being also "*eiphanes*."

This is excusable in a certain measure, seeing that Epiphanius wrote at
the end of the fourth century (at least 250 years after the time of the
actual Epiphanes) when any means of discrediting a heretic were
considered justifiable; but what shall we say of Clement

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

of Alexandria, who is generally fair, and who lived in the same century
as Epiphanes? His blunder is even more extraordinary. This is his
legend. Epiphanes was the son of Carpocrates and Alexandria, a lady of
Cephallenia. He died at the early age of seventeen, and was worshipped
as a god with the most elaborate and lascivious rites by the
Cephallenians, in the great temple of Samē, on the day of the new moon.

Such an extraordinary legend could not long escape the penetrating
criticism of modern scholarship, and as early as Mosheim the key was
found to the mystery. Volkmar has worked this out in detail, showing
that the festival at Samē was in honour of the moon-god, and accompanied
with licentious rites. It was called the Epiphany (τὰ Ἐπιφάνια) in
honour of Epiphanes (ὁ Ἐπιφανής), the "newly-appearing one," the new
moon. This moon lasted some seventeen days. Thus Clement of Alexandria,
deceived by the similarity of the names and also by the story of
licentious rites, bequeathed to posterity a scandalous libel. It is
almost to be doubted whether any Epiphanes existed. Clement further
asserts that among the Carpocratians one of their most circulated books
was a treatise *On Justice*, of which he had seen a copy. He ascribes
this to Epiphanes, but it is scarcely possible to believe that a boy of
seventeen or less could have composed an abstract dissertation on
justice.

<span class="margnote">Communism.</span>We thus come to the conclusion
that the Carpocratians, or Harpocratians, were a Gnostic circle in
Alexandria at the beginning of the second century, and that some of
their ideas were

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

set forth in a book concerning justice, a copy of which had come into
the hands of Clement. This Gnostic community was much exercised with the
idea of communism as practised by the early Christian circles; being
also students of Plato, they wished to reduce the idea to the form of a
philosophical principle and carry it out to its logical conclusion. The
false ideas of *meum* and *tuum* were no longer to exist; private
property was the origin of all human miseries and the departure from the
happy days of early freedom. There was, therefore, to be community of
everything, wives and husbands included--thus carrying out in some
fashion that most curious idea, of Plato's as set forth in *The
Republic*. We have, however, no reliable evidence that our Gnostics
carried these ideas into practice; it is also highly improbable that men
of education and refinement, as the Gnostics usually were, who came to
such views through the Pythagorean and Platonic discipline, and through
the teachings of Jesus--the *sine quâ non* condition of such ideal
communities being that they should consist of "gnostics" and be ruled by
"philosophers"--should have turned their meetings into orgies of
lasciviousness. Such, however, is the accusation brought against them by
Clement. This has already been in part refuted by what has been said
above; but it is not improbable that there were communities at
Alexandria and elsewhere, calling themselves Christian, who did confuse
the Agapæ or Love-feasts of the early times with the orgies and feasts
of the ignorant populace. The Pagans brought such accusations against
the Christians indiscriminately,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

and the Christian sects against one another; and it is quite credible
that such abuses did creep in among the ignorant and vicious.

<span class="margnote">The Monadic Gnosis.</span>The Carpocratian school
has been sometimes claimed, though I think improperly, as the originator
of the so-called Monadic Gnosis. This idea has been worked out in much
detail by Neander. The following summary by Salmon will, however, be
sufficient for the general reader to form an idea of the theory.

"From one eternal Monad all existence has flowed, and to this it strives
to return. But the finite spirits who rule over several portions of the
world counteract this universal striving after unity. From them the
different popular religions, and in particular the Jewish, have
proceeded. Perfection is attained by those souls who, led on by
reminiscences of their former conditions, soar above all limitation and
diversity to the contemplation of the higher unity. They despise the
restriction imposed by the mundane spirits; they regard externals as of
no importance, and faith and love as the only essentials; meaning by
faith, mystical brooding of the mind absorbed in the original unity. In
this way they escape the dominion of the finite mundane spirits; their
souls are freed from imprisonment in matter, and they obtain a state of
perfect repose (corresponding to the Buddhist Nirvāna) when they have
completely ascended above the world of appearance."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cerinthus](fff35)
