[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff32)  [Next](fff34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CARPOCRATIANS.

OUR main source of information is Irenæus; Tertullian, Hippolytus and
Epiphanius simply copy their predecessor. Carpocrates, or Carpocras, was
(according to Eusebius) a Platonic philosopher who taught at Alexandria
in the reign of Hadrian (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 117-138); he
was also the head of a Gnostic circle, whom the Church fathers call
Carpocratians, but who called themselves simply Gnostics. With regard to
the charge which Epiphanius brings against them two hundred and fifty
years afterwards, it is evidently founded on a complete misunderstanding
of the jumbled account of Irenæus, if not of malice prepense; for the
Bishop of Lyons distinctly says, that he by no means believes that they
did the things which he thinks they ought to have done, if they had
consistently carried out their teachings! As a matter of fact, the whole
confusion arises through

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

the incapacity of the latter Church Father to understand the elements of
the doctrine of rebirth. The main tenets of the school were as follows.

<span class="margnote">Their Idea of Jesus.</span>The sensible world was
made by the fabricating powers, or builders, far inferior to the
ineffable power of the unknown ingenerable Father. Jesus was the son of
Joseph and Mary, and was born like all other men; he differed from the
rest in that his soul, being strong and pure, *remembered* what it saw
in its orbit round (or conversation with) the ineffable Father. This is
also the idea (lying behind the Pythagorean, Platonic and Hermetic
traditions) of the orderly course of the soul in harmonious circuit
round the Spiritual Sun, in the Plain of Truth, when it is in its own
nature. In consequence of this reminiscence (which is the source of all
wisdom and virtue) the Father clothed him with powers, whereby he might
escape from the dominion of the rulers of the world, and passing through
all their spheres, and being freed from each, finally ascend to the
Father. In like manner all souls of a like nature who put forth similar
efforts, shall ascend to the Father. Though the soul of Jesus was
brought up in the ordinary Jewish views, he soared above them, and thus
by the powers he received from above, he triumphed over human passions.

Believing, then, that all souls which rise above the constraints of the
world-building rulers, will receive similar powers and perform like
wonders, these Gnostics still further claimed that some of their number
had actually attained to the same degree of perfection as Jesus, if not
to a higher

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

degree, and were stronger than Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles
who had attained similar powers.

In fact they boldly taught that men could reach higher degrees of
illumination than Jesus; it is not, however, clear whether they made the
usual distinction between Jesus and the Christ. These powers were of a
"magical" nature, and the next paragraph of Irenæus puts us strongly in
mind of the tenets of the "Simonian" school. Such ideas seem to have
been very prevalent, so much so that Irenæus complains that outsiders
were induced to think that such views were the common belief of
Christianity.

The next paragraph deals with the doctrine that there is no essential
evil in the universe, <span class="margnote">Reincarnation.</span> but
that things are bad and good in man's opinion only. Let us, therefore,
see how Irenæus, from his summary of their doctrine of rebirth, arrives
at this generalisation.

The soul has to pass through every kind of existence and activity in its
cycle of rebirth. Irenæus is apparently drawing his information from a
MS. which asserted that this could be done in one life; that is to say,
apparently, that some souls then existing in the world could pay their
kārmic debt in one life. For the MS. quotes the saying, "Agree with
thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him, lest at any
time thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver
thee to his officer, and thou be cast into prison. Amen, I say unto
thee, thou shalt not come forth thence till thou has paid the uttermost

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

farthing." Now, the adversary is the accuser (diabolus), that is to say
the karmic record in the man's own nature; the judge is the chief of the
world-building powers; the officer is the builder of the new body; the
prison is the body. Thus the MS. explains the text--precisely the same
exegesis as is given to it in the *Pistis Sophia* treatise, which
explains all in the fullest manner on the lines of reincarnation and
what Indian philosophers call karma.

But not so will Irenæus have it. He asserts that the doctrine means that
the soul must pass through all experience good and bad, and until every
experience has been learned, no one can be set free. That some souls can
do all this in one life! That the Carpocratians, therefore, must have
indulged in the most unmentionable crimes because they wished to fill
full the tale of all experience good and bad, and so come to an end of
the necessity of experience.

Irenæus, however, immediately afterwards adds that he does not believe
the Carpocratians actually do such things, although he is forced to
deduce such a logical consequence from their books. It is, however,
evident that the whole absurd conclusion is entirely due to the
stupidity of the Bishop of Lyons, who, owing to his inability to
understand the most elementary facts of the doctrine of reincarnation,
has started with entirely erroneous premises, although the matter was as
clear as daylight to a beginner in Gnosticism.

The circle of the Carpocratians is said to have established a branch at
Rome, about 150, under a

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

certain Marcellina. They had pictures and statues of many great teachers
who were held in honour by their school, such as Pythagoras, Plato, and
Aristotle, and also a portrait of Jesus.

It is curious to remark that Celsus, as quoted by Origen (c. 62), in
referring to these Marcellians, also mentions the Harpocratians who
derived their tenets from Salōmē. Is it possible that this is the
correct form of the name, and not Carpocratians? Harpocrates was the
Græcised form of Horus, the Mystery-God of the Egyptians; and Salōmē, we
know, was a prominent figure in the lost *Gospel according to the
Egyptians*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ''Epiphanes''](fff34)
