[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff34)  [Next](fff36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### CERINTHUS.

CONTINUING to pick our way back along this trace towards the times of
the origins, we next come upon the circle of the Cerinthians (or the
Merinthians, according to the variant of Epiphanius). They are said to
derive their name from a certain Cerinthus, who is placed in "apostolic
times," that is to say the latter half of the first century.

Epiphanius has busied himself exceedingly over Cerinthus, and cleverly
made him a scapegoat for the <span class="margnote">The Scapegoat for
"Pillar-apostles."</span> "pillar-apostles’" antagonism to Paul. Most
writers the have followed his lead, and explained away a number of
compromising statements in the Acts and Pauline Letters by this device.
Impartial criticism, however, has to reject the lucubrations of the late
Epiphanius, and go back to the short account of Irenæus, from whom all
later writers have copied. Irenæus, who was himself a full century after
Cerinthus, has only a brief paragraph on the subject.

Cerinthus is the strongest trace between Ebionism, or the original
external non-Pauline tradition, and the beginning of the second century.
He is supposed to have come into personal contact with John, the reputed
writer of the fourth Gospel; but the same story is told of the mythic
Ebion, and it must therefore be dismissed as destitute of all historical
value.

Cerinthus is said to have been trained in the "Egyptian discipline," and
to have taught in Asia Minor. The Egyptian discipline is supposed to
mean

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="margnote">The Over-writer of the Apocalypse.</span>the
Philonic school, but this is a mere assumption. In any case the
importance of Cerinthus, whom some Gnostics claimed to have been the
writer of the Apocalypse orthodoxly ascribed to John, is that his name
has preserved one of the earliest forms of Christian tradition. Its
cosmogony declared the stupendous excellence of the God over all, beyond
the subordinate power, the World-fashioner. Its christology declared
that Jesus was son of Joseph and Mary; that at his "baptism" the Christ,
the "Father in the form of a dove," descended upon him, and only then
did he begin to prophesy and do mighty works, and preach the hitherto
unknown Father (unknown to the Jews), the God over all. That the Christ
then left him; and then Jesus suffered, and rose again (that is,
appeared to his followers after death).

Such is the account of Irenæus, which seems to be straightforward and
reliable enough as far as it goes. The scripture of the Cerinthians was
not the recension of the Sayings ascribed to "Matthew," but a still
earlier collection in Hebrew. All other collections and recensions were
rejected as utterly apocryphal. The Greek writer of the fourth canonical
Gospel is said to have composed his account in opposition to the school
of Cerinthus, but this hypothesis is not borne out by any evidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nicolaus](fff36.md)
