[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff40)  [Next](fff42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE VALENTINIAN MOVEMENT.

<span class="margnote">The "Great Unknown" of Gnosticism.</span>BEHIND
the whole Valentinian movement stands the commanding and mysterious
figure of Valentinus himself, universally acknowledged to have been the
greatest of the Gnostics. His learning and eloquence are admitted, even
by his bitterest opponents, to have been of a most extraordinary nature,
and no word has ever been breathed against his moral character. And yet,
when we come to analyze the chaos of "information" which Patristic
writers have left us on the subject of so-called Valentinianism, we find
the mysterious character of the great master of the Gnosis ever receding
before our respectful curiosity; he who has been made to give his name
to the remodelling of the whole structure, still remains the "great
unknown" of Gnosticism. We know nothing certain of him as a man, nothing
definite of him as a writer, except the few mutilated scraps which
hæresiological polemics have vouchsafed to us.

(I am of course leaving aside entirely the vexed question of, I will not
say the authorship, but the compilation, of the treatises in the Askew
and Bruce Codices. My own opinion is that we owe a great part of these
elaborations to Valentinus; not that I think this can be proved in any
satisfactory fashion

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

with the present scanty sources of information open to us. On the
contrary, however, I do not see how it is to be disproved. It is very
strange that, in spite of the universally admitted transcendency of
Valentinus, no one of his works has been preserved to us. They are said
to have been exceedingly intricate and difficult; they are further said
to have been syntheses and symphonies as it were of prior formulations
of the Gnosis. Now distinctly this is not the case with the outline of
the best known system ascribed to "them of Valentinus" by the Church
Fathers. Whereas it is patently the case with the treatises in Coptic
translations; they could have been elaborated by no one but the
stoutest-headed among the Gnostics--and the best head-piece of them all
is said to have been on the shoulders of Valentinus.)

In spite of this appalling ignorance of the man and his teachings, the
so-called Valentinian Gnosis is the *pièce de résistance* of nearly
every hæresiological treatise. We shall, therefore, have to trespass on
the patience of the reader for a short space, while we set up a few
finger-posts in the maze of Valentinianism, as seen through the eyes of
its Patristic opponents. We should moreover always remember that
"Valentinianism," so far from being a single separate formulation of the
Gnosis, was the main stream of Gnosticism simply rechristened by the
name of its greatest leader.

With the exception of the few fragments to which we have referred, all
that has been written <span class="margnote">"Them of
Valentinus."</span>by the Fathers refers to the teachings of "them

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

of Valentinus," and even then it is but very rarely that we have an
unmutilated quotation from any written work of theirs; for the most part
it all consists of fragments torn from their contexts, or mere hearsay.
Now the followers of Valentinus were no slavish disciples who could do
nothing else but repeat parrot-like the "words of the master"; the *ipse
dixit* spirit was far from their independent genius. Each of them
thought out the details of the scheme of universal philosophy in his own
fashion. True that by this time the presentation of the Gnosis, from
being of a most diverse nature, had become more settled in its main
features, and perhaps Valentinus may have initiated this syntheticizing
tendency, though it is far more probable that he developed and perfected
it; [nevertheless](errata.htm#34) it was still enormously free and
independent in innumerable details of a very far-reaching character, and
its adherents were imbued with that spirit of research, discovery, and
adaptation which ever marks a period of spiritual and intellectual life.

Thus we understand the complaint of Irenæus, who laments that he never
could find two Valentinians who agreed together. And if this be so, what
good is there in any longer talking of the "Valentinian system"? We know
next to nothing from the Church Fathers of the "system" of Valentinus
himself; as to his followers, each introduced new modifications, which
we can no longer follow in the confused representations of the Church
Fathers, who make them flatly contradict not only one another, but also
themselves.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

From *The Philosophumena*, published in 1851, we first heard of an
Eastern and Western (Anatolic <span class="margnote">The so-called
Eastern and Western Schools.</span> and Italic) division of the school
of Valentinus, thus explaining the title superscribed to the *Extracts
from Theodotus* appended, in the only MṢ. of them we possess, to *The
Miscellanies* of Clement of Alexandria. A great deal has been made of
this; the meagre differences of doctrine of the Anatolic and Italic
schools of Valentinianism indicated by Hippolytus (II.) have been seized
upon by criticism, and had their backs broken by the weight of argument
which has been piled upon them. But when Lipsius demonstrates that the
*Extracts from Theodotus*, which claim in their superscription to belong
to the Eastern school, are, following the indications of Hippolytus,
half Eastern and half Western, the ordinary student has to hold his head
tightly on to his shoulders, and abandon all hope of light from the
division of Valentinianism into Anatolic and Italic schools, in the
present state of our ignorance;--unless indeed we simply assume that
they were originally purely geographical designations, to which in later
times a doctrinal signification was unsuccessfully attempted to be
given.

Although we have no sure indication of the date of Valentinus himself,
it may be conjectured to extend from about <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 100 to <span class="small">A.D.</span> 180, as
will be seen later on.

Of the other leaders of the movement, the earliest with whose names we
are acquainted, are Secundus <span class="margnote">The Leaders of the
Movement.</span> and Marcus. Now Marcus himself had a large

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

following as early as 150; his followers were not called Valentinians
but Marcosians, or Marcians, and what we know of his system differs
enormously from those of the rest of "them of Valentinus." Marcus is
sometimes supposed to have been a contemporary of Irenæus, but this is
only on the supposition that Irenæus, in using the second person in his
hortatory and admonitory passages, is addressing a living person, and
not employing the "thou" as a mere rhetorical effect, as Tertullian with
Marcion.

Next, years later, we come to Ptolemæus, who again is supposed to have
been a contemporary of Irenæus somewhere about <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 180.

Irenæus had certainly no personal knowledge of Ptolemæus, and dealt for
the most part with his followers, who are said to have differed greatly
from their teacher.

Later still is Heracleon, whom Clement (*c*. 193) calls the most
distinguished of the disciples of Valentinus. Both Heracleon and
Ptolemæus, however, are known not so much for the exposition of a system
as for the exegetical treatment of scripture from the standpoint of the
Gnosis of their time.

Still later, and as late as, say, about 220, Axionicus and Bardesanes
flourished, the former of whom taught at Antioch, and the latter still
farther east. They are therefore called, by some, heads of the Anatolic
or Oriental school.

Theodotus, from whom the Excerpts appended to Clement's *Miscellanies*
were taken, was of course far earlier in date, but of him we know
nothing

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We also hear of a
certain Theotimus and Alexander, who are earlier than 220.

In brief, the influence of Valentinus spread far and wide, from Egypt
eastwards to Syria, Asia Minor and Mesopotamia, and westwards to Rome,
Gaul, and even Spain.

A short review of the teachings ascribed to these doctors of the Gnosis
will bring our task to a close, <span class="margnote">The
Syntheticizing of the Gnosis.</span> as far as the indirect sources of
Gnosticism for the first two centuries are concerned. But the fact we
would again insist upon is, that we are face to face with a great
movement and not a single system. On the one hand, such older forms of
the Gnosis as had been exceedingly antagonistic to Judaism found a
logical outcome in the great Marcionite movement, which cut Christianity
entirely apart from Judaism; on the other, a basis of reconciliation was
sought by the more moderate and mystical views of the movement now
headed by Valentinus, which found room for every view in its
all-embracing universality, and explained away contradictions by means
of that inner secret teaching which was claimed to have come from the
Saviour Himself.

The main outline of the movement of conciliation, which presumably had
always been the attitude of the innermost circles, is perhaps to be most
clearly seen to-day in the system of Basilides, but those infinite
spaces, which either Basilides himself left unfilled, or Hippolytus
(II.) has omitted to mention in his quotations, were also peopled with
an infinitude of creations and creatures by the genius

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

of the Gnostics, who could brook no deficiency in the exposition of
their universal science. Into this general outline, or one closely
resembling it, they fitted the various aspects of the ancient Gnosis and
the postulates of the old religions and philosophies, adopting these
world-old ideas, and adapting them by the light of the new revelation,
retaining sometimes the old names, more frequently inventing new ones.

This syntheticizing of the Gnosis was mainly due to the initiative of
the genius of Valentinus. His technical works, as we have observed
above, are said to have been most abstruse and difficult of
comprehension, as well they might be from the nature of the task he
attempted. What has become of these writings? No Church Father seems to
have been acquainted with a single one of his technical treatises; at
best we have only a few ethical fragments from letters and homilies. But
what of his own followers, whom Church Fathers and critics make
responsible for a certain Valentinian system of a most chaotic nature?
Were they in possession of MSS. of Valentinus; or did they depend on
general notions derived from his lectures? Did Valentinus work out a
consistent scheme of the Gnosis; or did he set forth several
alternatives, owing to the difficulty of the matter, and the innumerable
points of view from which it could be envisaged? If the *Pistis Sophia*
document and the other two Codices can be made to throw any light on the
matter, it will be a precious acquisition to our knowledge of this most
important epoch; if not, we must be

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

content to remain in the dark until some fresh document is discovered.

Meantime we must confine our attention to the certain traces of
Valentinus and the general <span class="margnote">Sources of
Information.</span> movement; but before doing so, we must briefly
review our authorities among the Fathers. In this review I shall mostly
follow Lipsius, who is not only one of the best authorities on the
subject (Art. in S. and W.'s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*, 1887), but who
long ago inaugurated the admirable critical investigations into our
Gnostic sources of information, by his analysis of *The Panarion* of
Epiphanius.

Tertullian informs us that prior to himself no fewer than four orthodox
champions had undertaken the refutation of the Valentinians: namely,
Justin Martyr, Miltiades, Irenæus and the Montanist Proculus. With the
exception of the five books of Irenæus, the rest of these controversial
writings are lost.

Irenæus wrote his treatise somewhere about <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 185-195. He devotes most of his first book to
the Valentinians exclusively, and isolated notices are found in the
remaining four books.

Irenæus claims to have come across certain Memoranda of the Valentinians
and had conversations with some of their number. But these Notes
belonged only to the followers of Ptolemæus, and only one short fragment
is ascribed to a writing of Ptolemæus himself. The personal
conversations were also held with followers of the same teacher,
presumably in the Rhone district--not

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

exactly a fertile soil in which to implant the abstruse tenets of the
Gnosis, we should think, in spite of the "martyrs of Lyons."

In dealing with Marcus, Irenæus derived his information for the most
part from the same unreliable oral communications, but he seems also to
have been in possession of a Memoir of a Marcosian; Marcus himself
living and working far away in Asia Minor years before.

In chapter xi. Irenæus professes to give the teaching of Valentinus
himself; but here he is simply copying from the work of a prior
refutator. Lipsius also points out that Irenæus drew some of his opening
statements from the same source as Clement in *The Excerpts from
Theodotus*.

From all of which it follows that we are face to face with a most
provoking patch-work, and that the system of Valentinus himself is not
to be found in *The Refutation* by the Bishop of Lyons.

Our next source of information is to be found in the *Excerpts* from the
otherwise unknown Theodotus, which are supposed by Lipsius to have
probably formed part of the first book of Clement's lost work, *The
Outlines*. These excerpts "have been dislocated and their original
coherence broken up" in so violent a manner, and so interspersed with
"counter-observations and independent discussions" by Clement
[himself](errata.htm#35), that it is exceedingly difficult to form a
judgment upon them. When, moreover, Lipsius assigns part of these
extracts to the Oriental and part to the Occidental school, he
practically bids us erase the superscription which

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

has always been associated with them--namely, *Extracts from the (Books)
of Theodotus and the so-called Anatolic School*. In any case, we are
again face to face with another patch-work.

Hippolytus (I.), in his lost Syntagma, recoverable from the epitomators
Pseudo-Tertullian and Philaster, and Epiphanius, seems to have combined
the first seven chapters of Irenæus with some other account, and the
chaos is still further confused.

Hippolytus (II.), in that most precious of all hæresiological documents,
*The Philosophumena*, gives an entirely independent account, in fact the
most uniform and synoptical representation of any phase of the Gnosis of
the Valentinian cycle that has reached us through the Fathers.

Tertullian simply copies from Irenæus, and so also for the most part
does Epiphanius. The latter, however, has preserved the famous *Letter
of Ptolemæus to Flora*, and also a list of "barbarous names" of the æons
not found elsewhere. Theodoret of course simply copies Irenæus and
Epiphanius.

So many, and of such a nature, then, are our indirect sources of
information for an understanding of the Valentinian movement;--a sorry
troop of blind guides, it must be confessed, where everything requires
the greatest care and discrimination. Let us now return to Valentinus
himself, and endeavour to patch together from the fragments that remain,
some dim silhouette of a character that was universally acknowledged to
have been the greatest among the Gnostics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Valentinus](fff42)
