[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff52)  [Next](fff54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIPPOLYTUS' ACCOUNT OF ONE OF THE VARIANTS OF THE SOPHIA-MYTHUS.

"VALENTINUS and Heracleon and Ptolemæus and the entire school of these
\[Gnostics\], disciples of Pythagoras and Plato and following their
guidance, laid down the 'arithmetical science' as the fundamental
principle of their doctrine.

"For them the beginning of all things is the Monad, ingenerable,
imperishable, incomprehensible, <span class="margnote">The Father of
all.</span> inconceptible, the creator and cause of all things that are
generated. This Monad is called by them the Father. Now as to its
nature, there is a difference of opinion among them. For some declare .
. . . that the Father is devoid of femininity, and without a syzygy, and
solitary;

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

whereas others think it is impossible that the creation of all things
should be from a single male principle, and so they are compelled to add
to the Father of all, in order that He may be a Father, the syzygy
Silence. But as to whether Silence is a syzygy or not, let them settle
this dispute among themselves. . . ."

Hippolytus has missed the point as usual; there were Fathers for every
plane, the monads or monadic state of being, and also Father-Mothers,
the dyads or dyadic state of being, and as forth.

"In the beginning, says \[the Gnostic whose MS. Hippolytus had before
him\], naught was that was created. The Father was alone, increate,
without space, or time, or any with whom to take counsel, or any
substantial nature capable of being conceived by any means. He was
alone, solitary, as they say, and at rest, Himself in Himself, alone.
But since He was creative, it seemed good to Him at length to create and
produce that which was most beautiful and most perfect in Himself. For
He was \[now\] no longer lover of solitariness. For He was all love,
says \[the writer of the MS.\], but love is not love if there be nothing
to be loved.

<span class="margnote">The Parents of the Æons.</span>"Therefore, the
Father, alone as He was, emanated and generated Mind-and-Truth, that is
to say, the dyad, which is Lady and Beginning, and Mother of all the
æons they reckon in the Plērōma. And Mind-and-Truth, having been
emanated from the Father, possessing the power of creation like His
creative parent, in imitation of the Father, emanated Himself also
Word-and-Life.

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Word-and-Life
emanates Man-and-Church. And Mind-and-Truth, when He saw that His own
creation had become creator in His turn, gave thanks to the Father of
all, and made an offering unto Him of ten æons, the perfect number. For,
says \[the writer\], Mind-and-Truth could not offer the Father a more
perfect number than this. For it needs must have been that the Father
who was perfect, should be glorified with a perfect number; now the
'ten' is a perfect number, for the first number of the series of
multiplicity is perfect. \[The 10 begins the series of multiplicity in
the system of numeration with radix 10.\] The Father, however, was more
perfect still; for increate Himself, alone, by means of the first single
syzygy, Mind-and-Truth, He succeeded in emanating all the roots of
things created.

"And when Word-and-Life also saw that Mind-and-Truth had glorified the
Father of all in a perfect number, Word-and-Life also wished to glorify
His own father-mother, Mind-and-Truth. But since Mind-and-Truth was
create and not possessed of perfect fatherhood, \[or\] the quality of
parentlessness \[ingenerability\], Word-and-Life does not glorify his
own father Mind with a perfect, but with an imperfect number. Thus
Word-and-Life offers Mind-and-Truth twelve æons."

The reader need hardly be reminded that this summary of the variant of
the myth has confused what we have supposed to have been the original
order of the Ten and Twelve, as may be seen from the next paragraph but
one of Hippolytus.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<span class="margnote">The Names of the Æons.</span>"So then the first
created roots of the æons . . . are as follows: Mind-and-Truth,
Word-and-Life, Man-and-Church, ten from Mind-and-Truth, and twelve from
Word-and-Life; eight and twenty in all. \[The ten, consisting of five
syzygies,\] are called by the following names:
Depthlike-and-Commingling, Unageing-and-Union,
Self-productive-and-Bliss, Immoveable-and-Blending,
Alone-begotten-and-Happiness."

In this nomenclature we have an attempt to shadow forth the positive and
negative aspects of the father-motherhood (polarisation) of the creative
mind, androgynous and self-generative. Hippolytus then continues:

"These are the ten æons which some derive from Mind-and-Truth, and
others from Word-and-Life. Some again derive the twelve from
Man-and-Church, and others from Word-and-Life; and the names they give
these \[six syzygies\] are: Comforter-and-Faith, Father-like-and-Hope,
Mother-like-and-Love, Everlasting and Understanding,
Church-like-and-Happiness, Longed-for-and-Wisdom."

It is evident that this list has suffered damage in the hands of
copyists; we can, however, make out some resemblance to the list of the
"fruits of the spirit," in Paul's *Letter to the Galatians* (v. 22, 23),
"love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
mildness, temperance." The word translated "Happiness" is a different
form from the "Happiness" of the decad, but both come from the same
root. It is impossible to represent the difference in the present
English we have at our disposal. We would also call

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

the attention of the student to the term for the female aspect of the
first and sixth syzygy--Faith-Wisdom (Pistis-Sophia). Epiphanius gives a
totally different set of names for the æons--a set of "*nomina barbara*"
which have so far proved the despair of every philologist, and with
which, therefore, we need not trouble the general reader. The Greek
terms, however, for the positive aspects of the six syzygies are
probably in part reflections of the characteristics of the higher triad
of æons, in part prototypes of the characteristics of the Holy Spirit.
Mind-and-Truth, Word-and-Life, Man-and-Church, seem to appear in the
terms Father-like and Mother-like, Comforter and Longed-for, Everlasting
and Church-like; the female aspects of the higher triad being male
aspects in the hexad. I believe that the names of the æons are probably
doctrinal variants or attempts at translation of original Zoroastrian
terms--of Hormuz and the Amshaspands and the rest of the
Light-beings--and that the "*barbara nomina*" are a relic of these
terms; the ideas and schematology of the æons, however, are demonstrably
Egyptian. But to continue with our Hippolytus.

"Now, the twelfth of these twelve, and the last of the eight and twenty
æons, female in nature, <span class="margnote">The World-Mother.</span>
and called Wisdom (Sophia), beheld the number and power of the creative
æons; she ascended \[or returned\] to the depth of the Father, and
perceived that whereas all the rest of the æons, as being themselves
create, created through a syzygy, the Father alone created without a
syzygy. She, therefore, longed to imitate the Father and create by

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

herself without her consort (syzygy), and so achieve a work in nothing
inferior to the Father; in ignorance that it is the increate alone, the
absolute cause, and root, and breadth, and depth of the universal
\[creations\], who has the power of creating by Himself alone, whereas
Wisdom, being created and coming into being after a number of others, is
thus incapable of possessing the power of the increate. For in the
increate, says the writer, are all things together, whereas in the
create the feminine has the power of emanating the essence \[or
substance\], while the masculine possesses the power of enforming the
essence emanated by the feminine. Wisdom, therefore, emanated the only
thing which she could, namely, a formless essence, easy to cool down
\[into shape\]. And this is the meaning, says he, of the words of Moses:
'The earth was invisible and unwrought' \[according to the translation
of the Seventy\]. This, says he, is the Good \[Land\], the Celestial
Jerusalem, into which God promised to lead the children of Israel,
saying, 'I will lead you into a good land flowing with milk and honey.'

<span class="margnote">The Abortion.</span>And thus ignorance arising in
the Plērōma owing to Wisdom, and formlessness through the creature of
Wisdom, tumult arose in the Plērōma \[from fear\] lest the creations of
the æons should in like manner become formless and imperfect, and
destruction in no long time seize on the æons \[themselves\].
Accordingly they all betook themselves to praying the Father to put an
end to Wisdom's grieving, for she was bewailing and groaning because of
the 'abortion' which she had

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

produced by herself--for thus they call it. And so the Father, taking
pity on the tears of Wisdom and giving ear to the prayers of the æons,
gives order for an additional emanation. For He did not Himself emanate,
says the writer, but Mind-and-Truth emanated Christ-and-Holy-Spirit for
the enforming and elimination of the abortion, and the relief and
appeasing of the complaints of Wisdom. Thus with Christ-and-Holy-Spirit
there are thirty æons."

Here we have the type of the dual world-creator and redeemer--Christ,
the Logos, by whom all things were made, and the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter.

"At any rate some of them think that the triacontad of æons is made up
in this way, while others would unite Silence to the Father and add the
\[æons of the Plērōma\] to them.

"Christ-and-Holy-Spirit, then, being additionally emanated by
Mind-and-Truth, eliminates this formless abortion of Wisdom's, which she
begat of herself and brought into existence without a consort, from
among the universal æons, so that the perfect æons should not be thrown
into confusion at the sight of its formlessness."

These passages throw great light on the term "only-begotten" (μονογενής)
Orthodoxly the phrase <span class="margnote">The Term
"Only-begotten."</span> "only-begotten son" is taken to mean that Christ
was the only son of the Father. Apologetic philology, moreover, has
asserted that it means "the only one of his kind." In the list of the
decad of æons given above, the male aspect of the last syzygy is called
by this name, where I have translated it "alone-begotten." In the above
passage,

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

the "abortion" of Wisdom is called by the same term, and I have
translated it "which she begat of herself," there being no doubt that
the term usually translated "only-begotten" means nothing of the kind,
but "created alone," that is to say, created from one principle and not
from a syzygy or pair. There are many instances of this meaning of the
word, not only among the Gnostics, but also in the lines of Orphic and
Egyptian tradition. Hippolytus then proceeds:

<span class="margnote">The Cross.</span>"Moreover, in order that the
formlessness of the abortion should finally never again make itself
visible to the perfect æons, the Father Himself also sent forth the
additional emanation of a single æon, the Cross \[or stock\], which
being created great, as \[the creature\] of the great and perfect
Father, and emanated to be the guard and wall of protection \[lit.,
paling or stockdale\] of the æons, constitutes the Boundary of the
Plērōma, holding the thirty æons together within itself. For these
\[thirty\] are they which form the \[divine\] creation."

The word translated by "cross" in the NṬ., means generally a stock or
stake. As we learn, from Grätz, it was the custom of the Jews, as a
warning to others, to expose on a stake the bodies of those who were
stoned, the cruel pain of the Mosaic penalty being in later times
mitigated by a soporific draught of hyssop and other ingredients. The
phrase "hanging on the tree" is thus comprehensible also. But, as
previously remarked, for the Plērōma, we have to deal with living and
not with dead symbols, and the cross-idea is thus transformed into the
conception

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

of a great wall (*sc*. sphere), by which the living Æon is "bounded"--if
an infinite can be bounded by a finite--the prototype of the mystic
Christ bound to or in the tree of the body.

The idea was simple, the expression of it in words exceedingly confused.

Thus Hippolytus writes:

"Now it is called the Boundary because it bounds off the deficiency
(*hysterēma*) from the perfection (*plērōma*); again it is called the
Partaker, because it partakes of the deficiency; and also the Cross
\[stake or stock\], because it is fixed immovable and unchangeable
\[*lit*. without repentance or change of mind\]; so that nothing of the
deficiency should approach the æons within the Plērōma."

It is difficult to reconcile the various characteristics of this great
boundary as given by Hippolytus. It <span class="margnote">The Last
Limit.</span> is of course the Great Firmament or Limitary Spirit of
Basilides, and the Last Limit of the *Pistis Sophia* treatise. It was
there that the glorious "robe of power" had been left behind, when the
Saviour descended for the regeneration of the cosmos without the
Plērōma, and with which he was again clothed at his final initiation,
after perfecting his task, as magnificently set forth in the opening
pages of the MS. This is the Limit "against which none shall prevail,"
until the Day Be-with-us, the Day of Come-unto-us of the so-called *Book
of the Dead* and the Askew Codex--the day of final initiation or
perfectioning for the rare individuals who have made themselves worthy
to become gods or christs (and thus a day which perpetually is), but for
the

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

average mass of humanity the end of the world-cycle when all things pass
into *pralaya*, as Indian philosophy calls it (and thus the final
consummation of the present universe).

This "robe of power" is presumably the highest spiritual body, or
*principium individuitatis*, which participates of the divine and human
natures, that is to say, opens up the realms of the divine world to the
man, and makes him a partaker of eternal being. Thus its living symbol
is a **O**, the reflection of the body, or self-limitation, of the
sexless Heavenly Man, the Logos, whereby He limits Himself and crucifies
Himself for the good of humanity. Lower down in the scale of being this
becomes the dead symbol of the orthodox cross (**+**), the man of sex.

It is to be noticed that this Limit is due to the Father alone, and by
its means He consummates and perfects the whole of the divine world of
æons, which accordingly become one entity, the Living Æon, to every
creation outside the Plērōma. But to continue with Hippolytus' summary:

"Without, then, this Boundary, Cross, or Partaker, is what they call the
Ogdoad; this is the Wisdom-without-the-Plērōma, which
Christ-and-Holy-Spirit, when they had been after-emanated by
Mind-and-Truth, shaped and wrought into a perfect æon, so that she
should finally become by no means inferior to any of those within the
Plērōma. When, then, Wisdom-without had had shape given her, seeing that
it was impossible that Christ-and-Holy-Spirit, in that they were
emanated from Mind-and-Truth, should remain along with her outside the
Plērōma, Christ-and-Holy-Spirit

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

ascended to Mind-and-Truth within the Boundary, to join the rest of the
æons in their glorification of the Father.

"And since at length there was, as it were, the singleness of peace and
harmony of all the æons <span class="margnote">The Mystic or Cosmic
Jesus.</span> within the Plērōma, it seemed good to them no longer to
glorify the Father by means of their several syzygies, but also to hymn
His glory by a \[single\] offering of fit fruits to the Father. The
whole thirty æons accordingly agreed to emanate a single æon, the common
fruit of the Plērōma, as the sign of their unity, unanimity and peace.
And inasmuch as it is an emanation of all the æons unto the Father, they
call it the Common Fruit of the Plērōma. Thus were the things within the
Plērōma constituted.

"And now the Common Fruit of the Plērōma had been emanated--Jesus (for
this is His name), the great High Priest; when
Wisdom-without-the-Plērōma, seeking after the Christ who had enformed
her, and the Holy Spirit, was thrown into great terror, lest she should
perish, now that He who had enformed and stablished her had withdrawn."

This operation of enforming Wisdom, or cosmic substance, is apparently
the making of a boundary for the Ogdoad (the ætherial space) in its
turn, following the law of similitude, and then fashioning the separated
substance according to the types of the æons. This is dramatically set
forth as follows:

"She mourned and was in great doubt, pondering on who was her enformer
\[the Christ\]; who the Holy Spirit; whither had they departed; who
prevented

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

them from being with her; who envied her that fair and blessed vision.
<span class="margnote">The Grief of Sophia.</span> Plunged in such
sufferings, she betook herself to praying and beseeching Him who had
left her. Thereupon the Christ within the Plērōma and the rest of the
æons took pity on her prayers, and sent forth out of the Plērōma the
Common Fruit, to be Consort of Wisdom-without, and corrector of the
passions which she suffered in seeking after the Christ.

"And so the Common Fruit coming forth from the Plērōma, and finding her
afflicted by the four primal passions--namely, fear, grief, doubt and
supplication--set right her sufferings; and in doing so He perceived
that neither was it proper \[on the one hand\] that such passions, as
being of the nature of an æon and peculiar to Wisdom, should be
destroyed, nor \[on the other\] should Wisdom continue in such
afflictions as fear and grief, supplication and doubt. Accordingly,
inasmuch as he was so great an æon, and child of the whole Plērōma, He
made the passions depart from her, and turned them into substantial
essences; and fear he made into psychic essence, and grief into subtle
matter \[hylic essence\], and doubt into elemental \[dæmonian\] essence,
and conversion--prayer and supplication--He made into a path upwards,
that is to say repentance and the power of the psychic essence which is
called 'right.'"

Just as the passions in man are regarded as being of a material nature,
so are the passions of the cosmic soul imagined as substantial essences
by the dramatisers of the world-process in this scheme of universal
philosophy.

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

We have now come to the stage of the Wisdom-drama which represents the
constitution of the <span class="margnote">The Sensible World.</span>
"sensible" world, as distinguished from the "intelligible," to use
Platonic terms. But before we proceed with Hippolytus' summary, a few
words of explanation may be added to guide the, student through the maze
of Gnostic technicalities.

The lower or fallen Wisdom is the prime substance, or World-mother,
chaotically moved by four great impulses, her primal "afflictions" or
"passions."

From her chaotic state she is rescued by the Divine Power from above,
the synthesis of the powers of the intelligible or noëtic universe.
Chaos becomes cosmos; un-order, order. The "passions" (fear, grief,
doubt and supplication) are separated from her, and she is purified and
remains above, while the passions contract into denser phases of
substance, constituting the sensible universe. Above them broods the
Power, the representative of the three highest planes (the intelligible
universe or Plērōma) and of the One beyond, the Supreme Deity. This
Divine Power is called the Common Fruit.

The four "passions" are separated from Sophia, and she remains as the
substance of the highest of the lower planes. Fear and grief become the
substances of the psychic and hylic (or physical) planes respectively.
Doubt is regarded as a downward tendency, a path downward to even more
dense and gross states of existence than the physical; while
supplication (prayer, repentance, or aspiration) is regarded as a path
upwards to the Heaven-world.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is the power
of the soul which is called "right," the tendency downwards into matter
being called "left." We may now return to the consideration of our text.

"The fabricative power \[proceeds\] from 'fear.' This is the meaning of
the scripture, says the writer, <span class="margnote">The
Demiurge.</span> 'The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom,' for
it was the beginning of the sufferings of Wisdom. She \[first\] feared,
then grieved, then doubted, and then flew for refuge to prayer and
supplication. Moreover, he says, the psychic substance is of a fiery
nature, and they call it \[Middle\] Space and Hebdomad and Ancient of
Days. And whatever other statements of this kind they make concerning
this \[space\], they \[in reality\] refer to the \[cosmic\] psychic
substance, which they declare to be the fabricative power of the
\[physical\] world. And it is of a fiery nature. Moses also, says the
writer, declares, 'The Lord, thy God, is fire burning and consuming,'
for thus he would have it written."

The action of the emotion of fear is said to contract and densify the
aura or subtle envelope of man. The psychic plane is a contraction or
densification of the mental, and uhe material again of the psychic.

"Now the power of fire, he says, is twofold; for there is a fire which
is all-devouring and cannot be quenched and . . ."

A lacuna unfortunately occurs here; perhaps to be filled up by the
words, "and another that is quenchable."

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

"According to this, then, the soul \[that is, the psychic substance\] is
partly mortal \[and partly immortal\], being as it were a kind of mean.
(It is \[both\] the Hebdomad \[the sublunary space\] and \[also\] the
means of bringing the Hebdomad to an end.) For it is below the Ogdoad
\[the mind or spirit-substance\]--where is Wisdom, the day of perfect
forms \[that is, the sun-space\], and the Common Fruit of the
Plērōma--but above the hylic matter \[the earth-space\], of which it is
the fashioner \[or demiurgic power\]. If then the soul is made like unto
the things above, it becomes immortal, and entereth into the Ogdoad;
which is, he says, the Jerusalem above the heavens; whereas if it be
made like to matter, that is to say the material passions, then it is
destructible and perishes."

The next sentence has a wide lacuna, which I have endeavoured to bridge
over as follows:

"As, therefore, proceeding from the psychic substance, \[and not from an
æon or plērōma\], the first and greatest power \[of the Sensible World\]
was an image, \[and not a plērōma, namely the Workman (Demiurge); while
the power proceeding from the material substance or 'grief' was\] the
Accuser (Diabolus), the ruler of this world.

"\[The power, moreover, which proceeds\] from the elemental \[or
dæmonian\] substance, that is to say 'doubt,' is Beelzeboul.

"\[And\] Wisdom herself energises from above, from the Ogdoad, as far as
the Hebdomad. \[For\] they say that the Workman knows nothing at all,
but is, according to them, mindless and foolish, and knows

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

not really what he does or works. Owing to his ignorance Wisdom
energised and strengthened for him everything he made; and, though it
was she who had done so, he imagined it was himself who had of himself
achieved the fabrication of the universe, and so he began to say: 'I am
God, and beside me there is no other.'

"Here then we have our Tetraktys according to Valentinus, 'a source of
ever-flowing nature having roots,' and our Wisdom from which the whole
creation is now constituted both psychic and material."

This is meant by Hippolytus to be ironical and a sneer both at
Pythagoras and Valentinus. The four "passions" are of course very far
from the Tetraktys proper; they are only a reflection of it on the lower
planes.

"Wisdom is called 'Spirit,' and the Workman 'Soul'; while the Accuser
(Diabolus) is the 'Ruler of this World' \[Body\], and Beelzeboul the
'Ruler of Daemons' \[Chaos\]. Such is what they tell us.

"Moreover, basing all their teaching on mathematical considerations, as
I have said before, they declare that the æons within the Plērōma
emanate a new series of thirty other æons following the law of
similitude, in order that the Plērōma should be finally grouped into a
perfect number. For just as the Pythagoreans divided into twelve \[?
ten\] and thirty and sixty--and have further subtleties on subtleties,
as has been shown--in the same way these (Gnostics) also subdivide the
creations within the Plērōma.

"The contents of the Ogdoad are also subdivided; and Wisdom (who is the
mother of all living \[the

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

cosmic Eve\] according to them) and the Common Fruit of the Plērōma (the
Word) have emanated <span class="margnote">"Words" or Minds.</span>
others who are the heavenly Angels, Citizens of Jerusalem Above, in the
heavens. For this Jerusalem is Wisdom-without, and her bridegroom is the
Common Fruit of the Plērōma."

Some critics have preferred a reading which would make Wisdom and the
Common Fruit emanate "seventy words"; but though this was the number of
the nations among the Jews in contradistinction to the twelve tribes of
Israel, for which reason also the "seventy" (standing for seventy-two)
apostles were chosen after the "twelve," according to the historicizing
narratives, I prefer to follow the reading of the Codex, as indeed I
have done in every case.

"The Workman also emanated souls; for he is the substance of souls.
According to them the <span class="margnote">Souls.</span> former is
Abraham, and the latter the children of Abraham."

(A nomenclature which would explain the otherwise very absurd expression
"Abraham's bosom.")

"It was moreover from the material and elemental substance that the
Workman made bodies for the souls. And this is the meaning of the
saying, 'And God fashioned man, taking clay from the earth, and breathed
into his person \[*lit*., face\] the breath of life; and man became a
living soul.'

"This \[soul\] is, according to them, the 'inner man,' called psychic
when it dwells in the body of hylic matter, but material, destructible,
imperfect, when \[its vehicle is\] formed of elemental substance."

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

Hippolytus here seems to be summarising the otherwise very elaborate
cosmogenesis and exegesis of the Valentinians into a few brief
paragraphs, and the reader should never forget that the summary is made
by an unfriendly hand. I have, however, thought it good to let the
student see for himself that, even so, the Church Father could not
eliminate all the meaning of the Gnostic writer.

"And this material man is, according to them, <span
class="margnote">Bodies.</span> as it were, an inn or dwelling-place at
one time of the soul alone, at another of the soul and dæmonian
existences \[elementals\], at another of the soul and 'words' \[or
angels\] which are 'words' sown from above--from the Common Fruit of the
Plērōma and Wisdom--into this world, dwelling in the body of clay
together with the soul, when dæmons cease to cohabit with her. And this
is, says \[the Gnostic writer\], what was written in the scriptures
\[Paul's *Letter to the Ephesians*\]: 'For this cause I bow my knees to
the God and Father and Lord of our Lord Jesus Christ, that God may
vouchsafe to you that Christ should dwell in your inner man'--that is to
say, the psychic and not the bodily man--'that ye may be strong to know
what is the Depth 'that is, the Father of the universals--'and what is
the Breadth'--that is, the Cross, the Boundary [of](errata.htm#36) the
Plērōma--'and what is the Greatness'--that is, the Plērōma of the æons.
Wherefore 'the psychic man,' says \[Paul elsewhere in his first *Letter
to the Corinthians*\], 'does not receive the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him'; and foolish, says \[the Gnostic
writer\], is the power of the Work-man,

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[that is, the
power (or soul) sent forth by the Workman\], for he himself was foolish
and mindless, and thought that he was fashioning the world unaided,
being ignorant that it was Wisdom, the Mother, the Ogdoad, who infused
energy into him for the formation of the universe without his knowing
it.

"All the Prophets and the Law, therefore, spake from the Workman,
foolish know-nothings of a foolish God, according to the writer. For
which cause, he writes, the Saviour says: 'All who came before me are
thieves and robbers'; and the Apostle: 'The mystery which was unknown to
former generations.' For none of the Prophets, says he, spake about any
of the things of which we speak; they were at that time unknown. . . .

"When, therefore, the world-formation was ended future evolution was to
consist of the unveiling <span class="margnote">The New Man.</span>
\[revelation\] of the Sons of God--that is to say of the Workman--\[the
revelation\] which had \[hitherto\] been hidden--in which, says he, the
psychic man had been hidden, having a veil over his heart. When,
therefore, the veil was to be raised and these mysteries revealed, Jesus
\[as the first example of the new evolution\] was born through Mary, the
virgin, according to the saying: 'Holy Spirit shall come upon
thee'--Spirit is Wisdom--'and Power of Highest shall overshadow
thee'--Highest is the Workman--'for that which is born of thee shall be
called holy.' For he was not born of the Highest alone, like as men
fashioned after the type of Adam owe their origin to the Highest alone,
that is the Workman. Jesus, the new man, was of the Holy Spirit--that is
to say

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wisdom--but of the
Workman also, in order that the Workman might furnish the moulding and
makeup of his body, but the Holy Spirit supply his essence or
\[substance\], and so he might be a heavenly word, born from the Ogdoad
through Mary."

That is to say, that Jesus was the type of the perfected man, who had
transcended the necessity of rebirth, the cycle of generation. He was
the manifestation of one of the Sons of God, who together make up the
Divine Sonship. These sons are all 'words' or logoi, according to this
nomenclature. The whole nature of such a man was said to be advanced one
stage. Thus his body was made by the power which furnished other men's
souls; his soul was of the same nature as the spirits of other men; and
his spirit was a "word," the direct progeny of æons, partaker of the
Plērōma.

<span class="margnote">The Mystic Body of the Christ.</span>"Now there
is much investigation devoted by them to this subject, and it is the
starting-point of schism and disagreement. Hence their doctrine is
divided in twain, and one teaching is called the Anatolic, according to
them, and the other the Italic. They \[who get their teaching\] from
Italy, of whom are Heracleon and Ptolemæus, say that the body of Jesus
was \[originally\] of psychic constitution, and, because of this, at his
baptism the Spirit, like a dove, descended upon him--that is to say, the
'word' of the Mother from above, Wisdom--and united with his psychic
\[body\], and raised him from the dead. This is, says the writer, the
saying: 'He who raised Christ from the dead will vivify also your mortal
bodies'--that is to say, psychic \[bodies\]. For the clay it was

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

which came under the curse. 'For earth,' says \[Moses\], 'thou art, and
unto earth shalt thou return.' Whereas those \[who derive their
teaching\] from the East, of whom are Axionicus and Ardesianes \[?
Bardesanes\], say that the body of the Saviour was spiritual. For the
Holy Spirit--that is to say Wisdom--came upon Mary, and also the power
of the Highest, the Workman's art, in order that that \[substance\]
which had been given to Mary, might be fashioned.

"We may leave them, then, to investigate such matters by themselves, and
\[so too\] anyone else who may like to carry on such investigations."
The writer, moreover, goes on to say that, just as the imperfections on
the plane of the æons within were corrected, so also were those on the
plane of the Ogdoad, the Wisdom-without, set right, and further those on
the plane of the Hebdomad were also corrected.

"(For the Workman was taught by Wisdom, that he was not God alone, as he
thought, and beside <span class="margnote">Soteriology.</span> him there
was no other, but through Wisdom he learned to know the Better
\[Deity\]. He received, \[however, only\] elementary instruction from
her \[became a catechumen\], and the first initiation, and was \[thus\]
taught the mighty mystery of the Father and the æons; and \[thus\] he
could reveal it to no one else.)"

The terms used denote that the Demiurge received instruction, but was
not given the higher power or initiation, whereby he could become a
teacher or initiator in his turn; he received the "*muēsis*," but not
the "*epopteia*."

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

"(This is the meaning, according to the writer, of his words unto Moses:
'I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
and the name of God I have not made known unto them'--that is to say, I
have not declared the Mystery, nor explained who is God, but I kept to
myself in secret the Mystery which I heard from Wisdom.)

"Since then the things above \[in the Plērōma, Ogdoad and Hebdomad\] had
been set right, by the same law of succession the things here \[on
earth\] were to meet with their proper regulation. For this cause Jesus,
the Saviour, was born through Mary, that things here might be righted.
Just as Christ was additionally emanated by Mind-and-Truth for the
righting of the sufferings of Wisdom-without, that is to say the
'abortion'; so again did the Saviour, born through Mary, come for the
righting of the sufferings of the soul."

The above will give the reader some general notion of the cycle of ideas
in which these Gnostics moved. The exposition of the Gnostic writer has
doubtless suffered much in the summarizing process to which it has been
subjected; nevertheless, even if it had been given in full, it would
have to be ascribed to a pupil and not to a master of the Gnosis such as
Basilides or Valentinus. In order to obtain a more consistent and
detailed exposition of the Valentinian cycle of ideas, it would be
necessary first of all to analyse (1) the above account, (2) the
contents of the *Excerpts from Theodotus*, and (3) the summary of the
tenets of the followers of Ptolemy given by Irenæus in his opening
chapters, and then re-formulate the

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

whole. Hippolytus’ account, however, is quite sufficient to acquaint the
reader with the general outlines, and a more detailed exposition would
be out of place in these short sketches.

We shall now give a brief outline of the teachings of the more prominent
leaders of Gnostic thought in this period, and so we return to a
consideration of "them of Valentinus."

Of Theodotus and Alexander we know nothing, and of Secundus only the
fact that he divided the highest Ogdoad, within the Plērōma, into two
Tetrads, a Right and Left,--though we are of course not to suppose that
he originated such a fundamental notion.

We shall, therefore, confine our attention to Marcus, Ptolemæus,
Heracleon and Bardesanes, brief notices of whom will bring our
information derived from indirect sources--namely, the Patristic
writings--to a conclusion.

Let us then turn to "them of Valentinus" and first treat of Marcus and
his number-symbolism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Number-Symbolism of Marcus](fff54)
