[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff56)  [Next](fff58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BARDESANES.

<span class="margnote">Biography.</span>WE will now treat of Bardesanes,
"the last of the Gnostics," as Hilgenfeld calls him, and so bring to an
end these rough sketches of the Christian theosophists, which we have
endeavoured to reconstruct from the disfigured scraps of the originals
preserved in Patristic literature.

Bardesanes was the "last of the Gnostics," in the sense of being the
last who attempted to make any propaganda of the phase of the Gnosis we
are dealing with, among the ranks of Common Christianity; for the Gnosis
was still studied in secret for centuries, and often reappeared in the
pages of history in other guises, *e.g.*, the so-called Manichæan
movement; for "You may pitch out nature with a fork, still she will find
a way home."

Bardesanes, or Bar-daisan (so called from the river Daisan (the Leaper),
on the banks of which he was born), was born at Edessa, on July 11th,
155 <span class="small">A.D.</span>, and died, most probably in the same
city, in 233, at the age of 78. His parents, Nuhama and Nahashirama,

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

were rich and noble; and young Bardaisan not only received the best
education in manners and learning which was procurable, but was brought
up with a prince who afterwards succeeded to the throne as one of the
Abgars; he not only shared the young prince's martial exercises, but in
his youth won great fame for his skill in archery. He married and had a
son, Harmonius.

At what age he embraced Gnostic Christianity is uncertain; but his eager
spirit not only speedily converted his royal friend and patron, but
induced the Abgar to make it the state religion, and thus (it is said)
Bardesanes must have the credit of indirectly establishing the first
Christian state. When Caracalla dethroned the Abgar Bar-Manu in 216,
Bardesanes made manful defence of the Christian faith before the
representative of the Roman Emperor, so that even Epiphanius is
compelled to call him "almost a confessor."

Subsequently he went for a time to Armenia, where he composed a history
based on the temple <span class="margnote">Writings.</span> chronicles,
which he found in the fortress of Ani, and translated it into Syriac.
This Armenian history of Bardaisan was the basis of the subsequent
history of Moses of Chorēnē. Bardaisan was also a great student of
Indian religion, and wrote a book on the subject, from which the
Platonist Porphyry subsequently quoted. But it was as a poet and writer
on Christian theology and theosophy that Bardaisan gained so wide a
reputation; he wrote many books in Syriac and also Greek, of which he
was said to be master, but even the titles of most of them are now lost.

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

His most famous work was a collection of 150 Hymns or Psalms on the
model of the Psalm-collection of the second temple, as still preserved
in the Old Covenant documents. He was the first to adapt the Syriac
tongue to metrical forms and set the words to music; these hymns became
immensely popular, not only in the Edessene kingdom but wherever the
Syriac tongue was spoken.

Of the rest of his works we hear of such titles as *Dialogues against
the Marcionites*, *The Light and the Darkness*, *The Spiritual Nature of
Truth*, *The Stable and Unstable*, and *Concerning Fate*. Nothing of
these has come down to us except a Syriac treatise, which was brought to
the British Museum in 1843, among the Nitrian MSS. This MS. is entitled
*Book of the Laws of Countries*, and purports to be a summary of
Bardaisan's views on fate or karman, as set forth by one of his pupils.
The Syriac text and an English translation were published by Cureton in
1855; and once more (as in the case of the discovery of the
*Philosophumena* MS. and Basilides) the possession of an approximately
first-hand source has revolutionised the old view, based on the hearsay
of the Fathers generally, and of the polemic of Ephraim in particular.
In fact, the latest view (that of Hort) tries to rob Gnosticism of
Bardesanes, and carry him off into the fold of orthodoxy. As more is
known and understood about the Gnostics, the same policy will no doubt
be adopted in other cases; but surely since Orthodoxy has cursed
Bardesanes throughout the ages, it might at least leave him the name
derived from those of whom his

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

master Valentinus learned his wisdom, and let him be Gnostic still.

But before considering Bardaisan's views on "fate," let us see whether
we can abstract an thing <span class="margnote">Indirect Sources.</span>
of value from the indirect sources. We are indebted for what we know
mainly to Ephraim of Edessa, who wrote some 120 years later than our
Gnostic. Of the temper of this saint when combatting a dead man who had
done him no injury, and who had been so loved and admired by all who
knew him, we may judge by the epithets he applied to Bardesanes, who (he
avers) died "with the Lord in his mouth, and demons in his heart." Thus
he apostrophizes Bardaisan as a garrulous sophist; of tortuous and
double mind; outwardly orthodox, a heretic in secret; a greedy sheep-dog
in league with the wolves; a faithless servant; a cunning dissembler
practising deceit with his songs.

In his zealous fury, however, Ephraim confuses Bardesanites, Marcionites
and Manichæans, although Bardesanes strongly opposed the views of the
former, and the religion of the latter was as yet unborn when the
Gnostic doctor wrote Ephraim's fifty-six Hymns against Heresies, for
instance, the metre and music of which he appropriated from our Gnostic
poet, are an indiscriminate polemic against not only Marcion, Bardaisan
and Mani, but also against their disciples, the very different views of
both teachers and pupils being hopelessly jumbled together.

The only clear traces of Bardaisan are four scraps from his Hymns,
quoted in the last two Hymns of

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ephraim. The first
three are as follows, in Hort's B translation:<span
class="margnote">From his Hymns.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(1\) "Thou fountain of joy  
     Whose gate by commandment  
     Opens wide to the Mother;  
     Which Beings divine  
     Have measured and founded,  
     Which Father and Mother  
     In their union have sown,  
     With their steps have made fruitful."

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(2\) "Let her who comes after thee  
     To me be a daughter  
     A sister to thee."

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(3\) "When at length shall it be ours  
     To look on thy banquet,  
     To see the young maiden,  
     The daughter thou sett’st  
     On thy knee and caressest?"

</div>

The first fragment is generally referred to the idea of Paradise, which
is usually placed above the third of the seven heavens, or in the midst
of the seven spheres; it seems, however, rather to refer to the Ogdoad
or space above the seven phases of psychic substance, the Jerusalem
Above of the Valentinians.

The second fragment appears to be an address of the Divine Mother to the
elder of her two daughters, the Wisdom above in the Plērōma and the
Wisdom

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

below in the Ogdoad, where is the spiritual Heaven-world.

The third fragment is most probably an address to the Divine Mother of
all, the Holy Spirit, and refers to the consummation of the
world-process, when the spiritual souls shall, be taken from the Ogdoad
into the Plērōma, and made one with their divine spouses at the Great
Wedding Feast, in the Space of the Light-maiden, the Wisdom above.

The remaining fragment consists of only two lines, and is as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(4\) "My God and my Head  
     Hast thou left me alone?"

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This cry was
ascribed to the lower Wisdom by the Valentinian school, both in the
world-drama, when the world-substance invokes the aid of her consort,
the æonic world-fashioner, and also in the soul-tragedy of the spirit
fallen into matter, the sorrowing Sophia, as in the *Pistis Sophia*
treatise.

Nothing more of a certain nature can be deduced from the polemical
writings of Ephraim, and the only scrap of interest we can glean from
other writers is a beautiful phrase preserved by the Syrian writer
Philoxenus of Mabūg (about 500 <span class="small">A.D.</span>): "The
Ancient of Eternity is a boy"--that is to say, is ever young.

Let us now turn to Bardaisan's views on "astrology" and "fate," or, in
other words, his conception of karman, and quote a few passages from
Cureton's somewhat unintelligible translation of The

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Book of the Laws
of Countries* (in his *Spicilegium Syriacum*, pp. 11, *sqq*.).

<span class="margnote">The Book of the Laws of Countries.</span>This
dialogue was written by a pupil of our Gnostic, and Bardaisan is
introduced as the main speaker; in fact, the pupils only break in here
and there with a short question for literary effect. We may be therefore
fairly confident that we have in this treatise a faithful reproduction
of the views, not only of Bardaisan on fate or karman, but also of the
Gnostics of his school.

The following extracts from the speeches of Bardaisan will throw much
light also on the astrological ideas in the *Pistis Sophia*.

"I likewise . . . know that there are men who are called Chaldæans, and
others who love this knowledge of the art, as I also once loved it
\[before he met with the teaching of Valentinus\], for it has been said
by me, in another place, that the soul of man is capable of knowing that
which many do not know, and the same men \[sic\] meditate to do; and all
that they do wrong, and all that they do good, and all the things which
happen to them in riches and in poverty, and in sickness and in health,
and in defects of the body, it is from the influence of those Stars,
which are called the Seven, they befall them, and they are governed by
them. But there are others who say the opposite of these things,--how
that this art is a lie of the Chaldæans, or that Fortune does not exist
at all, but it is an empty name; and all things are placed in the hands
of man, great and small; and bodily defects and faults happen and befall
him by chance. But others say that whatsoever a man doeth,

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

he doeth of his own will, by the Free-will that has been given to him,
and the faults and defects and <span class="margnote">Karman.</span>
evil things which happen to him, he receiveth as a punishment from God.
But as for myself, in my humble opinion, it appeareth to me that these
three sects are partly true, and partly false. They are true, because
men speak after the fashion which they see, and because, also, men see
how things happen to them, and mistake; because the wisdom of God is
richer than they, which hus established the worlds and created man, and
has ordained the Governors, and has given to all things the power which
is suitable for each one of them. But I say that God, and the Angels,
and the Powers, and the Governors, and the Elements, and men and animals
have this power; but all these orders of which I have spoken have not
power given to them in everything. For he that is powerful in everything
is One; but they have power in some things, and in some things they have
no power, as I have said: that the goodness of God may be seen in that
in which they have power, and in that in which they have no power they
may know that they have a Lord. There is, therefore, Fortune, as the
Chaldæans say."

And that everything is not in our own Free-will, that is that Free-will
is not absolute, is plainly visible in everyday experience. Fortune also
plays its part, but is not absolute, and Nature also. Thus "we men are
found to be governed by Nature equally, and by Fortune differently, and
by our Free-will each as he wishes."

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="margnote">Fortune and Nature.</span>"That which is called
Fortune is an order of procession which is given to the Powers and the
Elements by God; and according to this procession and order,
intelligences \[minds, egos\] are changed by their coming down to be
with the soul, and souls are changed by their coming down to be with the
body; and this alteration itself is called the Fortune and the Nativity
of this assemblage, which is being sifted and purified, for the
assistance of that which by the favour of God and by grace has been
assisted, and is being assisted, till the consummation of all. \[Compare
in the system of Basilides the 'benefitting and being benefitted in
turn.'\] The body, therefore, is governed by Nature, the soul also
suffering with it and perceiving; and the body is not constrained nor
assisted by Fortune in all the things which it does individually; for a
man does not become a father before fifteen years, nor does a woman
become a mother before thirteen years. And in the same manner, also,
there is a law for old age; because women become effete from bearing,
and are deprived of the natural power of begetting; while other animals
which are also governed by their own Nature before those ages which I
have specified, not only procreate, but also become too old to
procreate, in the same manner as also the bodies of men when they are
grown old do not procreate; nor is Fortune able to give them children at
that time at which the body has not the Nature to give them. Neither,
again, is Fortune able to preserve the body of man in life, without
eating and without drinking; nor even when it has meat and drink, to
prevent it

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

from dying, for these and many other things pertain to Nature itself;
but when the times and manners of Nature are fulfilled, then comes
Fortune apparent among these, and effecteth things that are distinct one
from another; and at one time assists Nature and increases, and at
another hinders it and hurts; and from Nature cometh the growth and
perfection of the body; but apart from Nature and by Fortune come
sickness and defects in the body. For Nature is the connection of males
and females, and the pleasure of the both heads \[*sic*\]; but from
Fortune comes abomination and a different manner of connection and all
the filthiness and indecency which men do for the cause of connection
through their lust. For Nature is birth and children; and from Fortune
sometimes the children are deformed; and sometimes they are cast away,
and sometimes they die untimely. From Nature there is a sufficiency in
moderation for all bodies; and from Fortune comes the want of food, and
affliction of the bodies; and thus, again, from the same Fortune is
gluttony, and extravagance which is not requisite. Nature ordains that
old men should be judges for the young, and wise for the foolish; and
that the valiant should be chiefs over the weak, and the brave over the
timid. But Fortune causeth that boys should be chiefs over the aged, and
fools over the wise; and that in time of war the weak should govern the
valiant, and the timid the brave. And know ye distinctly that, whenever
Nature is disturbed from its right course, its disturbance is from the
<span class="margnote">The Right and Left.</span> cause of Fortune,
because those Heads and Governors, upon whom  that alternation is which
is called

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nativity, are in
opposition one to the other. And those of them which are called Right,
they assist Nature, and add to its excellency whenever the procession
helps them, and they stand in the high places, which are in the sphere,
in their own portions; and those which are called Left are evil, and
whenever they, too, occupy the places of height, they are opposed to
Nature, and not only injure men, but, at different times, also animals,
and trees and fruits, and the produce of the year, and the fountains of
water, and everything that is in the Nature which is under their
control. And on account of these divisions and sects which exist among
the Powers, some men have supposed that the world is governed without
any superintendence, because they do not know that these sects and
divisions and justification and condemnation proceed from that influence
which is given in Free-will by God, that those actions also by the power
of themselves may either be justified or condemned, as we see that
Fortune crushes Nature, so we can also see the Freewill of man repelling
and crushing Fortune herself; but not in everything, as also Fortune
itself doth not repel Nature in everything; for it is proper that the
three things, Nature and Fortune and Free-will, should be maintained in
their lives until the procession be accomplished, and the measure and
number be fulfilled, as it seemed good before Him who ordained how
should be the life and perfection of all creatures, and the state of all
Beings and Natures."

Bardaisan thus makes Free-will, Fate, and Nature the three great factors
of the karmic law, all

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

three being ultimately in the hand of God. Each re-acts on each, none is
absolute. Nature has to do with body, Fate or Fortune with soul, and
Free-will with spirit. None of them is absolute, the absolute being in
God alone.

By a strange chance, however, one of the hymns of the great poet of
Gnosticism has been preserved to us <span class="margnote">The Hymn of
the Soul.</span> entire; it is now generally admitted that the beautiful
"Hymn of the Soul," as it has been called, imbedded in the Syriac form
of the apocryphal *Acts of Judas Thomas*, preserved in the British
Museum codex, is almost undoubtedly from the stylus of Bardaisan.
Nöldeke and Macke were the first scholars to call attention to the fact.
(See Lipsius’ *Die apokryphen Apostelgeschichten*, i. 299, *sqq*.,
1885). It is a beautiful legend of initiation, and was first translated
by Wright ([*Apocryphal*](errata.htm#37) *Acts of the Apostles*, ii.
238-245; 1871); it has now quite recently (1898) been retranslated by
Bevan, using Wright's version as a basis. Since the time of Wright so
much work has been done on this "master-piece of religious poetry," as
the Cambridge Reader in Arabic justly calls it, that the translation of
the pupil is to be [preferred](errata.htm#38) to that of the teacher,
and Professor Bevan's work must now be considered not only to have
superseded Wright's, but to be the best on the subject.

The high probability of the Bardesantist origin of the poem is based on
the following considerations: The three main accusations of the orthodox
Father Ephraim against Bardaisan, who, he says, taught that there were
Seven Essences (Īthyē), are: "(1) That

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

he denied the resurrection and regarded the separation of the soul from
the body as a blessing; (2) that he held the theory of a divine 'Mother'
who in conjunction with 'the Father of Life' gave birth to a being
called 'the Son of the Living'; (3) that he believed in a number of
lesser 'gods,' that is to say, eternal beings subordinate to the supreme
God.

"Now, it is remarkable," says Professor Bevan, "that these three
'heresies' all appear distinctly in the Poem before us. There can be no
doubt that the Egyptian garb, which the prince puts on as a disguise and
casts away as soon as his mission is accomplished, represents the human
body. The emphatic declaration that the 'filthy and unclean garb' is
left in their country' conveys an unmistakable meaning; it would be
difficult, in an allegorical piece, to deny a material resurrection more
absolutely."

Since Bardaisan, like all the great Gnostics, believed in reincarnation,
such a conception as the resurrection of the same physical body must
have been regarded by him as a gross superstition of the ignorant. Such
a "proof" of identity of doctrine as is here brought
[forward](errata.htm#39) could hardly occur to one who has realised the
meaning of the doctrine of rebirth.

"The true clothing of the soul, according to the poet, is the ideal form
which it feet behind in heaven and will resume after death. \[Only after
the 'death unto sin'; the Light-robe is not for all.\] As for the Father
of Life, the Mother, and the Son of the Living, they here figure as the
Father 'the King of

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

kings,' the Mother 'the Queen of the East,' and the Brother 'the next in
rank.' Finally the 'lesser gods' appear as 'the kings,' who obey the
command of the King of kings."

If the student, in reading this masterpiece of Gnostic poesy, will bear
in mind the beautiful Parable of the Prodigal Son, as preserved in the
third Synoptic, he will be able to trace the basic similarity of ideas
in the outer and inner traditions, and note how the inner expands and
explains the outer.

I do not know on what authority this beautiful poem has been called the
Hymn of the Soul; there is no authority in the text for the title, and
the Gnostic poet had a far more definite theme in mind. He sang of the
consummation of the Gnostic life, the crown of victory at the end of the
Path; not of any vague generalities but of a very definite goal towards
which he was running. He sang of the "wedding garment," the "robe of
initiation," so beautifully described in the opening pages of the
*Pistis Sophia*. Thus, then, in most recent translation runs what I will
venture to call:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hymn of the Robe of Glory](fff58)
