[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff71)  [Next](fff73.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

### SOME FORGOTTEN SAYINGS.

IN the early centuries of Christianity there were in circulation many
traditions, legends, and religious romances, called Memoirs, Acts, and
Gospels, which contained Sayings-of-the-Lord or Logoi. These Logoi or
Logia were oracles, or oracular utterances, couched in the same language
and of much the same tenour as the prophetic utterances of the members
of the Schools of the Prophets, which were introduced by the solemn
formula, "Thus saith the Lord," when recorded in the books of the Old
Covenant of the Jewish race.

In course of time certain of these traditional, legendary and mythical
settings of the Logoi were declared to be alone historical, and a canon
of orthodox tradition was evolved from the second half of the second
century onwards. I use the term "mythical" in its best sense, that is to
say, stories embodying in a designed symbolic fashion the teachings of
the mysteries, concerning the nature of God, the universe and the human
soul.

As only a few out of the many writings were selected, a large number of
Logoi was thus rejected. <span class="margnote">Rejected Logoi.</span>
The latest collection of these rejected Logoi has been made by Resell,
and was published in 1889 in Gebhardt and Harnack's series of *Texte und
Untersuchungen*, under the title of *Agrapha: Äussercanonische
Evangelienfragmente*.

Some of these extra-canonical fragments are variants of the familiar
canonical Sayings, and are of interest mainly for the reconstruction of
one of the

<span id="page_594">p. 594</span>

root-sources from which the synoptic compilers drew their information. A
few have been preserved in the Pauline Letters. Others are entirely
unfamiliar to those who are only acquainted with the canonical selection
of the books of the New Covenant, generally called the New Testament.
These Logoi are of special interest to students of the origins, and I
therefore append a selection of them translated from Resch's text.

It may be mentioned that some of these Logoi have been worked into a
religious novel by a Jewish writer, under the title *As Others Saw Him*,
published in 1895, at London, by William Heinemann.

 

Be merciful that ye may obtain mercy; forgive that it may be forgiven
unto you; as ye do so shall it be done to you; as ye give so shall it be
given unto you; as ye judge so shall ye be judged; as ye do service so
shall service be done to you; with what measure ye mete, with the same
shall it be measured to you in return.

Wisdom sendeth forth her children.

He who is near Me is near the fire; and he who is far from Me is far
from the kingdom.

If ye observe not the little \[*sci*., mystery\], who will give you the
great?

They who would see Me and reach My kingdom need must attain Me with pain
and suffering.

Good must needs come, but blessed is he by whom it cometh; in like
manner also evil must needs come, but woe unto him by whom it cometh.

The weak shall be saved by the strong.

<span id="page_595">p. 595</span>

Guard the mysteries for Me and for the sons of My house.

Cleave to the holy ones, for they who cleave to them are made holy.

The fashion of this world passeth away.

\[Fashion--that is, configuration (σχῆμα), for there are other worlds
and other phases of this world\].

As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup make proclamation of My
death and confession in My resurrection and ascension until I come \[to
you\].

\[A variant gives the saying in the third person, and speaks of the
"death of the Son of the Man," the Logos. The Master promises to return
to His disciples at the time of the performance of a certain holy
rite.\]

Be ye mindful of faith and hope, through whom is born that love to God
and man which giveth life eternal.

There is a mingling that leadeth to death, and there is a mingling that
leadeth to life.

Beholding a certain man working on the Sabbath., He said unto him: Man,
if thou knowest what thou doest thou art blessed; but if thou knowest
not, thou art accursed and a transgressor of the law.

Why do ye wonder at the signs? I give unto you a mighty inheritance
which the whole world doth not contain.

When the Lord was asked by a certain man, When should His kingdom come,
He saith unto him: When two shall be one, and the without as the within,
and the male with the female, neither male nor female.

Call not any one "Father" on earth, for on earth

<span id="page_596">p. 596</span>

there are rulers \[only\]; in heaven is the Father from whom is every
descent \[that is, "blood descent from a father" (πατριά)\] both in
heaven and on earth.

Grieve not the Holy Spirit which is in you, and put not out the Light
which hath shone forth in you.

As ye see yourselves in water or mirror, so see ye Me in yourselves.

As I find you, so will I judge you.

Seek for the great \[mysteries\] and the little shall be added to you;
seek for the heavenly and the earthly shall be added to you.

Be ye approved money-changers, rejecting the bad and retaining the good.

Keep thy flesh pure.

Because of the sick I was sick; because of the hungry I was ahungered;
because of the thirsty I was athirst.

Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, or fist for fist,
or curse for curse.

Love hideth a multitude of sins.

There are false christs and false teachers who have blasphemed the
Spirit of Grace, and have spit forth its gift of grace; these shall not
be forgiven either in this æon or in the æon to come.

\[Grace is the "power above," the power of the Logos which makes a man a
"christ." Charis or Grace is the consort of the Logos, His power or
shakti. The false "christs" are those who have been "initiated" and
broken their vows. The æon is a certain time-period.\]

For the Heavenly Father willeth the repentance of the sinner rather than
his chastisement.

<span id="page_597">p. 597</span>

For God willeth that all should receive of His gifts.

Keep that which thou hast, and it shall be increased into more.

Behold, I make the last as the first.

I am come to end the sacrifices, and if ye cease not from sacrificing,
the wrath shall not cease from you.

\[Woe unto him\] who hath made sad the spirit of his brother.

And never rejoice unless ye see your brother \[also\] happy.

He who hath wondered shall reign, and he who hath reigned shall rest.

\[This is a dark saying; it has been compared to the phrase of Plato:
"There is no other beginning of philosophy than wondering"--that is to
say, regarding the works of the Deity with wonder and reverence. This is
the beginning of philosophy, or gnosis, and the end of it makes the man
king of himself, and thus master of gods and men; thus is he at peace.\]

My mother, the Holy Spirit, even now took me by one of the hairs of my
head and carried me to the great mountain Tabor.

\[The hairs of the head may perhaps symbolise the *nādi's*, as they are
called in the Upanishads, by which the soul goes forth from the body;
the mountain is the way up to the spiritual regions.\]

He who seeketh me shall find me in children from seven years
\[onwards\]; for hidden in them I am manifested in the fourteenth period
(æon).

<span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

\[This may refer either to the higher ego or light-spark from the Logos,
or to certain degrees of initiation, the initiated having to become as
"little children."\]

When Salome asked how long should death hold sway, the Lord said unto
her: So long as ye women bring forth; for I came to end the works of the
female. And Salome said unto Him: I have then done well in not bringing
forth. And the Lord answered and said: Eat of every pasture, but of that
which hath the bitterness \[of death\] eat not. And when Salome asked
when should those things of which she enquired be known, the Lord said:
When ye shall tread upon the vesture of shame, and when the two shall be
one, and the male with the female neither male nor female.

\["Shame" is presumably the same as the "mingling" in one of the Logoi
quoted above. To tread on the vesture of shame is to rise above the
animal nature.\]

Pray for your enemies; blessed are they who mourn over the destruction
of the unbelievers.

I stood on a lofty mountain, and saw a gigantic man and another, a
dwarf; and I heard as it were a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to
hear; and He spake unto me and said, I am thou and thou art I; and
wheresoever thou mayst be I am there. In all am I scattered, and
whencesoever thou wiliest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me thou
gatherest Thyself.

\[Here again we have the mountain of initiation. The initiate beholds
the vision of the Heavenly Man, the Logos, and of himself, the dwarf; of
the Great

<span id="page_599">p. 599</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Man and the little
man, the light-spark which sits in the heart.\]

May thy Holy Spirit come upon us and purify us \[From a very ancient
version of the Lord's Prayer, instead of the clause "Thy kingdom
come."\]

Possess nothing upon the earth.

Though ye be gathered together with me in My bosom, if ye do not My
commandments, I will cast you forth.

Gain for yourselves, ye sons of Adam, by means of these transitory
things which are not yours, that which is your own, and passeth not
away.

For even among the prophets after they have been anointed by the Holy
Spirit, the word of sin has been found among them.

\[That is to say, after they have been made "christs" (μετὰ τὸ χρισθῆναι
αὐτοὺς ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ). The "word of sin" means apparently erroneous
prophetical utterances.\]

If a man shall abandon all for my name's sake, at the second coming he
shall inherit eternal life.

\["For my name's sake" signifies the power of the Great Name which the
Master used in his public preaching; the second coming is the descent of
the Christ-spirit upon the candidate at his initiation. "Eternal life"
is the life of the æons or spiritual existences, whose lives are an
eternity.\]

If ye make not the below into the above and the above into the below,
the right into the left and the left into the right, the before into the
behind \[and the behind into the before\], ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of God.

<span id="page_600">p. 600</span>

\[That is to say, ye shall not enter into the central point and so pass
into the spiritual region.\]

I am to be crucified anew.

I recognised myself, and gathered myself together from all sides; I
sowed no children for the ruler, but I tore up his roots, and gathered
together \[my\] limbs that were scattered abroad; I know thee who thou
art, for I am front the realms above.

\[This is the apology, or defence, of the soul of the initiate as it
passes through the realms of the unseen world, each of which is in
charge of a ruler, the minister of Death. As the Logos gathers together
his children (the light-sparks, the limbs of his body), and takes them
home into his bosom, so does the ego collect its limbs and becomes the
Osirified.\]

What ye preach with words before the people, do ye in deeds before every
man.

Thou art the key \[who openest\] for every man, and shuttest for every
man.

\[This saying is put in the mouth of the disciples; in the direct
formula it would read, "I am the key," &c.\]

<span class="margnote">The Oxyrhynchus Papyrus.</span>Numerous other
Logoi could be added from Gnostic literature, especially from the
contents of the Coptic Codices; but enough has been given to show the
reader that much of the Sayings-material has been rejected and
forgotten. How precious some of this matter was, has been lately shown
by a recent discovery. The ancient papyrus-fragment discovered on the
site of Oxyrhynchus by Grenfell and Hunt, in 1897, preserves for us the
most primitive form of the Logoi

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

known to us. Of the six decipherable Sayings it contains, one is
familiar to us, two contain new matter and important variants, and three
are entirely new. If the proportion of now unknown to known sayings was
as high in the rest of the MS. as in the solitary leaf which has reached
us, then we have indeed lost more by the Canon than we have gained.

The new-found Sayings run as follows, omitting the one already familiar
to us:

Jesus saith: Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in no wise find the
Kingdom of God; and except ye sabbatize the Sabbath, ye shall not see
the Father.

Jesus saith: I stood in the midst of the world, and in flesh was I seen
of them, and I found all drunken, and none found I athirst among them.
And My soul grieveth over the souls of men, because they are blind in
their heart and see not. . . .

Jesus saith: Wheresoever there be two, they are not without God; and
wherever there is one alone, I say, I am with him. Raise the stone, and
there thou shalt find Me; cleave the wood, and there am I.

\[The first part of this saying is exceedingly imperfect; I have
followed Blass's conjectures. See Taylor's *Oxyrhynchus Logia*, Oxford;
1899\].

Jesus saith: A prophet is not acceptable in his own country, neither
doth a physician work cures upon those that know him.

Jesus saith: A city built on the top of a high hill and stablished can
neither fall nor be hid.

Jesus saith: Thou hearest with one ear (but the other thou hast closed).

Since the publication of the first edition of this

<span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

work the rubbish heaps of ancient Oxyrhynchus have yielded yet another
battered scrap of papyrus containing material from a similar collection
of sayings, the decipherable portions of which run as follows in
Grenfell & Hunt's edition (New Sayings of Jesus; London, 1904):

These are the . . . words which Jesus the Living (One) spake to . . .
and Thomas, and He said unto (them): Every one who hearkeneth to these
words shall never taste of death.

Jesus saith: Let not him who seeketh . . . cease until he findeth, and
when he findeth he shall wonder; wondering he shall reign, and reigning
shall rest.

Jesus saith: (Ye ask? Who are these) that draw us (to the kingdom if)
the kingdom is in Heaven? . . . the fowls of the air, and all beasts
that are under the earth or upon the earth, and the fishes of the sea
(these are they that draw) you; and the Kingdom of Heaven is within you;
and whosoever shall know himself shall find it. (Strive therefore?) to
know yourselves, and ye shall be aware that ye are the sons of the . . .
Father; (and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City of God?), and ye
are (the City?).

Jesus saith: Everything that is not before thy face and that which is
hidden from thee shall be revealed to thee. For there is nothing hidden
which shall not be made manifest, nor buried which shall not be raised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](fff73.md)
