[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb12)  [Next](olb14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Laws for the Navigators.</span>

*Navigator is the title of those who make foreign voyages*.

1\. All Frya's sons have equal rights, and every stalwart youth may
offer himself as a navigator to the Olderman, who may not refuse him as
long as there is any vacancy.

2\. The navigators may choose their own masters.

3\. The traders must be chosen and named by the community to which they
belong, and the navigators have no voice in their election.

4\. If during a voyage it is found that the king is bad or incompetent,
another may be put in his place, and on the return home he may make his
complaint to the Olderman.

5\. If the fleet returns with profits, the sailors may divide one-third
among themselves in the following manner: The king twelve portions, the
admiral seven, the boatswains each two portions, the captains three, and
the rest of the crew each one part; the youngest boys each one-third of
a portion, the second boys half a portion each, and the eldest boys
two-thirds of a portion each.

6\. If any have been disabled, they must be maintained at the public
expense, and honoured in the same way as the soldiers.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

7\. If any have died on the voyage, their nearest relatives inherit
their portion.

8\. Their widows and orphans must be maintained at the public expense;
and if they were killed in a sea-fight, their sons may bear the names of
their fathers on their shields.

9\. If a topsailman is lost, his heirs shall receive a whole portion.

10\. If he was betrothed, his bride may claim seven portions in order to
erect a monument to her bridegroom, but then she must remain a widow all
her life.

11\. If the community is fitting out a fleet, the purveyors must provide
the best provisions for the voyage, and for the women and children.

12\. If a sailor is worn out and poor, and has no house or patrimony,
one must be given him. If he does not wish for a house, his friends may
take him home; and the community must bear the expense, unless his
friends decline to receive it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Useful Extracts from the Writings left by Minno](olb14)
