[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb20)  [Next](olb22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">This stands inscribed upon all Citadels.</span>

Before the bad time came our country was the most beautiful in the
world. The sun rose higher, and there was seldom frost. The trees and
shrubs produced various fruits, which are now lost. In the fields we had
not only barley, oats, and rye, but wheat which shone like gold, and
which could be baked in the sun's rays. The years were not counted, for
one was as happy as another.

On one side we were bounded by Wr-alda's Sea, on which no one but us
might or could sail; on the other side we were hedged in by the broad
Twiskland (Tusschenland, Duitschland), through which the Finda people
dared not come on account of the thick forests and the wild beasts.

Eastward our boundary went to the extremity of the East Sea, and
westward to the Mediterranean

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sea; so that
besides the small rivers we had twelve large rivers given us by Wr-alda
to keep our land moist, and to show our seafaring men the way to his
sea.

The banks of these rivers were at one time entirely inhabited by our
people, as well as the banks of the Rhine from one end to the other.
Opposite Denmark and Jutland we had colonies and a Burgtmaagd. Thence we
obtained copper and iron, as well as tar and pitch, and some other
necessaries. Opposite to us we had Britain, formerly Westland, with her
tin mines.

Britain was the land of the exiles, who with the help of their
Burgtmaagd had gone away to save their lives; but in order that they
might not come back they were tattooed with a B on the forehead, the
banished with a red dye, the other criminals with blue. Moreover, our
sailors and merchants had many factories among the distant Krekalanders
and in Lydia. In Lydia (Lybia) the people are black. As our country was
so great and extensive, we had many different names. Those who were
settled to the east of Denmark were called Jutten, because often they
did nothing else than look for amber (*jutten*) on the shore. Those who
lived in the islands were called Letten, because they lived an isolated
life. All those who lived between Denmark and the Sandval, now the
Scheldt, were called Stuurlieden <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10)
(pilots), Zeekampers <span id="fr_11"></span>[†](#fn_11) (naval men),
and Angelaren <span id="fr_12"></span>[‡](#fn_12) (fishermen). The
Angelaren were men who fished in the sea, and were so named because they
used lines and hooks instead of nets. From there to the nearest part of
Krekaland the inhabitants were called Kadhemers, because they never went
to sea but remained ashore.

Those who were settled in the higher marches bounded by Twisklanden
(Germany) were called Saxmannen, because they were always armed against
the wild beasts and the savage Britons. Besides

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

these we had the names Landzaten (natives of the land), Marzaten <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) (natives of the fens), and Woud or Hout
zaten (natives of the woods).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[69:\*](olb21.htm#fr_10) *Stjurar*, in Latin
*Sturii*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[69:†](olb21.htm#fr_11) *Sêkâmpar*, in Latin
*Sicambri*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[69:‡](olb21.htm#fr_12) *Angelara*, in Latin
*Angli*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[71:\*](olb21.htm#fr_13) *Mârsata*, in Latin
*Marsacii*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Bad Time came](olb22)
