[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb25)  [Next](olb27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Now we will write about the War between the Burgtmaagden Kalta and Min-erva</span>,

*And how we thereby lost all our southern lands and Britain to the
Golen*.

Near the southern mouth of the Rhine and the Scheldt there are seven
islands, named after Frya's seven virgins of the week. In the middle of
one island is the city of Walhallagara <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) (Middelburg), and on the walls of this
city the following history is inscribed. Above it are the words "Read,
learn, and watch."

Five hundred and sixty-three years after the submersion of Atland—that
is, 1600 years before Christ <span id="fr_32"></span>[†](#fn_32)—a wise
town priestess presided here, whose name was Min-erva—called by the
sailors Nyhellenia. This name was well chosen, for her counsels were new
and clear above all others.

On the other side of the Scheldt, at Flyburgt, Sijrhed presided. This
maiden was full of tricks. Her face was

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

beautiful, and her tongue was nimble; but the advice that she gave was
always conveyed in mysterious terms. Therefore the mariners called her
Kalta, and the landsmen thought it was a title. In the last will of the
dead mother, Rosamond was named first, Min-erva second, and Sijrhed
third in succession. Min-erva did not mind that, but Sijrhed was very
much offended. Like a foreign princess, she wished to be honoured,
feared, and worshipped; but Min-erva only desired to be loved. At last
all the sailors, even from Denmark and Flymeer, did homage to her. This
hurt Sijrhed, because she wanted to excel Min-erva. In order to give an
impression of her great watchfulness, she had a cock put on her banner.
So then Min-erva went and put a sheep-dog and an owl on her banner. The
dog, she said, guards his master and his flock, and the owl watches that
the mice shall not devastate the fields; but the cock in his lewdness
and his pride is only fit to murder his nearest relations. When Kalta
found that her scheme had failed she was still more vexed, so she
secretly sent for the Magyars to teach her conjuring. When she had had
enough of this she threw herself into the hands of the Gauls; but all
her malpractices did not improve her position. When she saw that the
sailors kept more and more aloof from her, she tried to win them back by
fear. At the full moon, when the sea was stormy, she ran over the wild
waves, calling to the sailors that they would all be lost if they did
not worship her. Then she blinded their eyes, so that they mistook land
for water and water for land, and in this way many a good ship was
totally lost. At the first war-feast, when all her countrymen were
armed, she brought casks of beer, which she had drugged. When they were
all drunk

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

she mounted her war-horse, leaning her head upon her spear. Sunrise
could not be more beautiful. When she saw that the eyes of all were
fixed upon her, she opened her lips and said:

Sons and daughters of Frya, you know that in these last times we have
suffered much loss and misery because the sailors no longer come to buy
our paper, but you do not know what the reason of it is. I have long
kept silence about it, but can do so no longer. Listen, then, my
friends, that you may know on which side to show your teeth. On the
other side of the Scheldt, where from time to time there come ships from
all parts, they make now paper from pumpkin leaves, by which they save
flax and outdo us. Now, as the making of paper was always our principal
industry, the mother willed that people should learn it from us; but
Min-erva has bewitched all the people—yes, bewitched, my friends—as well
as all our cattle that died lately. I must come out with it. If I were
not Burgtmaagd, I should know what to do. I should burn the witch in her
nest.

As soon as she had uttered these words she sped away to her citadel; but
the drunken people were so excited that they did not stop to weigh what
they had heard. In mad haste they hurried over the Sandfal, and as night
came on they burst into the citadel. However, Kalta again missed her
aim; for Min-erva, her maidens, and her lamp were all saved by the
alertness of the seamen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[87:\*](olb26.htm#fr_31) Walhallagara is
Middelburg, in Walcheren.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[87:†](olb26.htm#fr_32) 2193-583 is 1630 years
before Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: We now come to the History of Jon](olb27)
