[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb38)  [Next](olb40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Now I will write myself, first about my Citadel, and then about what I have been able to see.</span>

My city lies near the north end of the Liudgaarde. The tower has six
sides, and is ninety feet high, fiat-roofed, with a small house upon it
out of which they look at the stars. On either side of the tower is a
house three hundred feet long, and twenty-one feet broad, and twenty-one
feet high, besides the roof, which is round. All this is built of
hard-baked bricks, and outside there is nothing else. The citadel is
surrounded by a dyke, with a moat thirty-six feet broad and twenty-one
feet deep. If one looks down from the tower, he sees the form of the
Juul. In the ground among the houses on the south side all kinds of
native and foreign herbs grow, of which the maidens must study the
qualities. Among the houses on the north side there are only fields. The
three houses on the north are full of corn and other necessaries; the
two houses on the south are for the maidens to live in and keep school.
The most southern house is the dwelling of the Burgtmaagd. In the tower
hangs the lamp. The walls of the tower are decorated with precious
stones. On the south wall the Tex is inscribed. On the right side of
this are the formulae, and on the other side the laws; the other things
are found upon the three other sides. Against the dyke, near the house
of the Burgtmaagd, stand the oven and the mill, worked by four oxen.
Outside the citadel wall is the place where the Burgtheeren and the
soldiers live. The fortification outside is an hour long—not a seaman's
hour, but an hour of the sun, of which twenty-four go to a day. Inside
it is a plain five feet below the top. On it are three hundred crossbows
covered with wood and leather.

Besides the houses of the inhabitants, there are along

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the inside of the dyke thirty-six refuge-houses for the people who live
in the neighbourhood. The field serves for a camp and for a meadow. On
the south side of the outer fortification is the Liudgaarde, enclosed by
the great wood of lime-trees. Its shape is three-cornered, with the
widest part outside, so that the sun may shine in it, for there are a
great number of foreign trees and flowers brought by the seafarers. All
the other citadels are the same shape as ours, only not so large; but
the largest of all is that of Texland. The tower of the Fryaburgt is so
high that it rends the sky, and all the rest is in proportion to the
tower. In our citadel this is the arrangement: Seven young maidens
attend to the lamp; each watch is three hours. In the rest of their time
they do housework, learn, and sleep. When they have watched for seven
years, they are free; then they may go among the people, to look after
their morals and to give advice. When they have been three years
maidens, they may sometimes accompany the older ones.

The writer must teach the girls to read, to write, and to reckon. The
elders, or "Greva," must teach them justice and duty, morals, botany,
and medicine, history, traditions, and singing, besides all that may be
necessary for them to give advice. The Burgtmaagd must teach them how to
set to work when they go among the people. Before a Burgtmaagd can take
office, she must travel through the country a whole year. Three
grey-headed Burgtheeren and three old maidens must go with her. This was
the way that I did. My journey was along the Rhine—on this side up, and
on the other side down. The higher I went, the poorer the people seemed
to be. Everywhere about the Rhine the people dug holes, and the sand
that was got out was poured with water over fleeces to get the gold, but
the girls did not wear golden crowns of it. Formerly they were

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

more numerous, but since we lost Schoonland they have gone up to the
mountains. There they dig ore and make iron. Above the Rhine among the
mountains I have seen Marsaten. The Marsaten are people who live on the
lakes. Their houses are, built upon piles, for protection from the wild
beasts and wicked people. There are wolves, bears, and horrible
lions <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_52). Then come the Swiss <span
id="fr_53"></span>[†](#fn_53), the nearest to the frontiers of the
distant Italians, the followers of Kalta and the savage Twiskar, all
greedy for robbery and booty. The Marsaten gain their livelihood by
fishing and hunting. The skins are sewn together by the women, and
prepared with birch bark. The small skins are as soft as a woman's skin.
The Burgtmaagd at Fryasburgt <span id="fr_54"></span>[‡](#fn_54)
(Freiburg) told us that they were good, simple people; but if I had not
heard her speak of them first, I should have thought that they were not
Frya's people, they looked so impudent. Their wool and herbs are bought
by the Rhine people, and taken to foreign countries by the ship
captains. Along the other side of the Rhine it was just the same as at
Lydasburcht <span id="fr_55"></span>[§](#fn_55) (Leiden). There was a
great river or lake <span id="fr_56"></span>[\*\*](#fn_56), and upon
this lake also there were people living upon piles. But they were not
Frya's people; they were black and brown men who had been employed as
rowers to bring home the men who had been making foreign voyages, and
they had to stay there till the fleet went back.

At last we came to Alderga. At the head of the south harbour lies the
Waraburgt, built of stone, in which all kinds of clothes, weapons,
shells, and horns are kept, which were brought by the sea-people from
distant lands. A quarter of an hour's distance from there is Alderga, a
great river surrounded by houses, sheds, and gardens, all richly
decorated. In the river lay a great fleet ready, with banners of all
sorts of colours. On Frya's day the shields were hung on board likewise.
Some shone

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

like the sun. The shields of the sea-king and the admiral were bordered
with gold. From the river a canal was dug going past the citadel.
Forana <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_58) (Vroonen), with a narrow
outlet to the sea. This was the egress of the fleet; the Fly was the
ingress <span id="fr_58"></span>[†](#fn_59). On both sides of the river
are fine houses built, painted in bright colours. The gardens are all
surrounded by green hedges. I saw there women wearing felt tunics, as if
it were writing felt. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_57) Just as at
Staveren, the girls wore golden crowns on their heads, and rings on
their arms and ankles. To the south of Forana lies Alkmarum. Alkmarum is
a lake or river in which there is an island. On this island the black
and brown people must remain, the same as at Lydasburgt. The Burgtmaagd
of Forana told me that the burgtheeren go every day to teach them what
real freedom is, and how it behoves men to live in order to obtain the
blessing of Wr-alda's spirit <span id="fr_60"></span>[‡](#fn_60). If
there was any one who was willing to listen and could comprehend, he was
kept there till he was fully taught. That was done in order to instruct
the distant people, and to make friends everywhere. I had been before in
the Saxenmarken, at the Mannagardaforda <span
id="fr_61"></span>[§](#fn_61) castle (Munster). There I saw more poverty
than I could discover wealth here. She answered: So whenever at the
Saxenmarken a young man courts a young girl, the girls ask : Can you
keep your house free from the banished Twisklanders? Have you ever
killed any of them ? How many cattle have you already caught, and how
many bear and wolfskins have you brought to market ? And from this it
comes that the Saxons have left the cultivation of the soil to the
women, that not one in a hundred can read or write ; from this it comes,
too, that no one has a motto on his shield, but only a misshapen form of
some animal that he has killed;

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

and lastly, from this comes also that they are very warlike, but
sometimes as stupid as the beasts that they catch, and as poor as the
Twisklanders with whom they go to war. The earth and the sea were made
for Frya's people. All our rivers run into the sea. The Lydas people and
the Findas people will exterminate each other, and we must people the
empty countries. In movement and sailing is our prosperity. If you wish
the highlanders to share our riches and wisdom, I will give you a piece
of advice. Let the girls, when they are asked to marry, before they say
yes, ask their lovers: What parts of the world have you travelled in?
What can you tell your children about distant lands and distant people?
If they do this, then the young warriors will come to us; they will
become wiser and richer, and we shall have no occasion to deal with
those nasty people. The youngest of the maids who were with me came from
the Saxenmarken. When we came back she asked leave to go home.
Afterwards she became Burgtmaagd there, and that is the reason why in
these days so many of our sailors are Saxons.

 

 

<span class="small">END OF APOLLONIA'S BOOK</span>

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[151:\*](olb39.htm#fr_52) Lions in Europe, see
Herodotus, vii. 125.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[151:†](olb39.htm#fr_53) Swetsar are Swiss.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[151:‡](olb39.htm#fr_54) Fryasburch is Freiburg.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[151:§](olb39.htm#fr_55) Lydasburch is Leyden,
the city.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[151:\*\*](olb39.htm#fr_56) *Flyt, jeftha mâre*,
is a lake or sea.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[153:1](olb39.htm#fr_59) Felt, very thin and
compressed, with a smooth surface.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[153:\*](olb39.htm#fr_57) Forana is Vroonen.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[153:†](olb39.htm#fr_58) Engamuda is Egmond.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[153:‡](olb39.htm#fr_60) Diodorus Siculus. v.
27, on the Gauls.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[153:§](olb39.htm#fr_61) Mannagardaforda is
Munster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Writings of Frêthorik and Wiljow](olb40)
