[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb48)  [Next](olb50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Here is my Counsel.</span>

If you wish that you alone should inherit the earth, you must never
allow any language but God's language to pass your lips, and take care
that your own language remains free from outlandish sounds. If you wish
that some of Lyda's children and some of Finda's children remain, you
must do the same. The language of the East Schoonlanders has been
perverted by the vile Magyars, and the language of the followers of
Kaltana has been spoiled by the dirty Gauls. Now, we have been weak
enough to admit among us the returned followers of Hellenia, but I
anxiously fear that they will reward our weakness by debasing our pure
language.

Many things have happened to us, but among all the citadels that have
been disturbed and destroyed in the bad time, Irtha has preserved
Fryasburgt uninjured; and I may remark that Frya's or God's language has
always remained here untainted.

Here in Texland, therefore, schools should be established; and from all
the states that have kept to the old customs the young people should be
sent here, and afterwards those whose education is complete can help
those who remain at home. If foreigners come to buy ironwares from you,
and want to talk and bargain, they must come back to God's language. If
they learn God's language, then the words, "to be free" and "to have
justice," will come to them, and glimmer and glitter in their brains to
a perfect light, and that flame will destroy all bad princes and
hypocritical dirty priests.

The native and foreign messengers were pleased with that writing, but no
schools came from it. Then Adel established schools himself. Every year
Adel and Ifkja went to inspect the schools. If they found a friendly
feeling

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span id="page_221">p. 221</span>.

existing between the natives and foreigners, they were extremely
pleased. If there were any who had sworn friendship together, they
assembled the people, and with great ceremony let them inscribe their
names in a book which was called the Book of Friendship, and afterwards
a festival was held. All these customs were kept up in order to bring
together the separate branches of Frya's race; but the maidens who were
opposed to Adel and Ifkja said that they did it for no other reason than
to make a name for themselves, and to bring all the other states under
their subjection.

Among my father's papers I found a letter from Liudgert the
Geertman <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84). Omitting some passages
which only concern my father, I proceed to relate the rest.

Punjab, that is five rivers, and by which we travel, is a river of
extraordinary beauty, and is called Five Rivers, because four other
streams flow into the sea by its mouth. Far away to the eastward is
another large river, the Holy or Sacred Ganges. Between these two rivers
is the land of the Hindoos. Both rivers run from the high mountains to
the plains. The mountains in which their sources lie are so high that
they reach the heavens (laia), and therefore these mountains are called
Himmellaia. Among the Hindoos and others out of these countries there
are people who meet together secretly. They believe that they are pure
children of Finda, and that Finda was born in the Himmellaia mountains,
whence she went with her children to the lowlands. Some of them believe
that she, with her children, floated down upon the foam of the Ganges,
and that that is the reason why the river is called the Sacred Ganges.
But the priests, who came from another country, traced out these people
and had them burnt, so that they

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

do not dare to declare openly their creed. In this country all the
'priests are fat and rich. In their churches there are all kinds of
monstrous images, many of them of gold. To the west of the Punjab are
the Yren (Iraniers), or morose (Drangianen), the Gedrosten (Gedrosiers),
or runaways, and the Urgetten, or forgotten. These names are given by
the priests out of spite, because they fled from their customs and
religion. On their arrival our forefathers likewise established
themselves to the east of the Punjab, but on account of the priests they
likewise went to the west. In that way we learned to know the Yren and
other people. The Yren are not savages, but good people, who neither
pray to nor tolerate images; neither will they suffer priests or
churches; but as we adhere to the light of Fasts, so they everywhere
maintain fire in their houses. Coming still further westward, we arrive
at the Gedrosten. Regarding the Gedrosten: They have been mixed with
other people, and speak a variety of languages. These people are really
savage murderers, who always wander about the country on horseback
hunting and robbing, and hire themselves as soldiers to the surrounding
princes, at whose command they destroy whatever they can reach.

The country between the Punjab and the Ganges is as flat as Friesland
near the sea, and consists of forests and fields, fertile in every part,
but this does not prevent the people from dying by thousands of hunger.
The famines, however, must not be attributed to Wr-alda or Irtha, but to
the princes and priests. The Hindoos are timid and submissive before
their princes, like hinds before wolves. Therefore the Yren and others
have called them Hindoos, which means hinds. But their timidity is
frightfully abused. If strangers come to purchase corn, everything is
turned

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

into money, and this is not prevented 'by the priests, because they,
being more crafty and rapacious than all the princes put together, know
very well that all the money will come into their pockets. Besides what
the people suffer from their princes, they suffer a great deal from
poisonous and wild beasts. There are great elephants that sometimes go
about in whole flocks and trample down cornfields aid whole villages.
There are great black and white cats which are called tigers. They are
as large as calves, and they devour both men and beasts. Besides other
creeping animals there are snakes from the size of a worm to the size of
a tree. The largest can swallow a cow, but the smallest are the most
deadly. They conceal themselves among the fruits and flowers, and
surprise the people who come to gather them. Any one who is bitten by
them is sure to die, as Irtha has given no antidote to their poison,
because the people have so given themselves up to idolatry. There are,
besides, all sorts of lizards, tortoises, and crocodiles. All these
reptiles, like the snakes, vary from the size of a worm to the trunk of
a tree. According to their size and fierceness, they have names which I
cannot recollect, but the largest are called alligators, because they
eat as greedily the putrid cattle that float down the stream as they do
living animals that they seize. On the west of the Punjab where we come
from, and where I was born, the same fruits and crops grow as on the
east side. Formerly there existed also the same crawling animals, but
our forefathers burnt all the underwood, and so diligently hunted all
the wild animals, that there are scarcely any left. To the extreme west
of the Punjab there is found rich clay land

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

as well as barren heaths, which seem endless, occasionally varied lovely
spots on which the eye rests enchanted. Among the fruits there are many
that I have not found here. Among the various kinds of corn some is as
yellow as gold. There are also golden apples, of which some are as sweet
as honey and others as sour as vinegar. In our country there are nuts as
large as a child's head. They contain cheese and milk. When they are old
oil is made from them. Of the husks ropes are made, and of the shells
cups and other household utensils are made. I have found in the woods
here bramble and holly berries. In my country we have trees bearing
berries, as large as your lime-trees, the berries of which are much
sweeter and three times as large as your gooseberries. When the days are
at the longest, and the sun is in the zenith, a man's body bas no
shadow. If you sail very far to the south and look to the east at
midday, the sun shines on your left side as it does in other countries
on the right side. With this I will finish. It will be easy for you, by
means of what I have written, to distinguish between false accounts and
true descriptions.—Your [Liudgert](errata.htm#1).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[221:\*](olb49.htm#fr_84) See page
[164](olb41.htm#page_164).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Writing of Beeden](olb50)
