[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb44)  [Next](olb46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Now I will write about Friso.</span>

Friso, who was already powerful by his troops, was chosen chief
Grevetman of the districts round Staveren. He laughed at our mode of
defending our land and our sea-fights; therefore he established a school
where the boys might learn to fight in the Greek manner, but I believe
that he did it to attach the young people to himself. I sent my brother
there ten years ago, because I thought, now that we have not got any
mother, it behoves me to be doubly watchful, in order that he may not
become our master.

Goss has given us no successors. I will not give any opinion about that;
but there are still old suspicious people who think that she and Friso
had an understanding about it. When Gosa died, the people from all parts
wished to choose another mother; but Friso, who was busy establishing a
kingdom for himself, did not desire to have any advice or messenger from
Teerland. When the messengers of the Landsaten came to him, he said that
Gosa had been far-seeing and wiser than all the counts together, and yet
she had been unable to see any light or way out of this affair;
therefore she had not had the courage to choose a successor, and to
choose a doubtful one she thought would be very bad; therefore she wrote
in her last will, It is better to have no mother than to have one on
whom you cannot rely. Friso had seen a great deal. He had been brought
up in the wars, and he had just learned and gathered as much of the
tricks and

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

cunning ways of the Gauls and the princes as he required, to lead the
other counts wherever he wished. See here how he went to work about
that.

Friso had taken here another wife, a daughter of Wilfrêthe, who in his
lifetime had been chief count of Staveren. By her he had two sons and
two daughters. By his wish Kornelia, his youngest daughter, was married
to my brother. Kornelia is not good Frisian; her name ought to be
written Korn-helia. Weemoed, his eldest daughter, he married to Kauch.
Kauch, who went to school to him, is the son of Wichhirte, the king of
the Geertmen. But Kauch is likewise not good Frisian, and ought to be
Kaap (Koop). So they have learned more bad language than good manners.

Now I must return to my story.

After the great flood of which my father wrote an account, there came
many Jutlanders and Letlanders out of the Baltic, or bad sea <span
id="fr_73"></span>[\*](#fn_73). They were driven down the Kattegat in
their boats by the ice as far as the coast of Denmark, and there they
remained. There was not a creature to be seen; so they took possession
of the land, and named it after themselves, Jutland. Afterwards many of
the Denmarkers returned from the higher lands, but they settled more to
the south; and when the mariners returned who had not been lost, they
all went together to Zeeland <span id="fr_74"></span>[†](#fn_74). By
this arrangement the Jutlanders retained the laud to which Wr-alda had
conducted them. The Zeeland skippers, who were not satisfied to live
upon fish, and who hated the Gauls, took to robbing the Phœnician ships.
In the south-west point of Scandinavia there lies Lindasburgt, called
Lindasnôse, built by one Apol, as is written in the book <span
id="fr_75"></span>[‡](#fn_75). All the people

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

who live on the coasts, and in the neighbouring districts, had remained
true Frisians; but by their desire for vengeance upon the Gauls, and the
followers of Kaltona, they joined the Zeelanders. But that connection
did not hold together, because the Zeelanders had adopted many evil
manners and customs of the wicked Magyars, in opposition to Frya's
people. Afterwards, everybody went stealing on his own account; but when
it suited them they held all together. At last the Zeelanders began to
be in want of good ships. Their shipbuilders had died, and their forests
as well as their land had been washed out to sea. Now there arrived
unexpectedly three ships, which anchored off the ringdyk of our citadel.
By the disruption of our land they had lost themselves, and had missed
Flymond. The merchant who was with them wished to buy new ships from us,
and for that purpose had brought all kinds of valuables, which they had
stolen from the Celtic country and Phœnician <span
id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76) ships. As we had no ships, I gave them
active horses and four armed couriers to Friso; because at Stavere,
along the Alberga, the best ships of war were built of hard oak which
never rots. While these sea rovers remained with us, some of the Jutmen
had gone to Tex-land, and thence to Friso. The Zeelanders had stolen
many of their strongest boys to row their ships, and many of their
finest daughters to have children by. The great Jutlanders could not
prevent it, as they were not properly armed. When they had related all
their misfortunes, and a good deal of conversation had taken place,
Friso asked them at last if they had no good harbours in their country.
Oh, yes, they answered; a beautiful one, created by Wr-alda. It is like
a bottle, the neck narrow, but in the belly a thousand large boats may
lie; but we have no citadel and no defences to keep out

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the pirate ships. Then you should make them, said Friso. That is very
good advice, said the Jutlanders; but we have no workmen and no building
materials; we are all fishermen and trawlers. The others are drowned or
fled to the higher lands. While they were talking in this way, my
messengers arrived at the court with the Zeeland gentlemen. Here you
must observe how Friso understood deceiving everybody, to the
satisfaction of both parties, and to the accomplishment of his own ends.
To the Zeelanders he promised that they should have yearly fifty ships
of a fixed size for a fixed price, fitted with iron chains and
crossbows, and fall rigging as is necessary and useful for men-of-war,
but that they should leave in peace the Jutlanders and all the people of
Frya's race. But he wished to do more; he wanted to engage all our sea
rovers to go with him upon his fighting expedition. When the Zeelanders
had gone, he loaded forty old ships with weapons for wall defences,
wood, bricks, carpenters, masons, and smiths, in order to build
citadels. Witto, or Witte, his son, he sent to superintend. I have never
been well informed of what happened; but this much is clear to me, that
on each side of the harbour a strong citadel has been built, and
garrisoned by people brought by Friso out of Saksenmarken. Witto courted
Siuchthirte and married her. Wilhem, her father, was chief Alderman of
the Jutmen—that is, chief Grevetman or Count. Wilhem died shortly
afterwards, and Witte was chosen in his place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[199:\*](olb45.htm#fr_73) *Balda jefta kvade sê*
is the Baltic. *Juttarland* is Jutland.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[199:†](olb45.htm#fr_74) Zeeland is the Danish
Islands.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[199:‡](olb45.htm#fr_75) See page
[124](olb33.htm#page_124).

<span id="fn_76"></span>[201:\*](olb45.htm#fr_76) *Phonisjar* are Punics
or Carthaginians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Friso did further](olb46)
