[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### Fragment.

*This page begins in the middle of the sentence. There do not appear to
be any missing pages in the source book.—JBH*.

… therefore I will first write about black Adel. Black Adel was the
fourth king after Friso. In his youth he studied first at Texland, and
then at Staveren, and afterwards travelled through all the states. When
he was twenty-four years old his father had him elected Asega-Asker. As
soon as be became Asker he always took the part of the poor. The rich,
he said, do enough of wrong b means of their wealth, therefore we ought
to take Care that the poor look up to us. By arguments of this kind he
became the friend of the poor and the terror of the rich. It was carried
so far that his father looked up to him. When his father died he
succeeded, and then he wished to retain his office as well, as the kings
of the East used to do. The rich would not suffer this, so all the
people rose up, and the rich were glad to get out of the assembly with
whole skins. From that time there was no more talk of equality. He
oppressed the rich and flattered the poor, by whose assistance he
succeeded in all his wishes. King Askar, as he was always called, was
seven feet high, and his strength was as remarkable as his height. He
had a clear intellect, so that he understood all that was talked about,
but in his actions he did not display much wisdom. He had a handsome
countenance and a smooth tongue, but his soul was blacker than his hair.
When he had been king for a year, he obliged all the young men in the
state to come once a year to the camp to have a sham fight. At first he
had some trouble with it, but at last it became such a habit that old
and young came from all sides to ask if they might take part in it. When
he had brought it to this point, he established military schools. The
rich complained that their

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

children no longer learned to read and write. Askar paid no attention to
it; but shortly afterwards, when a sham fight was held, he mounted a
throne and spoke aloud: The rich have come to complain to me that their
boys do not learn to read and write. I answered nothing; but I will now
declare my opinion, and let the general assembly decide. While they all
regarded him with curiosity, he said further: According to my ides, we
ought to leave reading and writing at present to the maagden and wise
people. I do not wish to speak ill of our forefathers; I will only say
that in the times so vaunted by some, the Burgtmaagden introduced
disputes into our country, which the mothers were unable, either first
or last, to put an end to. Worse still, while they talked and chattered
about useless customs the Gauls came and seized all our beautiful
southern country. Even at this very time our degenerate brothers and
their soldiers have already come over the Scheldt. It therefore remains
for us to choose whether we will carry a yoke or a sword. If we wish to
be and to remain free, it behoves our young men to leave reading and
writing alone for a time; and instead of playing games of swinging and
wrestling, they must learn to play with sword and spear. When we are
completely prepared, and the boys are big enough to carry

helmet and shield and to use their weapons, then, with your help, I will
attack the enemy. The Gauls may then record the defeat of their helpers
and soldiers upon our fields with the blood that flows from their
wounds. When we have once expelled the enemy, then we must follow it up
till there are no more Gauls, Slaves, or Tartars to be driven out of
Frya's inheritance. That is right, the majority shouted, and the rich
did not dare to open their mouths.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He must certainly
have thought over this address and had it written out, for on the
evening of the same day there were copies in at least twenty different
hands, and they all sounded the same. Afterwards he ordered the ship
people to make double prows, upon which steel crossbows could be fixed.
Those who were backward in doing this were fined, and if they swore that
they had no means, the rich men of the village were obliged to pay. Now
we shall see what resulted from all this bustle. In the north part of
Britain there exists a Scotch people—the most of them spring from Frya's
blood—some of them are descended from the followers of Keltana, and, for
the rest, from Britons and fugitives who gradually, in the course of
time, took refuge there from the tin mines. Those who come from the tin
mines have wives, either altogether foreign or of foreign descent. They
are all under the dominion of the Gauls. Their arms are wooden bows and
arrows pointed with stag's-horn or flint. Their houses are of turf and
straw, and some of them live in caves in the mountains. Sheep that they
have stolen form their only wealth. Some of the descendants of Keltana's
followers still have iron weapons, which they have inherited from their
forefathers. In order to make myself well understood, I must let alone
for a while my account of the Scotch people, and write something about
the near Krekalanders (Italians. The Krekalanders formerly belonged to
us only, but from time immemorial descendants of Lyda and Finda have
established themselves there. Of these last there came in the end a
whole troop from Troy. Troy is the name of a town that the far
Krekalanders (Greeks) had taken and destroyed. When the Trojans had
nestled themselves among the near Krekalanders, with time and industry
they built a strong town with walls and citadels named Rome, that is,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spacious. When
this was done, the people by craft and force made themselves masters of
the whole. land. The people who live on the south side of the
Mediterranean Sea, come for the most part from Phœnicia. The
Phœnicians <span id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87) (Puniers or
Carthaginians) are a bastard race of the blood of Frya, Finda, and Lyda.
The Lyda people were there as slaves, but by the unchastity of the women
these black people have degenerated the other people and dyed them
brown. These people and the Romans are constantly struggling for the
supremacy over the Mediterranean Sea. The Romans, moreover, live at
enmity with the Phœnicians; and their priests, who wish to assume the
sole government of the world, cannot bear the sight of the Gauls. First
they took from the Phœnicians Marseilles—then all the countries lying to
the south, the west, and the north, as well as the southern part of
Britain—and they have always driven away the Phœnician priests, that is
the Gauls, of whom thousands have sought refuge in North Britain. A
short time ago the chief of the Gauls was established in the citadel,
which is called Kerenac (Karnac), that is the corner, whence he issued
his commands to the Gauls. All their gold was likewise collected there.
Keeren Herne (chosen corner), or Kerenac, is a stone citadel which did
belong to Kalta. Therefore the maidens of the descendants of Kaltana's
followers wished to have the citadel again. Thus through the enmity of
the maidens and the Gaul's, hatred and quarrelling spread ever the
mountain country with fire and sword. Our sea people often came there to
get wool, which they paid for with prepared hides and linen. Askar had
often gone with them, and had secretly made friendship with the maidens
and some princes, and bound himself to drive the Gauls out of Kerenac.
When he came back there again he gave to the princes and the fighting
men iron helmets and steel bows. War had come with him, and soon blood
was streaming down

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the slopes of the mountains. When Askar thought a favourable opportunity
occurred, he went with forty ships and took Kerenac and the chief of the
Gauls, with all his gold. The people with whom he fought against the
soldiers of the Gauls, he had enticed out of the Saxenmarken by promises
of much booty and plunder. Thus nothing was left to the Gauls. After
that he took two islands for stations for his ships, from which he used
later to sally forth and plunder all the Phœnician ships and towns that
he could reach. When he returned he brought nearly six hundred of the
finest youths of the Scotch mountaineers with him. He said that they had
been given him as hostages, that he might be sure that the parents would
remain faithful to him; but this was untrue. He kept them as a bodyguard
at his court, where they had daily lessons in riding and in the use of
all kinds of arms. The Denmarkers, who proudly considered themselves
sea-warriors above all the other sea-people, no sooner heard of the
glorious deeds of Askar, than they became jealous of him to such a
degree, that they would bring war over the sea and over his lands. See
here, then, how he was able to avoid a war. Among the ruins of the
destroyed citadel of Stavia there was still established a clever
Burgtmaagd, with a few maidens. Her name was Reintja, and she was famed
fur her wisdom. This maid offered her assistance to Askar, on condition
that he should afterwards rebuild the citadel of Stavin. When he had
bound himself to do this, Reintja went with three maidens to Hals <span
id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_88) (Holstein). She travelled by night, and
by day she made speeches in all the markets and in all the assemblies.
Wr-alda, she said, had told her by his thunder that all the Frya's
people must become friends, and united as brothers and sisters,
otherwise Finda's people would come and sweep them off the face of the
earth. After the thunder Frya's seven watch-maidens appeared to her in a
dream seven nights in succession. They had

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

said, Disaster hovers over Frya's land with yoke and chains; therefore
all the people who have sprung from Frya's blood must do away with their
surnames, and only call themselves Frya's children, or Frya's people.
They must all rise up and drive. Finda's people out of Frya's
inheritance. If you will not do that, you will bring the slave-chains
round your necks, and the foreign chiefs will ill-treat your children
and flog them till the blood streams into your graves. Then shall the
spirits of your forefathers appear to you, and reproach your cowardice
and thoughtlessness. The stupid people who, by the acts of the Magyars,
were already so much accustomed to folly, believed all that she said,
and the mothers clasped their children to their bosoms. When Reintja had
brought the king of Holstein and the others to an agreement, she sent
messengers to Askar, and went herself along the Baltic Sea. From there
she went to the Lithauers (Face-hewers), so called because they always
strike at their enemy's face. The Lithauers are fugitives and banished
people of our own race, who wander about in the Twisklanden. Their wives
have been mostly stolen from the Tartars. The Tartars are a branch of
Finda's race, and are thus named by the Twisklanders because they never
will be at peace, but provoke people to fight. She proceeded on beyond
the Saxsenmarken, crossing through the other Twisklanders in order
always to repeat the same thing. After two years had passed, she came
along the Rhine home. Among the Twisklanders she gave herself out for a
mother, and said that they might return as free and true people; but
then they must go over the Rhine and drive the Gauls out of Frya's south
lands. If they did that, then her King Askar would go over the Scheldt
and win back the land. Among the Twisklanders many bad customs of the
Tartars and Magyars have crept in, but likewise many of our

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

laws have remained. Therefore they still have Maagden, who teach the
children and advise the old. In the beginning they were opposed to
Reintja, but at last she was followed, obeyed, and praised by them where
it was useful or necessary.

As soon as Askar heard from Reintja's messengers how the Jutlanders were
disposed, he immediately, on his side, sent messengers to the King of
Hals. The ship in which the messengers went was laden with women's
ornaments, and took also a golden shield on which Askar's portrait was
artistically represented. These messengers were to ask the King's
daughter, Frethogunsta, in marriage for Askar. Frethogunsta came a year
after that to Staveren. Among her followers was a Magy, for the
Jutlanders had been long ago corrupted. Soon after Askar had married
Frethogunsta, a church was built at Staveren. In the church were placed
monstrous images, bedecked with gold-woven dresses. It is also said that
Askar, by night, and at unseasonable times, kneeled to them with
Frethogunsta; but one thing is certain, the citadel of Stavia was never
rebuilt. Reintja was already come back, and went angrily to Prontlik the
mother, at Texland, to complain. Prontlik sent out messengers in all
directions, who proclaimed that Askar is gone over to Idolatry. Askar
took no notice of this, but unexpectedly a fleet arrived from Hals. In
the night the maidens were driven out of the citadel, and in the morning
there was nothing to be seen of the citadel but a glowing heap of
rubbish. Prontlik and Reintja came to me for shelter. When I reflected
upon it, I thought that it might prove bad for my state. Therefore, we
hit upon a plan which might serve us all. This is the way we went to
work. In the middle of the Krijlwood, to the east of Liudwerd, lies our
place of refuge, which can only be reached by a concealed path. A long
time ago I had

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

established a garrison of young men who all hated Askar, and kept away
all other people. Now it was come to such a pitch among us, that many
women, and even men, talked about ghosts, white women, and gnomes, just
like the Denmarkers. Askar had made use of all these follies for his own
advantage, and we wished to do the same. One dark night I brought the
Maagden to the citadel, and afterwards they went with their
serving-maids dressed in white along the path, so that nobody dare go
there any more. When Askar thought he had his hands free, he let the
Magyars travel through his states under all kinds of names, and, except
in my state, they were not turned away anywhere. After that Askar had
become so connected with the Jutlanders and the Denmarkers, they all
went roving together; but it produced no real good to them. They brought
all sorts of foreign treasures home, and just for that reason the young
men would learn no trades, nor work in the fields; so at last he was
obliged to take slaves; but that was altogether contrary to Wr-alda's
wish and to Frya's counsel. Therefore the punishment Was sure to follow
it. This is the way in which the punishment came. They had all together
taken a whole fleet that came out of the Mediterranean Sea. This fleet
was laden with purple cloths and other valuables that came from
Phœnicia. The weak people of the fleet were put ashore south of the
Seine, but the strong people were kept to serve as slaves. The
handsomest were retained ashore, and the ugly and black were kept on
board ship as rowers. In the Fly the plunder was divided, but, without
their knowing it, they divided the punishment too. Of those who were
placed in the foreign ships six died of colic. It was thought that the
food and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

drink were poisoned, so it was all thrown overboard, but the colic
remained all the same. Wherever the slaves or the goods came, there it
came too. The Saxsenmen took it over to their marches. The Jutlanders
brought it to Schoonland and along the coasts of the Baltic Sea, and
with Askar's mariners it was taken to Britain. We and the people of
Grênegâ did not allow either the people or the goods to come over our
boundaries, and therefore we remained free from it. How many people were
carried off by this disease I cannot tell; but Prontlik, who heard it
afterwards from the maidens, told me that Askar had helped out of his
states a thousand times more free-men than he had brought dirty slaves
in. When the pest had ceased, the Twisklanders who had become free came
to the Rhine, but Askar would not put himself on an equality with the
princes of that vile degenerate race. He would not suffer them to call
themselves Frya's children, as Reintja had offered them, but he forgot
then that he himself had black hair. Among the Twisklanders there were
two tribes who did not call themselves Twisklanders. One came from the
far south-east, and called themselves Allemannen. They had given
themselves this name when they had no women among them, and were
wandering as exiles in the forests. Later on they stole women from the
slave people like the Lithauers, but they kept their name. The other
tribe, that wandered about in the neighbourhood, called themselves
Franks, not because they were free, but the name of their first king was
Frank, who, by the help of the degenerate maidens, had had himself made
hereditary king over his people. The people nearest to him called
themselves Thioth—his sons—that is, sons of the people. They had
remained free, because they never would acknowledge any king, or prince,
or master except those chosen by general consent in a general assembly.
Askar had

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

already learned from Reintja that the Twisklander princes were almost
always at war with each other. He proposed to them that they should
choose a duke from his people, because, as he said, he was afraid that
they would quarrel among themselves for the supremacy. He said also that
his princes could speak with the Gauls. This, he said, was also the
opinion of the mother. Then the princes of the Twisklanders came
together, and after twenty-one days they chose Alrik as duke. Alrik was
Askar's nephew. He gave him two hundred Scotch and one hundred of the
greatest Saksmannen to go with him as a bodyguard. The princes were to
send twenty-one of their sons as hostages for their fidelity. Thus far
all had gone according to his wishes; but when they were to go over the
Rhine, the king of the Franks would not be under Alrik's command.
Thereupon all was confusion. Askar, who thought that all was going on
well, landed with his ships on the other side of the Scheldt; but there
they were already aware of his coming, and were on their guard. He had
to flee as quickly as he had come, and was himself taken prisoner. The
Gauls did not know whom they had taken, so he was afterwards exchanged
for a noble Gaul whom Askar's people had taken with them. While all this
was going on, the Magyars went about audaciously over the lands of our
neighbours. Near Egmuda, where formerly the citadel Forana had stood,
they built a church larger and richer than that which Askar had built at
Staveren. They said afterwards that Askar had lost the battle against
the Gauls, because the people did not believe that Wodin could help
them, and therefore they would not pray to him. They went about stealing
young children, whom they kept and brought up in the mysteries of their
abominable doctrines. Were there people who

 

 

\[Here the manuscript ends abruptly.\]

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[241:\*](olb52.htm#fr_87) *Phonsiar* are
Carthaginians.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[243:\*](olb52.htm#fr_88) *Hals* is Holstein.

 
