[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo01)  [Next](lo03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

### 2

<span class="smallcaps">Frogs</span> and fishes and worms—and these are
the materials of our expression upon all things.

Hops and flops and squirms—and these are the motions.

But we have been considering more than matter and motion, to start with:
we have been considering attempts by scientists to explain them. By
*explanation*, I mean *organization*. There is more than matter and
motion in our existence: there is organization of matter and motion.

Nobody takes a little clot that is central in a disease germ, as
Absolute Truth; and the latest scientific discovery is only something
for ideas to systematize around. But there is this systematization, or
organization, and we shall have to consider it.

There is no more meaning—though that may be utmost meaning—to
arrangements of observations, than there is to arrangements of
protoplasm in a microbe, but it must be noted that scientific
explanations do often work out rather well—but say in medical
treatments, if ailments are mostly fancied; or in stock-market
transactions, except in a crisis; or in expert testimony in the courts,
except when set aside by other expert testimony—

But they are based upon definitions—

And in phenomenal existence there is nothing that is independent of
everything else. Given that there is Continuity, everything is a degree
or aspect of whatever everything else is. Consequently there is no way
of defining anything, except in terms of itself. Try any alleged
definition. What is an island? An island is a body of land completely
surrounded by water. And what is a body of land that is completely
surrounded by water?

Among savage tribesmen, there is a special care for, or even
respectfulness for, the mentally afflicted. They are regarded as in some
obscure way representing God's chosen. We recognize the defining of a
thing in terms of itself, as a sign of feeble-mindedness. All

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

scientists begin their works with just such definitions, implied, if not
stated. And among our tribes there is a special care for, or even
respectfulness for, scientists.

It will be an expression of mine that there is a godness in this idiocy.
But, no matter what sometimes my opinion may be, I am not now writing
that God is an Idiot. Maybe he, or it, drools comets and gibbers
earthquakes, but the scale would have to be considered at least
super-idiocy.

I conceive, or tell myself that I conceive, that if we could have a
concept of our existence as a whole, we could have a kind of
understanding of it, rather akin to what, say, cells in an animal
organism could have of what is a whole to them, if they should not be
mere scientists, trying to find out what a bone is, or the flow of blood
in a vein is, in itself; but if they could comprehend what the
structures and functions of the Organism are, in terms of Itself.

The attempted idea of Existence as Organism is one of the oldest of the
pseudo-thoughts of philosophy. But the idea in this book is not
metaphysical. Metaphysical speculations are attempts to think
unthinkably, and it is quite hard enough to think thinkably. There can
be nothing but bafflement for anybody who tries to think of Existence as
Organism: our attempt will be to think of *an* existence as *an*
organism. Having a childish liking for a little rhetoric, now and then,
I shall call it God.

Our expressions are in terms of Continuity. If all things merge away
into one another, or transmute into one another, so that nothing can be
defined, they are of a oneness, which may be the oneness of one
existence. I state that, though I accept that there is continuity, I
accept that also there is discontinuity But there is no need, in this
book, to go into the subject of continuity-discontinuity, because no
statement that I shall make, as a monist, will be set aside by my
pluralism. There is a Oneness that both submerges and individualizes.

By the continuity of all things we have, with a hop and a flop and a
squirm, jumped from frogs toward finality. We have rejected whirlwinds
and the fishmonger, and have incipient notions upon a selectiveness and
an intelligent, or purposeful, distribution of living things.

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

What is selecting and what is distributing?

The old-fashioned theologian thinks of a being, with the looks of
himself, standing aside somewhere and directing operations.

What, in any organism, is selecting and distributing—say, oxygen in
lungs, and materials in stomachs?

The organism itself.

If we can think of our existence as a conceivable-sized
formation—perhaps one of countless things, beings, or formations in the
cosmos—we have graspableness, or we have the outlines and the limits
within which to think.

We look up at the stars. The look is of a revolving shell that is not
far away. And against such a view there is no opposition except by an
authoritative feeble-mindedness, which most of us treat respectfully,
because such is the custom in all more or less savage tribes.

Mostly in this book I shall specialize upon indications that there
exists a transportory force that I shall call *Teleportation*. I shall
be accused of having assembled lies, yarns, hoaxes, and superstitions.
To some degree I think so, myself. To some degree I do not. I offer the
data.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3](lo03)
