[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo03)  [Next](lo05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4

<span class="smallcaps">Over</span> the town of Noirfontaine, France,
one day in April, 1842, there was a cloudless sky, but drops of water
were falling. See back to data upon repetitions. The water was falling,
as if from a fixed appearing-point, somewhere above the ground, to a
definite area beneath. The next day water was still falling upon this
one small area, as mysteriously as if a ghost aloft were holding the
nozzle of an invisible' hose.

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

I take this account from the journal of the French Academy of Sciences
(*Comptes Rendus*), vol. 14, p. 664.

What do I mean by that?

I don't mean anything by that. At the same time, I do mean something by
the meaninglessness of that. I mean that we are in the helpless state of
a standardless existence, and that the appeal to authority is as much of
a wobble as any other of our insecurities.

Nevertheless, though I know of no standards by which to judge anything,
I conceive—or accept the idea—of something that is The Standard, if I
can think of our existence as an Organism. If human thought is a growth,
like all other growths, its logic is without foundation of its own, and
is only the adjusting constructiveness of all other growing things. A
tree cannot find out, as it were, how to blossom, until comes
blossom-time. A social growth cannot find out the use of steam engines,
until comes steam-engine-time. For whatever is supposed to be meant by
progress, there is no need in human minds for standards of their own:
this is in the sense that no part of a growing plant needs guidance of
its own devising, nor special knowledge of its own as to how to become a
leaf or a root. It needs no base of its own, because the relative
wholeness of the plant is relative baseness to its parts. At the same
time, in the midst of this theory of submergence, I do not accept that
human minds are absolute nonentities, just as I do not accept that a
leaf, or a root, of a plant, though so dependent upon a main body, and
so clearly only a part, is absolutely without something of an
individualizing touch of its own.

It is the problem of continuity-discontinuity, which perhaps I shall
have to take up sometime.

However—

London *Times*, April 26, 1821—that the inhabitants of Truro, Cornwall,
were amused, astonished, or alarmed, "according to nerve and judgment,"
by arrivals of stones, from an unfindable source, upon a house in Carlow
Street. The mayor of the town visited the place, and was made so nervous
by the rattling stones that he called out a military guard. He
investigated, and the soldiers investigated, and the clatter of
theorists increased the noise. *Times*, May 1—stones still rattling,
theorists still clattering, but nothing found out.

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

Flows of frogs—flows of worms—flows of water—flows of stones—just where
do we expect to draw a line? Why not go on to thinking that there have
been mysterious transportations of human beings?

We'll go on.

A great deal of the opposition to our data is connotative. Most likely
when Dr. Gilbert rubbed a rod and made bits of paper jump on a table,
the opposition to his magic was directed not so much against what he was
doing as against what it might lead to. Witchcraft always has a hard
time, until it becomes established and changes its name.

We hear much of the conflict between science and religion, but our
conflict is with both of these. Science and religion always have agreed
in opposing and suppressing the various witchcrafts. Now that religion
is inglorious, one of the most fantastic of transferences of worships is
that of glorifying science, as a beneficent being. It is the attributing
of all that is of development, or of possible betterment to science. But
no scientist has ever upheld a new idea, without bringing upon himself
abuse from other scientists. Science has done its utmost to prevent
whatever Science has done.

There are cynics who deny the existence of human gratitude. But it seems
that I am no cynic. So convinced am I of the existence of gratitude that
I see in it one of our strongest oppositions. There are millions of
persons who receive favors that they forget: but gratitude does exist,
and they've got to express it somewhere. They take it out by being
grateful to science for all that science has done for them, a gratitude,
which, according to their dull perceptions won't cost them anything. So
there is economic indignation against anybody who is disagreeable to
science. He is trying to rob the people of a cheap gratitude.

I like a bargain as well as does anybody else, but I can't save expenses
by being grateful to Science, if for every scientist who has perhaps
been of benefit to me, there have been many other scientists who have
tried to strangle that possible benefit. Also, if I'm dead broke, I
don't get benefits to be grateful for.

Resistance to notions in this book will come from persons who identify
industrial science, and the good of it, with the pure, or

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

academic, or aristocratic sciences that are living on the repute of
industrial science. In my own mind there is distinguishment between a
good watchdog and the fleas on him. If the fleas, too, could be taught
to bark, there'd be a little chorus that would be of some tiny value.
But fleas are aristocrats.

London *Times*, Jan. 13, 1843—that, according to the *Courrier de
l’Isère*, two little girls, last of December, 1842, were picking leaves
from the ground, near Clavaux (Livet), France, when they saw stones
falling around them. The stones fell with uncanny slowness. The children
ran to their homes, and told of the phenomenon, and returned with their
parents. Again stones fell, and with the same uncanny slowness. It is
said that relatively to these falls the children were attractive agents.
There was another phenomenon, an upward current, into which the children
were dragged, as if into a vortex. We might have had data of mysterious
disappearances of children, but the parents, who were unaffected by the
current, pulled them back.

In the *Toronto Globe*, Sept. 9, 1880, a correspondent writes that he
had heard reports of most improbable occurrences upon a farm, near the
township of Wellesley, Ontario. He went to the place, to interview the
farmer, Mr. Manser. As he approached the farmhouse, he saw that all the
windows were boarded up. He learned that, about the end of July, windows
had begun to break, though no missiles had been seen. The explanation by
the incredulous was that the old house was settling. It was a good
explanation, except for what it overlooked. To have any opinion, one
must overlook something. The disregard was that, quite as authentic as
the stories of breaking windows, were stories of falls of water in the
rooms, having passed through walls, showing no trace of such passage. It
is said that water had fallen in such volumes, from appearing-points in
rooms, that the furniture of the house had been moved to a shed. In all
our records openness of phenomena is notable. The story is that showers
fell in rooms, when the farmhouse was crowded with people. For more
details see the *Halifax Citizen*, September 13.

I omit about sixty instances of seeming teleportations of stones and
water, of which I have records. Numerousness hasn't any meaning, as a
standard to judge by.

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

The simplest cases of seeming teleportations are flows of stones, into
open fields, doing no damage, not especially annoying anybody, and in
places where there were no means of concealment for mischievous or
malicious persons. There is a story of this kind, in the *New York Sun*,
June 22, 1884. June 16th—a farm near Trenton, N. J.—two young men,
George and Albert Sanford, hoeing in a field—stones falling. There was
no building anywhere near, and there was not even a fence behind which
anybody could hide. The next day stones fell again. The young men
dropped their hoes and ran to Trenton, where they told of their
experiences. They returned with forty or fifty amateur detectives, who
spread out and tried to observe something, or more philosophically sat
down and arrived at conclusions without observing anything. Crowds came
to the cornfield. In the presence of crowds, stones continued to fall
from a point overhead. Nothing more was found out.

A pig and his swill—

Or Science and data—

Or that the way of a brain is only the way of a belly—

We can call the process that occurs in them either assimilative or
digestive. The mind-worshiper might as well take guts for his god.

For many strange occurrences there are conventional explanations. In the
mind of a conventionalist, reported phenomena assimilate with
conventional explanations. There must be disregards. The mind must
reject some data. This process, too, is both alimentary and mental.

The conventional explanation of mysterious flows of stones is that they
are peggings by neighbors. I have given data as I have found them. Maybe
they are indigestible. The conventional explanation of mysterious flows
of water is that they are exudations from insects. If so there must
sometimes be torrential bugs.

*New York Sun*, Oct. 30, 1892—that, day after day, in Oklahoma, where
for weeks there had been a drought, water was falling upon a large
cottonwood tree, near Stillwater. A conventionalist visited this tree.
He found insects. In *Insect Life*, 5-204, it is said that the
Stillwater mystery had been solved. Dr. Neel, Director of the
Agricultural Experimental Station, at Stillwater, had gone to the tree,

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

and had captured some of the insects that were causing the
precipitation. They were *Proconia undata* Fab.

And how am I going to prove that this was a senseless, or brutal, or
anyway mechanical, assimilation?

We don't have proofs. We have expressions.

Our expression is that this precipitation in Oklahoma was only one of
perhaps many. We find three other recorded instances, at this time, and
if they be not attributable to exudations from insects—but we'll not
prove anything. There is a theorem that Euclid never attempted. That is
to take *Q. E. D.* as a proposition.

In *Science*, 21-94, Mr. H. Chaplin, of Ohio University, writes that, in
the town of Akron, Ohio—about while water was falling upon a tree in
Oklahoma—there had been a continuous fall of water, during a succession
of clear days. Members of the faculty of Ohio University had
investigated, but had been unable to solve the problem. There was a
definite and persisting appearing-point from which to a small area near
a brickyard, water was falling. Mr. Chaplin, who had probably never
heard of similar occurrences far from damp places, thought that vapors
from this brickyard were rising, and condensing, and falling back. If so
there would often be such precipitations over ponds and other bodies of
water.

About the same time, water was mysteriously appearing at Martinsville,
Ohio, according to the *Philadelphia Public Ledger*, Oct. 19, 1892.
Behind a house, a mist was falling upon an area not more than a dozen
feet square. *St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, November 19—that, in Water
Street, Brownsville, Pa., there was a garden, in which was a peach tree,
upon which water was falling. As to the insect-explanation, we note the
statement that the water "seemed to fall from some height above the
tree, and covered an area about 14 feet square."

For all I know, some trees may have occult powers. Perhaps some
especially gifted trees have power to transport water, from far away, in
times of need. I noted the drought in Oklahoma, and then I looked up
conditions in Ohio and Pennsylvania. Rainfall was below normal. In Ohio,
according to the *Monthly Weather Review*, of November, there was a
drought. A watery manna came to chosen trees.

<span id="page_562">p. 562</span>

There is no sense in trying to prove anything, if all things are
continuous, so that there isn't anything, except the inclusive of all,
which may be Something. But aesthetically, if not scientifically, there
may be value in expressions, and we'll have variations of our theme.
There were, in places far apart, simultaneous flows of water from
stationary appearing-points, in and around Charleston, S. C., in the
period of the long series of earthquake shocks there. Later I shall
touch more upon an idea that will be an organic interpretation of falls
of water in places that have been desolated by catastrophes. About the
middle of September, 1886, falling water from "a cloudless sky," never
falling outside a spot 25 feet wide, was reported from Dawson, Ga. This
shower was not intermittent. Of course the frequently mentioned
circumstance of the "cloudless sky" has no significance. Water falling
all the way from the sky, even at times of the slightest breezes, cannot
be thought of as localizing strictly upon an area a few yards in
diameter. We think of appearing-points a short distance above the
ground. Then showers upon a space 10 feet square were reported from
Aiken, S. C. There were similar falls of water at Cheraw, S. C. For
particulars, see the *Charleston News and Courier*, October 8, 21, 25,
26. For an account of falls of water, "from a cloudless sky," strictly
to one point, in Charlotte, N. C., according to investigations by a
meteorologist, see the *Monthly Weather Review*, October, 1886. In the
*New York Sun*, October 24, it is said that, for 14 days, water had been
falling from "a cloudless sky," to a point in Chesterfield County, S.
C., falling so heavily that streams of it had gushed from roof pipes.

Then came news that water was falling from a point in Charleston.

Several days before, in the *News and Courier*, had been published the
insect-explanation of falls of water. In the *News and Courier*,
November 5, a reporter tells that he had visited the place in
Charleston, where it was said that water was falling, and that he had
seen a fall of water. He had climbed a tree to investigate. He had seen
insects.

But there are limits to what can be attributed, except by the most
desperate explainers, to insects.

In the *Monthly Weather Review*, August, 1886, it is said that, in

<span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Charleston,
September 4th, three showers of hot stones had been reported.

"An examination of some of these stones, shortly after they had fallen,
forced the conviction that the public was being made the victim of a
practical joke."

How an examination of stones could demonstrate whether they had been
slung humorously or not, is more than whatever brains I have can make
out. Upon September 4th, Charleston was desolated. The great earthquake
had occurred upon August 31st, and continuing shocks were terrorizing
the people. Still, I'd go far from my impressions of what we call
existence, if I'd think that terror, or anything else, was ever
homogeneous at Charleston, or anywhere else. Battles and shipwrecks, and
especially diseases, are materials for humorists, and the fun of
funerals never will be exhausted. I don't argue that in the midst of
desolation and woe, at Charleston, there were no jokers. I tell a story
as I found it recorded in the *Charleston News and Courier*, September
6, and mention my own conclusion, which is that wherever jocular
survivors of the catastrophe may have been cutting up capers, they were
not concerned in this series of occurrences.

At 2:30 o'clock, morning of September 4th, stones, which were found to
be "warm," fell near the *News and Courier* building, some of them
bounding into the press room. Five hours later, when there was no
darkness to hide mischievous survivors, more stones fell. It was a
strictly localized repetition, as if one persisting current of force. At
1:30 o'clock in the afternoon again stones fell, and these were seen,
coming straight down from a point overhead. If any conviction was
forced, it was forced in the same old way as that in which for ages
convictions have been forced, and that is by forcing agreements with
prior convictions. Other details were published in the *Richmond Whig:*
it was told that the stones, which were flint pebbles, ranging from the
size of a grape to the size of a hen's egg, had fallen upon an area of
75 square feet, and that about a gallon of them had been picked up. In
*A Descriptive Narrative of the Earthquake of August 31, 1886*, Carl
McKinley, an editor of the *News and Courier*, tells of two of these
showers of stones, which, according to him, "undoubtedly fell."

<span id="page_564">p. 564</span>

The localized repetitions of showers of stones are so much like the
localized repetitions of showers of water, that one, inclusive
explanation, or expression, is called for. Insects did them? Or the
fishmonger of Worcester had moved to South Carolina?

A complication has been developing. Little frogs fell upon Mr. Stoker
and his horses, but we had no reason to think that either Mr. Stoker or
his horses had anything to do with bringing about the precipitation. But
the children of Clavaux did seem to have something to do with showers of
stones, and trees did seem to have something to do with the
precipitations of water.

*Rand Daily Mail*, May 29, 1922—that Mr. D. Neaves, living near
Roodeport, employed as a chemist in Johannesburg, having for several
months endured showers of stones, had finally reported to the police.
Five constables, having been sent to the place, after dark, had hardly
taken positions around the house, when a stone crashed on the roof.
Phenomena were thought to associate with the housemaid, a Hottentot
girl. She was sent into the garden, and stones fell vertically around
her. This is said to have been one of the most mysterious of the
circumstances: stones fell vertically, so that there was no tracing of
them to an origin. Mr. Neaves’ home was an isolated building, except for
outhouses. These outhouses were searched, but nothing to suspect was
found. The stones continued to fall from an unknown source.

Police Inspector Cummings took charge. He ordered all members of the
family, servants, and newspaper men to remain in the house for a while:
so everybody was under inspection. Outside were constables, and all
around were open fields, with no means of concealment. Stones fell on
the roof. Watched by the police, the Hottentot girl went to the well. A
large stone fell near her. She ran back to the house, and a stone fell
on the roof. It is said that everything that could be done was done, and
that the cordon of police was complete. More stones fell. Convinced that
in some way the girl was implicated, the Inspector tied her hands. A
stone fell on the roof.

Then everything was explained. A "civilian," concealed in one of the
outhouses, had been caught throwing a stone. If so, whoever wrote this
account did not mention the name of the culprit, and it

<span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

is not said that the police made any trouble for him for having made
them work.

Then everything was explained again. It was said that the girl, Sara,
had been taken to the police station, where she had confessed. "It is
understood that Sara admits being a party to all the stone-throwing, and
has implicated two other children and a grown native. So ends the
Roodeport ghost story, shorn of all its alleged supernatural trappings."

Though usually we do not think piously of the police, their stations are
confessionals. But they're confessionals more in a scientific than in a
religious sense. When a confessor holds a club over a conscience, he can
bully statements with the success of any scientist who slugs data with a
theory. There is much brutality in police stations and in laboratories,
but I can't say that we're trying to reform anything; and if there never
has been a Newton, or a Darwin, or an Einstein—or a Moses, or a Christ,
or a St. Augustine—who has practiced other than the third degree upon
circumstances, I fear me that sometimes we are not innocent of one or
two degrees, ourselves.

However, the story reads more as if the girl had been taken to a barber
shop. Her story was shorn, we read. It was clipped bald of all details,
such as the cordon of police, search of the outhouses, and the taking of
precautions, such as will not fit in with this yarn of the tricky kids.
In this book we shall note much shearing.

The writer, in the *Monthly Weather Review*, is not the only clipper who
forces a conviction, when he can. There was a case, in another part of
South Africa, not long before the bombardments at Roodeport began. In
the *Klerksdorp Record*, Nov. 18, 1921, it is said that for several
weeks there had been "mysterious stonethrowing by invisible agencies" at
the houses of Mr. Gibbon Joseph and Mr. H. J. Minnaar, in North Street.
A detective was put upon the case. He was a logician. It was a ghost
story, or it was a case of malicious mischief. He could not pinch a
ghost. So he accused two Negroes, and arrested them. The Negroes were
tried upon testimony given by two boys of their race. But the boys
contradicted each other, and it was brought out that they were lying.
They admitted that the

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

logical detective had promised them five shillings to substantiate his
syllogisms.

In the *Journal of the Society for Psychical Research*, 12-260, is
published a letter from Mr. W. G. Grottendieck, telling that, about one
o'clock, one morning in September, 1903, at Dortrecht, Sumatra, he was
awakened by hearing something fall on the floor of his room. Sounds of
falling objects went on. He found that little, black stones were
falling, with uncanny slowness, from the ceiling, or the roof, which was
made of large, overlapping, dried leaves. Mr. Grottendieck writes that
these stones were appearing near the inside of the roof, not puncturing
the material, if through this material they were passing. He tried to
catch them at the appearing-point, but, though they moved with
extraordinary slowness, they evaded him. There was a coolie boy, asleep
in the house, at the time. "The boy certainly did not do it, because at
the time that I bent over him, while he was sleeping on the floor, there
fell a couple of stones." There was no police station handy, and this
story was not finished off with a neat and fashionable cut.

I point out that these stories of flows of stones are not conventional
stories, and are not well known. Their details are not standardized,
like "clanking chains" in ghost stories, and "eyes the size of saucers,"
in sea serpent yarns. Somebody in France, in the year 1842, told of
slow-moving stones, and somebody in Sumatra, in the year 1903, told of
slow-moving stones. It would be strange, if two liars should invent this
circumstance—

And that is where I get, when I reason.

If strangeness be a standard for unfavorable judgment, I damn at a swipe
most of this book.

But damnation is nothing to me. I offer the data. Suit yourself. Nobody
can investigate the reported phenomena that we're taking up, without
noticing the number of cases in which boys and girls, but a great
preponderance of girls, appear. An explanation by those who disregard a
great deal—or disregard normally—is that youngsters are concerned so
much, because it is their own mischief. Poltergeist-phenomena, or
teleportations of objects, in the home of Mr. Frost, 8 Ferrostone-road,
Hornsey, London, for several months, early in the year 1921, cannot be
so explained. There were three

<span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

children. Phenomena so frightened one of them that, in a nervous
breakdown, she died (London *Daily Express*, April 2, 1921). Another, in
a similar condition, was taken to the Lewisham (London) Hospital (London
*Daily News*, April 30, 1921).

In attempting to rationalize various details that we have come upon, or
to assimilate them, or to digest them, the toughest meal is swallowing
statements upon mysterious appearances in closed rooms, or passages of
objects and substances through walls of houses, without disturbing the
material of the walls. Oh, yes, I have heard of "the fourth dimension,"
but I am going to do myself some credit by not lugging in that
particular way of showing that I don't know what I'm writing about.
There's a story in the *St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, Jan. 27, 1888—large
stones that were appearing and "falling slowly" in closed rooms in the
home of Mr. P. C. Martin, Caldwell County, N. C. *Madras* (India)
*Mail*, March 5, 1888—pieces of brick that, in the presence of many
investigators, were falling in a schoolroom, in Pondicherry.

I can understand this phenomenon, or alleged phenomenon, of appearances
in closed rooms, no more than I can understand the passage of a magnetic
field of force through the wall of a house, without disturbing the
material. But lines of this force do not transport objects through a
dense material. Then I think of X-rays, which do something like this, if
it be accepted that X-rays are aggregations of very small objects, or
particles. X-rays do, or sometimes do, disturb materials penetrated by
them, but this disturbance is not evident until after long continuance.

If there is Teleportation, it is in two orders, or fields: electric and
non-electric—or phenomena that occur during thunderstorms, and phenomena
that occur under "a cloudless sky," and in houses. In the hosts of
stories that I have gathered—but with which I have not swamped this
book—of showers of living things, the rarest of all statements is of
injury to the falling creatures. Then, from impressions that have arisen
from other data, we think that the creatures may not have fallen all the
way from the sky, but may have fallen from appearing-points not high
above the ground—or may have fallen a considerable distance under a
counter-gravitational influence.

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

I think that there may be a counter-gravitational influence upon
transported objects, because of the many agreeing accounts—more than I
have told of—of slow-falling stones, by persons who had probably never
heard of other stories of slow-falling stones, and because I have come
upon records of similar magic, or witchcraft, in what will be accepted
as sane and sober meteorological observations.

See the *Annual Register*, 1859-70—an account by Mr. E. J. Lowe, a
meteorologist and an astronomer, of a fall of hailstones, at Nottingham,
England, May 29, 1859. Though the objects were more than an inch across,
they fell slowly. In September, 1873, near Clermont-Ferrand, France,
according to *La Nature*, 7-289, hailstones, measuring from an inch to
an inch and a half across, fell. They were under an unknown influence.
Notwithstanding their size, they fell so slowly that they did no damage.
Some fell upon roofs, and rebounded, and it was as if these shook off
the influence. Those that rebounded then fell faster than fell those
that came down in an unbroken fall. For other records of this
phenomenon, see *Nature*, 36-445; *Illustrated London News*, 34-546;
*Bull. Soc. Astro. de France*, June 19, 1900.

If in the general electric conditions of a thunderstorm there be
sometimes a counter-gravitational effect upon objects, somebody might
find out how counter-gravitationally to electrify aircraft and aviators.
If all work is opposition to gravitation, somebody may make a big
discovery of benefit to general laziness. Elevators in skyscrapers might
be run with half the power now needed. Here is an idea that may
revolutionize industry, but just now I am too busy revolutionizing
everything else, and I give this idea to the world, with the generosity
of somebody who bestows something that isn't any good to him.

But mysterious disappearances?

Our data have been upon mysterious appearances.

If I could appeal to what used to be supposed to be known as common
sense, I'd ask whether something that mysteriously appears somewhere had
not mysteriously disappeared somewhere else.

*Annals of Electricity*, 6-499—Liverpool, May 11, 1842—"not a breath of
air." Suddenly clothes on lines on a common shot upward. They moved away
slowly. Smoke from chimneys indicated

<span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

that above ground there was a southward wind, but the clothes moved away
northward.

There was another instance, a few weeks later. London *Times*, July 5,
1842—a bright, clear day, at Cupar, Scotland, June 30th—women hanging
out clothes on a common. There was a sharp detonation, and clothes on
lines shot upward. Some fell to the ground, but others went on and
vanished. There was a seeming of selection, which, because of possible
bearing upon various observations of ours interests me. Though this was
a powerful force, nothing but the clothes it seized was affected. I
wonder about the detonation, largely because it is in agreement with a
detail of still another story.

The closeness in time of these two occurrences attracts my attention.
They were a few weeks apart, and I have no other such record, until
seventy-seven years later. A sensible suggestion is that somebody, in
Cupar, having read the Liverpool story, had faked a similar story from
his town. A suggestion that is not so sensible is that, in this year
1842, somebody had learned the secrets of teleportation, and to avoid
attracting much attention in any one place was experimenting in places
far apart. It seems likely enough to me that, if there be teleportation,
human beings may have come upon knowledge of it, and may have used it.

"Likely enough?" a spiritualist would say. "Has he never heard of
*apports?*"

But whether it's narrowness and bigotry, upon my part, or not, I do not
go to séances for data. I have collected notes upon "mysterious
robberies," wondering whether a teleportative power has ever been used
criminally. As to *apports*, if a medium could transport sea shells from
the sea to his cabinet, he could abstract funds from a bank to his
pocket. If he could, but would not, how account for his being a medium?
Looking through newspapers, I have had a searching eye for something
like an account of a medium, who had become mysteriously rich, in a town
where there had been shortages of funds: clerks accused of embezzlement,
and convicted, but upon evidence that was not altogether satisfactory.
Although usually I can find data to "prove" anything that I want to
"prove,"

<span id="page_570">p. 570</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have come upon
no such account, and I am skeptical as to apports, and think that
mediums are like most of the rest of us, who are not criminals, having
no exceptional abilities. However, there may be criminal adepts who are
not known mediums.

There was, in June, 1919, at Islip, Northampton, England, an occurrence
like the occurrences at Liverpool and Cupar. London *Daily Express*,
June 12, 1919—a loud detonation—basketful of clothes shooting into the
air. Then the clothes came down. There may be ineffective teleportative
seizures.

London *Daily Mail*, May 6, 1910—phenomena near Cantillana, Spain. From
ten o'clock in the morning until noon, May 4th, stones shot up from a
spot in the ground. Loud detonations were heard. "Traces of an extinct
volcano are visible at the spot, and it is believed that a new crater is
being formed." But there is no findable record of volcanic activity in
Spain, at this time—nor at any other time. I am reminded of the loud
noises that often accompany poltergeist disturbances.

In *Niles’ Weekly Register*, Nov. 4, 1815, there is an account of stones
that had been watched rising in a field, near Marbleton, Ulster County,
New York—that these stones had been seen to rise three or four feet from
the ground, then moving horizontally, from thirty to sixty feet.

Out in open fields, there have been showers of water, strictly
localized, and of unknown origin. A Dr. Neel will be heard from. He has
captured, not indefinitely alluded to insects, but *Proconia undata*
Fab. Every mystery has its fishmonger. Considered figuratively, he need
not be a seller of fish. His name may be Smith, or O'Brien, or it may be
Proconia Undata Fab.

But presumably in the wintertime, in England, members of the Proconia
family are not busy and available for explanations. In the *Chorley*
(Lancashire) *Standard*, Feb. 15, 1873, is a story of excitement in the
town of Eccleston. At Bank House, occupied by two elderly women and
their niece, streams of water started falling, about the first of
February, seemingly from ceilings. Furniture was soaked, and the
occupants of the house were alarmed. The falls seemed to come from the
ceiling, but "probably the most singular feature of the affair is that
ceilings were apparently quite dry." See

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

back to Mr. Grottendieck's story of objects that were appearing near a
ceiling, or roof, with no signs of penetrating the material. Workmen had
been called to the house, and had investigated, but were unable to
explain. Openness again. House packed with neighbors, watching the
showers. These data would make trouble for spiritualistic mediums and
their requirements for special, or closed, conditions, and at least
semi-darkness, if mediums were bothered by more than unquestioning or,
occasionally politely questioning, faith. If some of them have been
knocked about a bit, they were relatively few. Nobody in this house sat
in a cabinet. Nobody was a logician. Nobody reasonably argued that
chemists, for instance, must have special conditions, or their reactions
will not work out. "For instance," said nobody, "how could you develop a
photograph, except in the special conditions of darkness, or
semi-darkness?"

The look to me is that, throughout what is loosely called Nature,
teleportation exists, as a means of distribution of things and
materials, and that sometimes human beings have command, mostly
unconsciously, though perhaps sometimes as a development from research
and experiment, of this force. It is said that in savage tribes there
are "rain makers," and it may be that among savages there are
teleportationists. Some years ago, I'd have looked superior, if anybody
had said this to me but a good many of us are not so given to the
"tut-tut!" as we used to be. It may be that in civilized communities,
because of their storages, a power to attract flows of water, being no
longer needed, has virtually died out, still appearing occasionally,
however.

It could be that, in reading what most persons think are foolish little
yarns of falling stones, we are, visionarily, in the presence of cosmic
constructiveness—or that once upon a time this whole earth was built up
by streams of rocks, teleported from other parts of an existence. The
crash of falling islands—the humps of piling continents—and then the
cosmic humor of it all—or utmost spectacularity functioning, then
declining, and surviving only as a vestige—or that the force that once
heaped the peaks of the Rocky Mountains now slings pebbles at a couple
of farmers, near Trenton, N. J.

So I'd conceive of the existence of a force, and the use of it,
unconsciously mostly, by human beings. It may be that, if somebody,

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

gifted with what we think we mean by "agency," fiercely hates somebody
else, he can, out of intense visualizations, direct, by teleportation,
bombardments of stones upon his enemy.

Water falls on a tree, in Oklahoma. It is told of in an entomological
magazine. Water falls in a house in Eccleston. I read that in a
spiritualists’ periodical, though I went to a newspaper for the data.
These are the isolations, or the specializations, of conventional
treatments. I tell of water falling upon a tree, in Oklahoma, and of
water falling in a house, in Eccleston, and think that both phenomena
are manifestations of one force. It is my attempt to smash false
demarcations: to take data away from narrow and exclusive treatments by
spiritualists, astronomers, meteorologists, entomologists: also denying
the validity of usurpations of words and ideas by metaphysicians and
theologians. But my interest is not only that of a unifier: it is in
bringing together seeming incongruities, and finding that they have
affinity. I am very much aware of the invigoration of products of ideas
that are foreign to each other, if they mate. This is exogamy, practiced
with thoughts—to fertilize a volcanic eruption with a storm of frogs—or
to mingle the fall of an edible substance from the sky with the
unexplained appearance of Cagliostro. But I am a pioneer and no purist,
and some of these stud-stunts of introducing vagabond ideas to each
other may have about the eugenic value of some of the romances in houses
of ill fame. I cannot expect to be both promiscuous and respectable.
Later, most likely, some of these unions will be properly licensed.

Sometimes, in what I call "teleportations," there seems to be "agency"
and sometimes not. That the "agency" is not exclusively human, and has
nothing to do with "spirits of the departed" is indicated, I suppose, if
we accept that sometimes there are "occult powers" of trees. Some other
time I may be able more clearly to think out an expression upon flows of
pigeons to their homes, and flows of migratory birds, as teleportative,
or quasi-teleportative. My suggestion as to the frequently reported
"agency" of children, is that "occult forces" were, in earlier times of
human affairs, far more prevalent, and far more necessary to the help
and maintenance of human communities than they are now, with political
and economic mechanisms somewhat well-established, or working, after a

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

fashion; and that, wherein children are atavistic, they may be in
rapport with forces that mostly human beings have outgrown.

Though just at present I am no darling of the popes, I expect to end up
holy, some other time, with a general expression that all stories of
miracles are not lies, or are not altogether lies; and that in the
primitive conditions of the Middle Ages there were hosts of occurrences
that now, considerably, though not altogether, have been outgrown.
Anybody who broadly accepts the doctrine of relativity should accept
that there are phenomena that exist relatively to one age, that do not,
or do not so pronouncedly, exist in another age. I more or less accept a
great deal that religionists piously believe. As I see myself, I
represent a modernization of the old-fashioned atheist, who so
sweepingly denied everything that seemed to interfere with his
disbeliefs.

There are of course other explanations of the "occult powers" of
children. One is that children, instead of being atavistic, may
occasionally be far in advance of adults, foreshadowing coming human
powers, because their minds are not stifled by conventions. After that,
they go to school and lose their superiority. Few boy-prodigies have
survived an education.

The outstanding suggestion, which, however, like many other suggestions,
I cannot now develop, is that, if Teleportation exists, it may be used.
It may be criminally used, or it may be used commercially. Cargoes,
without ships, and freights, without trains, may be of the traffics of
the future. There may be teleportative voyages from planet to planet.

Altogether, so many of our data are bound up with jokes, hoaxes, and
flippant treatments that I think of the toy and play genesis of many
practical inventions. Billions of dollars are today seriously drawing
dividends from toys and games that were put to work. Billions of laughs
and jeers have preceded solemn expressions of satisfaction with fat bank
accounts. But this is only reasoning, and is nothing but logic and
argument, and there have been billions of laughs that never turned into
anything more satisfactory—though where do I get the idea that there is
anything more satisfactory than a laugh?

If, in other worlds, or in other parts of one relatively little
existence,

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

there be people who are far ahead of terrestrians, perhaps,
teleportatively, beings from other places have come to this earth. And
have seen nothing to detain them. Or perhaps some of the more degraded
ones have felt at home here, and have hung around, or have stayed here.
I'd think of these fellows as throw-backs: concealing their origin, of
course; having perhaps only a slightly foreign appearance; having
affinity with our barbarisms, which their own races had cast off. I'd
think of a feeling for this earth, in other worlds, as corresponding to
the desire of most of us, now and then, to go to a South Sea Island and
be degraded. Throw-backs, translated to this earth, would not, unless
intensely atavistic, take to what we regard as vices, but to what their
own far-advanced people regard as perhaps unmentionable, or anyway,
unprintable, degradations. They would join our churches, and wallow in
pews. They'd lose all sense of decency and become college professors.
Let a fall start, and the decline is swift. They'd end up as members of
Congress.

There is another view, for which I am now gathering material—*New York
Times*, Dec. 6, 1930—"Scores die; 300 stricken by poison fog in Belgium;
panic grips countryside. Origin complete mystery. War scenes recalled."
It may be that it was war.

Mostly, explanations by the scientists were just about what one would
expect, but, in the *New York Telegram*, December 6, Prof. H. H. Sheldon
was quoted—"If there is a widespread, lethal fog in the Meuse Valley,
the conclusion of science would be that it is being deliberately caused
by men or women."

It may be that inhabitants of other worlds, or other parts of one,
organic existence, have declared war upon this earth, and have
discharged down here, sometimes under cover of fogs, volumes of
poisonous gases. I have other records that may indicate something of
this kind, but, reluctantly, I give up this interesting notion, as
applied to the occurrence of Dec. 5, 1930, because it associates with
another phenomenon, of which I shall tell later.

Only two weeks after the tragedy in Belgium, appeared the fishmonger.
The writer of an editorial, in the *New York Herald Tribune*, Dec. 19,
1930, started the conventionalizing and the minimizing and the
obscurizing that always cloak events that are inconsistent

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

with a main norm of supposed knowledge. "One may suspect that a
sensational newspaper man, counting up the deaths, some dark day, in the
smoky steel towns on the Allegheny River, could produce a story not far
behind that from Belgium."

Seventy-seven men and women were struck dead in Belgium. Oh, there's
always some commonplace explanation for these occurrences, if we only
use our common sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5](lo05)
