[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo10)  [Next](lo12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11

<span class="smallcaps">Science</span> is very much like the Civil War,
in the U. S. A. No matter which side won, it would have been an American
victory. By Science, I mean conventionalization of alleged knowledge.
It, or maybe she, acts to maintain itself, or whatever, against further
enlightenment, or alleged enlightenment but when giving in, there is not
surrender, but partnership, and something that had been bitterly fought
then becomes another factor in its, or her, prestige. So, seventy years
ago, no matter whether evolutionists or anti-evolutionists had won, it
would have been a big, scientific victory anyway. No wonder so many of
us are humbled by a reputation that can't lose any way.

Science is a maw, or a headless and limbless stomach, an amoeba-like gut
that maintains itself by incorporating the assimilable and rejecting the
indigestible. There are whirlwinds and waterspouts, and it seems
acceptable that there have been rare occurrences of faintly luminous
owls. Then by a process of sorting over data, rejecting the
objectionable, and taking in the desirable, Science saves itself great
pains, because a bellyache is something that is only a gut in torment.
So, with alimentary treatments, a shower of living things

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

can always be made to assimilate with the whirlwind-explanation, and a
brilliant, electric thing can be toned down digestibly. In extreme cases
there is a secretion of fishmongers or gamekeepers.

In some cases of obstinate unassimilableness, it is supposed to be
necessary to swat a little girl. But I doubt the necessity, because
there is in human beings such a fondness, or sometimes such a passion,
for confessing, that sooner or later somebody will come forward with
almost any desired confession. Sometimes, from time to time, half a
dozen persons confess to having committed the same murder. The police
pay scarcely any attention any more to a new confession, in the matter
of the Hall murder, in New Jersey. There was a case, in an English
police court, of a man who had given himself up, as a deserter from the
army. But a policeman testified that this was his fifth or sixth
confession, and that he had never been in the army. The man admitted the
charge. "But," said he, "I have something else that I wish to confess."
"I'll hear no more of your confessions. Six months!" said the
magistrate. In some cases the incentive for false confessions is not
obvious, but in others it is obviously to come out of one's pale, yellow
glow, and be brilliant in limelight. There have been cases not quite of
confessions, but of somebody attributing to himself unexplained
occurrences, or taking advantage of them for various kinds of profit. I
accept that, if explorers from somewhere else should visit this earth,
and if their vessels, or the lights of their vessels, should be seen by
millions of the inhabitants of this earth, the data would soon be
conventionalized. If beings, like human beings, from somewhere else,
should land upon this earth, near New York, and parade up Broadway, and
then sail away, somebody, a year or so later, would "confess" that it
had been a hoax by him and some companions, who had dressed up for their
parts, and had jabbered, as they thought extramundanians should jabber.
New Yorkers would say that from the first they had suspected something
wrong. Who ever heard of distinguished foreigners coming to New York,
and not trying to borrow something? Or not coinciding with propaganda in
newspapers?

Probably, in August, 1929, an aeroplane from somewhere in Europe passed
over a jungle, and was reported, in a village, by a native.

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Savages are highly
scientific. They reason upon generalizations that are so exclusive as to
be nothing short of academic. They are as keen as any Newton, or
Einstein, in understanding that, in order to arrive at what is said to
be the known, they must start with something that they don't know about.
We'd have a pretty good idea of what the wisemen said, when they heard
the story of a vessel, probably occupied by passengers, that had been
seen in the sky, if we could accept that they could be so undignified as
to say anything

*New York Herald Tribune*, Aug. 29, 1929—a traveling light in the
sky—about 400 miles off the coast of Virginia. It was reported by Thomas
Stuart, third mate of the steamship *Coldwater*, of the South Atlantic
Steamship Line. "There was something that gave the impression that it
was a large, passenger craft." It was traveling at an estimated speed of
100 miles an hour, in the direction of Bermuda. There was an
investigation that "failed to reveal any trans-Atlantic or Bermuda
flight."

We shall have an expression upon luminous appearances that may have been
of a kind with the seeming creatures of the preceding chapter, or that
may belong in another category.

Before I could find out the date, and look the matter up, I came upon
several humorous allusions, in English newspapers, to a time when there
was a scare in England, because of moving lights in the sky. And all the
excitement was about the advertising scheme of an automobile
manufacturer, who had sent up an imitation-airship, with lanterns tied
to it. There was a lesson in this: presumably other alleged mysteries
could be explained in similar, commonplace terms.

I was doing one of my relatively minor jobs, which was going through the
London *Daily Mail*, for a period of about twenty-five years, when I
came upon this—

March 25, 1909—that, upon the 23rd of March, at 5:10 o'clock in the
morning, two constables, in different parts of the city of Peterborough,
had reported having seen an object, carrying a light, moving over the
city, with sounds like the sounds of a motor. In the *Peterborough
Advertiser*, March 27th, is published an interview with one of these
constables, who described "an object, somewhat oblong and narrow in
shape, carrying a powerful light." To suit whatever anybody should
prefer, I could give data to show that only

<span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

lights, and no object were seen, and that no sound was heard; or that a
vessel, carrying lights, was seen, and that sounds, like sounds of a
motor, were heard.

It is said, in the *Daily Mail*, May 17th, that many other stories of
unaccountable objects and lights in the sky had reached the office of
the *Mail*. If so, these stories were not published. The newspapers are
supposed to be avid for sensational news, but they have their
conventions, and unaccountable lights and objects in the sky are not
supposed to have sex, and it is likely that hosts of strange, but
sexless, occurrences have been reported, but have not been told of in
the newspapers. In the *Daily Mail*, it is said that no attention had
been paid to the letters, because everything that was mentioned in them,
as evidence, was unsatisfactory. It is said that the object reported at
Peterborough was probably a kite with a lantern tied to it. On the 15th
of May, a constable at Northampton had sent to headquarters a written
report upon lights that he had seen in the sky at 9 P.M.; but Chief
Constable Madlin had learned that a practical joker had sent up a fire
balloon.

The practical joker of Northampton, amusing himself at 9 o'clock in the
evening, is an understandable representative of his species; but some
other representative of his species, flying a kite and lanterns, at
Peterborough, at 5 o'clock in the morning, limiting his audience mostly
to milkmen, though maybe a joker, could not have been a very practical
joker. He must have been fond of travel. There were other reports from
various places in England and in Wales. There were reports from places
far apart.

*Daily Mail*, May 20—that a man, named Lithbridge, of 4 Roland Street,
Cardiff, Wales, had, in the office of the *Cardiff Evening Express*,
told a marvelous story. This story was that, upon the 18th of May, about
11 P.M., while walking along a road, near the Caerphilly Mountains,
Wales, he had seen, on the grass, at a side of the road, a large
tube-shaped construction. In it were two men, in heavy fur-overcoats.
When they saw Mr. Lithbridge, they spoke excitedly to each other, in a
foreign language, and sailed away. Newspaper men visited the place, and
found the grass trampled, and found a scattering of torn newspapers and
other débris.

If anybody else wants to think that these foreigners were explorers

<span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

from Mars or the moon, here is a story that of course can be reasoned
out quite, or almost, satisfactorily.

At any rate, still more satisfactorily it may be said that no foreigners
of this earth were sailing in the sky of Great Britain. In the *Western
Mail* (Cardiff), May 21st, is published an interview with Mr. C. S.
Rolls, the motorist, and the founder of the Aero Club, who gave his
opinion that some of the stories of a strange object in the sky were
hoaxes, but that not all of them could be explained so. Chiefly for the
reason that there was no known airship of this earth, with such powers
of flight, the reported observations were discredited, at least
sometimes, in all newspapers that I have looked at. In the London
*Weekly Dispatch*, May 23rd, the stories are so discredited, and it is
argued that to be seen so often, without having been seen to cross the
Channel, an airship would have to have a base in England, to which, in
view of the general excitement, it would certainly have been traced: a
base where it would be seen, "especially during the tedious
preliminaries of ascent." Then, in the *Weekly Dispatch*, are listed
reports from 22 places, in the week preceding the 23rd of May, and 19
reports earlier in May and in March.

Mr. Lithbridge was a Punch and Judy man. Perhaps his story was of some
profit to him. Not much attention was paid to it. But then came another
explanation.

Upon May 26th, it was told in the newspapers that the mystery of the
lights in the sky had been solved. A large imitation-airship had "come
down" at Dunstable, and the lights had been upon that. It was an
advertising scheme. An automobile manufacturer had been dragging the
thing around in England and Wales. There had been reports from Ireland,
but Ireland was omitted in this explanation. We are told that this
object, roped to an automobile, had been dragged along the roads,
amusingly exciting persons who were not very far advanced mentally. With
whatever degree of advancement mine may be, I suppose that such a thing
could be dragged slowly, and for a short time, perhaps only a few
minutes, because it was of hot-air-inflation, along a road, and
conceivably through a city or two, with a policeman, who reported lights
in the sky, not seeing a rope going up from an automobile: but, with
whatever degree of advancement that of mine may be, I do not think of
any such

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

successful imposition in about forty large cities, some of them several
hundred miles apart. No one at Dunstable saw or heard the
imitation-airship come down from the sky. An object, to which was tied a
card, upon which was a request to communicate with a London automobile
manufacturer, "in case of accident," was found in a field, morning of
May 26th.

The explanation, as I want to see it, is that probably the automobile
manufacturer took advantage of the interest in lights in the sky, and at
night dumped a contrivance into a field, having tied his card to it. If
so this was only one of many occurrences that have been exploited by
persons who had a liking, or a use, for publicity. Probably Mr. Cannell
and his dead owl can be so explained: and, though I should very much
like to accept Mr. Lithbridge's story, I fear me that we shall have to
consider him one of these exploiters. Also, there was the case of the
press agent, who, taking advantage of stories of a prowling animal, tied
tin wings and green whiskers to a kangaroo.

The range of the reported observations was from Ipswich, on the east
coast of England, to Belfast, Ireland, a distance of 350 miles: and, in
Great Britain, from Hull to Swansea, a distance of 200 miles. Perhaps a
gas bag could be dragged around a little, but the imitation-airship that
was found at Dunstable, was a flimsy contrivance, consisting of two
hot-air balloons, and a frame about 20 feet long, connecting them.

The lights in the sky were frequently reported, upon the same night,
from places far apart. Upon the night of May 9th, reports came from
Northampton, Wisbech, Stamford, and Southend. In the *Weekly Dispatch*,
May 23rd, it is pointed out that to be seen at Southend about 11 P.M.,
and then twenty minutes later, at Stamford, seventy miles away, the
object in the sky must have traveled at a rate of 210 miles an hour.

The question that comes up is whether, after the finding of the object
at Dunstable, or after a commonplace ending of a mystery, lights
continued to be seen traveling in the sky.

The stoppage was abrupt. Or the stoppage of publication of reports was
abrupt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12](lo12)
