[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo11)  [Next](lo13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_634">p. 634</span>

### 12

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> may be that upon new principles we can
account for the mystery of the *Marie Celeste*. If there is a selective
force, which transports stones exclusively, or larvae, and nothing but
larvae, or transports living things of various sizes, but nothing but
living things, such a selective force might affect a number of human
beings, leaving no trace, because unaffective to everything else.

I take from the report by the Queen's Proctor, in the Admiralty Court,
published in the London *Times*, Feb. 14, 1873. Upon the 5th of
December, 1872, between the Azores and Lisbon, the crew of the British
ship Dei Gratia saw a vessel, made out to be the American brigantine
*Marie Celeste*. Her sails were set, and she was tacking, but so
erratically that attention was attracted. Whether ships are really
females, or not, this one looked so helpless, or woebegone, that all
absence of male protection was suspected. The Britons shoved out and
boarded the vessel. There was nobody aboard. There was findable nothing
by which to account for the abandonment. "Every part of the vessel,
inside and outside, was in good order and condition." In the log book,
the latest entry, having in it no suggestion of impending trouble of any
kind, was dated November 25th. There was no sign of any such trouble as
mutiny. A phial of oil, used by the captain's wife, upon a sewing
machine, stood upright, indicating that there had been no rough weather.
Investigation of this mystery was world-wide. The State Department of
the United States communicated with all representatives abroad, and
every custom house in the world was more or less alert for information
of any kind: but fourteen persons, in a time of calm weather, and under
circumstances that gave no indication of any kind of violence,
disappeared, and either nothing, or altogether too much, was found out.
I have a collection of yarns, by highly individualized liars, or artists
who scorned, in any particular, to

<span id="page_635">p. 635</span>

imitate one another; who told, thirty, forty, or fifty years later, of
having been members of this crew.

London *Times*, Nov. 6, 1840—the *Rosalie*, a large French ship, bound
from Hamburg to Havana—abandoned ship—no clew to an explanation. Most of
the sails set—no leak—valuable cargo. There was a half-starved canary in
a cage.

But I suggest that, with our hints of Teleportation, we are on the wrong
track. Crews of vessels have disappeared, and vessels have disappeared.
It may be that something of which the inhabitants of this earth know
nothing, is concerned in these disappearances, or seizures.

In the *New York Sun*, April 24, 1930, the French astronomer and
meteorologist, Gen. Frederic Chapel, is quoted, saying that aircraft,
missing at sea, and seacraft, may have been struck by meteors. That
there is something of the unexplained in these disappearances, many
writers have felt. But there is no recorded instance of aircraft, flying
over land, having been struck by a meteor, and I know of few instances
of reported falls of meteoric matter upon vessels, and no instance of a
vessel that has been much damaged by a meteor.

The disappearance of the *Cyclops*, a fuel ship of the U. S. N., even
though in war time, is considered mysterious—some time after March 4,
1918, after leaving Barbados, B. W. I., for Hampton Roads, Va.

When the *Titanic* went down, April 15, 1912, flotsam was reported
months afterward, and there were many survivors: but, after the
disappearance of the White Star steamship, the *Naronic*, in February,
1893, two empty lifeboats, supposed to be hers, were reported by a sea
captain, and nothing more was seen. In the report by the London Board of
Trade, it was considered highly improbable that the *Naronic* had struck
an iceberg. It was said that this vessel was "almost perfect," in
construction and equipment. She was a freighter, with 75 men aboard.
There were life belts for all.

*New York Times*, June 21, 1921—disappearance of three American
ships—difficult to think of piracy—seemed to be no other
explanation—five departments of the Washington Government investigating.
In February, the *Carol Deering*, a five-masted schooner, of Portland,
Me., had gone ashore, near Diamond Shoals, North Carolina.

<span id="page_636">p. 636</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The mystery is
similar to that of the *Marie Celeste*. Nobody aboard. Everything was in
good condition. The circumstance that attracted most attention was that
the crew had disappeared about the time a meal was to be served. A
little later, a bottle was picked up on shore, and in it was a message
purporting to have been written by the mate of the vessel. "An
oil-burning tanker has boarded us, and placed our crew in irons. Get
word to headquarters of the Company at once." Just how somebody in irons
could get a container for a message makes me wonder: still, if it's a
bottle, they say that that could be got by anybody in double irons.

In the London *Daily Mail*, June 22, the finding of another bottle, with
a message in it, is told of—from the Captain of the Deering, this
time—that he had been taken prisoner by the crew, and had been put upon
another vessel.

After the *Waratah* "mysteriously disappeared," off the coast of South
Africa, July, 1909, five bottles, all said to be hoaxes, were found.
There is as much complication and bafflement in this subject, as in
anything that Science is said absolutely to have proved. If some of us
tire of our existence, and would like to try some other existence, they
had better think it over, because anything merrier than ours is hard to
conceive of. Every shipwreck, or any other catastrophe, brings out
merrymakers. The tragedy of the *Waratah* was enjoyed a long time. More
than thirteen years later (Nov. 21, 1922) another bottle, said to be a
hoax, was found near Cape Town. Still, I am affected just the other way,
and am taking on a new pessimism. Heretofore I have thought cheerfully
of bottles. But there's a depression from anything, once the humorists
get ahold of it. I wonder how comes it that nobody has reported finding
an old bottle, and in it a sea captain's account of an impending mutiny,
signed "Christopher Columbus."

*New York Times*, June 22, 1921—"More ships added to the
mystery-list—almost simultaneous disappearances, without a trace,
regarded as significant." *Times*, June 24—about a dozen vessels in the
list.

And yet such a swipe by an unknown force, of the vessels of a nation,
along its own coast, was soon thought of no more. Anything could occur,
and if not openly visible, or if observed by mil.

<span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

lions, would soon be gulfed in forgetfulness. Or soon it would be
conventionalized. In the year 1921, it was customary to accuse the
Russians. I think that the climax was reached, in the year 1927, when
unruliness of natives in the jungles of Peru was attributed to Russian
agents. Still, I suppose that, for years, whenever there is revolt
against misrule and oppression, propagandists will tell us the same old
yarn of otherwise contented natives, misled by those Russians. In June,
1921, the way of explaining the disappearance of a dozen vessels was by
saying that it was thought that the Soviet Government was stealing them.

It may be that constructions from somewhere else have appeared upon this
earth, and have seized crews of this earth's ships.

In their book, *The Cruise of the Bacchante*, the two young princes,
sons of the Prince of Wales, one of them now the King of England, tell
of "a strange light, as if of a phantom vessel all aglow" that was, at
four o'clock, morning of the 11th of June, 1881, between Melbourne and
Sydney, reported by the lookout of the *Bacchante*. The unknown
appearance was seen by twelve other members of the crew. Whether there
be relation, or not, five hours later, the lookout fell from a crosstree
and was killed.

*Brooklyn Eagle*, Sept. 10, 1891—something that was seen, at
Crawfordsville, Indiana, 2 A.M., Sept. 5th. Two icemen saw it. It was a
seemingly headless monster, or it was a construction, about 20 feet
long, and 8 feet wide, moving in the sky, seemingly propelled by
fin-like attachments. It moved toward the icemen. The icemen moved. It
sailed away, and made such a noise that the Rev. G. W. Switzer, pastor
of the Methodist church, was awakened, and, looking from his window, saw
the object circling in the sky.

I supposed that there was no such person as the Rev. G. W. Switzer.
Being convinced that there had probably never been a Rev. G. W. Switzer,
of Crawfordsville—and taking for a pseudo-standard that if I'm convinced
of something that is something to suspect—I looked him up. I learned
that the Rev. G. W. Switzer had lived in Crawfordsville, in September,
1891. Then I found out his present address in Michigan. I wrote to him,
and received a reply that he was traveling in California, and would send
me an account of what he had seen in the sky, immediately after
returning

<span id="page_638">p. 638</span>

home. But I have been unable to get him to send that account. If anybody
sees a "headless monster" in the sky, it is just as well to think that
over, before getting into print. Altogether, I think that I make here as
creditable and scientific a demonstration as any by any orthodox
scientist, so far encountered by us. The problem is: Did a "headless
monster" appear in Crawfordsville, in September, 1891? And I publish the
results of my researches: "Yes, a Rev. G. W. Switzer did live in
Crawfordsville, at the time."

I'd like to know what Mr. W. H. Smith saw, Sept. 18, 1877, in the sky,
moving over the city of Brooklyn. It looked like a winged human form
(*New York Sun*, Sept. 21, 1877).

*Zoologist*, July, 1868—something that was seen in the sky, near
Copiapo, Chile—a construction that carried lights, and was propelled by
a noisy motor—or "a gigantic bird; eyes wide open and shining like
burning coals; covered with immense scales, which clashed together with
a metallic sound."

I don't know what will be thought generally of our data, but in the *New
York Times*, July 6, 1873, the writer of *General Notes* tells of
something that he considered "the very worst case of
[delirium](errata.htm#1) tremens on record." This was before my time. He
copied from the *Bonham* (Texas) *Enterprise*—that a few days before the
time of writing, a man living 5 or 6 miles from Bonham, had told of
having seen something like an enormous serpent, floating over his farm;
and that other men working in the fields had seen the thing and had been
frightened. I suppose that, equally deliriously, inhabitants of the
backwoods of China, would similarly describe one of this earth's
airships floating over their farms. I don't know that this one account,
considered alone, amounts to anything, but, in the Times, of the 7th of
July, I found something else noted. A similar object had been reported
from Fort Scott, Kansas. "About half way above the horizon, the form of
a huge serpent, apparently perfect in form, was plainly seen."

*New York Times*, May 30, 1888—reports from several places, in
Darlington County, South Carolina—huge serpent in the sky, moving with a
hissing sound, but without visible means of propulsion.

In the London *Daily Express*, Sept. 1, 1922, it is said that, upon
September 9th, John Morris, coxswain of the Barmouth (Wales)

<span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Life Boat, and
William James, looking out at sea, from the shore, at Barmouth, saw what
they thought was an aeroplane falling into the ocean. They rushed out in
a motor boat, but found nothing. In the *Barmouth Advertiser*, of the
14th, it is said that this object had fallen so slowly that features
described as features of an aeroplane had been seen. In newspapers and
aeronautical journals of the time, there is no findable record of an
aeroplane of this earth reported missing.

There was a series of occurrences, in the summer of 1910. Early in July,
the crew of the French fishing smack, *Jeune Frédéric*, reported having
seen, in the sky, off the coast of Normandy, a large, black, bird-like
object. Suddenly it fell into the sea, bounded back, fell again, and
disappeared, leaving no findable traces. Nothing was known of the flight
of any terrestrial aircraft, by which to explain (London *Weekly
Dispatch*, July 10). Upon August 17th (London *Times*, August 19)
laborers at work in the forest east of Dessau, Germany, saw in the sky
an object that they thought was a balloon. It suddenly flamed, and
something that was thought to be its car, fell into the forest. The
Chief Forester was notified, and a hunt, on a large scale, was made, but
nothing was found. Aeronautical societies reported that no known balloon
had been sent up. It was thought that the object must have been
somebody's large toy balloon. About this time, the fall from the sky of
a white cylinder of marble was reported. One of us pioneers, or whatever
we are, Mr. F. T. Mayer, looked up this matter, and learned that the
reported occurrence was upon the farm of Mr. Daniel Lawyer, Rural Route
4, Westerville, Ohio. I wrote to Mr. Lawyer, asking whether the object
could be considered artificial. I had an idea that it might, or might
not, be a container of a message that had been fired to this earth from
Mars or the moon or somewhere else. Mr. Lawyer did not like the
suggestion of artificiality, which he interpreted as meaning that he had
picked up something that had been made in Ohio. He said that it was not
an artificial object, but a meteorite. For a reproduction of a
photograph of this symmetric, seemingly carved cylinder, 12 inches long,
weight about 3 pounds, see *Popular Mechanics*, 14-801. About 9 P.M.,
August 30th—lights as if upon an airship, moving over New York City
(*New York World*, August

<span id="page_640">p. 640</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 31). Aviators were
interviewed, but all known aircraft were accounted for. *World*,
September 2—that two men had sent up a large kite. Upon the 21st of
September (*New York Tribune*, September 22) a great number of round
objects were seen passing from west to east over the lower part of New
York City. Crowds stood in the streets, watching them. They were thought
to be little balloons. I have records of similar objects, in large
numbers, that could not be considered little balloons. For several hours
this procession continued. If somebody in Jersey City was advertising,
he kept quiet in his bid for publicity. The next day, at Dunkirk, N. Y.,
an object, described as an unknown cigar-shaped balloon, was seen in the
sky, over Lake Erie, seeming to be unmanageable, gradually disappearing,
late in the evening. There was so much excitement in Dunkirk that
tugboats went out and searched all night. Toronto *Daily Mail and
Empire*, September 24—that someone on a tugboat had found a large
box-kite, which had been sent up by a party of campers, and was
undoubtedly the reported object.

Mr. A. H. Savage-Landor, in *Across Unknown South America*, vol. II, p.
425, tells a story that was told to him, by the people of Porto
Principal, Peru, in January, 1912—that, some years before, a ship had
been seen in the sky, passing over the town, not far above the tree
tops. According to his interpretations, it was a "square globe," flying
a flag of Stars and Stripes. Mr. Savage-Landor thinks that the object
might have been the airship, which, upon Oct. 17, 1910, Wellman
abandoned about 400 miles east of Hatteras. In newspaper accounts of
this unsuccessful attempt to cross the Atlantic, it is said that, when
abandoned, this airship was leaking gas rapidly. If a vessel from
somewhere else, flying the Stars and Stripes, is pretty hard to think
of, except by thinking that there are Americans everywhere, also the
"square globe" is not easy, at least for the more conventional of us.
Probably these details are faults of interpretation. Whatever this thing
in the sky may have been, if we will think that it may have been, it
returned at night, and this time it showed lights.

In the New York newspapers, September, 1880, are allusions to an unknown
object that had been seen traveling in the sky, in several places,
especially in St. Louis and Louisville. I have

<span id="page_641">p. 641</span>

not been able to get a St. Louis newspaper of this time, but I found
accounts in the *Louisville Courier-Journal*, July 29, Aug. 6, 1880.
Unless an inventor of this earth was more self-effacing than biographies
of inventors indicate, no inhabitant of this earth succeeded in making a
dirigible aerial contrivance, in the year 1880, then keeping quiet about
it. The story is that, between 6 and 7 o'clock, evening of July 28th,
people in Louisville saw in the sky "an object like a man, surrounded by
machinery, which he seemed to be working with his hands and feet." The
object moved in various directions, ascending and descending, seemingly
under control. When darkness came, it disappeared. Then came dispatches,
telling of something that had been seen in the sky, at Madisonville, Ky.
"It was something with a ball at each end." "It sometimes appeared in a
circular form, and then changed to an oval. It passed out of sight,
moving south."

These are stories of at least harmless things that were, or were not,
seen over lands of this earth. It may be that if beings from somewhere
else would seize inhabitants of this earth, wantonly, or out of
curiosity, or as a matter of scientific research, the preference would
be for an operation at sea, remote from observations by other humans of
this earth. If such beings exist, they may in some respects be very
wise, but—supposing secrecy to be desirable—they must have neglected
psychology in their studies, or unconcernedly they'd drop right into
Central Park, New York, and pick up all the specimens they wanted, and
leave it to the wisemen of our tribes to explain that there had been a
whirlwind, and that the Weather Bureau, with its usual efficiency, had
published warnings of it.

Now and then admirers of my good works write to me, and try to convert
me into believing things that I say. He would have to be an eloquent
admirer, who could persuade me into thinking that our present expression
is not at least a little fanciful; but just the same I have labored to
support it. I labor, like workers in a beehive, to support a lot of
vagabond notions. But how am I to know? How am I to know but that
sometime a queen-idea may soar to the sky, and from a nuptial flight of
data, come back fertile from one of these drones?

<span id="page_642">p. 642</span>

In the matter of the disappearance of the Danish training ship
*Kobenhoven*, which, upon Dec. 14, 1928, sailed, with fifty cadets and
sailors aboard, from Montevideo, I note that another training ship, the
*Atalanta* (British) set sail, early in the year 1880, with 250 cadets
and sailors aboard, from Bermuda, and was not heard of again.

Upon Oct. 3, 1902, the German bark, *Freya*, cleared from Manzanillo for
Punta Arenas, on the west coast of Mexico. I take from *Nature*, April
25, 1907. Upon the 20th of October, the ship was found at sea, partly
dismasted, lying on her side, nobody aboard. The anchor was still
hanging free at her bow, indicating that calamity had occurred soon
after the ship had left port. The date on a calendar, on a wall of the
Captain's cabin, was October 4th. Weather reports showed that there had
been only light winds in this region. But upon the 5th, there had been
an earthquake in Mexico.

Several weeks after the disappearance of the crew of the *Freya*,
another strange sea-occurrence was reported.

*Zoologist*, 4-7-38—that, according to the log of the steamship *Fort
Salisbury*, the second officer, Mr. A. H. Raymer, had, Oct. 28, 1902, in
Lat. 5°, 31´ S., and Long. 4°, 42´ W., been called, at 3:05 A.M., by the
lookout, who reported that there was a huge, dark object, bearing lights
in the sea ahead. Two lights were seen. The steamship passed a slowly
sinking bulk, of an estimated length of five or six hundred feet.
Mechanism of some kind—fins, the observers thought—was making a
commotion in the water. "A scaled back" was slowly submerging.

One thinks that seeing for such details as "a scaled back" could not
have been very good, at three o'clock in the morning. So doubly damned
is this datum that the attempt to explain it was in terms of the
accursed Sea Serpent.

Phosphorescence of the water is mentioned several times, but that seems
to have nothing to do with two definite lights, like those of a vessel.
The Captain of the *Fort Salisbury* was interviewed. "I can only say
that he (Mr. Raymer) is very earnest on the subject, and has, together
with the lookout and helmsman, seen something in the water, of a huge
nature, as specified."

<span id="page_643">p. 643</span>

One thinks that this object may have been a large, terrestrial vessel
that had been abandoned, and was sinking.

I have looked over *Lloyd's List*, for the period, finding no record, by
which to explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13](lo13)
