[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo14)  [Next](lo16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> every organism, there are, in its
governance as a whole, mysterious transportations of substances and
forces, sometimes in definite, circulatory paths, and sometimes
specially, for special needs. In the organic view, Teleportation is a
distributive force that is acting to maintain the balances of a whole;
with the seeming wastefulness sometimes, and niggardliness sometimes, of
other forces: providing, or sometimes providing, new islands with
vegetation, and new ponds with fishes: Edens with Adams, and Adams with
Eves; always dwindling when other mechanisms become established, but
surviving sporadically.

Our expression is that once upon a time, showers of little frogs were
manifestations of organic intelligence, in the choice of creatures that
could survive, in the greatest variety of circumstances, if indefinitely
translated from place to place. They'd survive in water, or

<span id="page_668">p. 668</span>

on land; in warmth, or in coldness. But, if organic intelligence is like
other intelligence, there is no understanding it, except as largely
stupid; and, if it keeps on sending little frogs to places where they're
not wanted, we human phenomena cheer up, thinking of the follies of
Existence, itself. I have never done foolisher, myself, than did Nature
when it, or she—probably she—fatally loaded the tusks of mammoths, and
planted a tree on the head of the Irish elk, losing species for the sake
of displays. By intelligence I mean nothing that can be thought of as
exclusively residing in, or operating in, brain substance: I mean
equilibration, or adaptation, which pervades all phenomena. The
scientific intelligence in human brains, and the physiologic
intelligence that pervades the bodies of living things, wisely-foolishly
acts to solve problems, and somewhere in the beauty of a theorem, or of
a peacock, lurks the grotesque. When Nature satisfies us critics with
such a graceful stroke as a swimming seal, she fumbles her seal on land.

But there is another view. We apologizing theologians always have
another view. Cleverness and stupidity are relative, and what is said to
be stupidity has functional value. To keep on sending little frogs,
where, so far as can be seen, there is no need for little frogs, is like
persistently, if not brutally, keeping right on teaching Latin and
Greek, for instance. What's that for? Most of the somewhat good writers
know little of either. According to my experience, both of these
studies, if at all extended, are of no active value, except to somebody
who wants to write up to the highest and noblest standards of the past,
and considers himself literary. But this is an expression upon the
functions of stupidity. It is likely that showers of little frogs, and
the vermiform appendix, and classical studies are necessary for the
preservation of continuity between the past and the present. Some
persons, who know nothing about it, must for ages go on piously
believing in Sir Isaac Newton's doctrine. People who go to fortune
tellers and people who go to church are functioning conservatives. If
the last platypus or the last churchgoer should die off, there would be
broken continuity. It would be a crack in existence. Perhaps to this
day, a chink is stuffed with iguanas, which are keeping alive the
dinosaur-strain. Why is it that, when one's mind is not specializing
upon anything,

<span id="page_669">p. 669</span>

it is given to recalling past experiences? It is preserving continuity
with the past, or is preserving whatever one can be thought of, as
having, of identity. We shall have instances of the interruption of this
process, in human minds. Perhaps if Existence should stop sending little
frogs, and stop teaching Latin and Greek, a whole would be in a state of
amnesia. Our expression is that Teleportation is enormously useful to
life upon this earth, but our data have been, and for a while will
continue to be, mostly of its vagaries, or its conservations.

If our existence is an organism, it would seem that it must be one of
the most notorious old rascals in the cosmos. It is a fabric of lies.
Everywhere it conjures up appearances of realness and finality and
trueness—words that I use as synonyms for one state—and then, when
examined, everything is found not to be real, or final, or true, but to
be depending upon something else, or some other chimera, merging away,
and losing its appearance of individuality, into everything else, or
every other fraud. That this pseudo-individualizing may in some cases
realize itself is a view that I am not taking up in this book. Here it
is our concern to find out, if we think we can, whether we be the
phenomena of an organism, or not. Whether that organism be producing
something, or be graduating realness out of the phenomenal, is a
question that I shall take up some other time.

Imposture pervades all things phenomenal. Everything is a mirage.
Nevertheless, accepting that there is continuity, I cannot accept that
anybody ever has been an absolute impostor. If he's a Tichborne
Claimant, after a while he thinks that there may be some grounds for his
claims. If good and evil are continuous, any crime can be linked with
any virtue. Imposture merges away into self-deception so that only
relatively has there ever been an impostor.

Every scientist who has played a part in any developing science has, as
can be shown, if he's been dead long enough, by comparing his views with
more modern views, deceived himself. But there have been cases that look
more flagrant. To what degree did Haeckel doctor illustrations in his
book, to make a theory work out right? What must one think of Prof.
Kammerer? In August, 1926, he was accused of faking what he called
acquired characters

<span id="page_670">p. 670</span>

on the feet of toads. In September, he shot himself. The only polite way
of explaining Prof. Smyth, Astronomer Royal of Scotland, who founded a
cult upon his measurements of the Great Pyramid, is to say that his
measuring rod must have slipped. If in his calculations, Prof. Einstein
made the error that two distinguished mathematicians say he made, but,
if eclipses came out, as they should come out, as reported by
astronomers who did not know of the error, there is very good
encouragement for anybody to keep on deceiving himself.

I can draw no line between imposture and self-deception. I can draw no
line between anything phenomenal and anything else phenomenal, even
though I accept that also there are lines. But there are scientists who
have deceived others so rankly that it seems an excess of good manners
to say that also they deceived themselves. If among scientists there
have been instances of rank imposture, we shall expect to come upon much
imposture in our data of irresponsible persons. The story told by Prof.
Martino-Fusco, of Naples, when, in August, 1924, he announced that he
had discovered the 109 missing volumes of Livy's *History of Rome*, is
not commonly regarded as imposture, because when the Professor could not
produce the missing volumes, his explanation that he had been indiscreet
was published and accepted. This scientist's indiscretion was glossed
over, as in the time of full power of the preceding orthodoxy, the
indiscretion of any priest was hushed up. The impression went abroad
that all that was wrong was that the Professor had been too ardent, or
so hopeful of finding the books that prematurely he had announced having
found them. But there are other impressions. They are of credulous
American millionaires, and of the unexpected interest that the Italian
Government showed in the matter.

What about the other Professors, who told that they had seen the
volumes? See *Current Literature*, 77-594. Here is published a facsimile
of four lines, which Dr. Max Funcke said that he had copied from one of
the manuscripts, which according to Prof. Fusco's explanation, he had
only hoped to find. I can find no explanation by Dr. Funcke.

One explanation is that perhaps there was not forgery, and that

<span id="page_671">p. 671</span>

perhaps the volumes were found, and by evasion of representatives of the
Italian Government, are in the collection of a silent, American
millionaire, today. But I do not think that collectors care much for
treasures that they can't tell about.

The tale of an itch—Dr. Grimme and the inscribed stone—and the
irritation it was to a pious Professor, until he was able to translate
it, as it should be translated. In the year 1923, Dr. Grimme, Professor
of Semitic Languages, at the University of Munich, sent out good cheer
to the faithful. God, who had been doing poorly, got a boost. Dr. Grimme
announced that, from an inscribed stone, which had been discovered in a
temple, at Sinai, he had deciphered the story of the rescue of the
infant Moses, from the Nile, by an Egyptian Princess.

London *Observer*, Oct. 25, 1925—a letter from Sir Flinders Petrie—that
Dr. Grimme had made his translation by adding cracks in the stone, and
some of its weather marks, to the hieroglyphics—that, in one division of
the inscription he had "translated" as many scratches as he had
veritable characters, to make the thing come out right.

If Dr. Grimme alleviated an itch with scratches, that is the temporary
way by which problems always have been said to be solved.

Only to be phenomenal is to be at least questionable. Any scientist who
claims more is trying to register divinity. If Life cannot be positively
differentiated from anything else, the appearance of Life itself is
deception. If, in mentality, there is no absolute dividing-line between
intellectuality and imbecility, all wisdom is partly idiocy. The seeker
of wisdom departs more and more from the state of the idiot, only to
find that he is returning. Belief after belief fades from his mind: so
his goal is the juncture of two obliterations. One is of knowing
nothing, and the other is of knowing that there is nothing to know.

But here are we, at present not so wise as no longer to have ideas.
Suppose we accept that anything phenomenal ever has developed, though
only relatively, into considerable genuineness, or a good deal of a look
of genuineness, so long as it is not examined. But it began in what we
call fraudulency. Everybody who can

<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>

exceptionally do anything, began with a pose, with false claims, and
with extreme self-deception. Our expression is that, in human affairs,
rank imposture is often a sign of incipiency, or that astrologers,
alchemists, and spiritualistic mediums are forerunners of what we shall
have to call values, if we can no longer believe in truths. It could be
that, with our data, we tell of nothing but lies, and at the same time
be upon the track of future values.

Snails, little frogs, seals, reindeer have mysteriously appeared. The
standardized explanation of mysterious human strangers, who have
appeared at points upon this earth, acting as one supposes inhabitants
of some other world would act, if arriving here, or acting as
inhabitants of other parts of this earth, transported in a state of
profound hypnosis, would probably act, is that of imposture. Having
begun with a pretty liberal view of the prevalence of impostors, I am
not going much to say that the characters of our data were not
impostors, but am going to examine the reasons for saying that they
were. If, except fraudulently, some of them never have been explained
conventionally, we are just where we are in everything else that we take
up, and that is in the position of having to pretend to think for
ourselves.

The earliest of the alleged impostors in my records—for which, though
not absolutely, I draw a dead line at the year 1800—is the *Princess
Caraboo*, if not Mary Willcocks, though possibly Mrs. Mary Baker, but
perhaps Mrs. Mary Burgess, who, the evening of April 3, 1817, appeared
at the door of a cottage, near Bristol, England, and in an unknown
language asked for food.

But I am not so much interested in whether the *Princess*, or Mary, was
a rascal, as I am in the reasons for saying that she was. It does not
matter whether we take up a theorem in celestial mechanics, or the case
of a girl who jabbered, we come upon the bamboozlements by which
conventional thought upon this earth is made and preserved.

The case of the angles in a triangle that equal two right angles has
never been made out: no matter what refinements of measurement would
indicate, ultra-refinement would show that there had been errors.
Because of continuity, and because of discontinuity, nothing has ever
been proved. If only by making a very bad

<span id="page_673">p. 673</span>

error to start with, Prof. Einstein's prediction of the curvature of
lights worked out as it should work out, we suspect, before taking up
the case of the *Princess Caraboo* that the conventional conclusion in
her case was a product of mistakes.

That the *Princess Caraboo* was an impostor—first we shall take up the
case, as it has been made out:

London *Observer*, June 10, 1923—that the girl, who spoke
unintelligibly, was taken before a magistrate, Samuel Worrall, of Knowle
Park, Bristol, who, instead of committing her as a vagrant, took her to
his home. It is not recorded just what Mrs. Worrall thought of that. It
is recorded that the girl was at least what is said to be "not
unprepossessing." When questioned the "mysterious stranger" wrote in
unknown characters, many of which looked like representations of combs.
Newspaper correspondents interviewed her. She responded with a fluency
of "combs," and a smattering of "bird cages" and "frying pans." The news
spread, and linguists traveled far to try their knowledge, and finally
one of them was successful. He was "a gentleman from the East Indies,"
and, speaking in the Malay language to the girl, he was answered. To him
she told her story. Her name was *Caraboo*, and one day while walking in
her garden in Java, she was seized by pirates, who carried her aboard a
vessel, from which, after a long imprisonment, she escaped to the coast
of England. The story was colorful with details of Javanese life. But
then Mrs. Willcocks, not of Java, but of a small town in Devonshire,
appeared and identified her daughter Mary. Mary broke down and
confessed. She was not prosecuted for her imposture: instead, Mrs.
Worrall was so kind as to pay her passage to America.

Mostly our concern is in making out that this case was not made out—or,
more widely, that neither this nor any other case ever has been made
out—but I notice a little touch of human interest entering here. I
notice that we feel a disappointment, because Mary broke down and
confessed. We much prefer to hear of impostors who stick to their
impostures. If no absolute line can be drawn between morality and
immorality, I can show, if I want to, that this touch of rascality in
all of us—or at any rate in me—is a virtuous view, instead. So when an
impostor sticks to his

<span id="page_674">p. 674</span>

imposture, and we are pleased, it is that we approve a resolutely
attempted consistency, even when applied to a fabric of lies. Provided I
can find material enough, I can have no trouble in making it appear
"reasonable," as we call it, to accept that Mary, or the Princess,
confessed, or did not confess, or questionably confessed.

*Chambers’ Journal*, 66-753—that *Caraboo*, the impostor, had told her
story of alleged adventures, in the Malay language. Farther along, in
this account—that the girl had spoken in an unknown language.

This is an inconsistency worth noting. We're on the trail of
bamboozlement, though we don't have to go away back to the year 1817 to
get there. We hunt around. We come upon a pamphlet, entitled *Caraboo*,
published by J. M. Cutch, of Bristol, in the year 1817. We learn in this
account, which is an attempt to show that Caraboo was unquestionably an
impostor, that it was not the girl, but the "gentleman from the East
Indies," whose name was Manuel Eyenesso, who was the impostor, so far as
went the whole Javanese story. To pose as a solver of mysteries, he had
pretended that to his questions, the girl was answering him in the Malay
language, and pretending to translate her gibberish, he had made up a
fanciful story of his own.

*Caraboo* had not told any story, in any known language, about herself.
Her writings were not in Malay characters. They were examined by
scientists, who could not identify them. Specimens were sent to Oxford,
where they were not recognized. Consequently, the "gentleman from the
East Indies" disappeared. We are told in the pamphlet that every Oxford
scholar who examined the writings, "very properly and without a moment's
hesitation, pronounced them to be humbug." That is swift propriety.

If the elaborate story of the Javanese Princess had been attributed to a
girl who had told no understandable story of any kind, it seems to us to
be worth while to look over the equally elaborate confession, which has
been attributed to her. It may be that regretfully we shall have to give
up a notion that a girl had been occultly transported from the planet
Mars, or from somewhere up in Orion or Leo, but we are seeing more of
the ways of suppressing mysteries.

<span id="page_675">p. 675</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The mad fishmonger
of Worcester shovels his periwinkles everywhere.

According to what is said to be the confession, the girl was Mary
Willcocks, born in the village of Witheridge, Devonshire, in the year
1791, from which at the age of 16 she had gone to London, where she had
married twice. It is a long, detailed story. Apparently the whole story
of Mary's adventures, from the time of her departure from Witheridge, to
the time of her arrival in Bristol, is told in what is said to be the
confession. Everything is explained—and then too much is explained. We
come to a question that would be an astonisher, if we weren't just a
little sophisticated, by this time—

By what freak of accomplishment did a Devonshire girl learn to speak
Javanese?

The author of the confession explains that she had picked up with an
East Indian, who had taught her the language.

If we cannot think that a girl, who had not even pretended to speak
Javanese, would explain how she had picked up Javanese, it is clear
enough that this part of the alleged confession is forgery. I explain it
by thinking that somebody had been hired to write a confession, and with
too much of a yarn for whatever skill he had, had overlooked the exposed
imposture of the "gentleman from the East Indies."

All that I can make of the story is that a girl mysteriously appeared.
It cannot be said that her story was imposture, because she told no
intelligible story. It may be doubted that she confessed, if it be
accepted that at least part of the alleged confession was forgery. Her
mother did not go to Bristol and identify her, as, for the sake of a
neat and convincing finish, the conventionalized story goes. Mrs.
Worrall told that she had gone to Witheridge, where she had found the
girl's mother, who had verified whatever she was required to verify.
*Caraboo* was shipped away on the first vessel that sailed to America;
or, as told in the pamphlet, Mrs. Worrall, with forbearance and charity,
paid her passage far away. In Philadelphia, somebody took charge of her
affairs, and, as if having never heard that she was supposed to have
confessed, she gave exhibitions, writing in an unknown language. And I
wouldn't give half this

<span id="page_676">p. 676</span>

space to the story of the *Princess Caraboo*, were it not for the
epitomization, in her story, of all history. If there be God, and if It
be ubiquitous, there must be a jostle of ubiquities because the
Fishmonger of Worcester, too, is everywhere.

I should like to think that inhabitants of other worlds, or other parts
of one existence, have been teleported to this earth. How I'd like it,
if I were teleported the other way, has nothing to do with what I'd like
to think has befallen somebody else. But I can't say that our own
stories, anyway so far, have the neat and convincing finish of the
conventional stories. Toward the end of the year 1850, a stranger, or I
should say a "mysterious stranger," was found wandering in a village
near Frankfort-on-the-Oder. How he got there, nobody knew. See the
*Athenaeum*, April 15, 1851. We are told that his knowledge of German
was imperfect. If the imperfections were filled out by another Manuel
Eyenesso, I fear me that suggestions of some new geographical, or
cosmographical, knowledge can't develop. The man was taken to Frankfort
where he told his story, or where, to pose as a linguist, somebody told
one for him. It was told that his name was Joseph Vorin, and that he had
come from *Laxaria*. *Laxaria* is in *Sakria*, and *Sakria* is far from
Europe—"beyond vast oceans."

In the London *Daily Mail*, Sept. 18, 1905, and following issues, are
accounts of a young man who had been arrested in Paris, charged with
vagrancy. It was impossible to understand him. In vain had he been tried
with European and Asiatic languages, but, by means of signs, he had made
known that he had come from *Lisbian*. *Eisar* was the young man's word
for a chair: a table was a *lotoba*, and his *sonar* was his nose. Mr.
George R. Sims, well-known criminologist, as well as a story writer,
took the matter up scientifically. As announced by him, the mystery had
been solved by him. The young man, an impostor, had transposed letters,
in fashioning his words. So the word *raise*, transposed, becomes
*eisar*. But what has a raise to do with a chair? It is said that true
science is always simple. A chair raises one, said Mr. Sims, simply. Now
take the word *sonar*. As we see, when Mr. Sims points it out to us,
that word is a transposition of the word *snore*, or is almost. That's
noses, or relation to noses.

<span id="page_677">p. 677</span>

The criminologists are not banded like some scientists. In Paris, the
unbanded wisemen said that Mr. Sims’ transpositions were farfetched.
With a freedom that would seem reckless to more canny scientists, or
without waiting three or four months to find out what each was going to
say, they expressed opinions. The savants at Glozel, in the year 1927,
were cannier, but one can't say that their delays boosted the glories of
science. One of the wisemen of Paris, who accused Mr. Sims of fetching
too far, was the eminent scientist, M. Haag. "Take the young man's word
*Odir*, for *God*," said M. Haag: "transpose that, and we have *Dio*, or
very nearly. *Dio* is Spanish for *God*. The young man is Spanish."
Another distinguished wiseman was M. Roty. He rushed into print, while
M. Haag was still explaining. "Consider the word *sacar*, for *house*,"
said M. Roty. "Unquestionably we have a transposition of the word
*casa*, with a difference of only one letter, and *casa* is Italian for
*house*. The young man is Italian." *Le Temps*, September 18—another
wiseman, a distinguished geographer, this time, identified the young man
as one of the Russian Doukhobors.

Where would we be, and who would send the young ones to school, if all
the other wisemen of our tribes had such independence? If it were not
for a conspiracy that can be regarded as nothing short of providential,
so that about what is taught in one school is taught in the other
schools, one would spend one's lifetime, learning and unlearning, in
school after school. As it is, the unlearning can be done, after leaving
one school.

The young man was identified by the police, as Rinaldo Agostini, an
Austrian, whose fingerprints had been taken several times before,
somewhere else, when he had been arrested for vagrancy.

Whether the police forced this mystery to a pseudo-conclusion, or not, a
suggestive instance is told of, in the London *Daily Express*, Oct. 16,
1906. A young woman had been arrested in Paris, charged with picking
pockets, and to all inquiries she answered in an unknown language.
Interpreters tried her with European and Asiatic languages, without
success, and the magistrate ordered her to be kept under surveillance,
in a prison infirmary. Almost immediately, watchers reported that she
had done exactly what they

<span id="page_678">p. 678</span>

wanted to report that she had done—that she had talked in her sleep, not
mumbling in any way that might be questionable, but speaking up "in
fluent French, with the true Parisian accent." If anybody thinks that
this book is an attack upon scientists, as a distinct order of beings,
he has a more special idea of it than I have. As I'm seeing things,
everybody's a scientist.

If there ever have been instances of teleportations of human beings from
somewhere else to this earth, an examination of inmates of infirmaries
and workhouses and asylums might lead to some marvelous astronomical
disclosures. I suppose I shall be blamed for a new nuisance, if after
the publication of these notions, mysterious strangers start cropping
up, and when asked about themselves, point up to Orion or Andromeda.
Suppose any human being ever should be translated from somewhere else to
this earth, and should tell about it. Just about what chance would he
have for some publicity? I neglected to note the date, but early in the
year 1928, a man did appear in a town in New Jersey, and did tell that
he had come from the planet Mars. Wherever he came from, everybody knows
where he went, after telling that.

But, if human beings ever have been teleported to this earth from
somewhere else, I should think that their clothes, different in cut and
texture, would attract attention. Clothes were thought of by Manuel
Eyenesso. He pretended that *Caraboo* had told him that, before arriving
in Bristol, she had exchanged her gold-embroidered, Javanese dress for
English clothes. Whatever the significance may be, I have noted a number
of "mysterious strangers," or "wild men," who were naked.

A case that is mysterious, and that may associate with other mysteries,
was reported in the London newspapers (*Daily Mail*, April 2; *Daily
News*, April 3, 1923). It was at the time that Lord Carnarvon was dying,
in Cairo, Egypt, of a disease that physicians said was septic pneumonia,
but that, in some minds, was associated with the opening of
Tut-Ankh-Amen's tomb. Upon Lord Carnarvon's estate, near Newbury,
Hampshire, a naked man was running wild, often seen, but never caught.
He was first seen, upon March 17th. Upon March 17th, Lord Carnarvon fell
ill, and he died upon

<span id="page_679">p. 679</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> April 5th. About
April 5th, the wild man of Newbury ceased to be reported.

If human beings from somewhere else ever have been translated to this
earth—

There are mysteries at each end, and in between, in the story of
Cagliostro.

He appeared in London, and then in Paris, and spoke with an accent that
never has been identified with any known language of this earth. If,
according to most accounts of him, he was Joseph Balsamo, a Sicilian
criminal, who, after a period of extraordinarily successful imposture,
was imprisoned in Rome, until he died, that is his full life-story.

The vagueness of everything—and the merging of all things into
everything else, so that stories that we, or some of us, have been
taking, as "absolutely proved," turned out to be only history, or merely
science. Hosts of persons suppose that the exposure of Cagliostro, as an
impostor, is as firmly, or rationally, established, as are the
principles of geology, or astronomy. And it is my expression that they
are right about this.

Wanted—well, of course, if we could find data to support our own
notions—but, anyway, wanted—data for at least not accepting the
conventionalized story of Cagliostro:

See Trowbridge's story of Cagliostro. According to Trowbridge, the
identification of Cagliostro was fraudulent. At the time of the
*Necklace Affair*, the police of Paris, needing a scapegoat, so
"identified" him, in order to discredit him, according to Trowbridge. No
witness appeared, to identify him. There was no evidence, except that
handwritings were similar. There was suggestion, in the circumstance
that Balsamo had an uncle, whose name was Giuseppe Cagliostro. One
supposes that a police official, whose labors were made worth while by
contributions from the doctors of Paris, searched records until he came
upon an occurrence of the name of Cagliostro in the family of a
criminal, and then went on from that finding. Then it was testified that
the handwritings of Balsamo and Cagliostro were similar. For almost
everybody's belief that of course Cagliostro was identified as Joseph
Balsamo, there

<span id="page_680">p. 680</span>

is no more than this for a base. In February, 1928, the New York
newspapers told of a graphologist, who had refused to identify
handwriting, according to the wishes of the side that employed him.
According to all other cases that I have ever read of, anybody can get,
for any handwriting, any identification that he pays for. If in any
court, in any land, any scientific pronouncement should be embarrassing
to anybody, that is because he has been too stingy to buy two expert
opinions.

Cagliostro appeared, and nothing more definite can be said of his
origin. He rose and dominated, as somebody from Europe, if transported
to a South Sea Island, might be expected to capitalize his superiority.
He was hounded by the medical wisemen, as Mesmer was hounded by them,
and as anybody who, today, would interfere with flows of fees, would be
hounded by them. Whether in their behalf, or because commonplace endings
of all mysteries must be published, we are told, in all conventional
accounts, that Cagliostro was an impostor, whose full life-story is
known, and is without mystery.

It is said that, except where women were concerned, where not much can
be expected, anyway, Cagliostro had pretty good brains. Yet we are told
that, having been identified as an Italian criminal, he went to Italy.

There are two accounts of the disappearance of Cagliostro. One is a
matter of mere rumors: that he had been seen in Aix-les-Bains; that he
had been seen in Turin. The other is a definite story that he went to
Rome, where, as Joseph Balsamo, he was sent to prison. A few years
later, when Napoleon's forces were in Rome, somebody went to the prison
and investigated. Cagliostro was not there. Perhaps he had died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16](lo16)
