[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo16)  [Next](lo18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_686">p. 686</span>

### 17

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> interpreters of dreams, I can't say
that we have ambitions, but I think of one dream that many persons have
had, repeatedly, and it may have relation to our present subject. One is
snoring along, amidst the ordinary marvels of dreamland—and there one
is, naked, in a public place, with no impression of how one got there.
I'd like to know what underlies the prevalence of this dream, and its
disagreeableness, which varies, I suppose, according to one's opinion of
oneself. I think that it is sub-conscious awareness of something that
has often befallen human beings, and that in former times was commoner.
It may be that occult transportations of human beings do occur, and
that, because of their selectiveness, clothes are sometimes not
included.

"Naked in the street—strange conduct by a strange man." See the
*Chatham* (Kent, England) *News*, Jan. 10, 1914. Early in the evening of
January 6th—"weather bitterly cold"—a naked man appeared, from nowhere
that could be found out, in High Street, Chatham.

The man ran up and down the street, until a policeman caught him. He
could tell nothing about himself. "Insanity," said the doctors, with
their customary appearance of really saying something.

I accept that, relatively, there is insanity, though no definite lines
can be drawn as to persons in asylums, persons not in asylums, and
persons not yet in asylums. If by insanity is meant processes of thought
that may be logical enough, but that are built upon false premises, what
am I showing but the insanity of all of us? I accept that as extremes of
the state that is common to all, some persons may be considered insane:
but, according to my experience with false classifications, or the
impossibility of making anything but false classifications, I suspect
that many persons have been put away, as insane, simply because they
were gifted with uncommon insights, or had been through uncommon
experiences. It may

<span id="page_687">p. 687</span>

be that, hidden under this cloakery, are the subject-matters of
astonishing, new inquiries. There may be stories that have been told by
alleged lunatics that some day will be listened to, and investigated,
leading to extraordinary disclosures. In this matter of insanity, the
helplessness of science is notorious, though it is only of the
helplessness of all science. Very likely the high-priced opinions of
alienists are sometimes somewhat nearly honest: but, as in every other
field of so-called human knowledge, there is no real standard to judge
by: there is no such phenomenon as insanity, with the noumenal quality
of being distinct and real in itself. If it should ever be somewhat
difficult to arrange with professional wisemen to testify either for or
against any person's sanity, I should have to think that inorganic
science, in this field, may not be so indefinite.

This naked man of Chatham appeared suddenly. Nobody had seen him on his
way to his appearing-point. His clothes were searched for, but could not
be found. Nowhere near Chatham was anybody reported missing.

Little frogs, showers of stones, and falls of water—and they have
repeated, indicating durations of transportory currents to persisting
appearing-points, suggesting the existence of persisting
disappearing-points somewhere else. There is an account, in the London
*Times*, Jan. 30, 1874, of repeating disappearances of young men, in
Paris. Very likely, as a development of feminism, there will be female
Bluebeards, but I don't think of them away back in the year 1874. "In
every case, their relatives and friends declare that they were unaware
of any reason for evasion, and the missing persons seem to have left
their homes for their usual avocations."

A field, somewhere near Salem, Va., in the year 1885—and that in this
field there was a suction. In the *New York Sun*, April 25, 1885, it is
said that Isaac Martin, a young farmer, living near Salem, Va., had gone
into a field, to work, and that he had disappeared. It is said that in
this region there had been other mysterious disappearances. In Montreal,
in July and August, 1892, there were so many unaccountable
disappearances that, in the newspapers, the headline "Another Missing
Man" became common. In July, 1883, there was a similar series, in
Montreal. London Evening Star. Nov.

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 2,
1926—"mysterious series of disappearances—eight persons missing, in a
few days." It was in and near Southend. First went Mrs. Kathleen Munn,
and her two small children. Then a girl aged 15—girl aged 16, girl aged
17, another girl aged 16. Another girl, Alice Stevens, disappeared. "She
was found in a state of collapse, and was taken to hospital."

*New York Sun*, Aug. 14, 1902—disappearances, in about a week, of five
men, in Buffalo, N. Y.

Early in August, 1895, in the city of Belfast, Ireland, a little girl
named Rooney disappeared. Detectives investigated. While they were
investigating, a little boy, named Webb, disappeared. Another child
disappeared. September 10—disappearance of a boy, aged seven, named
Watson. Two days later, a boy, named Brown, disappeared. See the *Irish
News* (Belfast), September 20. In following issues of this newspaper, no
more information is findable.

London *Daily Mirror*, Aug. 5, 1920—"Belfast police are in possession of
the sensational news that eight girls, all under twelve years of age,
are missing since last Monday, week, from the Newtownards-road, East
Belfast."

In August, 1869, English newspapers reported disappearances of 13
children, in Cork, Ireland. I take from the *Tiverton Times*, August 31.
It may be that the phenomenon cannot be explained in terms of local
kidnapers, because somewhere else, at the same time, children were
disappearing. London *Daily News*, August 31—excitement in Brussels,
where children were disappearing.

Five "wild men" and a "wild girl" appeared in Connecticut, about the
first of January, 1888. See the *St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, January 5,
and the *New York Times*, Jan. 9, 1888.

I have records of six persons, who, between Jan. 14, 1920, and Dec. 9,
1923, were found wandering in or near the small town of Romford, Essex,
England, unable to tell how they got there, or anything else about
themselves. I have satisfactorily come upon no case in which somebody
has stated that he was walking, say, in a street in New York, and was
suddenly seized upon and set down somewhere, say in Siberia, or Romford.
I have come upon many cases like that of a man who told that he was
walking along Euston Road, London, and—but nine months later—when next
he

<span id="page_689">p. 689</span>

was aware of where he was, found himself working on a farm, in
Australia. If human beings ever have been teleported, and, if some
mysterious appearances of human beings be considered otherwise
unaccountable, an effect of the experience is effacement of memory.

There have been mysterious appearances of children in every land. In
India, the explanation of appearances of children of an unknown past is
that they had been brought up by she-wolves.

There have been strange fosterings: young rabbits adopted by cats, and
young pigs welcomed to strangely foreign founts. But these cases are of
maternal necessity, and of unlikely benevolence, and we're asked to
believe in benevolent she-wolves. I don't deny that there is, to some
degree, benevolence in wolves, cats, human beings, ants: but benevolence
is erratic, and not long to be depended upon. Sometimes I am benevolent,
myself, but pretty soon get over it. The helplessness of a human infant
outlasts the suckling period of a wolf. How long do she-wolves, or any
of the rest of us, keep on being unselfish, after nothing's made by
unselfishness?

For an account of one of the later of the "wolf children" of India (year
1914) see *Nature*, 93-566. In the *Zoologist*, 3-12-87, is an account
of a number of them, up to the year 1852. In the *Field*, Nov. 9, 1895,
the story of the "wolf child" of Oude is told by an Assistant
Commissioner, who had seen it. It was a speechless, little animal, about
four years old. Policemen said that, in a wolf's den, they had found
this child, almost devoid of human intelligence. The child grew up and
became a policeman. In *Human Nature*, 7-302, is a story of two "wolf
children" that were found at different times, near Agra, Northern India.
Each was seven or eight years old. For a recent case, see the London
*Observer*, Dec. 5, 1926. Hindus had brought two "wolf children," one
aged two, and the other about eight years old, to the Midnapore
Orphanage. The idea of abandonment of young idiots does not look so
plausible, in cases of more than one child. Also, in a case of several
children, a she-wolf would seem very graspingly unselfish. The children
crawled about on all fours, ate only raw meat, growled, and avoided
other inmates of the Orphanage. I suppose that they ate only raw meat,
because to confirm a theory that was all they got.

<span id="page_690">p. 690</span>

London *Daily Mail*, April 6, 1927—another "wolf child"—boy aged
seven—found in a cave, near Allahabad. For an instance that is the
latest, at this writing, see the *New York Times*, July 16, 1927.
Elephant youngsters and rhinoceros brats have still to be heard of, but,
in the London *Morning Post*, Dec. 31, 1926, is a story of a "tiger
child." A "leopard boy" and a "monkey girl" are told of, in the London
*Observer*, April 10, 1927.

Our data are upon events that have astonished horses and tickled
springboks. They have shocked policemen. I have notes upon an outbreak
of ten "wild men," who appeared in different parts of England, in that
period of extraordinary phenomena, the winter of 1904-5. One of them, of
origin that could not be found out, appeared in a street in Cheadle. He
was naked. An indignant policeman, trying to hang his overcoat about the
man, tried to reason with him, but had the same old trouble that Euclid
and Newton and Darwin had, and that everybody else has, when trying to
be rational, or when trying, in the inorganic, or scientific, way, to
find a base to argue upon. I suppose the argument was something like
this—

Wasn't he ashamed of himself?

Not at all. Some persons might have reasons for being ashamed of
themselves, but he had no reason for being ashamed of himself. What's
wrong with nakedness? Don't cats and horses and dogs go around without
clothes on?

But they are clothed with natural, furry protections.

Well, Mexican dogs, then.

Let somebody else try—somebody who thinks that, as products of logic,
the teachings of astronomy, biology, geology, or anything else are
pretty nearly final, though with debatable minor points, to be sure. Try
this simple, little problem to start with. Why shouldn't the man walk
around naked? One is driven to argue upon the basis of conventionality.
But we are living in an existence, which itself may be base, but in
which there are not bases. Argue upon the basis of conventionality, and
one is open to well-known counter-arguments. What is all progress but
defiance of conventionality?

The policeman, in Euclid's state of desperation, took it as self-evident
disgracefulness. Euclid put theorems in bags. He solved

<span id="page_691">p. 691</span>

problems by encasing some circumstances in an exclusion of whatever
interfered with a solution. The policeman of Cheadle adopted the
classical method. He dumped the "wild man" into a sack, which he dragged
to the station house.

Another of these ten "wild men" spoke in a language that nobody had ever
heard of before, and carried a book, in which were writings that could
not be identified, at Scotland Yard. Like a traveler from far away, he
had made sketches of things that he had seen along the roads. At
Scotland Yard, it was said of the writings: "They are not French,
German, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, Hungarian, Turkish. Neither are they
Bohemian, Greek, Portuguese Arabic, Persian, Hebrew, nor Russian." See
London newspapers, and the *East Anglian Daily Times*, Jan. 12, 1905.

I have come upon fragments of a case, which I reconstruct:

Perhaps in the year 1910, and perhaps not in this year, a Hindu magician
teleported a boy from somewhere in England, perhaps from Wimbledon,
London, perhaps not. The effect of this treatment was of mental
obliteration; of profound hypnosis, or amnesia. The boy could learn, as
if starting life anew, but mostly his memory was a void. Later the
magician was dying. He repented, and his problem was to restore the boy,
perhaps not to his home, but to his native land. He could not tell of
the occult transportation, but at first it seemed to him that nobody
would believe a story of ordinary kidnaping. It would be a most
improbable story: that, in London, a Hindu had kidnaped a boy, and on
the way to India had spent weeks aboard a vessel with this boy, without
exciting inquiry, and with ability to keep the boy from appealing to
other passengers. Still, a story of kidnaping is a story in commonplace
terms. No story of ordinary kidnaping could account for the boy's lapsed
memory, but at the most some persons would think that some of the
circumstances were queer, and would then forget the matter.

For fragments of this story, see *Lloyd's Sunday News* (London), Oct.
17, 1920. Sometime in the year 1917, the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel, in Nepal, India, received a message from a native priest,
who was dying, and wanted to tell something. With the priest was a
well-grown boy. The priest told that, about the year 1910, in a street
in Wimbledon (South London) he had kidnaped

<span id="page_692">p. 692</span>

this boy. Details of a voyage to India not given. The boy was taken to
Gorakapur, and was given employment in a railway workshop. He could
speak a little English, but had no recollection of ever having been in
England.

This is the account that the Society sent to its London representative,
Mrs. Sanderson, Earl's Court, London. A confirmation of the story, by
Judge Muir, of Gorakapur, was sent. Mrs. Sanderson communicated with
Scotland Yard.

*Lloyd's Sunday News*, October 24—"boy not yet identified by Scotland
Yard. An even more extraordinary development of the story is that quite
a number of boys disappeared in Wimbledon, ten years ago." It is said
that the police had no way of tracing the boy, because, in Scotland
Yard, all records of missing children were destroyed, after a few years.
I have gone through the *Wimbledon News*, for the year 1910, without
finding mention of any missing child. Someone else may take a fancy to
the job, for 1909, or 1911. In *Thomson's Weekly News*, Oct. 23, 1920,
there are additional details. It is said that without doubt the boy was
an English boy: as told by the priest, his Christian name was Albert.

*Hants and Sussex News*, Feb. 25, 1920—"one of the most sensational
discoveries and most mysterious cases of tragedy that we have ever been
called upon to record"—a naked body of a man, found in a plowed field,
near Petersfield, Hampshire, England.

The mystery is in that there had not been a murder. A body had not been
thrown from a car into this field. Here had appeared a naked man, not in
possession of his senses. He had wandered, and he had died. It was not
far from a road, and was about a mile from the nearest house. Prints of
the man's bare feet were traced to the road, and across the road into
another field. Police and many other persons searched for clothes, but
nothing was found. A photograph of the man was published throughout
England, but nobody had seen him, clothed or unclothed, before the
finding of the body. At the inquest, the examining physician testified
that the body was that of a man, between 35 and 40; well-nourished, and
not a manual worker; well-cared-for, judging from such particulars as
carefully trimmed finger nails. There were scratches upon the body, such
as would be made by bushes and hedges, but there was no wound

<span id="page_693">p. 693</span>

attributable to a weapon, and in the stomach there was no poison, nor
drug. Death had been from syncope, due to exposure. "The case remains
one of the most amazing tragedies that could be conceived of."

This mystery did not immediately subside. From time to time there were
comments in the newspapers. London *Daily News*, April 16—"Although his
photograph has been circulated north, east, south, and west, throughout
the United Kingdom, the police are still without a clew, and there is no
record of any missing person, bearing the slightest resemblance to this
man, presumably of education and good standing."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18](lo18)
