[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo25)  [Next](lo27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26

<span class="smallcaps">Horses</span> erect in a blizzard of frogs—and
the patter of worms on umbrellas. The hum of lady birds in England—the
twang of a swarm of Americans, at Templemore, Ireland. The appearance of
Cagliostro—the appearance of Prof. Einstein's theories. A policeman
dumps a wild man into a sack—and there is alarm upon all continents of
this earth, because of a blaze in a constellation—

That all are related, because all are phenomena of one, organic
existence—just as, upon Aug. 26, 1883, diverse occurrences were related,
because all were reactions to something in common.

Aug. 26, 1883—people in Texas excitedly discussing a supposed war in
Mexico—young men in Victoria, Australia, watching a snowstorm, the first
time in their lives—crowds of Chinamen hammering

<span id="page_781">p. 781</span>

on gongs—staggering sailors in a vessel, off the Cape of Good Hope.

I have data for thinking that, somewhere beyond this earth, and not
enormously far away, there was, before these occurrences, an eruption.
About August 10th, of this year 1883, at various places, appeared
"afterglows" that cannot be traced to terrestrial eruptions. Upon the
13th of August, an "afterglow" was reported from Indiana, and, ten days
later, from California (*Monthly Weather Review*, 1883-289). Upon the
21st and 22nd, "afterglows" appeared in South Africa (*Knowledge*,
5-418).

There was no known eruption upon this earth, by which to explain these
atmospheric effects, but there was a disturbance upon this earth, and
the circumstances were similar to those in Italy, in April, 1872. The
volcano Krakatoa, in Java, was in a state of minor activity. It was not
considered alarming.

Upon the 25th of August, a correspondent to the *Perth* (Western
Australia) *Inquirer*—see *Nature*, 29-388—was traveling far inland, in
Western Australia. He was astonished to see ashes falling from the sky,
continuing to fall, all afternoon. If this material came from regions
external to this earth, it came down, hour after hour, as if to a point
upon a stationary earth. An attempt to explain was that there may have
been an eruption in some little-known part of Australia. In Australian
newspapers, there is no mention of an eruption in Australia, at this
time; and in my own records, there is only one instance, and that one
doubtful, of an eruption in Australia, at any time. I am not here
including New Zealand. There was, at this time, no eruption in New
Zealand.

Krakatoa was in a state of minor activity. Wisemen from Batavia,
localizing, like the wisemen at Vesuvius, in April, 1872, were studying
only Krakatoa. Considered as a thing in itself, out of relation with
anything else, conditions here were not alarming. The natives were told
that there was no danger—and natives—Columbia University, or east side,
west side, New York City—or Java—believe what the wisemen tell them.

April 19, 1872—the dust of unknown origin that fell from the sky—it
preceded, by one day, the eruption of Vesuvius.

<span id="page_782">p. 782</span>

Aug. 25, 1883—the ashes of unknown origin that fell from the sky

August 26—Krakatoa exploded. It was one of this world's biggest noises,
and surrounding mountains doffed their summits. Or, like a graduating
class at Annapolis, they fired off their peaks, which came down, as new
reefs in the ocean. The bombs that shot out were like meteors. The
mountain was a stationary meteor-radiant, and shot out *Krakatoatids*.
Had the winds gone upward, the new meteor stream would have been also of
houses and cattle and people. The explosion shattered shores so that all
charts were useless.

Krakatoa paused.

Early in the morning of the 27th, the Straits of Sunda went up. The
units of its slaughters were villages. 95 villages went up, in waves
that were 90 feet high, 100 feet high, 120 feet high. From the 95
villages, tens of thousands of humans were recruited, and they went dead
into warring confusions. In the gigantic waves, armies of the dead were
flung upon each other. There was no more knowledge of what it was all
about than in many other battles. Charges of dead men rushed down the
waves, and were knocked into rabbles by regiments spouting up from the
bottom. Onslaughts of corpses—and in the midst of them appeared green
fields that were the tops of palm trees. Raiders in thousands dashed
over momentary meadows, and there were stampedes that were as senseless
as the charges.

Stone clouds were rolling over the conflict. Furies of dead men were
calming under bulks of pumice, and slimy palm trees were protruding. The
waves were going down under pressures of pumice, twenty feet deep, in
places. Battlefields on land have, after a while, turned quiet with
graveyards: but change in the Straits of Sunda was of the quickest of
mortuary transitions. The waves were pressed flat by pumice. There was a
gray slab of stone over the remains of the people of 95 villages. Black
palms, heavy with slime, drooped on each side of this long, gray slab.

By volcanic dust, the sun was dimmed so that unseasonable coldness
followed. In places in Victoria, Australia, where for twenty-five years
snow had not been seen, snow fell. I'd like to have this

<span id="page_783">p. 783</span>

especially noted—that at places far away, the volcanic bombs were
mistaken for meteors—or they were meteors. An account of volcanic bombs
from Krakatoa, which looked like "shooting stars," as seen from a
vessel, about 90 miles from the volcano, is published in the *Cape
Times* (Weekly Edition), Oct. 3, 1883. At Foochow, China, the glare in
the sky was like an aurora borealis. For this record, which is important
to us, see the *Rept. Krakatoa Committee*, Roy. Soc., p. 269. People in
Texas heard sounds, as if of a battle. Off the Cape of Good Hope,
vessels lurched in waves from the catastrophe.

It is my expression that the explosion of Krakatoa was stimulated by, or
was a reaction to, an eruption in a land of stars that is not enormously
far away. Afterglows that were seen after August 26th were attributed to
Krakatoa—

That the preceding afterglows and the fall of ashes were of materials
that drifted to this earth, from an eruption somewhere else, passing
over a distance that cannot be considered vast, in a few weeks, or a few
days—

And that the light of a volcanic eruption somewhere in the sky was seen
by people of this earth.

See the *Perth Inquirer*, October 3—a correspondent tells of several
observations, early in September, upon a brilliant light that had been
seen in the sky, near the sun. There was a beam of light from it, and
the observers thought that it was a comet. This appearance is described
as conspicuous. If so, it was seen at no Observatory in Australia.

The circumstance that no professional astronomer in Australia saw this
brilliant light brings up, in any normally respectful mind, doubt that
there was such a light. But this appearance in the sky is the central
datum of our expression, and I am going to make acceptable that, even
though it was reported only by amateurs, there was at this time a
conspicuous new appearance in the heavens. New Zealand—silence in the
Observatories—but reports from amateurs, upon a "very large" light in
the sky. See the *New Zealand Times*, Sept. 20, 1883. That a yarn in
Australia could quickly spread to New Zealand? Ceylon—an unknown light
that was seen in the sky of Ceylon, about a week after the eruption of
Krakatoa (*Madras Athenaeum*, September 22). *Straits Times*, October
13—an appearance

<span id="page_784">p. 784</span>

like a comet, in the sky, at Samarung, where the natives and the Chinese
were terrified, and burned incense for protection from it.
England—observation, upon the night of August 28th, by Captain Noble, a
well-known amateur astronomer. Whatever the professionals of Australia
and New Zealand were doing, the professionals of England were doing
likewise, if doing nothing is about the same wherever it's done. In
*Knowledge*, 4-173, Capt. Noble tells of a sight in the heavens that he
describes as "like a new and most glorious comet." An amateur in
Liverpool saw it. *Knowledge*, 4-207—an object that looked like the
planet Jupiter, with a beam from it. However, one professional
astronomer did report something. Prof. Swift, at Rochester, N. Y., saw,
nights of September 11 and 13, an object that was supposed by him to be
a comet, but if so, it was not seen again (*Observatory*, 6-343).

There was a beam of light from this object: so it was thought to be a
comet. See coming data upon beams of light that have associated with new
stars.

The first observation upon a new light in the sky was two nights after
the explosion of Krakatoa. It may have been shining, conspicuous but
unseen, at the time of the eruption.

The matter of the supposed velocity of light, or the hustle of
visibility, comes up in the mind of a conventionalist. But, if in the
past, scientists have determined the velocity of light to be whatever
suited their theories, I feel free for any view that I consider
suitable. Look it up, and find that once upon a time the alleged
velocity of light agreed with supposed distances in this supposed solar
system, and that when changed theories required changes in these
distances, the velocity of light was cut down to agree with the new
supposed distances. In the kindergarten of science, the more or less
intellectual infants who have made these experiments have prattled
anything that the child-like astronomers have wanted them to prattle. A
conventionalist would say that, even if there were a new star, at a time
of terrestrial catastrophe, light of it would not be seen upon this
earth, until years later. My expression is that so close to this earth
are the stars that when a new star appears, or erupts, effects of it are
observable upon this earth, and that, whether because of closeness, or
because there is no velocity of light, it is seen

<span id="page_785">p. 785</span>

immediately—or is seeable immediately—if amateurs happen to be looking.

Upon the night of Aug. 6, 1885, while all the professional astronomers
of this earth were attending to whatever may be professional
astronomical duties, a clergyman made an astronomical discovery. The
Rev. S. H. Saxby looked up at a new star, in the nebula of Andromeda,
and he saw it.

There is much of uppishness to anybody who says, or announces, that of
all cults his cult is *the* aristocrat. But most of his upward looking
is likely to be at the supposed altitude of himself. All over this
earth, professional astronomers were looking up at themselves. In
England and Ireland, three amateurs, besides the Rev. S. H. Saxby, being
probably of only ordinary conceit, looked up beyond themselves, and saw
the new star. For the records, see the *English Mechanic*, of this
period. Whatever the professional astronomers of the United States were
looking up at, they saw nothing new. But somebody, in the U. S. A., did
see the new star. *Sidereal Messenger*, 4-246—an amateur in Red Wing,
Minnesota. It was not until August 31st that upness in an Observatory
related to the stars. Finally a professional astronomer either looked
up, or woke up; or waking up, looked up; or looking up, woke up.

The whole nebula of Andromeda shone with the light of the new star.
Several observers thought that the newly illuminated nebula was a comet
(*Observatory*, 8-330). From the light of the new star the whole
formation lighted up, like a little West Indian island, at a time of an
eruption in it. According to conventionalists, this nebula is 60 × 60 ×
24 × 365 × 8 × 186,000 miles in diameter, and light from a new star,
central in it, would occupy four years in traversing the whole. But as
if because this nebula may not be so much as 60 × 186,000 inches in
diameter, no appreciable time was occupied, and the whole formation
lighted up at once.

Other indications—whatever we think we mean by "indications"—that the
nebula of Andromeda is close to this earth:

Sweden—and it was reported that wild fowl began to migrate, at the
earliest date (August 16th) ever recorded in Sweden—

Flap of a wild duck's wings—and the twinkles of a star—the star

<span id="page_786">p. 786</span>

and the bird stammered a little story that may some day be vibrated by
motors, oscillating back and forth from Vega to Canopus. So the birds
began to fly.

It was because of unseasonable coldness in Sweden. Unseasonable coldness
is a phenomenon of this earth's volcanic eruptions. It is attributed to
the shutting off of sunlight by volcanic dusts. The temperature was
lower, in Sweden, than ever before recorded, in the middle of August
(*Nature*, 32-427). Upon August 31st, the new star reached maximum
brilliance, and upon this date the temperature was the lowest that it
had ever been known to be, in the last of August, in Scotland (Nature,
32-495).

All very well—except that unusual coldness may be explained in various
ways, having nothing to do with volcanoes

See *Nature*, 32-466, 625—that nine days after the first observation
upon the new star in Andromeda, an afterglow was seen in Sweden. There
is no findable record of a volcanic eruption, upon this earth, to which
this phenomenon could be attributed. September 3rd, 5th, 6th—afterglows
appeared in England. These effects continued to be seen in Sweden, until
the middle of September.

I don't know whether these data are enough to jolt our whole existence
into a new epoch, or not. From what I know of the velocity of thought, I
should say not.

If a volcanic discharge did drift from Andromeda to Sweden, it came from
a northern constellation to a northern part of this earth, as if to a
part of this earth that is nearest to a northern constellation. But, if
Andromeda were trillions of miles away, no part of this earth could be
appreciably nearer than any other part, to the constellation. If
repeating afterglows, in Sweden, were phenomena of repeating arrivals of
dust, from outer space, they so repeated in the sky of one part of this
earth, because this earth is stationary.

I note that I have overlooked the new star in Cygnus, late in the year
1876. Perhaps it is because this star was discovered by a professional
astronomer that I neglected it. However, I shall have material for some
malicious comments. Upon the night of Nov. 24, 1876, Dr. Schmidt, of the
Athens Observatory, saw, in the constellation Cygnus, a new star. It was
about third magnitude, and increased to about second. Over all the
Observatories of this earth,

<span id="page_787">p. 787</span>

this new star was shining magnificently, but it was not until December
9th that any other astronomer saw it. It was seen, in England, upon the
9th, because, upon the 9th, news reached England of Dr. Schmidt's
discovery. I note the matter of possible overclouding of the sky in all
other parts of this earth, at this time. I note that, between the dates
of November 24th and December 9th, there were eight favorable nights, in
England.

It so happens that I have record of what one English astronomer was
doing, in this period. Upon the night of November 25, he was looking up
at the sky.

Meteoric observations are conventionalities.

New stars are unconventionalities.

See *Nature*, Dec. 21, 1876—this night, this astronomer observed
meteors.

There was a volcanic eruption in the Philippines, upon the 26th of
November. About two weeks later, a red rain fell in Italy.

There is considerable in this book that is in line with the teachings of
the most primitive theology. We have noted how agreeable I am sometimes
to the most southern Methodists. It is that scientific orthodoxy of
today has brutally, or mechanically, or unintelligently, reacted sheerly
against all beliefs of the preceding, or theological, orthodoxy, and has
reacted too far. All reactions react too far. Then a reaction against
this reaction must of course favor, or restore, some of the beliefs of
the earlier orthodoxy.

Often before disasters upon this earth there have been appearances that
were interpretable as warnings.

But if a godness places kindly lights in the sky, also is it spreading
upon the minds of this earth a darkness of scientists. This is about the
beneficence of issuing warnings, and also seeing to it that the warnings
shall not be heeded. This may not be idiocy. It may be "divine plan"
that surplus populations shall be murdered. In less pious terms we may
call this maintenance of equilibrium.

If surplusages of people upon this earth should reduce, and if then it
should, in the organic sense, becomes desirable that people in
disaster-zones should live longer, or die more lingeringly, provided for
them are phenomena of a study of warnings, a study that is now, or that
has been, subject to inhibitions.

<span id="page_788">p. 788</span>

Aug. 31, 1886—"Just before the sun dropped behind the horizon, it was
eclipsed by a mass of inky, black clouds." People noted this appearance.
It was like the "dense, mountain-like cloud" that appeared, at Callao,
Peru, before the earthquake of Sept. 4, 1868. But these people were in a
North American city. Meteors were seen. They were like the fire balls
that have shot from this earth's volcanoes. Luminous clouds, such as
have been seen at times of this earth's eruptions, appeared, and people
watched them. There was no thought of danger. There was a glare. More
meteors. The city of Charleston, South Carolina, was smashed.

People running from their houses—telegraph poles falling around
them—they were meshed in coils of wires. Street lamps and lights in
houses waved above, like lights of a fishing fleet that had cast out
nets. It was a catch of bodies, but that was because minds had been
meshed in the net of a cult, woven out of the impudence of the De
Ballores and the silences of the Davisons, spread to this day upon every
school of this earth.

The ground went on quaking. Down from the unknown came, perhaps, a
volcanic discharge upon this quaking ground. Whether it were volcanic
dust, or not, it is said, in the *New York World*, September 4, that
"volcanic dust" was falling, at Wilmington, North Carolina.

September 5th—a severe shock, at Charleston, and a few minutes later
came a brilliant meteor, which left a long train of fire. At the same
time, two brilliant meteors were seen, at Columbia, S. C. See almost any
newspaper, of the time. I happen to take from the London *Times*,
September 7.

There was another discharge from the unknown—or a "strange cloud"
appeared, upon the 8th of September, off the coast of South Carolina.
The cloud hung, heavy, in the sky, and was thought to be from burning
grass on one of the islands. *Charleston News and Courier*, September
to—that such was the explanation, but that no grass was known to be
burning.

If a procession starts at Washington Square, New York City, and, if
soldiers arrive in Harlem, and then keep on arriving in Harlem, I
explain that, in spite of all the eccentricities of Harlem, Harlem is
neither flying away from the procession, nor turning on 125th

<span id="page_789">p. 789</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Street, for an
axis. Meteors kept on coming to Charleston. They kept on arriving at
this quaking part of this earth's surface, as if at a point on a
stationary body. The most extraordinary display was upon the night of
October 22nd. There was a severe quake, at Charleston, while these
meteors were falling. About fifty appeared (*New York Sun*, November 1).
About midnight, October 23-24, a meteor exploded over Atlanta, Georgia,
casting a light so intense that small objects on the ground were visible
(*New York Herald*, October 25). A large meteor, at Charleston, night of
October 24th (*Monthly Weather Review*, 1886-296). An extraordinary
meteor, at Charleston, night of the 28th, is described, in the *News and
Courier*, of the 29th, as "a strange, celestial visitor."

"It was only coincidence."

There is no conventional seismologist, and there is no orthodox
astronomer, who says otherwise.

In the *Friend of India*, June 22, 1897, is another record of some of
the meteors that were seen in Charleston: that, at the time of the great
quake, Prof. Oswald saw meteor after meteor shoot from an apparent
radiant near Leo. Carl McKinley, in his *Descriptive Narrative of the
Earthquake of August 31, 1886*, records a report from Cape Romain Light
Station, upon "an unusual fall of meteors during the night."

Again a volcanic discharge came to this point—or a fall of ashes was
reported. In the *News and Courier*, November 20, it is said that, about
ten days before, ashes had fallen from the sky, at Summerville, S. C. It
is said that the material was undoubtedly ashes. Then it is said that it
had been discovered that, upon the day of this occurrence, there had
been "an extensive forest fire near Summerville."

*Monthly Weather Review*, October and November, 1886—under "Forest and
Prairie Fires," there is no mention of a forest fire, either small or
extensive, in either North or South Carolina.

Summerville, and not Charleston, was the center of the disturbances.
Ashes came from somewhere exactly to this central point.

In *A Study of Recent Earthquakes*, Dr. Charles Davison gives 36 pages
to an account of phenomena at Charleston. He studies neither meteors nor
anything else that was seen in the sky. He

<span id="page_790">p. 790</span>

studiously avoids all other occurrences upon this earth, at this time.
Refine such a study to a finality of omissions, and the vacancy of the
imbecile is the ideal of the student. I approve this, as harmless.

The other occurrences were enormous. Destruction in South Carolina was
small compared with a catastrophe in Greece. Upon the day of the first
slight shock, at Charleston (August 27th), there was a violent quake in
Greece, and at the same time, torrents poured from the sky, in Turkey,
carrying away houses and cattle and bridges (*Levant Herald*, September
8). Thousands of houses collapsed, and hundreds of persons perished.
This day, there was a shock, at Srinagar, Kashmir: shocks in Italy and
Malta; and increased activity of Vesuvius. Just such an inky cloud as
was seen at Charleston, was seen in the eastern Mediterranean, at the
time of the catastrophe in Greece—reported by the captain of the
steamship *La Valette*—see *Malta Standard*, September 2—"a mass of
thick, black smoke, changing into a reddish color." "The sea was
perfectly calm, at the time." In the sky of Greece, there was a glare,
like the light of a volcanic eruption (*Comptes Rendus*, 103-565) .

I confess to a childish liking for making little designs, or
arrangements of data, myself. And every formal design depends upon
blanks, as much as upon occupied spaces. But my objection to such a
patternmaker as Dr. Davison is to the preponderance of what he leaves
out. In Dr. Davison's 36 pages upon the lesser catastrophe, at
Charleston, he spins thin lines of argument, in a pretty pattern of
agreements, around omissions. It is his convention that all earthquakes
are of local, subterranean origin—so he leaves out all appearances in
the sky, and mentions none of the other violences that disturbed a zone
around this earth. It is a monstrous disproportion, when a mind that
should be designing embroidery takes catastrophes for the lines and
blanks of its compositions.

It is my expression that if a clipper of data should mislay his
scissors, or should accidentally let in an account of one of the many
localized repetitions of meteors, he would tell of an indication that
this earth is, or is almost, stationary. Night of October 10th—meteors
falling at Srinagar, Kashmir. There was an earthquake. Shocks

<span id="page_791">p. 791</span>

and falls of meteors continued together. According to my searches in
Indian newspapers, these repeating meteors were seen nowhere else. As to
zone-phenomena, I point out that there is a difference of only one
degree of latitude between Charleston and Srinagar. For the data, see
the *Times of India*, November 5.

If a string of meteors should be flying toward this earth, and if the
first of them should fall to this earth, at Srinagar, how is anybody
going to think of the rest of them falling exactly here, if this earth
is speeding away from them? Sometimes I am almost inclined to have a
little faith, of course not in general reasoning, but anyway in my own
reasoning, and I go on to observe that a long string of meteors can be
thought of, as coming down to the one point where the first fell, if
that point is not moving away from them. But I begin to suspect that the
trouble with me is that I am simple-minded, and that mine enemies, whom
I call "conventionalists," are more subtle than I am, and prefer their
views, because mine are so obvious. Of course this earth is stationary,
in a surrounding of revolving stars so far from far away that an
expedition could sail to them. But no dialectician, of any
fastidiousness, would be attracted by a subject so easy to maintain.

Back to data—geysers spouted from the ground, at Charleston, and there
were sulphurous emissions. The ground was incipiently volcanic and
charged electrically.

Meteors and smoky discharges and glares and falls of ashes and enormous
pours of water, as if from a volcano that was moving around a zone of
this earth

And there is no knowing when, in the year 1886, disturbances began in
the constellation Andromeda.

In the *Observatory*, 9-402, it is said that, upon September 26th, a new
star in the Andromeda nebula had been reported by one astronomer, but
that, according to another astronomer, there was no such new star.
*Astronomical Register*, 1886-269—that, upon October 3rd, a new star in
this nebula had been photographed.

I think of our existence as a battery—an enormous battery, or, in the
cosmic sense, a little battery. So I think of volcanic regions, or
incipiently volcanic regions, in a land of the stars and in a land of
this earth, as electrodes, which are mutually perturbative, and

<span id="page_792">p. 792</span>

between which flow quantities of water and other volcanic discharges, in
electrolytic, or electrically teleportative, currents. According to
data, I think that some teleportations are instantaneous, and that some
are slow drifts. To illustrate what I mean by stimulation, most likely
electric, by interacting volcanoes, and transportation, or electric
teleportation, of matter, between mutually affective volcanoes, I shall
report a conversation, which, unlike mere human dialogue, was seen, as
well as heard.

Upon the evening of Sept. 3, 1902, at Martinique, where the volcano Mont
Pelée humps high, Prof. Angelo Heilprin, as he tells in his book, *Mont
Pelée*, saw southward, at sea, electric flashes. They were in the
direction of La Soufrière, the volcano upon the island of St. Vincent,
90 miles away. La Soufrière was flashing. Then Pelée answered. Pelée
hugely answered, in tones befitting greater magnitude. A dozen flickers
in the southern sky—and then Pelée speaking up, with a blinding,
electric opinion. The little female volcano, or anyway the volcano with
a feminine name, nagged and nagged, and was then answered with a roar.
This bickering kept up a long time.

About 5 o'clock, morning of the 4th, there was another appearance, upon
the southern horizon. It was a dense bulk of smoke from La Soufrière. It
drifted slowly. It went directly to Pelée, and massed about Pelée.

There's no use arguing with a little, female volcano: she casts out
obscurations. But there may be enormous use for this occurrence regarded
as data.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27](lo27)
