[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo29)  [Next](lo31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_820">p. 820</span>

### 30

<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> thinking of an abstraction that was
noted by Aristotle, and that was taken by Hegel, for the basis of his
philosophy: That wherever there is a conflict of extremes, there is an
outcome that is not absolute victory on either side, but is a
compromise, or what Hegel called "the union of complementaries."

Our own controversy is an opposition of extremes:

That this earth moves swiftly;

That this earth is stationary.

In terms of controversies and their outcomes, I cannot think that either
of these sides can be altogether right, or will absolutely defeat the
other, when comes some way of finding out, and settling this issue.

The idea of stationariness came first. Then, as a sheer, mechanical
reaction—inasmuch as Copernicus had not one datum that a conventionalist
of today would accept as meaning anything—came the idea of a swiftly
moving earth. An intermediate view will probably appear and prevail.

My own notion of equilibrium between these extremes, backed up with our
chapters of data, is that, within a revolving, starry shell that,
relatively to the extravagances of the astronomical extremists, is not
far away, this roundish earth is almost central, but is not absolutely
stationary, having various slight movements. Perhaps it does rotate, but
within a period of a year. Like everybody else, I have my own notions
upon what constitutes reasonableness, and this is my idea of a
compromise.

The primary view had for its support the highest mathematical
authoritativeness of its era. Now, so has the secondary view.
Mathematics has been as subservient to one view as the other.

Mostly our data have been suggestive, or correlative, but it may be that
there are visual indications of a concave land in the sky, or of a
substantial shell around this earth. There are dark places in the

<span id="page_821">p. 821</span>

sky, and some of them have the look of land. They are called "dark
nebulae." Some astronomers have speculated upon them, as glimpses of a
limiting outline of a system as a whole. See back to Dolmage, quoted
upon this subject. My own notion is of a limiting, outlining substance
that I call a "shell." "Dark nebulae" have the look of bare, or
starless, patches of a shell. Some of them may be formations that are
projections from a shell. They hang like super-stalactites in a vast and
globular cave. At least one of these appearances has the look of a
mountain peak. In several books by astronomers plates of this object
have appeared. See Duncan's Astronomy. It is known as the Horse-head
nebula. It stands out, as a vast, sullen refusal to mix into a frenzy of
phosphorescent confetti. It is a solid-looking gloom, such as, some
election night, the Woolworth Building would be, if Republican, and all
the rest of Broadway hysterical with a Democratic celebration. Over its
summit comes light, like the fringe of dawn topping a mountain.
Something is shining behind this formation, but penetrates no more than
it would shine through a mountain.

It may be that relatively there are few stars—that hosts of tiny lights
in the sky are reflections, upon irregularities of the shell-land, from
large stars.

Among expressions that I have not developed is one that is suggested by
a circumstance that astronomers consider strange. This is that some
variable stars have a period of about a year. Just what variations of
stars that are said to be trillions of miles away could have to do with
a period upon this ultra-remote earth cannot be conceived of in orthodox
terms. The suggestion is that these lights, with variations
corresponding with advances and recessions of the sun, moving spirally
around this almost stationary earth, are reflections of sunlight from
points of land, or from lakes in extinct, or dormant craters. It may be
that many variations of light that have been attributed to "companions"
are tidal phenomena in celestial lakes that shine as reflections from
the sun, or from other stars, which may be lakes of molten lava.

There is a formation in the constellation Cygnus that has often been
noted. It is faintly luminescent, but this light, according to Prof.
Hubble, is a reflection from the star Deneb. It is shaped like

<span id="page_822">p. 822</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> North America, and
it is known as the America nebula. Out from its Gulf of Mexico are
islands of light. One of these may be a San Salvador some day.

Like Alaska to birds from the north, the Horse-head nebula stands out
from its background, like something to fly to.

Star after star after star has blazed a story, sometimes publishing
tragedy on earth, illustrated with spectacles in the heavens. But, when
transcribed into human language, these communications are depopularized
with "determinations" and "pronouncements." So our tribes have left
these narratives of fires and smokes and catastrophes to the wisemen,
who have made titanic tales unintelligible with their little technical
jargons. The professionals will not unprofessionalize; they will not
give up their system. Where have the wisemen ever done so among the
Eskimos, or the hairy Ainus, the Zulus, or the Kaffirs? Whatever we are,
they are acting to keep us whatever we are, as the Zulus are kept
whatever they are. We are beguiled by snoozers, who have been beaten
time after time by schoolboys.

There's a fire in the sky, and ashes and smoke and dust reach this
earth, as sometimes after an eruption of Vesuvius, discharges reach
Paris. There may be volcanoes in a land of the sky, so close to this
earth that, if intervening space be not airless and most intensely cold,
an expedition could sail away in a dash to the stars that would be a
bold and magnificent trifle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31](lo31)
