[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ljp02)  [Next](ljp04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087785176X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Last Judgment Posthumous*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1762\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Last Judgment Posthumous

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

\[101\] It was said to them that there are Mohammedans who receive the
belief that the Lord is one with the Father, and that they have a heaven
in which all things are happy; and that they live there from the Lord in
spiritual marriage of good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

\[102\] SOME THINGS CONCERNING THE PAPISTS. When the Last Judgment was
going on, he who was Pope in the year 1738, and was then blind in his
old age, dwelt on high near a city in the northern quarter; and I saw
him then brought away, and carried sitting upon a litter, and sent into
a secure place; and as everyone after death is first led to his own
religion, and afterwards is led away from it, as far as he can be, they
also, for that reason, seek for the Pope: on which account someone is
always appointed, who takes on the name and the function of Pope. He was
for a long time in that function after that time; but when he observed
that he had no power at all of remitting sins, nor of opening heaven,
and that this power was Divine, and thence the Lord's alone, he
therefore began to be averse to that doctrine, and afterwards to abhor
it, and he abdicated that office, and betook himself among the
Christians who worship the one Lord, and is with them in heaven. I have
often spoken with him; and he called himself happy, that he had embraced
those truths, and had removed himself away from that idolatrous
religious persuasion. He said that he revolved in his mind similar
things in the world, and acknowledged in heart that the Word was holy,
and that the Lord was to be worshipped; but that he could not then
recede, on account of causes which he also mentioned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

\[103\] But it happened otherwise with his successor, Benedict XIV. He
declared openly that he had confirmed in his own mind, that since the
Lord had transferred all power over the heavens to Peter, He had no
power at all left, and no longer any holiness. I saw him speaking with
Sextus V, who was called up from below, and after the conversation sank
down again. I heard him speaking many things in regard to the Word with
someone concerning the Bull Unigenitus, but this is not the place to
make them public. He was cunning, and at first civil, and then very
sharp-sighted: he loved the Jesuits more than others, and went down to
them into their hell; nor have I as yet seen him come up therefrom: and
scarcely is he to come up thence, because he said that he had confirmed
and established the Bull Unigenitus, and because he said that the Sacred
Scripture was not equal in his mind to the papal decree, but inferior to
it. When it was shown him that the Word was holy in every word, and that
they were perpetual correspondences, and that thence it was for the
whole heaven, he made this of no account, saying that the papal decrees
were of the same holiness. But then it was said, that there is in each
thing which the Pope pronounces in the Consistory, something derived
from the infernal love of ruling over heaven and earth, and of ascribing
to himself the Divine power, and so of being worshipped as God; and that
hell, and not heaven, is in such a decree. And it was shown from what
spirits it is said, and who it is that then breathe into and move the
breast; that they are infernal spirits, who are not willing to believe
in salvation by the Holy Spirit, <span id="fr_8"></span>[103-1](#fn_8.md)
but he reasoned against those things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

\[104\] Louis XIV, king of France, is at this day among the happy. He
was made by the Lord the governor over the best society of the French
nation, over those who are arriving in the spiritual world from the
world. He acts uprightly and justly, and is diligent in looking out for
things useful to his subjects there. He acknowledges the Lord, and that
He has power over the heavens and the earth. He reads the Word, and
shuns cunning and craftiness. He said that he was such in the world.
Once when I was speaking with him, he suddenly descended seemingly as if
by steps, to a place below me a little in front; and it was perceived
that then in vision he was as if he was at Versailles. And it was then
perceived that he had come as if into a kind of sleep; and it
immediately became silent around him, and also with me; which lasted two
hours. Afterwards he ascended, and spoke to those who stood around him,
saying that he had spoken with the king of France, his grandson, who
reigns at this day; and that he exhorted him to desist from confirming
the Bull Unigenitus; and he said that otherwise misfortune would come
upon him. He said that he did not know whether he perceived that in
clear vision, or obscure vision, which are in the thought with some
emotion of the mind. This took place Dec. 13, 1759, about seven or eight
o'clock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

\[105\] After the Last Judgment, the Babylonians were for a long time
gathered together upon mountains in the west as before. The reason is,
that a spirit after death can go nowhere else than the place where his
life is. They were thus there upon mountains, where a part made to
themselves as it were new heavens. But as soon as it was calculated that
there were about two hundred there, they were cast down into the hells,
as before; and this was done until all things were reduced into such
order; and no one after death can go anywhere but into his own hell; nor
can a part remain upon the earth there; and this is done when those
places are taken possession of by societies, where they are in the
acknowledgment and adoration of the Lord. \[106\] The southern quarter,
where the richest were, and where the great city of the Jesuits is,
which quarter was altogether overturned, as may be seen from the
description of the Last Judgment, is still a desert land; and I saw the
monks there sometimes, who, as they had heard that treasures were hidden
away there, still flocked thither for the purpose of exploring; but in
vain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

\[107\] Nor do they still desist from sending out their emissaries into
the Reformed Christian world, for the purpose of seducing as in the
world. They are monks, who thirst solely for gain and who aspire to
supreme, yea Divine, power and who are so barren that they know nothing
at all of Divine truth; but yet they prevail over others by cunning;
nevertheless they are investigated, and those who have been investigated
are miserably punished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

\[108\] It was shown me to the life, why Babel or Babylon was called
Lucifer, son of the dawn, Isa. 14 and Gen. \[11:1-9\]. That by Lucifer
there Babel is meant, is manifest from what precedes and follows there,
concerning which the things there may be quoted. And that Babel in the
beginning adored the Lord, and observed the commandments more than
others, bearing domination in the mind; but that in process of time
domination becomes the head, and at length endeavors to drag the Lord
Himself from His throne, and to place itself thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

\[109\] The women and virgins who have lived in convents, and have
thought lascivious things, and still more those who have done lascivious
things, are cast into hells where there are direful things. But they who
have cultivated piety alone, and have not done any work, are divided
among the adherents of their own religion, to act as servants, learning
that bare piety in idleness does not conduce to salvation. But they who
were diligent and loved to work, are allotted places among those women
in the churches, with whom it is well. They who have been diligent in
the convents, by serving others there in various ways, as to food,
clothing, and other functions there, and who did these things from
charity and affection, are conducted away beyond that mountain into the
confines between the south and west, and form a society, which is
protected from infestations from the men, and they are sent to those who
teach the truths of faith; for they are more teachable than others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

\[110\] There was a vast multitude of Papists dwelling to the east,
occupying all those mountains, <span id="fr_9"></span>[109-1](#fn_9.md)
even from the eastern quarter to the southern, who introduced themselves
to the Gentiles upon the mountains and plains there. All that multitude
was transferred by a direct way to the west, where a settlement was
given them upon hills and plains for a great extent. They were those who
had lived in goods, although not in truths, who had performed good works
according to their religion, and were of that genius that they would not
injure others, nor plot evils. That they desired truths is manifest from
the fact that while they were on the way they appeared as if they were
borrowing silver and garments, as the sons of Israel did from the
Egyptians; by which was signified that they desired truths, and were
receiving them from them; from those who do not do anything good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

\[111\] The vast multitude was explored as to the quality of its
affection of truth from good, and at the same time whether they had
lived in the good of charity. That exploration was seen as a sudden and
instantaneous transference to various quarters. They who were in the
middle remained there; because they were in the affection of truth, and
wished to be imbued with the truths of faith. The rest were sent back,
that they might first be instructed below by their own people, who had
been upright monks, and at the same time had been in some doctrine of
truth from the Word; and they were afterwards transferred to those of
the Reformed, who, on account of a life according to the truths of the
Word, were angelic spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

\[112\] I also saw a vast multitude of the Catholic nation, who had been
hidden away and reserved by the Lord for a long time, and were reserved
from the idolatrous contagion of the others; because they had lived
well, and had acknowledged the Lord: and some were transferred to the
south, some to the east, some to the west, and some to the north, that
they might form some heavenly society, and be further instructed. For
this end angels were sent to them, not only to instruct them, but also
to guard them from the cunning and deceitful of their own nation, and
from the influx out of their hells. In a word, many and great societies
were instituted out of Catholics, and partly inserted into societies
where the Word is read freely and the Lord is adored. If, after being
instructed, they have received the truths of faith in the good of love,
they are elevated thence into heaven. It is not their fault that they
were born there. All their infants are in heaven: but these are ignorant
of the falsities of their parents, not knowing that they are such; and
they are educated under the Lord's auspices by the angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

\[113\] The most malicious of the Roman Catholics become the most
stupid, for the reason that when malice penetrates all the interiors of
the mind, and destroys all spiritual truth, they then first become
insane, and afterwards stupid, and are sent under the earth between the
west and the north. When anyone passes to that place, great stupor
occupies his thought, and torpor his body. Many of them were worshippers
of the devil, and had books where the doctrine of the worship of them
was contained. One or two of their books were taken from them and read
before others. The doctrinal teaching was this: that they petition God
the Father to excuse them for betaking themselves to the devil; because
they petitioned for help from God the Father, and had not obtained it,
knowing that they get help from the devil; on which account they betake
themselves to him, calling him their patron. Another book was opened,
written with various characters and flexures, and being deciphered,
taught that they had nothing from the Divine, but all from the devil.
Being asked the reason they said, that they had not obtained from God by
prayers their request that they might rule as in the world, over the
souls of men and over the goods of that earth. It was told them that no
one obtains this by prayers. Being detected, at first they became
insane, and were cast down from the mountain on which they were, from
the southern side of the mountain, into a direful hell where the
worshippers of the devil are; and their houses collapsed together into
heaps. One of them ran to me, and he was dusky like a devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

\[114\] Those of them who are upright by nature, cannot dwell together
with those who have attained spiritual uprightness from the affection of
truth; for those who are upright from any natural uprightness are easily
seduced. They believe all things, even things of cunning, and adore
idols; on which account also they are among those who serve others as
handmaids and servants; by whom they are guarded, lest they should be
approached by the monks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

\[115\] THE AFRICANS. There are, among the blackest of the Africans,
those who love to be punished and treated harshly; and who come into
heaven, saying afterwards that they detest blackness, because they know
that their souls are white and their bodies black.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

\[116\] I have heard it announced that at this day a church is being
established with many in Africa, and that revelations are made at this
day; and that they are receptive of the Heavenly Doctrine, especially
concerning the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

\[117\] I was conducted through several regions in front towards the
left. Afterwards I saw a great palace, and a spacious court there. A
certain one spoke with me there, saying that a revelation had been
promised, and that he was expecting it. And then something luminous
appeared in obscurity, which was an indication that now there will be a
revelation. And as I was attending, I heard that they were expecting a
revelation concerning Christ, whom they call the Only Man, from whom
every man is a man. And one of the angels then spoke with them, and
instructed them concerning the Lord, that He is the only God. They
replied that they perceived this, but not as yet that He was born a man.
But when they were instructed by the angels, they understood this also,
saying, that this was done for the sake of the salvation of the human
race. Moreover, they knew many things respecting heaven and hell, of
which Christians are ignorant. It was said that they were Africans. I
was afterwards conducted thence towards the right, where I heard them
saying that they had expected a revelation, and that angels were now
speaking with them from the Lord, and were instructing them concerning
the Lord, with the promise that they were about to receive the Heavenly
Doctrine. These said that it could not be otherwise than that God, the
Creator of the universe, should appear in the world, because He created
men, and loves them; and that His appearing must be made even to the
ocular sight in the human form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

\[118\] It was afterwards shown in obscure vision how the Heavenly
Doctrine would proceed in Africa; namely, towards the interior parts,
even to the middle of it; and that it would then proceed towards those
who were at, the sides on the Mediterranean Sea, but not to the coast;
and then, after a time, would turn itself back towards Egypt. Thereupon
the angels were glad, that there was now the Lord's coming anew, and
that a New Church was being established, with whom they could be
conjoined. That doctrine does not extend as far as to the Africans that
dwell near the coasts, since the Christians come thither, who insinuate
scandals, and who have a human and not a Divine idea concerning the
Lord. The Africans are more receptive of the Heavenly Doctrine than
others on the earth, because they freely receive the doctrine concerning
the Lord, and have it as if implanted in themselves that God will
altogether appear as a man. They are in the faculty of receiving the
truths of faith, and especially its goods, because they are of a
celestial disposition. It was told them that a prediction was made by
the Lord concerning His coming, and concerning the New Church after the
old one; and that His appearing is made through angels who teach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

\[119\] I was conducted again to the Africans by a way running first to
the north and afterwards to the west; and I saw there as it were a
palace, where someone walked; and afterwards higher up, where I stopped,
and heard a vast number sent forth out of the Christian heaven to those
who were Africans; and those were there who in the world had lived
according to their religion and had acknowledged one God under the human
form. It was told them that he who has lived in good according to
religion is also in the affection of truth, because the good of life
desires nothing more than truth; for it desires to know how one is to
live well. Thence they rejoice when they are informed; and that all such
receive truths from the Lord, and are enlightened according to the
quality and quantity of their good of life: this they acknowledged, and
were glad. The African race can be in greater enlightenment than others
on this earth, since they are such that they think more interiorly, and
so receive truths and acknowledge them. Others, as the Europeans, think
only exteriorly, and receive truths in the memory; nor do they see them
interiorly from any intellectual light, which they do not acknowledge in
matters of faith. I said there, that few Christians live according to
religion, but only according to the civil laws, and live well morally
for the sake of fame, honor, and gains; and that they rarely think of
living according to their doctrinals; believing also that they are saved
by the faith of doctrine, and not by the life: on which account they
have no doctrinals of life. At this the Africans wondered exceedingly,
not being willing to believe that it is so; believing that there is no
man who does not live according to his religion; and if not, that he
cannot but become stupid and evil, because he then does not receive
anything from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

\[120\] All are explored after death as to what idea they have
concerning God. That idea is the chief of all, because conjunction with
the Lord and conjunction with heaven is according to it, and all of the
love and faith of the church is hence according to it, because the
Divine is the all of the church, yea, is God: hence the all of the
church with a man is from his idea of God: such as that idea is, such is
heaven to everyone. The Africans also differ from each other according
to their idea of God. Some worship an invisible God, and some a visible
one: some make of them two, and some make of them one and the same. Some
have been instructed by Christians that God was born a man, and they
receive this; and when they hear that they distinguish the Divine into
three Persons, they go away, believing, however, that the Christians,
although they say three, still think of one: for they do not comprehend
what a Son born from eternity is. Some, who are the best of them,
believe that God is altogether a Man. They say that those who believed
that God was born a Man, formerly saw a bright star in the air. The
wiser of them believe that God was born a Man in the world, and so
manifested Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

\[121\] It was said that in a certain region of Africa there is from
ancient times a book which they regard as holy. It is written by
correspondences in a similar manner as the Word is with us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

\[122\] A certain priest, who had supposed that the idea of the Divine
Human is not given with anyone, was transferred into societies of
Africans, and he found that they had no other idea than that of the
Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

In Abyssinia, in Africa, they have some psalms written in a style
similar to that of our Word, and they sing them in their temples, and
spirits are sensible of communication therefrom. In the spiritual sense
they treat of one God, the Redeemer of the human race; but these things
have been treated of before, where the Word is spoken of, Spiritual
Experiences \[n. 5947\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

\[123\] It has been granted me to speak with African spirits on various
subjects, and they perceived all the truths of the church with a clear
perception; and when the Word was presented to them, they understood it
as to the internal spiritual sense, and carried it to their elders, who
said that they have a Word with them, and that it is most holy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

\[124\] They afterwards showed me the quality of those who are in
Africa, which they know from the societies of that race in the spiritual
world; namely, that interiorly in Africa are the best and the wise: that
those that are not good are near the Mediterranean Sea, also near Egypt,
and at the Cape of Good Hope. The tract where the good are, lies from
Ethiopia towards the middle, into which part strangers from Europe are
not admitted; and if they enter, and are not willing to perform service,
they sell them to the Asiatics; and they said that at this day some
speak with Africans in the world, and instruct them orally; and that
their speech with them falls especially into their interior perception;
and that they perceive the influx, and so receive the revelation with
enlightenment; and that such speech is with their instructors, in whom
they have confidence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

\[125\] THE GENTILES. Concerning the lot of nations and peoples outside
the church, see what has been written in Arcana Coelestia (n. 2589-
2604), and in the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 318-328); also something
in the little work on The Last Judgment (n. 47-51). That a new heaven
has been formed both from Christians and from Gentiles, and also the
Lord's Church on earth, see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem (n. 3,
244-246).

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

\[126\] About the time of the Last Judgment, Christians appeared there
in the middle, where they were arranged at a distance from the center 2
to the circumference, and also at the various quarters according to the
light of truth from the love of good. Around this middle were seen the
Mohammedans arranged in like manner at the various quarters, near to the
Christians according to the light of truth from good. Outside this
compass were seen the Gentiles arranged according to their religion and
according to life therefrom. All have similar lands divided into
mountains, hills, rocks and valleys, and above them are expanses where
dwell the best of them who have received from angels truths of doctrine
concerning the Lord and concerning life. Beyond them appeared as it were
a sea, which was the boundary. All these circuits taken together are
extended not in a plane but in a globe like the earth, so that when I
was conducted to the Gentiles, after passing through the Mohammedans, I
descended by a declivity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

\[127\] When the Last Judgment was going on, those who were in the
western quarter beyond the Mohammedans, were led away towards the east.
They were led, not by a circuit, but above the northern plane of the
Christians, and, what I wondered at, on high, so that they were
transferred by a way above the Christians, and yet did not communicate
with them. And they were then allotted places around the Mohammedans at
the east and also at the south. On both sides of where the Mohammedan
heavens are, there appeared openings descending into the depths. Thither
were cast those of them who were evil, who had worshipped idols, and had
thought nothing about God, and at the same time had lived an evil life.
\[128\]. There is also a similar chasm on the northern side of the
Mohammedan desert. Into this were cast the worst, and also many of the
Roman Catholic religion who had worshipped the images of saints, and had
thought nothing at all about the Lord. These latter were gathered from
the northern quarter under the mountains there and were mingled with the
Gentiles because they are similar. I then saw the whole northern valley
even to the mountains there torn up to its foundations, and all who were
there, scattered, and then there appeared in that place as it were a
smokiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

\[129\] I was afterwards led beyond the Mohammedans to certain Gentiles
who were in the eastern quarter, with whom it was granted to speak. They
said that they were sad because the Divine does not appear to them, when
yet they think of the Divine and speak about it; and, therefore, if
there is a God \[they had hoped\] that He would send to them those who
would teach them; but that they had long waited for this in vain,
lamenting that perchance He had deserted them, and that thus there
seemed nothing else for them but to perish. And then I heard angels
speaking with them out of heaven, saying that God could not have been
manifested to them because they had not been willing to believe that God
was born a man in the world, or that He had taken on a Human, and that
until they believe this, God cannot be manifested to them, nor can they
be taught, because this is the primary thing of all revelation. They
said that they did indeed believe that God is Man but that they could
not comprehend that He was born Man in the world. But answer was made
them, that He was not born Man like any other man, since He was not born
from a human father, but from the Father Jehovah, and by a Virgin, and
that thus He was unlike any other man; for a man's soul from a human
father is a recipient of life, but the Lord's soul from the Father
Jehovah is life itself, which gives life to all; and that the difference
is as between the human and the Divine, and the finite and the infinite,
or the create and the uncreate; and because He was such as to His soul,
it could not be otherwise than that His body should become like His
soul, after He had rejected that of the body which He had taken from the
mother; and that therefore He rose as to His whole body, nor did He
leave anything of it in the sepulcher, as is the case with every other
man, who rises only as to his spirit, and never as to his material body.
And further, it was said that the Divine itself, as it is in itself,
which is infinite, could not have done otherwise than reject the finite
which was from the mother, and put on the infinite from the Father, thus
the Divine. They said that they had known no other than that He was like
any other man born from a human father, and also that He so died, and
was afterwards received by men as God, and that they now know that the
Lord is not such a man as others are. After they received these things
they were divided, and those who had received the faith were instructed
by angels in other matters of faith and love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

\[130\] I was conducted to those who in the world had known nothing
about God, but who nevertheless had led a moral life amongst each other;
they were said to live on a certain island. They appeared to me not like
men but like apes and yet with a human face. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[129-1](#fn_10.md) They so appeared because they knew
nothing about God, and the Divine is in the likeness of a man. One of
the Christians is set over them by the Lord. I have spoken with him, and
he said that they obey him and love him; that they are modest and are
engaged in employments, but that at first they could hardly comprehend
the things of religion. But after some time, there was given them a
nearer communication with the Christians, and they are beginning to
receive something of religion, and he cherished the hope that they could
be reformed, for the reason that they had lived a moral life, and are in
obedience and are industrious. As to similar people elsewhere, see
below. <span id="fr_11"></span>[129-2](#fn_11.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

\[131\] There were likewise seen others, who had lived in an island in
the West Indian seas, who had no thought at all about God, thus no
religion, and who yet had lived together in a sincere and friendly way.
It was told me, that at first they appear destitute of rationality, but
that nevertheless, because they had contracted no false principles
against religion, some of them suffer themselves to be instructed like
infants, and they are perfected. It was shown that the delight of their
life was to will to serve others under others. Some wealth was once
given them, but they offered it to the angel who was instructing them,
in order that he might receive them as his servants, that thus they
might be instructed as to how they should live. It is an angelic delight
to inform such spirits and to lead them to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

\[132\] I was once in a sweet sleep, and when I awoke I saw around me
some Chinese, <span id="fr_12"></span>[131-1](#fn_12.md) and I noticed that
they sat with their legs crosswise, and were talking with each other.
And it was ascertained that they had been sent to me by the Lord in
order that I might know of what quality many of them are. The angels
said that the delightfulness of my sleep had inflowed from the fact that
angels had been speaking with them about God and about the wonderful
things of wisdom, and that they had been so delighted at this that they
had been in the tranquillity of some celestial peace; and that evil
spirits could not approach, because they were of a spiritual celestial
genius.

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

\[133\] There were with me some spirits from Tartary, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[132-1](#fn_13.md) who dwelt outside the Chinese wall,
saying that their country is populous; nor do they know anything about
war, saying that they are without the love of reigning and that they
give the government to those who say they can rule and govern, but if he
cannot, he is rejected with a fine; those who do what is right and just
are loved. They said that all are engaged in work, and that the lazy are
cast out. They say that sometimes Christians come to them, and they
marvel at their sayings that God is a Man, for they believe that all men
know this. They also say that they have the commandments of the
Decalogue, and that they live according to them because God so wills.
They said that they have a holy book of which others do not know, and
which they understand. Inquiry was made, and it was the Psalms of David.
They call the Chinese their friends because they are of their nation;
nor do they think of war, saying that if any strangers should come,
then, unknown to them, they would all depart, taking their provisions
with them. I also saw a Christian preacher with the spirits of that
region. They are of a tranquil disposition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

\[134\] THE LAST JUDGMENT ON THE PROTESTANTS OR REFORMED. Before the
Last Judgment which was a general one, less general judgments preceded
which might be called preparatory, by which those who were more
exteriorly evil were cast into hells. It should be known that between
the judgment effected by the Lord when He was in the world, and that of
the judgment which is now effected, spirits who had outwardly lived a
moral life, and had confessed God with the lips but not interiorly or in
heart, had ascended upon mountains and hills and had there made for
themselves, as it were, heavens, where by various arts, which are very
numerous in the spiritual world, all of them unknown in our world, they
had ascended on mountains; so that the world of spirits which is mediate
between heaven and hell had been filled up with such heavens, and
thereby the communication of the Lord and heaven with the human race had
been intercepted. This also was the reason why the spiritual things of
the Word and of doctrine therefrom were not disclosed until after the
Last Judgment, for by the latter the world of spirits was purified and
communication with man opened. If the spiritual things of the Word and
of doctrine therefrom had been disclosed before, they would not have
been received nor understood; and if they had been received and
understood, still hell, which then prevailed, would have secretly
snatched them away from men's hearts and have profaned them. Those
fictitious heavens are meant in Revelation by the heaven and earth which
passed away. These could pass away, but our visible heaven, which is the
firmament of all things, was so created that it cannot pass away, for if
this should pass away, the angelic heavens would also pass away. It
would be as when the foundation is taken away from a palace, or the base
from a column, whereby the house and the column would fall. For there is
a connection of all things from the first to the last, from the Lord
Himself to His last work which is the visible heaven and the habitable
earth. The case would be similar if the human race were to perish, for
thus, for a like reason, the angelic heavens would also fall to ruin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

\[135\] Before the Last Judgment I often saw societies, which had made
for themselves semblances of heavens, purged and also destroyed. There
was one rock on which was quite a large city, where those were who were
in faith separate from charity, believing as in the world, that faith
alone saves, and this from mere mercy whatsoever the life may have been.
They were in the lust of commanding; and therefore they stood at the
sides of the rock, and in various ways infested those who were beneath.
When visitation was made, and all there were found to be of such a
character, I saw that the rock sank down into the depths together with
the hill and the inhabitants. The like was done elsewhere. But prior to
this being done, the good are separated from the evil, and the evil are
in the middle; and then the middle sinks down while the borders remain;
in the borders are those who are in the good of faith, that is, who are
in charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

\[136\] All who have not denied God with the lips, although they have in
the heart, and have led a moral life on account of the civil laws and
also on account of reputation and consequent honors and gains, when they
come into the other life betake themselves into societies where there
are cities; and there as in the world they live well morally, from fear
of punishment and of the loss of honor and gain. But when their
externals are taken away from them, and they are let into their
internals, they rush into infamous crimes. But when the wicked increase
in number the society is then perverted; wherefore angels are then sent
thither who search out the state and separate the good from the evil;
and the good are either sent to the sides of the society or are taken
away. Then the city with the evil sinks down into hell, to a depth
according to their wickedness. Once I saw that four angels were sent to
such a city, who when they came thither entered into a house; <span
id="fr_14"></span>[135-1](#fn_14.md) but the criminal spirits who were
there, being excited by their presence into interior malice, as takes
place, rushed to the house where the angels were, shouting out to them,
Did they wish to come out and commit whoredom? They wished to urge them
to it, and even attempted to offer violence, but in vain; in a word,
they did like what was done in Sodom. And that city was completely
destroyed and its inhabitants cast into hells. The reason why they
wished to lead them forth to commit whoredom, was because in that city
were gathered those who in the world had accounted adulteries as
allowable; also because they had been in falsities of doctrine, by
reason of having regarded life as of no account; moreover, to confirm
these things they had falsified the Word, and all those who falsify the
Word in order to confirm evils of life and falsities of doctrine,
account adulteries as allowable and are led into them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

\[137\] I also saw a rock on which there had been such a city; torn up
from its place and carried away to another place at a remarkable
distance; it appeared carried away like a cloud. And when it came to
that place I saw that it also sank down, because there was their hell.
The inhabitants had been first reduced into a state of stupor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

\[138\] A great number of those who are in faith separate from charity
betake themselves to rocks; while those who are in the love of self
betake themselves to mountains which are higher than the rocks. Hence it
is that in the Word, a rock signifies faith, and a mountain love. And
when, before the Last Judgment, the evil had been thus gathered together
upon rocks and upon mountains, first there were suddenly felt
concussions and earthquakes, by which are meant perversions of state in
respect to the church, and afterwards follows the overturning, which is
effected either by sinking, or by carrying away, or by casting out and
thus thrusting down into hell. On the mountains and hills upon which are
angels, the wisest are in the middle and the less wise at the
circumferences; but on those upon which are the evil, the worst are in
the middle and the better at the circumferences. The sinking in the
middle appears like a vortical gyration, but in a spiral.

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

\[139\] There was a plain somewhat more elevated than the valley. In
this plain was congregated a multitude of spirits who had learned to
practice evils by means of cunning, and to station themselves invisible
behind others, and thus force them to think and speak what they wish
them to, yea evils and falsities. They have contracted these arts by
reason of their having been in the insane love of ruling over others. As
it was then disclosed that their wickedness was consummated, their
destruction followed. The whole of that plain was overturned; and the
earth was then opened elsewhere and there rose up good spirits who had
been kept concealed by the Lord in the lower earth and guarded lest they
should be infested by the evil; and they succeeded in place of the
former, and came in full number into possession of their land. Such
things are represented by the sons of Israel to whom the land of Canaan
was given after the wickedness of its nations had been consummated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

\[140\] After many destructions and partial judgments had been executed,
which were premonitory of the general destruction and judgment, and
hordes of spirits who were impure had been cast into pools, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[139-1](#fn_15.md) lakes, and chasms, that is into hells,
then some came who were skilled in the art of breathing into others and
exciting them to evils of interior thought. They incited some souls
against the Lord and against Divine truth from Him, and from these the
multitude, like one mass, began to be fermented. The tumult spread
thence in every direction, as when a rebellion is started by a few
persons, and yet at length stirs up a crowd. I there saw the disturbance
widely spread to many rocks and mountains, even to their peaks, and
thence to the sides down to the bases. Their intent was to destroy those
who acknowledged and worshipped the Lord and were in Divine truths from
Him. When it was noticed that the contagion had grown so wide, then was
the Lord's coming for the general judgment. This coming was the Lord's
influx into them through the heavens, an influx which appeared like a
misty sphere spread around over those mountains and rocks; and it
carried off the dwellers there, not by casting them down but by bearing
them away. The Divine sphere entered into their interiors and laid them
bare; and what lay concealed in their will and heart was thus made
manifest. And it snatched them away and carried them down to hells
according to the evils of their life. That Divine sphere was seen
carried around in gyres, sometimes returning; and it also drew them out
of the places where they had concealed themselves. This was done with
some myriads within the space of an hour. When these things had been
accomplished, the tops of the mountains receded, and the mountains
themselves sank down even to the plain, and there was seen a solitude.
Such things are meant in Revelation by the former heaven and the former
earth which John saw pass away; for the mountains there, with the rocks
and valleys, appear like the earth in our world; and the habitations
upon the mountains are there called heavens. Those who were thus carried
off and cast away, are they who are meant in Revelation by the dragon
and his two beasts (Rev. 12-13), and by the false prophet who was cast
into the lake of brimstone and fire (Rev. 19:20; 20:10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

\[141\] The judgment upon the Protestants or Reformed was effected as
follows: They who had led a life of charity, which may also be called a
life of faith, had all been carried up into heaven long before the
universal judgment; and all who in heart had denied heaven and had led
an evil life had been cast by turns into hell as they came from the
world. On those only was the judgment effected, who had professed
religion and had acted as if from religion but only hypocritically; to
these it was conceded to gather themselves together in many places in
the spiritual world, and, as in the world, to simulate religion, but
still they had no religion. These are they who made heavens for
themselves and who are meant by the former heaven and the former earth;
and by means of arts unknown in the world they are able to produce
splendid things, and to persuade those who are similar that they are in
heaven. Their exteriors communicated with the ultimate heaven but their
interiors with the hells; and it was on account of the communication
with the ultimate heaven that they were tolerated, according to the
Lord's words concerning the pulling up of the tares. The angels of the
ultimate heaven were first separated from them and the communication was
broken; as takes place comparatively with seeds in fruits when they
ripen, in that when the time comes for them to produce a new tree they
separate themselves, as it were, spontaneously from the body of the
fruit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

\[142\] All the Protestants or Reformed of whom there was still some
hope, were collected in the middle, where they were arranged according
to their kingdoms in the world; for according to these were also the
diversities of their dispositions or affections. But above them <span
id="fr_16"></span>[141-1](#fn_16.md) and also around them were those who
had read the Word and had frequented temples, but yet had made nothing
of evils of life, loving themselves and the world above all things;
there was an immense multitude there. Surrounding the middle region, in
which were Christians who had been in the good of faith and charity,
were dark caverns stretching obliquely into hells which occupied a wide
space below the heaven of spirits, where were hells beneath hells. Such
gulfs and chasms lay around that middle region on every side, east,
west, south and north; thus the hells extended even under the circuit
made by the Papists round about the Reformed. All who were interiorly
evil had been disposed around the Christian middle, and from every
quarter they were led down into those gulfs and cast into them. Thus,
into the eastern gulf were cast those who had been collected from the
east; they were such as had been in the love of self and especially in
the love of ruling, nor had known anything whatever except that faith
alone is saving. Into the southern gulf were cast those who had been
versed in the doctrinals of faith; into the western gulf those who had
been in the love of the world; and into the northern, those who had been
in no understanding, but had merely heard preachings and had received no
instruction afterwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

\[143\] Those at the south were led down first, then those at the west,
and, lastly, those at the east. This happened at the same time that the
eastern Papists were being led down beyond the northern tract.

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

\[144\] When this had been done their dwellings were laid waste and
destroyed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

\[145\] Afterwards I saw an immense number of those who had lauded faith
alone, and yet had possessed no faith because they had paid no attention
to the evils of their life, both the learned and the unlearned, saying
that they have the Word and the true doctrine, that they know the Lord,
and many other things, and that, therefore, they, above others, would be
saved. They were led away in a multitude, first to the west, afterwards
to the south, on the other side of the waste Babylonish tract there, and
even towards the east and still farther. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[144-1](#fn_17.md) And they were divided; \[some\] were
scattered towards the north, nor were they seen anymore. And many were
led back, but hither and thither; this transfer was effected in order
that they might be explored as to whether they had any faith such as
they had boasted of; namely, whether their faith was only a science,
which is not faith; or, whether there was anything of life in it, which
is faith. And it was given them to perceive that they had had no faith,
but only something scientific without life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

\[146\] When they were in the southern quarter near a gulf there, there
came forth a multitude which had been concealed there from early times,
who likewise said that they had had faith, and that they would be saved
by reason of faith alone, and they had thought nothing about life. This
multitude then approached them and was mingled with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

\[147\] From a certain mountain region a multitude was brought forth,
who had led a moral life, not from any religion, but merely from fear of
the law and of the loss of fame, honor and gain; thus without any
Christian life; wherefore, so far as they could do it unknown, they
perpetrated evils. Because they had not acquired to themselves any
communication with heaven by means of a life from religion, they were
led around to the southern and western quarters, that they might be
explored as to whether they had any religion of life; and because they
had none, they were rejected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

\[148\] Finally came those who had been versed in the doctrinals of the
church, and, in like manner, had led a moral but not a Christian life,
because they had lived, not from doctrine, or the Word, but for the sake
of fame, thus before men and not before God. And, being explored \[it
was seen\] that they had nothing of conscience, because nothing of the
religion of life. These were cast out of that mountain region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

\[149\] All these, who were divided into the three classes, were driven
so far away that they could not be seen except as a dark cloud; and they
were dissipated. It was told me from heaven that they were cast down
into uninhabited and desert places, and thus were separated lest they
should consociate together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

\[150\] The dispersion of these three classes was made to all the
quarters, east, south, west, and north, whence they can never return;
and this all the more, since every knowledge of religion is taken away
from them. Concerning life in deserts, see elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

\[151\] The angels wondered that there is so great a multitude in the
Christian world who are entirely ignorant of the truth that religion is
a matter of life, imagining that religion consists in thinking something
or other, and that by thus thinking they absolve themselves from every
obligation of life, which they have made up from this: that, by the
Lord's merit, they are exempt from the yoke of the law, and that no one
can do good from himself, and that if he does, it is meritorious: and
yet this is so far from religion of life that it is no religion at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[103-1](ljp03.htm#fr_8.md) Tafel has, qui non volunt
credere salutem per spiritum sanctum. The reading is doubtful. Acton
translates it, "Who at heart wish to be saluted as the Holy Spirit."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[109-1](ljp03.htm#fr_9.md) See SE 5341-5343.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[129-1](ljp03.htm#fr_10.md) See SE 5822.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[129-2](ljp03.htm#fr_11.md) See SS 116; SE 393,
5822.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[131-1](ljp03.htm#fr_12.md) See AC 2596; SE 6067.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[132-1](ljp03.htm#fr_13.md) See SE 607; R 11; T
279; Coro 39.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[135-1](ljp03.htm#fr_14.md) See SE 4932

<span id="fn_15"></span>[139-1](ljp03.htm#fr_15.md) In the M.S. stagna is
written twice; in SE 5202, lacus, "lakes," is given in place of the
second stagna.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[141-1](ljp03.htm#fr_16.md) See SE 5347.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[144-1](ljp03.htm#fr_17.md) See SE 5355, 5535,
5538.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](ljp04.md)
