[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ljp03)  [Next](ljp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087785176X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Last Judgment Posthumous*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1762\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Last Judgment Posthumous

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

But all who have thought with themselves that evil must not be done
because it is sin, and is against Divine laws, and who thus, so far as
they could, have abstained from evils, all these have received something
of conscience, and, in the things which were of their faith, although
they were spurious, there was much life; and they were saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

\[152. The cleansing of the middle where the Reformed were, lasted a
long time; and those who were in the church without the church in
themselves, or without doctrine and religion in themselves, were, by
turns, cast into the gulfs surrounding the middle, and many of them into
deserts. These cleansings lasted for a long time after the judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

\[153\] I once saw many spirits, sitting around a table in a certain
house, who looked like rich merchants; and still more spirits were
approaching so that there were quite a number of them. In face they
appeared as though upright, and they were clothed as though they were
angelic spirits. But I saw that they were all cast into desert places,
and into woods, thus outside the societies of the upright. The reason
was stated, namely, because, in the world, they had lived, in external
form like Christians and had acted well, but this solely for the purpose
of acquiring a reputation for sincerity and honesty in order to make
gain therefrom; and that they had not done the least thing for the sake
of God or the neighbor, but all for the sake of themselves; and that,
therefore, they had no communication with heaven. Hence it is that they
were cast out thither, where they roam about amongst robbers, and
themselves commit robbery. For when external bonds are taken away from
such spirits they become robbers. They were robbers even in the world,
were it not that externals, which are fears for the loss of fame and
hence of gain, held them in bonds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

\[154\] In the western quarter was seen a multitude whose speech sounded
sincere, so that from their speech they might be thought to be, as it
were, sincerities. By their speech and reasonings concerning sincerity
they could induce the simple to believe that they were of such a
character. But still it was found out that, within, they were like
wolves, because without religion and hence without conscience. I have
heard them consulting together as to how the simple might be deceived
and their goods stolen away from them; some were consulting to do this,
in order that they might thus obtain dominion. And then they assailed
them from behind and inspired evils into them, for in this way they are
able to subjugate. But their doings were seen in heaven and they were
cast into a hell about the western tract of the middle region; <span
id="fr_18"></span>[154-1](#fn_18) for they were insincerities and also
wickednesses - devisers of arts with the end of gain and dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

\[155\] Afterwards those of the Reformed were explored, (1) as to what
idea of God they had. (2) Who had led merely a life of piety. (3) Who
had frequented temples and made themselves guilty of all sins, but had
not explored themselves. (4) Who believed that they had led a Christian
life, in that they had lived well morally because of the civil laws. (5)
Who had been hypocrites.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

\[156\] They were explored as to what idea they had concerning God. It
was found that they had thought only of God the Father, and of the Lord
as like themselves; this is their belief, that the Father has compassion
for the Son's sake. And they had then thought nothing concerning the
Divine of the Lord. Thus, when they thought of one God they had not at
the same time thought of the Lord; when yet the Father cannot be
approached, since no one seeth Him but the Son alone; and that the Lord
is the Way, thus that the Father is to be approached by Him; and that
faith must be a faith in Him, and not in the Father. Hence they could
have no determinate idea of God except as of wind, or ether, or as of
nature in its leasts; and there is no Divine idea of the Lord when He is
thought of as a common man. The angels complained that they were
disturbed by their idea, which was communicated to them; and very many
of these spirits were brought down into the quarters round about. And
the places to which they came then appeared gloomy; for the true idea of
God makes clearness itself. Some of them were brought into places
underneath according to their life; some in order that they might be
further informed. And then only those who have lived well receive a
Divine idea concerning the Lord. I saw that those succeeded to their
place who had been kept concealed by the Lord lest they be hurt by the
contagion; these are meant in Revelation 20 by those who were slain and
were delivered out of the sepulchers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

\[157\] Afterwards I saw those who had led a life merely of piety, and
in idleness, led away from the others. They had been continually in
prayers, and not at all in truths, merely knowing that salvation is from
mercy, and that sins are remitted, but knowing nothing as to what sin
is. They had despised others in comparison with themselves, and had also
condemned them on account of cares of the world. Most of them had placed
merit in prayers. Of these also the angels made complaint, especially
because they induce sadness upon them. They dwelt at the side, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[157-1](#fn_19) wherefore they were driven away to
their own places; there they retain their worship, but they are driven
to work. They were brought down into the northern plain because they
were in ignorance of such things as lead to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

\[158\] Hypocrites who have spoken well concerning God, the neighbor and
the country, but in themselves have thought the contrary, were explored
and cast into hell. They wished to speak well concerning the Lord's
kingdom and concerning heaven, for this is then the country, but their
interior thought was explored, which was for themselves alone, and
against the rule of the country; wherefore, when they were let into
their interiors they perpetrated criminal things. They were cast into
hells, being first deprived of all that they had drawn from the Word and
from doctrines by which they had deluded others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

\[159\] Preachers who know something of the doctrine of their church,
and, after they have been instructed in the schools, and have come into
their functions, no longer care for it, nor for the Word, except that
they may preach and be elevated to higher offices or may gain wealth;
and thus who live in ease and are merely worldly and not Christians,
these are sent into a hell in the northern quarter towards the west, far
from the middle, where a dense fog is seen; and they then become
stupid. <span id="fr_20"></span>[159-1](#fn_20)

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

\[160\] All are separated according to their life, thus according to
their affections, not according to their external life, but according to
their internal, for this is the life of the thought from will or
affection, and no one has internal life except from religion; external
life is from morality and the state, and according to its laws;
wherefore moral life, unless it draw its quality from spiritual life,
and thereby change its appearance, is not spiritual life with any man;
consequently there is no conjunction with heaven, and they who are not
conjoined with heaven are conjoined with hell; and in such case,
although, in the world, they have not done evil, yet, after their
departure from the world, they do evil from delight; thus their state is
changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

\[161\] Concerning the Dragonists. Who are meant by the dragon, may be
deduced from what has been said in the \[Explanation\] of the
Apocalypse; also that by the tail of the dragon is meant faith separate
from charity, which drew down the stars from heaven, that is, the
knowledges of truth and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

\[162\] The dragonists were separated; many of them, when in the world,
had been priests, who had confirmed themselves in faith separate from
charity. They were explored in various ways, as, by the inspection, in
light, of the back of the head. With those who were merely natural and
hence infernal, the back of the head is filthy, hollowed out, and
altogether bony. They are led down to places where they are deprived of
the exteriors which have been induced on their faces by art, and the
face is regarded according to the affections and the interior thoughts
thence. What was human in their face is then taken away and something
diabolical succeeds in its place. They are also explored by being turned
to the east, and thus to the Lord; and then from the east there flows in
a spiritual affection concerning the Lord. And then they instantly turn
themselves back again to the west, like a spring, which recoils when it
has been twisted backwards. In this way, also, angels explore newcomers
to their heavenly societies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

\[163\] There are also some who desire to hear truths; they believe they
are saved if only they know them. But when they hear that truths are for
the sake of life, and that so far as truths of life become actual, so
far truths of faith also live, they then depart, feeling the utmost
disgust for life, but not so for the truths which are of faith, because
these they can talk about. <span id="fr_21"></span>[163-1](#fn_21) The
truths of faith which do not live unless truths of life become actually
such, may be enumerated; and it may be mentioned which are truths of
faith, and which truths of life. <span id="fr_22"></span>[163-2](#fn_22)

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

\[164\] Everyone can see that charity consists in not stealing from
anyone, either by artifice or openly; that charity consists in being
wholly unwilling to commit adultery with the wife of another; that
charity consists in not doing injury to the neighbor in hatred and
revenge; that charity consists in not reviling another, and so forth. He
who abhors these things as sins, has charity, for he loves the neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

\[165\] Afterwards I saw an immense number, both sent forth from the
heavens and rising up from below, and also of those who had been left,
who were allotted their places, mansions and habitations; in the east,
those in the clear good of love and of charity; at the west, those in
the obscure good of love and of charity; at the south, those in truths
from good in clearness; and at the north, those in truths from obscure
good; all acknowledging the Lord as the God of heaven and earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

\[166\] Many in the Christian world were also cast down who had an
understanding of truth but not a will of good. In the beginning such
spirits are accepted among the upright because they can speak about many
things, even truths; moreover in the beginning, the understanding with
them is enlightened but the will is laid to sleep. Such spirits were
collected together on the mountains in the western quarter. They league
themselves with the upright who are in the ultimate heaven, who do not
inquire as to things of the will, but believe that those who speak
intelligently are also good. But I saw such spirits, that they were
altogether devoid of charity; and they secretly consociate with the evil
and, first by reasonings and afterwards by arts, they infest the
upright, until they are conjoined and devoted to themselves; for in this
way they prevail against others. Many such were in heavens which they
had made for themselves; and they interposed themselves between the Lord
and man in the world, and so obstructed the way that the Divine
operation could not have its force. Very many of this character are in
the pride of self-intelligence from the love of self, and in the delight
of domineering. I once saw such spirits in a somewhat high mountain in
the western quarter toward the north, and everywhere round about on the
sides of the mountain; and they persuaded themselves and others that one
is in heaven from mere intellectual light and not at the same time from
heavenly heat; they are most dangerous. I saw them cast down from the
mountain and from the sides of the mountain, and a gulf underneath
opened itself and swallowed them up, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[166-1](#fn_23) and they sank deep down and were let
into darkness. For they then received falsities in place of truths, and
turned themselves to things contrary. Such is the understanding which is
led by an evil will. The evil who had conjoined themselves with them,
because they no longer had the power of resistance, were cast down into
their various hells, some into hells under the mountains, others into
hells under the plains. <span id="fr_24"></span>[166-2](#fn_24)

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

\[167\] Those who were in faith separate rose up in insurrection,
exciting a rebellion well-nigh universal. Their dogma and their learned
leaders rose up against those who acknowledged the Lord and a life of
love from Him. They stirred up all, except those who were in the eastern
quarter, these were guarded by the Lord, even to certain Mohammedans who
were in the northern quarter. They sent forth companies of fifty to many
places, in order that they might stir up those who were there; <span
id="fr_25"></span>[167-1](#fn_25) and those who remained and directed
were divided into companies of ten. Their purpose was to destroy all
those who acknowledged the Lord alone, and works together with faith as
being saving. Almost all of them were without religion, and hence
without conscience. But when they set out to do this, and were in the
endeavor to destroy others that were evil, a force flowed down from on
high, or from heaven, by which they were cast down to the hells, to a
number exceeding many thousands. They also conjoined themselves with
Papists and with monks who in the world had proclaimed themselves
Christs and had thought nothing of the Lord's Divinity. When the whole
crew had been cast down, the leaders were taken; and they became black
as devils, both within and without; and they became so monstrous that
they would be scarcely recognized as men. For man is such as he is as to
life; he who is black as to life, afterwards becomes black even from
head to heel. It was found that they had not rebelled from zeal on
account of the doctrine of faith alone, but from the delight of ruling
and of doing evil for the sake thereof. This was the combat of Michael
with the Dragon; for all such who have insinuated themselves into heaven
are drawn forth thence and cast down. They are Michael who worship the
Lord and \[who make\] works conjoined with faith saving; for since the
one is not given without the other, therefore they save conjointly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

\[168\] The combat of the Dragon with Michael was afterwards as follows,
for it lasted some days: A hand was seen stretched out over the heavens
by the Lord. In the western quarter towards the west <span
id="fr_26"></span>[168-1](#fn_26) there appeared as it were a great back
raised above the middle towards heaven; angels in immense number were
seen there. In that entrance were the dragonists; and they spoke with
them concerning the Lord and concerning the goods of charity and thence
of faith. All then turned towards them to hear what they would say. And
the dragonists were forced into the thoughts concerning the Lord and
concerning faith alone which they had in the world; and then most of
them had no Divine idea of the Lord, nor any idea of charity and works.
The angels answered them wisely on this matter, but in vain. They said,
moreover, that all the angels in the heavens do not perceive the matter
thus; but it was in vain. <span id="fr_27"></span>[168-2](#fn_27) And at
last, after the combat, when the dragonists were only willing to give
further response outside of the matter or the truth, but could not, they
were adjudged to be cast down from every place where such spirits were.
But when they said they would resist, the Lord was seen descending from
the sun in a bright cloud, and He gave judgment that all who were found
to be such should be separated and alienated. And then they were cast
down successively and by turns according to the connection of the
societies of heaven; towards the western quarter an immense number, and
a thousand then appeared as one. The grievous collision of truth and
falsity which pertained to temptation was felt within me. The whole
western quarter was full of such spirits who had been cast down from the
heavens; and then the earth was seen to open, and they were cast down
and were covered over with a dense cloud. They were all such as would
never have abstained from thinking and willing evils but only from doing
them by reason of fear. This happened in 1757 on the 11th day of
April. <span id="fr_28"></span>[168-3](#fn_28) From the southern quarter
to the western the dragonists were seen in a curved line under the
figure of a tail; at the south, there, were those who had been skilled
in the degrees of justification and had confirmed these with themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

\[169\] The Lord's heaven was first inherited by such as had
acknowledged Him and had lived well, who had had heaven in themselves;
afterwards, succeeded those who wished merely to have heaven outside
themselves. To these latter it was also granted to make heavens for
themselves, which they called heaven when they saw the magnificent
things, such as palaces, porticos, paradises, and many serviceable
things. But, since their internals were not in correspondence, such
things disappeared; and then by phantasies and the abuses of
correspondences and by many arts, they provided for themselves things
similar. This did not last long, however, for they placed everything in
delicacies and in bodily pleasures, and thus they became wholly external
such as they had been in the world; and then came the judgment, after
which followed continual purifications of the societies from such
spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

\[170\] Many of those who are in faith alone, because they have no
conjunction with heaven but all conjunction with hell, are in the love
of ruling. They are explored in the following way: From the societies of
heaven they look down to the places beneath; and where they see spirits,
whether many or few, walking about there, they rule their thoughts,
infest them in various ways, and by phantasies cause many things to
appear to them to which they are led; their joy is to precipitate them
into hells. They are of such a character that they do not want to be led
but to lead; this is their delight; wherefore they cannot be led by the
Lord, for the Lord leads through the affection of use, and this is not
their affection. With them use is to domineer, and, therefore, they
successively deny the Lord, and rely upon arts, which are many, by which
they have dominion. They put their trust in their own prudence, and
ascribe nothing to the Divine Providence and when the reins are
loosened, they rush finally into such a state that they think there is
no God. And yet inseated in them is the purpose of domineering over
heaven and to be there in place of God. This is inseated in the love of
ruling for the sake of self. I once saw that a certain spirit in a small
society was permitted to set in order those who were there. He set them
in order as a spider sets its webs, placing himself in the middle and
making paths in every direction, with the command that all should look
to him; but that society was swallowed up by the hells which were below.
All who are of such a character wish to be in the heavens; and they
climb up into high places, where they believe that the exercising of
dominion is the delight of life, but use is this; but when they have
been explored they are cast down. They are wanderers; they direct their
course from one society to another, often seeking to obtain office.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

\[171\] They are distinguished according to their ideas of the Divine,
as (1) They who have an idea concerning the union with the Father. (2)
They who have an idea solely of the Lord's Human and nothing of the
Divine, although they had known of it. (3) They who have acknowledged
three Persons and have not made them one God by essence; these are
specially distinguished. (4) They who have an idea solely of the Father;
these are without a God. (5) They who have not believed in the Lord from
eternity. <span id="fr_29"></span>[171-1](#fn_29)

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

\[172\] All those are preserved who in the world had acknowledged the
Divine of the Lord and had shunned evils as sins, especially those who
had acknowledged the Divine Human, and had approached Him. But the rest
who had thought of the Lord as of a common man, are cast back among the
Socinians and Arians who, at first, are under the heavens nearest above
the hells, and afterwards are in the hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

\[173\] They who were in faith alone persecuted me. They brought
persecution upon me <span id="fr_30"></span>[173-1](#fn_30) by bringing
me into a state like that in which they themselves were by means of a
like respiration and a like pulse; thus also into like thought and
affection. And, in respect to God and salvation, I was in an obscure
cloudiness as though immersed in water; and it was perceived that I had
no communication <span id="fr_31"></span>[173-2](#fn_31) with heaven;
and it was said that they have a similar communication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

\[174\] Many of those who are in faith alone and had committed nothing
of truth and good to life, for the reason that they had rejected all
moral life from a spiritual origin, saying that it effects nothing, and
that evils do not condemn, and that the Lord had fulfilled the Law for
them, and had taken away damnation, and that of themselves they cannot
do good still less fulfill the Law, many of these become rebels and put
forth various scandals against the Lord, as is the case with all who
have not lived their religion, even if in the world they had not thought
wickedly concerning the Lord. They were explored and it was found that
they had committed nothing of truth and good to life, and that they
merely knew something from the Word which was like any other scientific
matter in which there is nothing vital. And they then appeared without
clothing, for clothing signifies the truths of life; and then they
understand nothing at all, even as to what was right and just. It was
said to them that they had lived without religion, and they were cast
into the southern gulf, and were thus carried away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

\[175\] Some of this character were let out of hells in order that they
might be transferred to another hell. And it was then permitted them to
act according to their will. Then they at once desired to force their
way up to higher places by means of phantasies, and they were in the
endeavor to do evil. It was recalled to their memory that, in hell, they
had said to each other, that if it were allowed them to go out, they
would be just as wise as others. Certain ones then spoke with them,
saying something of intelligence in which was the light of truth; and
when they heard them they were seized with such anguish that they fled
away. This was done several times in order that it might be confirmed
that such spirits, even when the state is changed, do not sustain the
light of truth, thus of intelligence. They said that they were doing
them harm, but answer was made that with each other they said otherwise.
Hence it was made clear that they who are in hell can never live in the
light of heaven, thus in heaven; and least of all in the heat of heaven,
which is love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

\[176\] After the judgment, all societies were disposed according to
nations, in an admirable order. The order was according to affections in
the heavens, and according to cupidities in the hells. They are then
straightway purified by means of communications with the evil, and
thence as it were by a fermentation; and then the alien are cast down
like things heterogeneous. Sometimes the purification is effected by the
society becoming like one man; they who are in the man remain, they who
are outside the man are rejected. After the judgment, it is not
permitted to thus ascend into heaven and be cast down thence, but each
one is determined in such direction that he may go the way that leads to
his society.

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

\[177\] Afterwards societies were formed most distinctly according to
all the genera and species of the affections of good and of truth; and
also corresponding infernal societies. All spirits, after they have been
vastated, are now led along by designated ways tending to the interior
societies which correspond and are analogous to their life; nor are they
allowed as before to turn aside in any other direction, or to stay in
other places, still less to form for themselves societies and as it were
heavens, according to life in externals. It is perhaps believed in the
world, that man is saved and comes into heavenly societies according to
his thoughts which are of the understanding of truth; but no one is
saved according to these, but according to affections and thoughts
thence, thus according to the good of the will and thence the truth of
the understanding. For man is man from his will and his understanding
thence, and not from the truth of the understanding separate from the
good of the will; the understanding merely teaches how man must will and
act. Many are led along the designated ways with difficulty, for they
wish to go to the sides where they are sensible of the presence of the
good both below and above, to whom they are eager to do evil; for all
ways are such as are the societies above and below them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

\[178\] The arranging of the Reformed after the judgment lasted a long
time, for the reason that the Word is with them and the Lord is known,
and they are therefore in the middle; and the greatest light is there,
which passes from that middle to the peripheries where are also the
Gentiles. On this account the arranging of the Reformed lasted a long
time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="179.">179.</span></span>

\[179\] All those are retained in the heavens who have had the delight
of some use, or of some function for the sake of use, whether it be the
delight of business from sincerity, or of some study, provided only
there be the delight of use and the acknowledgment of God. These can be
held in order by the Lord, because the Lord inflows into uses. But they
who have led a life of idleness, merely in social companies, or in
offices solely for their own glory, cannot be ruled by the Lord; and
because they are not members of the society, considered as a man, they
are rejected. There is an application to the function of the blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="180.">180.</span></span>

\[180\] HE-GOATS; THEY ARE THOSE WHO ARE IN FAITH SEPARATE FROM CHARITY.
Speech was held with some in regard to the he-goat mentioned in Daniel
and to its combat with the ram; and also in regard to the judgment on
the goats and sheep mentioned in Matthew. And beneath me there then
appeared a he-goat with great horns which was seen to infest the sheep
and to treat them badly with its horns, and also to toss them hither and
thither. And inquiry was made as to what this was, and it was said that
this was the appearance of those who are in faith separate from charity,
and of their combat with those who have been in the life of charity. And
it was said that before their own eyes they do not look like this but
like men sharply disputing with each other; and that he who seemed like
a he-goats, was one who was in faith separate, while they who seemed
like sheep were those who were in the life of charity. For sometimes,
and especially at a distance, spirits appear according to their
affections, inclinations, and their principles therefrom. For example,
when anyone is thinking from the understanding, he appears as though
sitting on a horse, and some appear in other ways. Hence it was made
evident that by the horned he-goat in Daniel, and by the he-goats in
Matthew, none others are meant. It is supposed that all the evil are
meant by the he-goats, but no others of them are meant than those who
have lived wickedly and have nevertheless confessed faith alone.
\[Marginal Note:\] \[182\] After the Last Judgment was accomplished many
were seen who had been scattered among others at the back in the west;
at a distance they appeared like he-goats, and some like dragons; who
because they wished to seduce the upright were removed thence and driven
into deserts where there was scarcely a shrub.

<span class="margnote"><span id="181.">181.</span></span>

\[181\] In like manner afterwards, those who were in faith separate,
appeared as he-goats, and those who were in the life of charity as
sheep, and their argumentations and wranglings, as combats.

<span class="margnote"><span id="182.">182.</span></span>

\[183\]. THE DRAGON. By "the dragon" (Revelation 12), and by his "two
beasts" (Chap. 13), no others are meant than those who are in faith
separated from charity both in doctrine and in life, by "the dragon,"
all those who have confirmed themselves in that faith, and by the beast
from the sea, they who have confirmed those principles by means of
reasonings from the natural man, and by "the beast from the earth," who
is afterwards meant by "the false prophet," are meant confirmations from
the Word in favor of that faith. That such are meant by "the dragon and
his two beasts," may be clearly seen from each particular there written
about them, understood in the spiritual sense; which can be seen to the
life if the things written on Revelation should be given to the public,
for they are all confirmed from heaven; also that by "the tail of the
dragon," is meant the confirmation of that faith by means of the degrees
of justification which are treated of in \[Spiritual Experiences, n.
6014\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="183.">183.</span></span>

\[184\] The Apocalypse treats of the two religious systems in the
Christian world, that with the Reformed and that with the Papists, for
the whole of Christianity is from these two, since they are the ruling
systems. The religious system with the Reformed is a system of faith
alone, which has devastated the church; and that with the Papists deals
with the Lord's vicarious authority over the church, thus over the souls
of men, and also over heaven, that resides with the popes and the
primates and subordinate officials of the church. It is these two ruling
systems of religion which \[have been rejected\] by the Last Judgment,
concerning which we will treat later.

<span class="margnote"><span id="184.">184.</span></span>

\[185\] That they who are in faith separate are meant by "the dragon and
his beasts." \[186\] That by "the dragon" are meant those who are in
faith separate was made evident from the following circumstances: It is
related that "the dragon stood by the woman about to bring forth, that
he might devour her \[offspring\];" and that, by "the son, which the
woman was about to bring forth," is meant the doctrine concerning the
Lord and concerning the life of charity, was made evident from this,
that when that doctrine was being written many of those who are in faith
alone were present, and in such fury, that I could scarcely have written
had I not been guarded by the Lord by means of angels; and it appeared
as though they wished to rend it and tear it to pieces. By "the woman"
there, is meant the New Church which is the New Jerusalem, and by her
son, the doctrine concerning the Lord and concerning the life of
charity; and by "the dragon," are meant those who are in faith separate,
because such then was their nature, and because they were about to do
what is described afterwards, by persecuting the woman, and casting
forth water like a flood, that he might swallow her up; by "water like a
flood," falsities are signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="185.">185.</span></span>

\[187\] There was a certain preacher who was in faith alone; he appeared
to others altogether like a dragon, and he also seemed to hover around a
woman about to bring forth, eager to devour her child; and yet, seen
near at hand, he was standing near those who defended the life of
charity and the Lord. He was a preacher at The Hague.

<span class="margnote"><span id="186.">186.</span></span>

\[188\] Of those who are in faith separate there are some who correspond
to the head of the dragon, some who correspond to his body, and some who
correspond to his tail. The latter are they who are in the conceit of
those principles, for the tail is the continuation of the spinal cord,
and this again of the brain. There are some who correspond to the
poison.

<span class="margnote"><span id="187.">187.</span></span>

\[189\] Concerning the back and hinder part seen like the tail of a
dragon, see above \[n. 134-179\]. \[On the Reformed\], towards the end
of the chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="188.">188.</span></span>

\[190\] Moreover at the left was seen a hillside upon which ascended
many of those who were in faith alone; and on the summit there, they
have some bearded old man who had been bearded in the world, and
sometimes of lowly condition. This man persuades them that he is God the
Father. It is a rock and rocky places are around about it. And when they
do not wish to be seen they betake themselves behind the mountain. These
are they who have laid snares for all who do not believe like
themselves, believing that this is allowable. The life of charity they
make of no account. By their interiors they make one with the hells.
They who appeared round about the bottom of the mountain were seen like
an immense dragon stretching itself towards the places below; and its
tail was seen elevated and extended from the mountain to the lowest
parts thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="189.">189.</span></span>

\[191\] FAITH ALONE. The interior sphere of spirits was perceived to be
completely filled with affections, which are ends, of becoming great, of
growing rich and of being wise for the sake of glory, and little, if at
all, on account of the common good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="190.">190.</span></span>

\[192\] When, from the Lord, I was in the faith of the knowledges of
truth it was found that evil spirits were powerless to refute them or
even to reason about them as when I was in the knowledges that the Lord
rules the universe, that the Lord alone is life, and that the proprium
of man is nothing but evil, and others of a like kind. Evil spirits
hearing these, although they did not believe them yet could not
contradict, for truth is averse to it, because the intellectual does not
admit any thinking against it. From this it was made clear that those
who are in the simple faith of truth resist evils. I also saw some, who
were in truths, who passed through many hells and all the infernals
retreated, nor could they approach, still less do any evil. But he who
believes in the faith set forth in the church at this day, cannot do
this; the infernals are in no way troubled at their approach, because
truth from the Lord is not in that faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="191.">191.</span></span>

\[193\] Concerning certain spirits who have no spiritual life because
they are in ignorance of truth; and that life is inspired into them by
the Lord through angels. I once felt a somewhat intense cold from the
soles of the feet up to the knee; it became evident that there were cold
spirits \[present\]. It was told me that they were those who in the
world had lived in absolute ignorance of God. After they had been
elevated I heard them talking, and I could perceive scarcely anything
vital in their speech. They spoke as though they were making inanimate
statues speak, and I despaired of any life long remaining in them. They
were like automatons or sounding sculptures. But presently I heard that
they had been let into a species of activity appearing like a species of
gyration. Angels were caring for them by infusing life into them, which
they did with such solicitude and devotion, that it can scarcely be
described, nor did they suffer themselves to be wearied. In the meantime
they waved them, as is said in the Word of the things sacrificed, that
they were waved by the Levites, the reason being, that they might
receive spiritual life. When this had been done for some little time,
they began to be vivified, and to be no longer of such a nature as
before; thus they began to speak something in consociation, saying that
they were in heaven. The work was continued by the Lord through angels
during the whole night, and after this they became such as to be capable
of being insinuated or inserted into some companies in which they were
afterwards perfected. For they were receptive of life because they had
nothing repugnant thereto, as have those who confirm themselves in
falsities against truths. The manner in which life was successively
insinuated into them was represented by colors, the first of life by a
marble color increasing in whiteness, the second by a growing azure
color in which was the white, and the third by patches of bright clouds
rising up. Their quality was afterwards shown me by a blowing from them
on my face, and also into the anterior region of the breast. It was
somewhat cold but verging to heat. This was from the Lord alone by means
of angels. They may be said to be resuscitated from no life into some
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="192.">192.</span></span>

\[194\] There was one who held it as a principle that faith alone saves;
it was said to him that faith is like science and knowledge which should
be for the sake of use and good, and that otherwise it is nothing but a
science; also that he is insane who believes that science alone saves,
when yet all science and knowledge has good as an end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="193.">193.</span></span>

\[195\] He who has fought against evils, and, from the Lord, has come
into the love of good and truth, is in the knowledges of truth and good
as it were from himself; he sees them in himself, and they are inscribed
on his heart, as is said in Isaiah and Joel. The rational is then
enlightened. But prior to this he does not know them, except from the
memory alone, in which case he does not see them except externally, and
if they are not seen internally they are dry and transitory. This is the
life in truths; for all the things of truth are inscribed on the love,
just as, with every animal, all things which are for use are inscribed
on the affection, as in the case of bees, birds, and other animals; so
also are they inscribed on man if he is in the genuine love of truth and
good. It is from this that the angels have their wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="194.">194.</span></span>

\[196\] I was led through societies or mansions of heaven, and I spoke
with many. And when I came to mansions of the third heaven, where are
the celestial, I wished to speak with them about the knowledges which
are called knowledges of faith and which in themselves are truths. I
marveled that they did not wish to make any response to these things.
They said that they see all things in themselves from the love in which
they are, which was love to the Lord and mutual love, saying that the
truths of their faith were inscribed on their life, and that therefore
they see them from the light of truth which is from the Lord, and this
because in good is contained all truth. They also said, What are
knowledges except for the sake of uses? and uses are goods, and goods
are of love. It was told me that they are of this nature because, in the
world, they had applied all the truths they had heard to their life. All
their love and all their faith consists in deeds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="195.">195.</span></span>

\[197\] Those who are in faith alone believe in instantaneous salvation
and pure mercy; and therefore they implore mercy alone and believe that
they are instantly saved the moment they receive faith, even though it
be in the last hour of death. They also believe that the remission of
all sins consists in the wiping away of all evils. They have no
comprehension of remission by means of repentance of life, but only of
remission by means of faith arising from thinking such things as they
call of their faith; thus they are ignorant of all the means of
salvation. It was shown them that such things are a phantasy; and this
phantasy was represented as being interiorly full of poisonous serpents.
The nature of the phantasy was shown in a ludicrous manner, namely, that
they think and also wish to void those serpents through their
posteriors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="196.">196.</span></span>

\[198\] When they think from their doctrine about faith alone, and are
opposed by the statement, in The Epistle of James, that men should show
their faith by works, there appears as it were a knife flying forth to
slay those who perceive this to be the case. And from one side comes
forth an idea of Luther, and from the other, whither the knife flies, an
idea of James, although Luther and James themselves are not there. The
reason is, because, Luther excluded the Epistle of James.

<span class="margnote"><span id="197.">197.</span></span>

\[199\] Below, at the left, are those who from doctrine have confirmed
themselves in regard to faith alone, but yet have lived a life of
charity from the principle that faith produces the works of charity.
These, because they have lived well, are accepted and have conjunction
with heaven. Still it is not a direct conjunction, and this for the
reason that they hold it as a principle that it is faith that produces
the works of charity, when yet faith is of the thought, and thought
produces nothing; it only teaches what should be done, and if a man does
what it teaches, then it is not from any faith; for knowledges of truth
do not become knowledges of faith until man has done them. It is like
one who believes that the sight operates into the hands to enable a man
to work, or into the feet to enable him to walk and not stumble, when
yet the sight does not operate in this way, but it teaches and brings
things to view. That this is an inversion was shown by it being given to
a certain spirit to walk on a road and to then believe that it was the
understanding that was leading him. He then went from the east to the
west or from the south to the north, thus from truths to falsities, and
into obscurity. But his state was changed \[so that he believed\] that
the will or love was leading him; he then walked from the west to the
east and from the north to the south, thus into good and into truth in
light. It was told them that with those who have had this belief the
state is successively inverted, and that then they begin to be
regenerated and come into the angelic life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="198.">198.</span></span>

\[200\] They who, from doctrine, are in the principle that faith alone
saves, and yet have led a good life, constitute certain societies in
which they are in the middle, while at the circumferences are those who
are not of such a quality, and lastly those who are evil, so that they
are surrounded by the evil. It was told them that they still dwell among
the evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="199.">199.</span></span>

\[201\] It was made known by living experience that those who have been
in faith alone and have led a moral life, had made heavens for
themselves, where they seemed to themselves to have been in light; but
it was shown that it is a wintry light, for when angels looked thither,
in place of light there appeared a thick darkness. Those who go there,
and are at the same time in charity, feel a pain in the breast, the
stomach and the knees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="200.">200.</span></span>

\[202\] Concerning those who are continually wrangling about truths.
There are hells where they do nothing else but wrangle about truths. One
of them was under the groins. In that hell were those who believe that
they know everything and that nothing is hidden from them, when yet they
do not know anything, except that their faith is the all of the church
with men. There are those there who, by reason of their belief that they
know all things, think that they alone are entitled to talk; they
despise the laity. They are continually saying that this is the truth
itself, and that it cannot be contradicted. I have there heard perpetual
contradictions and quarrels which went so far that they wished to attack
their opponents with their fists, but they are held back by others. They
appear in that place as if they were tearing garments; and from the
place is heard as it were the gnashing of teeth. Thus do they go forward
and back and thus do they wrangle, not at all for the sake of truth but
for the sake of themselves from the pride of their own intelligence and
from the itch of domineering. They are removed from others, because they
disturb all tranquillity of mind and take away the freedom of thinking
from the Word, inducing their own opinions as though they were from the
Divine and infesting all who do not receive. At this day there are many
such consociations drawn from the Christian world, because there they
have divided the church on questions of opinion concerning what is to be
believed, and the good of life they not only reject, but they also say
that they know not what it is unless it be to give to the poor and to
hear preachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[154-1](ljp04.htm#fr_18) See SE 5398.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[157-1](ljp04.htm#fr_19) See SE 5392.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[159-1](ljp04.htm#fr_20) See SE 5514.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[163-1](ljp04.htm#fr_21) See SE 5540, 5541.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[163-2](ljp04.htm#fr_22) Tafel has, delati,
possibly it is detecti. See SE 5696, 5698.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[166-1](ljp04.htm#fr_23) See SE 5698.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[166-2](ljp04.htm#fr_24) See SE 5699.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[167-1](ljp04.htm#fr_25) See SE 5731 1/2, 5758.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[168-1](ljp04.htm#fr_26) The M.S. has,
ocvcidentem, "west." In SE 5742 it is septentrionalem, "north."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[168-2](ljp04.htm#fr_27) See SE 5722.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[168-3](ljp04.htm#fr_28) See SE 5746.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[171-1](ljp04.htm#fr_29) See SE 5821.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[173-1](ljp04.htm#fr_30) Tafel has, eamque mihi
intulerunt; the MS., me persecuti mihi intulerunt. In SE 5827 it is, Se
congregarunt, et violentiam inferebant, "They gathered themselves
together, and inflicted violence."

<span id="fn_31"></span>[173-2](ljp04.htm#fr_31) See SE 5827.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 201-250](ljp05)
