[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03020.md) 
[Next](daf03022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By Barbarians. Part V.

The personal animosities and hereditary feuds of the Barbarians were
suspended by the strong necessity of their affairs; and the brave
Adolphus, the brother-in-law of the deceased monarch, was unanimously
elected to succeed to his throne. The character and political system of
the new king of the Goths may be best understood from his own
conversation with an illustrious citizen of Narbonne; who afterwards, in
a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, related it to St. Jerom, in the presence
of the historian Orosius. "In the full confidence of valor and victory,
I once aspired (said Adolphus) to change the face of the universe; to
obliterate the name of Rome; to erect on its ruins the dominion of the
Goths; and to acquire, like Augustus, the immortal fame of the founder
of a new empire. By repeated experiments, I was gradually convinced,
that laws are essentially necessary to maintain and regulate a
well-constituted state; and that the fierce, untractable humor of the
Goths was incapable of bearing the salutary yoke of laws and civil
government. From that moment I proposed to myself a different object of
glory and ambition; and it is now my sincere wish that the gratitude of
future ages should acknowledge the merit of a stranger, who employed the
sword of the Goths, not to subvert, but to restore and maintain, the
prosperity of the Roman empire."  <span
id="fr_542"></span>[130](#fn_542.md) With these pacific views, the
successor of Alaric suspended the operations of war; and seriously
negotiated with the Imperial court a treaty of friendship and alliance.
It was the interest of the ministers of Honorius, who were now released
from the obligation of their extravagant oath, to deliver Italy from the
intolerable weight of the Gothic powers; and they readily accepted their
service against the tyrants and Barbarians who infested the provinces
beyond the Alps.  <span id="fr_543"></span>[131](#fn_543.md) Adolphus,
assuming the character of a Roman general, directed his march from the
extremity of Campania to the southern provinces of Gaul. His troops,
either by force of agreement, immediately occupied the cities of
Narbonne, Thoulouse, and Bordeaux; and though they were repulsed by
Count Boniface from the walls of Marseilles, they soon extended their
quarters from the Mediterranean to the Ocean. The oppressed provincials
might exclaim, that the miserable remnant, which the enemy had spared,
was cruelly ravished by their pretended allies; yet some specious colors
were not wanting to palliate, or justify the violence of the Goths. The
cities of Gaul, which they attacked, might perhaps be considered as in a
state of rebellion against the government of Honorius: the articles of
the treaty, or the secret instructions of the court, might sometimes be
alleged in favor of the seeming usurpations of Adolphus; and the guilt
of any irregular, unsuccessful act of hostility might always be imputed,
with an appearance of truth, to the ungovernable spirit of a Barbarian
host, impatient of peace or discipline. The luxury of Italy had been
less effectual to soften the temper, than to relax the courage, of the
Goths; and they had imbibed the vices, without imitating the arts and
institutions, of civilized society.  <span
id="fr_544"></span>[132](#fn_544.md)

The professions of Adolphus were probably sincere, and his attachment to
the cause of the republic was secured by the ascendant which a Roman
princess had acquired over the heart and understanding of the Barbarian
king. Placidia,  <span id="fr_545"></span>[133](#fn_545.md) the daughter of
the great Theodosius, and of Galla, his second wife, had received a
royal education in the palace of Constantinople; but the eventful story
of her life is connected with the revolutions which agitated the Western
empire under the reign of her brother Honorius. When Rome was first
invested by the arms of Alaric, Placidia, who was then about twenty
years of age, resided in the city; and her ready consent to the death of
her cousin Serena has a cruel and ungrateful appearance, which,
according to the circumstances of the action, may be aggravated, or
excused, by the consideration of her tender age.  <span
id="fr_546"></span>[134](#fn_546.md) The victorious Barbarians detained,
either as a hostage or a captive,  <span
id="fr_547"></span>[135](#fn_547.md) the sister of Honorius; but, while she
was exposed to the disgrace of following round Italy the motions of a
Gothic camp, she experienced, however, a decent and respectful
treatment. The authority of Jornandes, who praises the beauty of
Placidia, may perhaps be counterbalanced by the silence, the expressive
silence, of her flatterers: yet the splendor of her birth, the bloom of
youth, the elegance of manners, and the dexterous insinuation which she
condescended to employ, made a deep impression on the mind of Adolphus;
and the Gothic king aspired to call himself the brother of the emperor.
The ministers of Honorius rejected with disdain the proposal of an
alliance so injurious to every sentiment of Roman pride; and repeatedly
urged the restitution of Placidia, as an indispensable condition of the
treaty of peace. But the daughter of Theodosius submitted, without
reluctance, to the desires of the conqueror, a young and valiant prince,
who yielded to Alaric in loftiness of stature, but who excelled in the
more attractive qualities of grace and beauty. The marriage of Adolphus
and Placidia  <span id="fr_548"></span>[136](#fn_548.md) was consummated
before the Goths retired from Italy; and the solemn, perhaps the
anniversary day of their nuptials was afterwards celebrated in the house
of Ingenuus, one of the most illustrious citizens of Narbonne in Gaul.
The bride, attired and adorned like a Roman empress, was placed on a
throne of state; and the king of the Goths, who assumed, on this
occasion, the Roman habit, contented himself with a less honorable seat
by her side. The nuptial gift, which, according to the custom of his
nation,  <span id="fr_549"></span>[137](#fn_549.md) was offered to
Placidia, consisted of the rare and magnificent spoils of her country.
Fifty beautiful youths, in silken robes, carried a basin in each hand;
and one of these basins was filled with pieces of gold, the other with
precious stones of an inestimable value. Attalus, so long the sport of
fortune, and of the Goths, was appointed to lead the chorus of the
Hymeneal song; and the degraded emperor might aspire to the praise of a
skilful musician. The Barbarians enjoyed the insolence of their triumph;
and the provincials rejoiced in this alliance, which tempered, by the
mild influence of love and reason, the fierce spirit of their Gothic
lord.  <span id="fr_550"></span>[138](#fn_550.md)

The hundred basins of gold and gems, presented to Placidia at her
nuptial feast, formed an inconsiderable portion of the Gothic treasures;
of which some extraordinary specimens may be selected from the history
of the successors of Adolphus. Many curious and costly ornaments of pure
gold, enriched with jewels, were found in their palace of Narbonne, when
it was pillaged, in the sixth century, by the Franks: sixty cups, caps,
or chalices; fifteen patens, or plates, for the use of the communion;
twenty boxes, or cases, to hold the books of the Gospels: this
consecrated wealth  <span id="fr_551"></span>[139](#fn_551.md) was
distributed by the son of Clovis among the churches of his dominions,
and his pious liberality seems to upbraid some former sacrilege of the
Goths. They possessed, with more security of conscience, the famous
missorium, or great dish for the service of the table, of massy gold, of
the weight of five hundred pounds, and of far superior value, from the
precious stones, the exquisite workmanship, and the tradition, that it
had been presented by Aetius, the patrician, to Torismond, king of the
Goths. One of the successors of Torismond purchased the aid of the
French monarch by the promise of this magnificent gift. When he was
seated on the throne of Spain, he delivered it with reluctance to the
ambassadors of Dagobert; despoiled them on the road; stipulated, after a
long negotiation, the inadequate ransom of two hundred thousand pieces
of gold; and preserved the missorium, as the pride of the Gothic
treasury.  <span id="fr_552"></span>[140](#fn_552.md) When that treasury,
after the conquest of Spain, was plundered by the Arabs, they admired,
and they have celebrated, another object still more remarkable; a table
of considerable size, of one single piece of solid emerald,  <span
id="fr_553"></span>[141](#fn_553.md) encircled with three rows of fine
pearls, supported by three hundred and sixty-five feet of gems and massy
gold, and estimated at the price of five hundred thousand pieces of
gold.  <span id="fr_554"></span>[142](#fn_554.md) Some portion of the
Gothic treasures might be the gift of friendship, or the tribute of
obedience; but the far greater part had been the fruits of war and
rapine, the spoils of the empire, and perhaps of Rome.

After the deliverance of Italy from the oppression of the Goths, some
secret counsellor was permitted, amidst the factions of the palace, to
heal the wounds of that afflicted country.  <span
id="fr_555"></span>[143](#fn_555.md) By a wise and humane regulation, the
eight provinces which had been the most deeply injured, Campania,
Tuscany, Picenum, Samnium, Apulia, Calabria, Bruttium, and Lucania,
obtained an indulgence of five years: the ordinary tribute was reduced
to one fifth, and even that fifth was destined to restore and support
the useful institution of the public posts. By another law, the lands
which had been left without inhabitants or cultivation, were granted,
with some diminution of taxes, to the neighbors who should occupy, or
the strangers who should solicit them; and the new possessors were
secured against the future claims of the fugitive proprietors. About the
same time a general amnesty was published in the name of Honorius, to
abolish the guilt and memory of all the involuntary offences which had
been committed by his unhappy subjects, during the term of the public
disorder and calamity A decent and respectful attention was paid to the
restoration of the capital; the citizens were encouraged to rebuild the
edifices which had been destroyed or damaged by hostile fire; and
extraordinary supplies of corn were imported from the coast of Africa.
The crowds that so lately fled before the sword of the Barbarians, were
soon recalled by the hopes of plenty and pleasure; and Albinus, praefect
of Rome, informed the court, with some anxiety and surprise, that, in a
single day, he had taken an account of the arrival of fourteen thousand
strangers.  <span id="fr_556"></span>[144](#fn_556.md) In less than seven
years, the vestiges of the Gothic invasion were almost obliterated; and
the city appeared to resume its former splendor and tranquillity. The
venerable matron replaced her crown of laurel, which had been ruffled by
the storms of war; and was still amused, in the last moment of her
decay, with the prophecies of revenge, of victory, and of eternal
dominion.  <span id="fr_557"></span>[145](#fn_557.md)

This apparent tranquillity was soon disturbed by the approach of a
hostile armament from the country which afforded the daily subsistence
of the Roman people. Heraclian, count of Africa, who, under the most
difficult and distressful circumstances, had supported, with active
loyalty, the cause of Honorius, was tempted, in the year of his
consulship, to assume the character of a rebel, and the title of
emperor. The ports of Africa were immediately filled with the naval
forces, at the head of which he prepared to invade Italy: and his fleet,
when it cast anchor at the mouth of the Tyber, indeed surpassed the
fleets of Xerxes and Alexander, if all the vessels, including the royal
galley, and the smallest boat, did actually amount to the incredible
number of three thousand two hundred.  <span
id="fr_558"></span>[146](#fn_558.md) Yet with such an armament, which might
have subverted, or restored, the greatest empires of the earth, the
African usurper made a very faint and feeble impression on the provinces
of his rival. As he marched from the port, along the road which leads to
the gates of Rome, he was encountered, terrified, and routed, by one of
the Imperial captains; and the lord of this mighty host, deserting his
fortune and his friends, ignominiously fled with a single ship.  <span
id="fr_559"></span>[147](#fn_559.md) When Heraclian landed in the harbor of
Carthage, he found that the whole province, disdaining such an unworthy
ruler, had returned to their allegiance. The rebel was beheaded in the
ancient temple of Memory his consulship was abolished:  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[148](#fn_560.md) and the remains of his private
fortune, not exceeding the moderate sum of four thousand pounds of gold,
were granted to the brave Constantius, who had already defended the
throne, which he afterwards shared with his feeble sovereign. Honorius
viewed, with supine indifference, the calamities of Rome and Italy;
 <span id="fr_561"></span>[149](#fn_561.md) but the rebellious attempts of
Attalus and Heraclian, against his personal safety, awakened, for a
moment, the torpid instinct of his nature. He was probably ignorant of
the causes and events which preserved him from these impending dangers;
and as Italy was no longer invaded by any foreign or domestic enemies,
he peaceably existed in the palace of Ravenna, while the tyrants beyond
the Alps were repeatedly vanquished in the name, and by the lieutenants,
of the son of Theodosius.  <span id="fr_562"></span>[150](#fn_562.md) In
the course of a busy and interesting narrative I might possibly forget
to mention the death of such a prince: and I shall therefore take the
precaution of observing, in this place, that he survived the last siege
of Rome about thirteen years.

The usurpation of Constantine, who received the purple from the legions
of Britain, had been successful, and seemed to be secure. His title was
acknowledged, from the wall of Antoninus to the columns of Hercules;
and, in the midst of the public disorder he shared the dominion, and the
plunder, of Gaul and Spain, with the tribes of Barbarians, whose
destructive progress was no longer checked by the Rhine or Pyrenees.
Stained with the blood of the kinsmen of Honorius, he extorted, from the
court of Ravenna, with which he secretly corresponded, the ratification
of his rebellious claims Constantine engaged himself, by a solemn
promise, to deliver Italy from the Goths; advanced as far as the banks
of the Po; and after alarming, rather than assisting, his pusillanimous
ally, hastily returned to the palace of Arles, to celebrate, with
intemperate luxury, his vain and ostentatious triumph. But this
transient prosperity was soon interrupted and destroyed by the revolt of
Count Gerontius, the bravest of his generals; who, during the absence of
his son Constants, a prince already invested with the Imperial purple,
had been left to command in the provinces of Spain. From some reason, of
which we are ignorant, Gerontius, instead of assuming the diadem, placed
it on the head of his friend Maximus, who fixed his residence at
Tarragona, while the active count pressed forwards, through the
Pyrenees, to surprise the two emperors, Constantine and Constans, before
they could prepare for their defence. The son was made prisoner at
Vienna, and immediately put to death: and the unfortunate youth had
scarcely leisure to deplore the elevation of his family; which had
tempted, or compelled him, sacrilegiously to desert the peaceful
obscurity of the monastic life. The father maintained a siege within the
walls of Arles; but those walls must have yielded to the assailants, had
not the city been unexpectedly relieved by the approach of an Italian
army. The name of Honorius, the proclamation of a lawful emperor,
astonished the contending parties of the rebels. Gerontius, abandoned by
his own troops, escaped to the confines of Spain; and rescued his name
from oblivion, by the Roman courage which appeared to animate the last
moments of his life. In the middle of the night, a great body of his
perfidious soldiers surrounded and attacked his house, which he had
strongly barricaded. His wife, a valiant friend of the nation of the
Alani, and some faithful slaves, were still attached to his person; and
he used, with so much skill and resolution, a large magazine of darts
and arrows, that above three hundred of the assailants lost their lives
in the attempt. His slaves when all the missile weapons were spent, fled
at the dawn of day; and Gerontius, if he had not been restrained by
conjugal tenderness, might have imitated their example; till the
soldiers, provoked by such obstinate resistance, applied fire on all
sides to the house. In this fatal extremity, he complied with the
request of his Barbarian friend, and cut off his head. The wife of
Gerontius, who conjured him not to abandon her to a life of misery and
disgrace, eagerly presented her neck to his sword; and the tragic scene
was terminated by the death of the count himself, who, after three
ineffectual strokes, drew a short dagger, and sheathed it in his heart.
 <span id="fr_563"></span>[151](#fn_563.md) The unprotected Maximus, whom
he had invested with the purple, was indebted for his life to the
contempt that was entertained of his power and abilities. The caprice of
the Barbarians, who ravaged Spain, once more seated this Imperial
phantom on the throne: but they soon resigned him to the justice of
Honorius; and the tyrant Maximus, after he had been shown to the people
of Ravenna and Rome, was publicly executed.

The general, (Constantius was his name,) who raised by his approach the
siege of Arles, and dissipated the troops of Gerontius, was born a
Roman; and this remarkable distinction is strongly expressive of the
decay of military spirit among the subjects of the empire. The strength
and majesty which were conspicuous in the person of that general,  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[152](#fn_564.md) marked him, in the popular opinion, as
a candidate worthy of the throne, which he afterwards ascended. In the
familiar intercourse of private life, his manners were cheerful and
engaging; nor would he sometimes disdain, in the license of convivial
mirth, to vie with the pantomimes themselves, in the exercises of their
ridiculous profession. But when the trumpet summoned him to arms; when
he mounted his horse, and, bending down (for such was his singular
practice) almost upon the neck, fiercely rolled his large animated eyes
round the field, Constantius then struck terror into his foes, and
inspired his soldiers with the assurance of victory. He had received
from the court of Ravenna the important commission of extirpating
rebellion in the provinces of the West; and the pretended emperor
Constantine, after enjoying a short and anxious respite, was again
besieged in his capital by the arms of a more formidable enemy. Yet this
interval allowed time for a successful negotiation with the Franks and
Alemanni and his ambassador, Edobic, soon returned at the head of an
army, to disturb the operations of the siege of Arles. The Roman
general, instead of expecting the attack in his lines, boldly and
perhaps wisely, resolved to pass the Rhone, and to meet the Barbarians.
His measures were conducted with so much skill and secrecy, that, while
they engaged the infantry of Constantius in the front, they were
suddenly attacked, surrounded, and destroyed, by the cavalry of his
lieutenant Ulphilas, who had silently gained an advantageous post in
their rear. The remains of the army of Edobic were preserved by flight
or submission, and their leader escaped from the field of battle to the
house of a faithless friend; who too clearly understood, that the head
of his obnoxious guest would be an acceptable and lucrative present for
the Imperial general. On this occasion, Constantius behaved with the
magnanimity of a genuine Roman. Subduing, or suppressing, every
sentiment of jealousy, he publicly acknowledged the merit and services
of Ulphilas; but he turned with horror from the assassin of Edobic; and
sternly intimated his commands, that the camp should no longer be
polluted by the presence of an ungrateful wretch, who had violated the
laws of friendship and hospitality. The usurper, who beheld, from the
walls of Arles, the ruin of his last hopes, was tempted to place some
confidence in so generous a conqueror. He required a solemn promise for
his security; and after receiving, by the imposition of hands, the
sacred character of a Christian Presbyter, he ventured to open the gates
of the city. But he soon experienced that the principles of honor and
integrity, which might regulate the ordinary conduct of Constantius,
were superseded by the loose doctrines of political morality. The Roman
general, indeed, refused to sully his laurels with the blood of
Constantine; but the abdicated emperor, and his son Julian, were sent
under a strong guard into Italy; and before they reached the palace of
Ravenna, they met the ministers of death.

At a time when it was universally confessed, that almost every man in
the empire was superior in personal merit to the princes whom the
accident of their birth had seated on the throne, a rapid succession of
usurpers, regardless of the fate of their predecessors, still continued
to arise. This mischief was peculiarly felt in the provinces of Spain
and Gaul, where the principles of order and obedience had been
extinguished by war and rebellion. Before Constantine resigned the
purple, and in the fourth month of the siege of Arles, intelligence was
received in the Imperial camp, that Jovinus has assumed the diadem at
Mentz, in the Upper Germany, at the instigation of Goar, king of the
Alani, and of Guntiarius, king of the Burgundians; and that the
candidate, on whom they had bestowed the empire, advanced with a
formidable host of Barbarians, from the banks of the Rhine to those of
the Rhone. Every circumstance is dark and extraordinary in the short
history of the reign of Jovinus. It was natural to expect, that a brave
and skilful general, at the head of a victorious army, would have
asserted, in a field of battle, the justice of the cause of Honorius.
The hasty retreat of Constantius might be justified by weighty reasons;
but he resigned, without a struggle, the possession of Gaul; and
Dardanus, the Praetorian praefect, is recorded as the only magistrate
who refused to yield obedience to the usurper.  <span
id="fr_565"></span>[153](#fn_565.md) When the Goths, two years after the
siege of Rome, established their quarters in Gaul, it was natural to
suppose that their inclinations could be divided only between the
emperor Honorius, with whom they had formed a recent alliance, and the
degraded Attalus, whom they reserved in their camp for the occasional
purpose of acting the part of a musician or a monarch. Yet in a moment
of disgust, (for which it is not easy to assign a cause, or a date,)
Adolphus connected himself with the usurper of Gaul; and imposed on
Attalus the ignominious task of negotiating the treaty, which ratified
his own disgrace. We are again surprised to read, that, instead of
considering the Gothic alliance as the firmest support of his throne,
Jovinus upbraided, in dark and ambiguous language, the officious
importunity of Attalus; that, scorning the advice of his great ally, he
invested with the purple his brother Sebastian; and that he most
imprudently accepted the service of Sarus, when that gallant chief, the
soldier of Honorius, was provoked to desert the court of a prince, who
knew not how to reward or punish. Adolphus, educated among a race of
warriors, who esteemed the duty of revenge as the most precious and
sacred portion of their inheritance, advanced with a body of ten
thousand Goths to encounter the hereditary enemy of the house of Balti.
He attacked Sarus at an unguarded moment, when he was accompanied only
by eighteen or twenty of his valiant followers. United by friendship,
animated by despair, but at length oppressed by multitudes, this band of
heroes deserved the esteem, without exciting the compassion, of their
enemies; and the lion was no sooner taken in the toils,  <span
id="fr_566"></span>[154](#fn_566.md) than he was instantly despatched. The
death of Sarus dissolved the loose alliance which Adolphus still
maintained with the usurpers of Gaul. He again listened to the dictates
of love and prudence; and soon satisfied the brother of Placidia, by the
assurance that he would immediately transmit to the palace of Ravenna
the heads of the two tyrants, Jovinus and Sebastian. The king of the
Goths executed his promise without difficulty or delay; the helpless
brothers, unsupported by any personal merit, were abandoned by their
Barbarian auxiliaries; and the short opposition of Valentia was expiated
by the ruin of one of the noblest cities of Gaul. The emperor, chosen by
the Roman senate, who had been promoted, degraded, insulted, restored,
again degraded, and again insulted, was finally abandoned to his fate;
but when the Gothic king withdrew his protection, he was restrained, by
pity or contempt, from offering any violence to the person of Attalus.
The unfortunate Attalus, who was left without subjects or allies,
embarked in one of the ports of Spain, in search of some secure and
solitary retreat: but he was intercepted at sea, conducted to the
presence of Honorius, led in triumph through the streets of Rome or
Ravenna, and publicly exposed to the gazing multitude, on the second
step of the throne of his invincible conqueror. The same measure of
punishment, with which, in the days of his prosperity, he was accused of
menacing his rival, was inflicted on Attalus himself; he was condemned,
after the amputation of two fingers, to a perpetual exile in the Isle of
Lipari, where he was supplied with the decent necessaries of life. The
remainder of the reign of Honorius was undisturbed by rebellion; and it
may be observed, that, in the space of five years, seven usurpers had
yielded to the fortune of a prince, who was himself incapable either of
counsel or of action.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[130](daf03021.htm#fr_542.md) Orosius, l. vii. c.
43, p. 584, 585. He was sent by St. Augustin in the year 415, from
Africa to Palestine, to visit St. Jerom, and to consult with him on the
subject of the Pelagian controversy.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[131](daf03021.htm#fr_543.md) Jornandes supposes,
without much probability, that Adolphus visited and plundered Rome a
second time, (more locustarum erasit) Yet he agrees with Orosius in
supposing that a treaty of peace was concluded between the Gothic prince
and Honorius. See Oros. l. vii. c. 43 p. 584, 585. Jornandes, de Reb.
Geticis, c. 31, p. 654, 655.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[132](daf03021.htm#fr_544.md) The retreat of the
Goths from Italy, and their first transactions in Gaul, are dark and
doubtful. I have derived much assistance from Mascou, (Hist. of the
Ancient Germans, l. viii. c. 29, 35, 36, 37,) who has illustrated, and
connected, the broken chronicles and fragments of the times.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[133](daf03021.htm#fr_545.md) See an account of
Placidia in Ducange Fam. Byzant. p. 72; and Tillemont, Hist. des
Empereurs, tom. v. p. 260, 386, &c. tom. vi. p. 240.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[134](daf03021.htm#fr_546.md) Zosim. l. v. p. 350.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[135](daf03021.htm#fr_547.md) Zosim. l. vi. p.
383. Orosius, (l. vii. c. 40, p. 576,) and the Chronicles of Marcellinus
and Idatius, seem to suppose, that the Goths did not carry away Placidia
till after the last siege of Rome.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[136](daf03021.htm#fr_548.md) See the pictures of
Adolphus and Placidia, and the account of their marriage, in Jornandes,
de Reb. Geticis, c. 31, p. 654, 655. With regard to the place where the
nuptials were stipulated, or consummated, or celebrated, the Mss. of
Jornandes vary between two neighboring cities, Forli and Imola, (Forum
Livii and Forum Cornelii.) It is fair and easy to reconcile the Gothic
historian with Olympiodorus, (see Mascou, l. viii. c. 46:) but Tillemont
grows peevish, and swears that it is not worth while to try to
conciliate Jornandes with any good authors.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[137](daf03021.htm#fr_549.md) The Visigoths (the
subjects of Adolphus) restrained by subsequent laws, the prodigality of
conjugal love. It was illegal for a husband to make any gift or
settlement for the benefit of his wife during the first year of their
marriage; and his liberality could not at any time exceed the tenth part
of his property. The Lombards were somewhat more indulgent: they allowed
the morgingcap immediately after the wedding night; and this famous
gift, the reward of virginity might equal the fourth part of the
husband's substance. Some cautious maidens, indeed, were wise enough to
stipulate beforehand a present, which they were too sure of not
deserving. See Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, l. xix. c. 25. Muratori,
delle Antichita Italiane, tom. i. Dissertazion, xx. p. 243.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[138](daf03021.htm#fr_550.md) We owe the curious
detail of this nuptial feast to the historian Olympiodorus, ap. Photium,
p. 185, 188.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[139](daf03021.htm#fr_551.md) See in the great
collection of the Historians of France by Dom Bouquet, tom. ii. Greg.
Turonens. l. iii. c. 10, p. 191. Gesta Regum Francorum, c. 23, p. 557.
The anonymous writer, with an ignorance worthy of his times, supposes
that these instruments of Christian worship had belonged to the temple
of Solomon. If he has any meaning it must be, that they were found in
the sack of Rome.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[140](daf03021.htm#fr_552.md) Consult the
following original testimonies in the Historians of France, tom. ii.
Fredegarii Scholastici Chron. c. 73, p. 441. Fredegar. Fragment. iii. p.
463. Gesta Regis Dagobert, c. 29, p. 587. The accession of Sisenand to
the throne of Spain happened A.D. 631. The 200,000 pieces of gold were
appropriated by Dagobert to the foundation of the church of St. Denys.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[141](daf03021.htm#fr_553.md) The president Goguet
(Origine des Loix, &c., tom. ii. p. 239) is of opinion, that the
stupendous pieces of emerald, the statues and columns which antiquity
has placed in Egypt, at Gades, at Constantinople, were in reality
artificial compositions of colored glass. The famous emerald dish, which
is shown at Genoa, is supposed to countenance the suspicion.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[142](daf03021.htm#fr_554.md) Elmacin. Hist.
Saracenica, l. i. p. 85. Roderic. Tolet. Hist. Arab. c. 9. Cardonne,
Hist. de l'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous les Arabes tom. i. p. 83. It was
called the Table of Solomon, according to the custom of the Orientals,
who ascribe to that prince every ancient work of knowledge or
magnificence.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[143](daf03021.htm#fr_555.md) His three laws are
inserted in the Theodosian Code, l. xi. tit. xxviii. leg. 7. L. xiii.
tit. xi. leg. 12. L. xv. tit. xiv. leg. 14 The expressions of the last
are very remarkable; since they contain not only a pardon, but an
apology.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[144](daf03021.htm#fr_556.md) Olympiodorus ap.
Phot. p. 188. Philostorgius (l. xii. c. 5) observes, that when Honorius
made his triumphal entry, he encouraged the Romans, with his hand and
voice, to rebuild their city; and the Chronicle of Prosper commends
Heraclian, qui in Romanae urbis reparationem strenuum exhibuerat
ministerium.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[145](daf03021.htm#fr_557.md) The date of the
voyage of Claudius Rutilius Numatianus is clogged with some
difficulties; but Scaliger has deduced from astronomical characters,
that he left Rome the 24th of September and embarked at Porto the 9th of
October, A.D. 416. See Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom, v. p. 820.
In this poetical Itinerary, Rutilius (l. i. 115, &c.) addresses Rome in
a high strain of congratulation: -

Erige crinales lauros, seniumque sacrati Verticis in virides, Roma,
recinge comas, &c.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[146](daf03021.htm#fr_558.md) Orosius composed his
history in Africa, only two years after the event; yet his authority
seems to be overbalanced by the improbability of the fact. The Chronicle
of Marcellinus gives Heraclian 700 ships and 3000 men: the latter of
these numbers is ridiculously corrupt; but the former would please me
very much.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[147](daf03021.htm#fr_559.md) The Chronicle of
Idatius affirms, without the least appearance of truth, that he advanced
as far as Otriculum, in Umbria, where he was overthrown in a great
battle, with the loss of 50,000 men.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[148](daf03021.htm#fr_560.md) See Cod. Theod. l.
xv. tit. xiv. leg. 13. The legal acts performed in his name, even the
manumission of slaves, were declared invalid, till they had been
formally repeated.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[149](daf03021.htm#fr_561.md) I have disdained to
mention a very foolish, and probably a false, report, (Procop. de Bell.
Vandal. l. i. c. 2,) that Honorius was alarmed by the loss of Rome, till
he understood that it was not a favorite chicken of that name, but only
the capital of the world, which had been lost. Yet even this story is
some evidence of the public opinion.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[150](daf03021.htm#fr_562.md) The materials for
the lives of all these tyrants are taken from six contemporary
historians, two Latins and four Greeks: Orosius, l. vii. c. 42, p. 581,
582, 583; Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus, apud Gregor Turon. l. ii. c. 9,
in the Historians of France, tom. ii. p. 165, 166; Zosimus, l. v. p.
370, 371; Olympiodorus, apud Phot. p. 180, 181, 184, 185; Sozomen, l.
ix. c. 12, 13, 14, 15; and Philostorgius, l. xii. c. 5, 6, with
Godefroy's Dissertation, p. 477-481; besides the four Chronicles of
Prosper Tyro, Prosper of Aquitain, Idatius, and Marcellinus.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[151](daf03021.htm#fr_563.md) The praises which
Sozomen has bestowed on this act of despair, appear strange and
scandalous in the mouth of an ecclesiastical historian. He observes (p.
379) that the wife of Gerontius was a Christian; and that her death was
worthy of her religion, and of immortal fame.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[152](daf03021.htm#fr_564.md) It is the expression
of Olympiodorus, which he seems to have borrowed from Aeolus, a tragedy
of Euripides, of which some fragments only are now extant, (Euripid.
Barnes, tom. ii. p. 443, ver 38.) This allusion may prove, that the
ancient tragic poets were still familiar to the Greeks of the fifth
century.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[153](daf03021.htm#fr_565.md) Sidonius
Apollinaris, (l. v. epist. 9, p. 139, and Not. Sirmond. p. 58,) after
stigmatizing the inconstancy of Constantine, the facility of Jovinus,
the perfidy of Gerontius, continues to observe, that all the vices of
these tyrants were united in the person of Dardanus. Yet the praefect
supported a respectable character in the world, and even in the church;
held a devout correspondence with St. Augustin and St. Jerom; and was
complimented by the latter (tom. iii. p. 66) with the epithets of
Christianorum Nobilissime, and Nobilium Christianissime.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[154](daf03021.htm#fr_566.md) The expression may
be understood almost literally: Olympiodorus says a sack, or a loose
garment; and this method of entangling and catching an enemy, laciniis
contortis, was much practised by the Huns, (Ammian. xxxi. 2.) Il fut
pris vif avec des filets, is the translation of Tillemont, Hist. des
Empereurs, tom. v. p. 608.

Note: Bekker in his Photius reads something, but in the new edition of
the Bysantines, he retains the old version, which is translated Scutis,
as if they protected him with their shields, in order to take him alive.
Photius, Bekker, p. 58. - M

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By
Barbarians. Part VI.](daf03022.md)
