[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03017) 
[Next](daf03019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By Barbarians. Part II.

In populous cities, which are the seat of commerce and manufactures, the
middle ranks of inhabitants, who derive their subsistence from the
dexterity or labor of their hands, are commonly the most prolific, the
most useful, and, in that sense, the most respectable part of the
community. But the plebeians of Rome, who disdained such sedentary and
servile arts, had been oppressed from the earliest times by the weight
of debt and usury; and the husbandman, during the term of his military
service, was obliged to abandon the cultivation of his farm.  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[50](#fn_461) The lands of Italy which had been
originally divided among the families of free and indigent proprietors,
were insensibly purchased or usurped by the avarice of the nobles; and
in the age which preceded the fall of the republic, it was computed that
only two thousand citizens were possessed of an independent substance.
 <span id="fr_462"></span>[51](#fn_462) Yet as long as the people
bestowed, by their suffrages, the honors of the state, the command of
the legions, and the administration of wealthy provinces, their
conscious pride alleviated in some measure, the hardships of poverty;
and their wants were seasonably supplied by the ambitious liberality of
the candidates, who aspired to secure a venal majority in the
thirty-five tribes, or the hundred and ninety-three centuries, of Rome.
But when the prodigal commons had not only imprudently alienated the
use, but the inheritance of power, they sunk, under the reign of the
Caesars, into a vile and wretched populace, which must, in a few
generations, have been totally extinguished, if it had not been
continually recruited by the manumission of slaves, and the influx of
strangers. As early as the time of Hadrian, it was the just complaint of
the ingenuous natives, that the capital had attracted the vices of the
universe, and the manners of the most opposite nations. The intemperance
of the Gauls, the cunning and levity of the Greeks, the savage obstinacy
of the Egyptians and Jews, the servile temper of the Asiatics, and the
dissolute, effeminate prostitution of the Syrians, were mingled in the
various multitude, which, under the proud and false denomination of
Romans, presumed to despise their fellow- subjects, and even their
sovereigns, who dwelt beyond the precincts of the Eternal City.  <span
id="fr_463"></span>[52](#fn_463)

Yet the name of that city was still pronounced with respect: the
frequent and capricious tumults of its inhabitants were indulged with
impunity; and the successors of Constantine, instead of crushing the
last remains of the democracy by the strong arm of military power,
embraced the mild policy of Augustus, and studied to relieve the
poverty, and to amuse the idleness, of an innumerable people.  <span
id="fr_464"></span>[53](#fn_464) I. For the convenience of the lazy
plebeians, the monthly distributions of corn were converted into a daily
allowance of bread; a great number of ovens were constructed and
maintained at the public expense; and at the appointed hour, each
citizen, who was furnished with a ticket, ascended the flight of steps,
which had been assigned to his peculiar quarter or division, and
received, either as a gift, or at a very low price, a loaf of bread of
the weight of three pounds, for the use of his family. II. The forest of
Lucania, whose acorns fattened large droves of wild hogs,  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[54](#fn_465) afforded, as a species of tribute, a
plentiful supply of cheap and wholesome meat. During five months of the
year, a regular allowance of bacon was distributed to the poorer
citizens; and the annual consumption of the capital, at a time when it
was much declined from its former lustre, was ascertained, by an edict
from Valentinian the Third, at three millions six hundred and
twenty-eight thousand pounds.  <span id="fr_466"></span>[55](#fn_466)
III. In the manners of antiquity, the use of oil was indispensable for
the lamp, as well as for the bath; and the annual tax, which was imposed
on Africa for the benefit of Rome, amounted to the weight of three
millions of pounds, to the measure, perhaps, of three hundred thousand
English gallons. IV. The anxiety of Augustus to provide the metropolis
with sufficient plenty of corn, was not extended beyond that necessary
article of human subsistence; and when the popular clamor accused the
dearness and scarcity of wine, a proclamation was issued, by the grave
reformer, to remind his subjects that no man could reasonably complain
of thirst, since the aqueducts of Agrippa had introduced into the city
so many copious streams of pure and salubrious water.  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[56](#fn_467) This rigid sobriety was insensibly
relaxed; and, although the generous design of Aurelian  <span
id="fr_468"></span>[57](#fn_468) does not appear to have been executed
in its full extent, the use of wine was allowed on very easy and liberal
terms. The administration of the public cellars was delegated to a
magistrate of honorable rank; and a considerable part of the vintage of
Campania was reserved for the fortunate inhabitants of Rome.

The stupendous aqueducts, so justly celebrated by the praises of
Augustus himself, replenished the Thermoe, or baths, which had been
constructed in every part of the city, with Imperial magnificence. The
baths of Antoninus Caracalla, which were open, at stated hours, for the
indiscriminate service of the senators and the people, contained above
sixteen hundred seats of marble; and more than three thousand were
reckoned in the baths of Diocletian.  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[58](#fn_469) The walls of the lofty apartments were
covered with curious mosaics, that imitated the art of the pencil in the
elegance of design, and the variety of colors. The Egyptian granite was
beautifully encrusted with the precious green marble of Numidia; the
perpetual stream of hot water was poured into the capacious basins,
through so many wide mouths of bright and massy silver; and the meanest
Roman could purchase, with a small copper coin, the daily enjoyment of a
scene of pomp and luxury, which might excite the envy of the kings of
Asia.  <span id="fr_470"></span>[59](#fn_470) From these stately palaces
issued a swarm of dirty and ragged plebeians, without shoes and without
a mantle; who loitered away whole days in the street of Forum, to hear
news and to hold disputes; who dissipated in extravagant gaming, the
miserable pittance of their wives and children; and spent the hours of
the night in the obscure taverns, and brothels, in the indulgence of
gross and vulgar sensuality.  <span id="fr_471"></span>[60](#fn_471)

But the most lively and splendid amusement of the idle multitude,
depended on the frequent exhibition of public games and spectacles. The
piety of Christian princes had suppressed the inhuman combats of
gladiators; but the Roman people still considered the Circus as their
home, their temple, and the seat of the republic. The impatient crowd
rushed at the dawn of day to secure their places, and there were many
who passed a sleepless and anxious night in the adjacent porticos. From
the morning to the evening, careless of the sun, or of the rain, the
spectators, who sometimes amounted to the number of four hundred
thousand, remained in eager attention; their eyes fixed on the horses
and charioteers, their minds agitated with hope and fear, for the
success of the colors which they espoused: and the happiness of Rome
appeared to hang on the event of a race.  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[61](#fn_472) The same immoderate ardor inspired
their clamors and their applause, as often as they were entertained with
the hunting of wild beasts, and the various modes of theatrical
representation. These representations in modern capitals may deserve to
be considered as a pure and elegant school of taste, and perhaps of
virtue. But the Tragic and Comic Muse of the Romans, who seldom aspired
beyond the imitation of Attic genius,  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[62](#fn_473) had been almost totally silent since
the fall of the republic;  <span id="fr_474"></span>[63](#fn_474) and
their place was unworthily occupied by licentious farce, effeminate
music, and splendid pageantry. The pantomimes,  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[64](#fn_475) who maintained their reputation from
the age of Augustus to the sixth century, expressed, without the use of
words, the various fables of the gods and heroes of antiquity; and the
perfection of their art, which sometimes disarmed the gravity of the
philosopher, always excited the applause and wonder of the people. The
vast and magnificent theatres of Rome were filled by three thousand
female dancers, and by three thousand singers, with the masters of the
respective choruses. Such was the popular favor which they enjoyed,
that, in a time of scarcity, when all strangers were banished from the
city, the merit of contributing to the public pleasures exempted them
from a law, which was strictly executed against the professors of the
liberal arts.  <span id="fr_476"></span>[65](#fn_476)

It is said, that the foolish curiosity of Elagabalus attempted to
discover, from the quantity of spiders' webs, the number of the
inhabitants of Rome. A more rational method of inquiry might not have
been undeserving of the attention of the wisest princes, who could
easily have resolved a question so important for the Roman government,
and so interesting to succeeding ages. The births and deaths of the
citizens were duly registered; and if any writer of antiquity had
condescended to mention the annual amount, or the common average, we
might now produce some satisfactory calculation, which would destroy the
extravagant assertions of critics, and perhaps confirm the modest and
probable conjectures of philosophers.  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[66](#fn_477) The most diligent researches have
collected only the following circumstances; which, slight and imperfect
as they are, may tend, in some degree, to illustrate the question of the
populousness of ancient Rome. I. When the capital of the empire was
besieged by the Goths, the circuit of the walls was accurately measured,
by Ammonius, the mathematician, who found it equal to twenty-one miles.
 <span id="fr_478"></span>[67](#fn_478) It should not be forgotten that
the form of the city was almost that of a circle; the geometrical figure
which is known to contain the largest space within any given
circumference. II. The architect Vitruvius, who flourished in the
Augustan age, and whose evidence, on this occasion, has peculiar weight
and authority, observes, that the innumerable habitations of the Roman
people would have spread themselves far beyond the narrow limits of the
city; and that the want of ground, which was probably contracted on
every side by gardens and villas, suggested the common, though
inconvenient, practice of raising the houses to a considerable height in
the air.  <span id="fr_479"></span>[68](#fn_479) But the loftiness of
these buildings, which often consisted of hasty work and insufficient
materials, was the cause of frequent and fatal accidents; and it was
repeatedly enacted by Augustus, as well as by Nero, that the height of
private edifices within the walls of Rome, should not exceed the measure
of seventy feet from the ground.  <span id="fr_480"></span>[69](#fn_480)
III. Juvenal  <span id="fr_481"></span>[70](#fn_481) laments, as it
should seem from his own experience, the hardships of the poorer
citizens, to whom he addresses the salutary advice of emigrating,
without delay, from the smoke of Rome, since they might purchase, in the
little towns of Italy, a cheerful commodious dwelling, at the same price
which they annually paid for a dark and miserable lodging. House-rent
was therefore immoderately dear: the rich acquired, at an enormous
expense, the ground, which they covered with palaces and gardens; but
the body of the Roman people was crowded into a narrow space; and the
different floors, and apartments, of the same house, were divided, as it
is still the custom of Paris, and other cities, among several families
of plebeians. IV. The total number of houses in the fourteen regions of
the city, is accurately stated in the description of Rome, composed
under the reign of Theodosius, and they amount to forty-eight thousand
three hundred and eighty-two.  <span id="fr_482"></span>[71](#fn_482)
The two classes of domus and of insuloe, into which they are divided,
include all the habitations of the capital, of every rank and condition
from the marble palace of the Anicii, with a numerous establishment of
freedmen and slaves, to the lofty and narrow lodging-house, where the
poet Codrus and his wife were permitted to hire a wretched garret
immediately under the files. If we adopt the same average, which, under
similar circumstances, has been found applicable to Paris,  <span
id="fr_483"></span>[72](#fn_483) and indifferently allow about
twenty-five persons for each house, of every degree, we may fairly
estimate the inhabitants of Rome at twelve hundred thousand: a number
which cannot be thought excessive for the capital of a mighty empire,
though it exceeds the populousness of the greatest cities of modern
Europe.  <span id="fr_484"></span>[73](#fn_484)  <span
id="fr_485"></span>[\*\_0016](#fn_485)

Such was the state of Rome under the reign of Honorius; at the time when
the Gothic army formed the siege, or rather the blockade, of the city.
 <span id="fr_486"></span>[74](#fn_486) By a skilful disposition of his
numerous forces, who impatiently watched the moment of an assault,
Alaric encompassed the walls, commanded the twelve principal gates,
intercepted all communication with the adjacent country, and vigilantly
guarded the navigation of the Tyber, from which the Romans derived the
surest and most plentiful supply of provisions. The first emotions of
the nobles, and of the people, were those of surprise and indignation,
that a vile Barbarian should dare to insult the capital of the world:
but their arrogance was soon humbled by misfortune; and their unmanly
rage, instead of being directed against an enemy in arms, was meanly
exercised on a defenceless and innocent victim. Perhaps in the person of
Serena, the Romans might have respected the niece of Theodosius, the
aunt, nay, even the adoptive mother, of the reigning emperor: but they
abhorred the widow of Stilicho; and they listened with credulous passion
to the tale of calumny, which accused her of maintaining a secret and
criminal correspondence with the Gothic invader. Actuated, or overawed,
by the same popular frenzy, the senate, without requiring any evidence
of his guilt, pronounced the sentence of her death. Serena was
ignominiously strangled; and the infatuated multitude were astonished to
find, that this cruel act of injustice did not immediately produce the
retreat of the Barbarians, and the deliverance of the city. That
unfortunate city gradually experienced the distress of scarcity, and at
length the horrid calamities of famine. The daily allowance of three
pounds of bread was reduced to one half, to one third, to nothing; and
the price of corn still continued to rise in a rapid and extravagant
proportion. The poorer citizens, who were unable to purchase the
necessaries of life, solicited the precarious charity of the rich; and
for a while the public misery was alleviated by the humanity of Laeta,
the widow of the emperor Gratian, who had fixed her residence at Rome,
and consecrated to the use of the indigent the princely revenue which
she annually received from the grateful successors of her husband.
 <span id="fr_487"></span>[75](#fn_487) But these private and temporary
donatives were insufficient to appease the hunger of a numerous people;
and the progress of famine invaded the marble palaces of the senators
themselves. The persons of both sexes, who had been educated in the
enjoyment of ease and luxury, discovered how little is requisite to
supply the demands of nature; and lavished their unavailing treasures of
gold and silver, to obtain the coarse and scanty sustenance which they
would formerly have rejected with disdain. The food the most repugnant
to sense or imagination, the aliments the most unwholesome and
pernicious to the constitution, were eagerly devoured, and fiercely
disputed, by the rage of hunger. A dark suspicion was entertained, that
some desperate wretches fed on the bodies of their fellow-creatures,
whom they had secretly murdered; and even mothers, (such was the horrid
conflict of the two most powerful instincts implanted by nature in the
human breast,) even mothers are said to have tasted the flesh of their
slaughtered infants!  <span id="fr_488"></span>[76](#fn_488) Many
thousands of the inhabitants of Rome expired in their houses, or in the
streets, for want of sustenance; and as the public sepulchres without
the walls were in the power of the enemy the stench, which arose from so
many putrid and unburied carcasses, infected the air; and the miseries
of famine were succeeded and aggravated by the contagion of a
pestilential disease. The assurances of speedy and effectual relief,
which were repeatedly transmitted from the court of Ravenna, supported
for some time, the fainting resolution of the Romans, till at length the
despair of any human aid tempted them to accept the offers of a
praeternatural deliverance. Pompeianus, praefect of the city, had been
persuaded, by the art or fanaticism of some Tuscan diviners, that, by
the mysterious force of spells and sacrifices, they could extract the
lightning from the clouds, and point those celestial fires against the
camp of the Barbarians.  <span id="fr_489"></span>[77](#fn_489) The
important secret was communicated to Innocent, the bishop of Rome; and
the successor of St. Peter is accused, perhaps without foundation, of
preferring the safety of the republic to the rigid severity of the
Christian worship. But when the question was agitated in the senate;
when it was proposed, as an essential condition, that those sacrifices
should be performed in the Capitol, by the authority, and in the
presence, of the magistrates, the majority of that respectable assembly,
apprehensive either of the Divine or of the Imperial displeasure,
refused to join in an act, which appeared almost equivalent to the
public restoration of Paganism.  <span id="fr_490"></span>[78](#fn_490)

The last resource of the Romans was in the clemency, or at least in the
moderation, of the king of the Goths. The senate, who in this emergency
assumed the supreme powers of government, appointed two ambassadors to
negotiate with the enemy. This important trust was delegated to
Basilius, a senator, of Spanish extraction, and already conspicuous in
the administration of provinces; and to John, the first tribune of the
notaries, who was peculiarly qualified, by his dexterity in business, as
well as by his former intimacy with the Gothic prince. When they were
introduced into his presence, they declared, perhaps in a more lofty
style than became their abject condition, that the Romans were resolved
to maintain their dignity, either in peace or war; and that, if Alaric
refused them a fair and honorable capitulation, he might sound his
trumpets, and prepare to give battle to an innumerable people, exercised
in arms, and animated by despair. "The thicker the hay, the easier it is
mowed," was the concise reply of the Barbarian; and this rustic metaphor
was accompanied by a loud and insulting laugh, expressive of his
contempt for the menaces of an unwarlike populace, enervated by luxury
before they were emaciated by famine. He then condescended to fix the
ransom, which he would accept as the price of his retreat from the walls
of Rome: all the gold and silver in the city, whether it were the
property of the state, or of individuals; all the rich and precious
movables; and all the slaves that could prove their title to the name of
Barbarians. The ministers of the senate presumed to ask, in a modest and
suppliant tone, "If such, O king, are your demands, what do you intend
to leave us?" "Your Lives!" replied the haughty conqueror: they
trembled, and retired. Yet, before they retired, a short suspension of
arms was granted, which allowed some time for a more temperate
negotiation. The stern features of Alaric were insensibly relaxed; he
abated much of the rigor of his terms; and at length consented to raise
the siege, on the immediate payment of five thousand pounds of gold, of
thirty thousand pounds of silver, of four thousand robes of silk, of
three thousand pieces of fine scarlet cloth, and of three thousand
pounds weight of pepper.  <span id="fr_491"></span>[79](#fn_491) But the
public treasury was exhausted; the annual rents of the great estates in
Italy and the provinces, had been exchanged, during the famine, for the
vilest sustenance; the hoards of secret wealth were still concealed by
the obstinacy of avarice; and some remains of consecrated spoils
afforded the only resource that could avert the impending ruin of the
city. As soon as the Romans had satisfied the rapacious demands of
Alaric, they were restored, in some measure, to the enjoyment of peace
and plenty. Several of the gates were cautiously opened; the importation
of provisions from the river and the adjacent country was no longer
obstructed by the Goths; the citizens resorted in crowds to the free
market, which was held during three days in the suburbs; and while the
merchants who undertook this gainful trade made a considerable profit,
the future subsistence of the city was secured by the ample magazines
which were deposited in the public and private granaries. A more regular
discipline than could have been expected, was maintained in the camp of
Alaric; and the wise Barbarian justified his regard for the faith of
treaties, by the just severity with which he chastised a party of
licentious Goths, who had insulted some Roman citizens on the road to
Ostia. His army, enriched by the contributions of the capital, slowly
advanced into the fair and fruitful province of Tuscany, where he
proposed to establish his winter quarters; and the Gothic standard
became the refuge of forty thousand Barbarian slaves, who had broke
their chains, and aspired, under the command of their great deliverer,
to revenge the injuries and the disgrace of their cruel servitude. About
the same time, he received a more honorable reenforcement of Goths and
Huns, whom Adolphus,  <span id="fr_492"></span>[80](#fn_492) the brother
of his wife, had conducted, at his pressing invitation, from the banks
of the Danube to those of the Tyber, and who had cut their way, with
some difficulty and loss, through the superior number of the Imperial
troops. A victorious leader, who united the daring spirit of a Barbarian
with the art and discipline of a Roman general, was at the head of a
hundred thousand fighting men; and Italy pronounced, with terror and
respect, the formidable name of Alaric.  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[81](#fn_493)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_461"></span>[50](daf03018.htm#fr_461) The histories of Livy
(see particularly vi. 36) are full of the extortions of the rich, and
the sufferings of the poor debtors. The melancholy story of a brave old
soldier (Dionys. Hal. l. vi. c. 26, p. 347, edit. Hudson, and Livy, ii.
23) must have been frequently repeated in those primitive times, which
have been so undeservedly praised.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[51](daf03018.htm#fr_462) Non esse in civitate
duo millia hominum qui rem habereni. Cicero. Offic. ii. 21, and Comment.
Paul. Manut. in edit. Graev. This vague computation was made A. U. C.
649, in a speech of the tribune Philippus, and it was his object, as
well as that of the Gracchi, (see Plutarch,) to deplore, and perhaps to
exaggerate, the misery of the common people.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[52](daf03018.htm#fr_463) See the third Satire
(60 - 125) of Juvenal, who indignantly complains,

Quamvis quota portio faecis Achaei! Jampridem Syrus in Tiberem defluxit
Orontes; Et linguam et mores, &c.

Seneca, when he proposes to comfort his mother (Consolat. ad Helv. c. 6)
by the reflection, that a great part of mankind were in a state of
exile, reminds her how few of the inhabitants of Rome were born in the
city.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[53](daf03018.htm#fr_464) Almost all that is
said of the bread, bacon, oil, wine, &c., may be found in the fourteenth
book of the Theodosian Code; which expressly treats of the police of the
great cities. See particularly the titles iii. iv. xv. xvi. xvii. xxiv.
The collateral testimonies are produced in Godefroy's Commentary, and it
is needless to transcribe them. According to a law of Theodosius, which
appreciates in money the military allowance, a piece of gold (eleven
shillings) was equivalent to eighty pounds of bacon, or to eighty pounds
of oil, or to twelve modii (or pecks) of salt, (Cod. Theod. l. viii.
tit. iv. leg. 17.) This equation, compared with another of seventy
pounds of bacon for an amphora, (Cod. Theod. l. xiv. tit. iv. leg. 4,)
fixes the price of wine at about sixteenpence the gallon.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[54](daf03018.htm#fr_465) The anonymous author
of the Description of the World (p. 14. in tom. iii. Geograph. Minor.
Hudson) observes of Lucania, in his barbarous Latin, Regio optima, et
ipsa omnibus habundans, et lardum multum foras. Proptor quod est in
montibus, cujus aescam animalium rariam, &c.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[55](daf03018.htm#fr_466) See Novell. ad calcem
Cod. Theod. D. Valent. l. i. tit. xv. This law was published at Rome,
June 29th, A.D. 452.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[56](daf03018.htm#fr_467) Sueton. in August. c.
42. The utmost debauch of the emperor himself, in his favorite wine of
Rhaetia, never exceeded a sextarius, (an English pint.) Id. c. 77.
Torrentius ad loc. and Arbuthnot's Tables, p. 86.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[57](daf03018.htm#fr_468) His design was to
plant vineyards along the sea-coast of Hetruria, (Vopiscus, in Hist.
August. p. 225;) the dreary, unwholesome, uncultivated Maremme of modern
Tuscany

<span id="fn_469"></span>[58](daf03018.htm#fr_469) Olympiodor. apud
Phot. p. 197.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[59](daf03018.htm#fr_470) Seneca (epistol.
lxxxvi.) compares the baths of Scipio Africanus, at his villa of
Liternum, with the magnificence (which was continually increasing) of
the public baths of Rome, long before the stately Thermae of Antoninus
and Diocletian were erected. The quadrans paid for admission was the
quarter of the as, about one eighth of an English penny.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[60](daf03018.htm#fr_471) Ammianus, (l. xiv. c.
6, and l. xxviii. c. 4,) after describing the luxury and pride of the
nobles of Rome, exposes, with equal indignation, the vices and follies
of the common people.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[61](daf03018.htm#fr_472) Juvenal. Satir. xi.
191, &c. The expressions of the historian Ammianus are not less strong
and animated than those of the satirist and both the one and the other
painted from the life. The numbers which the great Circus was capable of
receiving are taken from the original Notitioe of the city. The
differences between them prove that they did not transcribe each other;
but the same may appear incredible, though the country on these
occasions flocked to the city.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[62](daf03018.htm#fr_473) Sometimes indeed they
composed original pieces. - Vestigia Graeca Ausi deserere et celeb rare
domestica facta.

Horat. Epistol. ad Pisones, 285, and the learned, though perplexed note
of Dacier, who might have allowed the name of tragedies to the Brutus
and the Decius of Pacuvius, or to the Cato of Maternus. The Octavia,
ascribed to one of the Senecas, still remains a very unfavorable
specimen of Roman tragedy.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[63](daf03018.htm#fr_474) In the time of
Quintilian and Pliny, a tragic poet was reduced to the imperfect method
of hiring a great room, and reading his play to the company, whom he
invited for that purpose. (See Dialog. de Oratoribus, c. 9, 11, and
Plin. Epistol. vii. 17.)

<span id="fn_475"></span>[64](daf03018.htm#fr_475) See the dialogue of
Lucian, entitled the Saltatione, tom. ii. p. 265 - 317, edit. Reitz. The
pantomimes obtained the honorable name; and it was required, that they
should be conversant with almost every art and science. Burette (in the
Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 127, &c.) has given
a short history of the art of pantomimes.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[65](daf03018.htm#fr_476) Ammianus, l. xiv. c.
6. He complains, with decent indignation that the streets of Rome were
filled with crowds of females, who might have given children to the
state, but whose only occupation was to curl and dress their hair, and
jactari volubilibus gyris, dum experimunt innumera simulacra, quae
finxere fabulae theatrales.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[66](daf03018.htm#fr_477) Lipsius (tom. iii. p.
423, de Magnitud. Romana, l. iii. c. 3) and Isaac Vossius (Observant.
Var. p. 26 - 34) have indulged strange dreams, of four, or eight, or
fourteen, millions in Rome. Mr. Hume, (Essays, vol. i. p. 450 - 457,)
with admirable good sense and scepticism betrays some secret disposition
to extenuate the populousness of ancient times.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[67](daf03018.htm#fr_478) Olympiodor. ap. Phot.
p. 197. See Fabricius, Bibl. Graec. tom. ix. p. 400.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[68](daf03018.htm#fr_479) In ea autem majestate
urbis, et civium infinita frequentia, innumerabiles habitationes opus
fuit explicare. Ergo cum recipero non posset area plana tantam
multitudinem in urbe, ad auxilium altitudinis aedificiorum res ipsa
coegit devenire. Vitruv. ii. 8. This passage, which I owe to Vossius, is
clear, strong, and comprehensive.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[69](daf03018.htm#fr_480) The successive
testimonies of Pliny, Aristides, Claudian, Rutilius, &c., prove the
insufficiency of these restrictive edicts. See Lipsius, de Magnitud.
Romana, l. iii. c. 4.

\- Tabulata tibi jam tertia fumant; Tu nescis; nam si gradibus
trepidatur ab imis Ultimus ardebit, quem tegula sola tuetur A pluvia.
Juvenal. Satir. iii. 199

<span id="fn_481"></span>[70](daf03018.htm#fr_481) Read the whole third
satire, but particularly 166, 223, &c. The description of a crowded
insula, or lodging-house, in Petronius, (c. 95, 97,) perfectly tallies
with the complaints of Juvenal; and we learn from legal authority, that,
in the time of Augustus, (Heineccius, Hist. Juris. Roman. c. iv. p.
181,) the ordinary rent of the several coenacula, or apartments of an
insula, annually produced forty thousand sesterces, between three and
four hundred pounds sterling, (Pandect. l. xix. tit. ii. No. 30,) a sum
which proves at once the large extent, and high value, of those common
buildings.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[71](daf03018.htm#fr_482) This sum total is
composed of 1780 domus, or great houses of 46,602 insuloe, or plebeian
habitations, (see Nardini, Roma Antica, l. iii. p. 88;) and these
numbers are ascertained by the agreement of the texts of the different
Notitioe. Nardini, l. viii. p. 498, 500.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[72](daf03018.htm#fr_483) See that accurate
writer M. de Messance, Recherches sur la Population, p. 175 - 187. From
probable, or certain grounds, he assigns to Paris 23,565 houses, 71,114
families, and 576,630 inhabitants.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[73](daf03018.htm#fr_484) This computation is
not very different from that which M. Brotier, the last editor of
Tacitus, (tom. ii. p. 380,) has assumed from similar principles; though
he seems to aim at a degree of precision which it is neither possible
nor important to obtain.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[\*\_0016](daf03018.htm#fr_485) M. Dureau de la
Malle (Economic Politique des Romaines, t. i. p. 369) quotes a passage
from the xvth chapter of Gibbon, in which he estimates the population of
Rome at not less than a million, and adds (omitting any reference to
this passage,) that he (Gibbon) could not have seriously studied the
question. M. Dureau de la Malle proceeds to argue that Rome, as
contained within the walls of Servius Tullius, occupying an area only
one fifth of that of Paris, could not have contained 300,000
inhabitants; within those of Aurelian not more than 560,000, inclusive
of soldiers and strangers. The suburbs, he endeavors to show, both up to
the time of Aurelian, and after his reign, were neither so extensive,
nor so populous, as generally supposed. M. Dureau de la Malle has but
imperfectly quoted the important passage of Dionysius, that which proves
that when he wrote (in the time of Augustus) the walls of Servius no
longer marked the boundary of the city. In many places they were so
built upon, that it was impossible to trace them. There was no certain
limit, where the city ended and ceased to be the city; it stretched out
to so boundless an extent into the country. Ant. Rom. iv. 13. None of M.
de la Malle's arguments appear to me to prove, against this statement,
that these irregular suburbs did not extend so far in many parts, as to
make it impossible to calculate accurately the inhabited area of the
city. Though no doubt the city, as reconstructed by Nero, was much less
closely built and with many more open spaces for palaces, temples, and
other public edifices, yet many passages seem to prove that the laws
respecting the height of houses were not rigidly enforced. A great part
of the lower especially of the slave population, were very densely
crowded, and lived, even more than in our modern towns, in cellars and
subterranean dwellings under the public edifices. Nor do M. de la
Malle's arguments, by which he would explain the insulae insulae (of
which the Notitiae Urbis give us the number) as rows of shops, with a
chamber or two within the domus, or houses of the wealthy, satisfy me as
to their soundness of their scholarship. Some passages which he adduces
directly contradict his theory; none, as appears to me, distinctly prove
it. I must adhere to the old interpretation of the word, as chiefly
dwellings for the middling or lower classes, or clusters of tenements,
often perhaps, under the same roof.

On this point, Zumpt, in the Dissertation before quoted, entirely
disagrees with M. de la Malle. Zumpt has likewise detected the mistake
of M. de la Malle as to the "canon" of corn, mentioned in the life of
Septimius Severus by Spartianus. On this canon the French writer
calculates the inhabitants of Rome at that time. But the "canon" was not
the whole supply of Rome, but that quantity which the state required for
the public granaries to supply the gratuitous distributions to the
people, and the public officers and slaves; no doubt likewise to keep
down the general price. M. Zumpt reckons the population of Rome at
2,000,000. After careful consideration, I should conceive the number in
the text, 1,200,000, to be nearest the truth - M. 1845.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[74](daf03018.htm#fr_486) For the events of the
first siege of Rome, which are often confounded with those of the second
and third, see Zosimus, l. v. p. 350 - 354, Sozomen, l. ix. c. 6,
Olympiodorus, ap. Phot. p. 180, Philostorgius, l. xii. c. 3, and
Godefroy, Dissertat. p. 467 - 475.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[75](daf03018.htm#fr_487) The mother of Laeta
was named Pissumena. Her father, family, and country, are unknown.
Ducange, Fam. Byzantium, p. 59.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[76](daf03018.htm#fr_488) Ad nefandos cibos
erupit esurientium rabies, et sua invicem membra laniarunt, dum mater
non parcit lactenti infantiae; et recipit utero, quem paullo ante
effuderat. Jerom. ad Principiam, tom. i. p. 121. The same horrid
circumstance is likewise told of the sieges of Jerusalem and Paris. For
the latter, compare the tenth book of the Henriade, and the Journal de
Henri IV. tom. i. p. 47 - 83; and observe that a plain narrative of
facts is much more pathetic, than the most labored descriptions of epic
poetry

<span id="fn_489"></span>[77](daf03018.htm#fr_489) Zosimus (l. v. p.
355, 356) speaks of these ceremonies like a Greek unacquainted with the
national superstition of Rome and Tuscany. I suspect, that they
consisted of two parts, the secret and the public; the former were
probably an imitation of the arts and spells, by which Numa had drawn
down Jupiter and his thunder on Mount Aventine.

\- Quid agant laqueis, quae carmine dicant, Quaque trahant superis
sedibus arte Jovem, Scire nefas homini.

The ancilia, or shields of Mars, the pignora Imperii, which were carried
in solemn procession on the calends of March, derived their origin from
this mysterious event, (Ovid. Fast. iii. 259 - 398.) It was probably
designed to revive this ancient festival, which had been suppressed by
Theodosius. In that case, we recover a chronological date (March the
1st, A.D. 409) which has not hitherto been observed.

Note: On this curious question of the knowledge of conducting lightning,
processed by the ancients, consult Eusebe Salverte, des Sciences
Occultes, l. xxiv. Paris, 1829. - M.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[78](daf03018.htm#fr_490) Sozomen (l. ix. c. 6)
insinuates that the experiment was actually, though unsuccessfully,
made; but he does not mention the name of Innocent: and Tillemont, (Mem.
Eccles. tom. x. p. 645) is determined not to believe, that a pope could
be guilty of such impious condescension.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[79](daf03018.htm#fr_491) Pepper was a favorite
ingredient of the most expensive Roman cookery, and the best sort
commonly sold for fifteen denarii, or ten shillings, the pound. See
Pliny, Hist. Natur. xii. 14. It was brought from India; and the same
country, the coast of Malabar, still affords the greatest plenty: but
the improvement of trade and navigation has multiplied the quantity and
reduced the price. See Histoire Politique et Philosophique, &c., tom. i.
p. 457.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[80](daf03018.htm#fr_492) This Gothic chieftain
is called by Jornandes and Isidore, Athaulphus; by Zosimus and Orosius,
Ataulphus; and by Olympiodorus, Adaoulphus. I have used the celebrated
name of Adolphus, which seems to be authorized by the practice of the
Swedes, the sons or brothers of the ancient Goths.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[81](daf03018.htm#fr_493) The treaty between
Alaric and the Romans, &c., is taken from Zosimus, l. v. p. 354, 355,
358, 359, 362, 363. The additional circumstances are too few and
trifling to require any other quotation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By
Barbarians. Part III.](daf03019)
