[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03044) 
[Next](daf03046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis. Part II.

The allegiance of his brother was already seduced; and the obedience of
Godegesil, who joined the royal standard with the troops of Geneva, more
effectually promoted the success of the conspiracy. While the Franks and
Burgundians contended with equal valor, his seasonable desertion decided
the event of the battle; and as Gundobald was faintly supported by the
disaffected Gauls, he yielded to the arms of Clovis, and hastily
retreated from the field, which appears to have been situate between
Langres and Dijon. He distrusted the strength of Dijon, a quadrangular
fortress, encompassed by two rivers, and by a wall thirty feet high, and
fifteen thick, with four gates, and thirty-three towers:  <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[40](#fn_1242) he abandoned to the pursuit of Clovis
the important cities of Lyons and Vienna; and Gundobald still fled with
precipitation, till he had reached Avignon, at the distance of two
hundred and fifty miles from the field of battle. A long siege and an
artful negotiation, admonished the king of the Franks of the danger and
difficulty of his enterprise. He imposed a tribute on the Burgundian
prince, compelled him to pardon and reward his brother's treachery, and
proudly returned to his own dominions, with the spoils and captives of
the southern provinces. This splendid triumph was soon clouded by the
intelligence, that Gundobald had violated his recent obligations, and
that the unfortunate Godegesil, who was left at Vienna with a garrison
of five thousand Franks,  <span id="fr_1243"></span>[41](#fn_1243) had
been besieged, surprised, and massacred by his inhuman brother. Such an
outrage might have exasperated the patience of the most peaceful
sovereign; yet the conqueror of Gaul dissembled the injury, released the
tribute, and accepted the alliance, and military service, of the king of
Burgundy. Clovis no longer possessed those advantages which had assured
the success of the preceding war; and his rival, instructed by
adversity, had found new resources in the affections of his people. The
Gauls or Romans applauded the mild and impartial laws of Gundobald,
which almost raised them to the same level with their conquerors. The
bishops were reconciled, and flattered, by the hopes, which he artfully
suggested, of his approaching conversion; and though he eluded their
accomplishment to the last moment of his life, his moderation secured
the peace, and suspended the ruin, of the kingdom of Burgundy.  <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[42](#fn_1244)

I am impatient to pursue the final ruin of that kingdom, which was
accomplished under the reign of Sigismond, the son of Gundobald. The
Catholic Sigismond has acquired the honors of a saint and martyr;  <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[43](#fn_1245) but the hands of the royal saint were
stained with the blood of his innocent son, whom he inhumanly sacrificed
to the pride and resentment of a step- mother. He soon discovered his
error, and bewailed the irreparable loss. While Sigismond embraced the
corpse of the unfortunate youth, he received a severe admonition from
one of his attendants: "It is not his situation, O king! it is thine
which deserves pity and lamentation." The reproaches of a guilty
conscience were alleviated, however, by his liberal donations to the
monastery of Agaunum, or St. Maurice, in Vallais; which he himself had
founded in honor of the imaginary martyrs of the Thebaean legion.  <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[44](#fn_1246) A full chorus of perpetual psalmody
was instituted by the pious king; he assiduously practised the austere
devotion of the monks; and it was his humble prayer, that Heaven would
inflict in this world the punishment of his sins. His prayer was heard:
the avengers were at hand: and the provinces of Burgundy were
overwhelmed by an army of victorious Franks. After the event of an
unsuccessful battle, Sigismond, who wished to protract his life that he
might prolong his penance, concealed himself in the desert in a
religious habit, till he was discovered and betrayed by his subjects,
who solicited the favor of their new masters. The captive monarch, with
his wife and two children, was transported to Orleans, and buried alive
in a deep well, by the stern command of the sons of Clovis; whose
cruelty might derive some excuse from the maxims and examples of their
barbarous age. Their ambition, which urged them to achieve the conquest
of Burgundy, was inflamed, or disguised, by filial piety: and Clotilda,
whose sanctity did not consist in the forgiveness of injuries, pressed
them to revenge her father's death on the family of his assassin. The
rebellious Burgundians (for they attempted to break their chains) were
still permitted to enjoy their national laws under the obligation of
tribute and military service; and the Merovingian princes peaceably
reigned over a kingdom, whose glory and greatness had been first
overthrown by the arms of Clovis.  <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[45](#fn_1247)

The first victory of Clovis had insulted the honor of the Goths. They
viewed his rapid progress with jealousy and terror; and the youthful
fame of Alaric was oppressed by the more potent genius of his rival.
Some disputes inevitably arose on the edge of their contiguous
dominions; and after the delays of fruitless negotiation, a personal
interview of the two kings was proposed and accepted. The conference of
Clovis and Alaric was held in a small island of the Loire, near Amboise.
They embraced, familiarly conversed, and feasted together; and separated
with the warmest professions of peace and brotherly love. But their
apparent confidence concealed a dark suspicion of hostile and
treacherous designs; and their mutual complaints solicited, eluded, and
disclaimed, a final arbitration. At Paris, which he already considered
as his royal seat, Clovis declared to an assembly of the princes and
warriors, the pretence, and the motive, of a Gothic war. "It grieves me
to see that the Arians still possess the fairest portion of Gaul. Let us
march against them with the aid of God; and, having vanquished the
heretics, we will possess and divide their fertile provinces."  <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[46](#fn_1248) The Franks, who were inspired by
hereditary valor and recent zeal, applauded the generous design of their
monarch; expressed their resolution to conquer or die, since death and
conquest would be equally profitable; and solemnly protested that they
would never shave their beards till victory should absolve them from
that inconvenient vow. The enterprise was promoted by the public or
private exhortations of Clotilda. She reminded her husband how
effectually some pious foundation would propitiate the Deity, and his
servants: and the Christian hero, darting his battle-axe with a skilful
and nervous band, "There, (said he,) on that spot where my Francisca,
 <span id="fr_1249"></span>[47](#fn_1249) shall fall, will I erect a
church in honor of the holy apostles." This ostentatious piety confirmed
and justified the attachment of the Catholics, with whom he secretly
corresponded; and their devout wishes were gradually ripened into a
formidable conspiracy. The people of Aquitain were alarmed by the
indiscreet reproaches of their Gothic tyrants, who justly accused them
of preferring the dominion of the Franks: and their zealous adherent
Quintianus, bishop of Rodez,  <span id="fr_1250"></span>[48](#fn_1250)
preached more forcibly in his exile than in his diocese. To resist these
foreign and domestic enemies, who were fortified by the alliance of the
Burgundians, Alaric collected his troops, far more numerous than the
military powers of Clovis. The Visigoths resumed the exercise of arms,
which they had neglected in a long and luxurious peace;  <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[49](#fn_1251) a select band of valiant and robust
slaves attended their masters to the field;  <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[50](#fn_1252) and the cities of Gaul were compelled
to furnish their doubtful and reluctant aid. Theodoric, king of the
Ostrogoths, who reigned in Italy, had labored to maintain the
tranquillity of Gaul; and he assumed, or affected, for that purpose, the
impartial character of a mediator. But the sagacious monarch dreaded the
rising empire of Clovis, and he was firmly engaged to support the
national and religious cause of the Goths.

The accidental, or artificial, prodigies which adorned the expedition of
Clovis, were accepted by a superstitious age, as the manifest
declaration of the divine favor. He marched from Paris; and as he
proceeded with decent reverence through the holy diocese of Tours, his
anxiety tempted him to consult the shrine of St. Martin, the sanctuary
and the oracle of Gaul. His messengers were instructed to remark the
words of the Psalm which should happen to be chanted at the precise
moment when they entered the church. Those words most fortunately
expressed the valor and victory of the champions of Heaven, and the
application was easily transferred to the new Joshua, the new Gideon,
who went forth to battle against the enemies of the Lord.  <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[51](#fn_1253) Orleans secured to the Franks a
bridge on the Loire; but, at the distance of forty miles from Poitiers,
their progress was intercepted by an extraordinary swell of the River
Vigenna or Vienne; and the opposite banks were covered by the encampment
of the Visigoths. Delay must be always dangerous to Barbarians, who
consume the country through which they march; and had Clovis possessed
leisure and materials, it might have been impracticable to construct a
bridge, or to force a passage, in the face of a superior enemy. But the
affectionate peasants who were impatient to welcome their deliverer,
could easily betray some unknown or unguarded ford: the merit of the
discovery was enhanced by the useful interposition of fraud or fiction;
and a white hart, of singular size and beauty, appeared to guide and
animate the march of the Catholic army. The counsels of the Visigoths
were irresolute and distracted. A crowd of impatient warriors,
presumptuous in their strength, and disdaining to fly before the robbers
of Germany, excited Alaric to assert in arms the name and blood of the
conquerors of Rome. The advice of the graver chieftains pressed him to
elude the first ardor of the Franks; and to expect, in the southern
provinces of Gaul, the veteran and victorious Ostrogoths, whom the king
of Italy had already sent to his assistance. The decisive moments were
wasted in idle deliberation the Goths too hastily abandoned, perhaps, an
advantageous post; and the opportunity of a secure retreat was lost by
their slow and disorderly motions. After Clovis had passed the ford, as
it is still named, of the Hart, he advanced with bold and hasty steps to
prevent the escape of the enemy. His nocturnal march was directed by a
flaming meteor, suspended in the air above the cathedral of Poitiers;
and this signal, which might be previously concerted with the orthodox
successor of St. Hilary, was compared to the column of fire that guided
the Israelites in the desert. At the third hour of the day, about ten
miles beyond Poitiers, Clovis overtook, and instantly attacked, the
Gothic army; whose defeat was already prepared by terror and confusion.
Yet they rallied in their extreme distress, and the martial youths, who
had clamorously demanded the battle, refused to survive the ignominy of
flight. The two kings encountered each other in single combat. Alaric
fell by the hand of his rival; and the victorious Frank was saved by the
goodness of his cuirass, and the vigor of his horse, from the spears of
two desperate Goths, who furiously rode against him to revenge the death
of their sovereign. The vague expression of a mountain of the slain,
serves to indicate a cruel though indefinite slaughter; but Gregory has
carefully observed, that his valiant countryman Apollinaris, the son of
Sidonius, lost his life at the head of the nobles of Auvergne. Perhaps
these suspected Catholics had been maliciously exposed to the blind
assault of the enemy; and perhaps the influence of religion was
superseded by personal attachment or military honor.  <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[52](#fn_1254)

Such is the empire of Fortune, (if we may still disguise our ignorance
under that popular name,) that it is almost equally difficult to foresee
the events of war, or to explain their various consequences. A bloody
and complete victory has sometimes yielded no more than the possession
of the field and the loss of ten thousand men has sometimes been
sufficient to destroy, in a single day, the work of ages. The decisive
battle of Poitiers was followed by the conquest of Aquitain. Alaric had
left behind him an infant son, a bastard competitor, factious nobles,
and a disloyal people; and the remaining forces of the Goths were
oppressed by the general consternation, or opposed to each other in
civil discord. The victorious king of the Franks proceeded without delay
to the siege of Angouleme. At the sound of his trumpets the walls of the
city imitated the example of Jericho, and instantly fell to the ground;
a splendid miracle, which may be reduced to the supposition, that some
clerical engineers had secretly undermined the foundations of the
rampart.  <span id="fr_1255"></span>[53](#fn_1255) At Bordeaux, which
had submitted without resistance, Clovis established his winter
quarters; and his prudent economy transported from Thoulouse the royal
treasures, which were deposited in the capital of the monarchy. The
conqueror penetrated as far as the confines of Spain;  <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[54](#fn_1256) restored the honors of the Catholic
church; fixed in Aquitain a colony of Franks;  <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[55](#fn_1257) and delegated to his lieutenants the
easy task of subduing, or extirpating, the nation of the Visigoths. But
the Visigoths were protected by the wise and powerful monarch of Italy.
While the balance was still equal, Theodoric had perhaps delayed the
march of the Ostrogoths; but their strenuous efforts successfully
resisted the ambition of Clovis; and the army of the Franks, and their
Burgundian allies, was compelled to raise the siege of Arles, with the
loss, as it is said, of thirty thousand men. These vicissitudes inclined
the fierce spirit of Clovis to acquiesce in an advantageous treaty of
peace. The Visigoths were suffered to retain the possession of
Septimania, a narrow tract of sea-coast, from the Rhone to the Pyrenees;
but the ample province of Aquitain, from those mountains to the Loire,
was indissolubly united to the kingdom of France.  <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[56](#fn_1258)

After the success of the Gothic war, Clovis accepted the honors of the
Roman consulship. The emperor Anastasius ambitiously bestowed on the
most powerful rival of Theodoric the title and ensigns of that eminent
dignity; yet, from some unknown cause, the name of Clovis has not been
inscribed in the Fasti either of the East or West.  <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[57](#fn_1259) On the solemn day, the monarch of
Gaul, placing a diadem on his head, was invested, in the church of St.
Martin, with a purple tunic and mantle. From thence he proceeded on
horseback to the cathedral of Tours; and, as he passed through the
streets, profusely scattered, with his own hand, a donative of gold and
silver to the joyful multitude, who incessantly repeated their
acclamations of Consul and Augustus. The actual or legal authority of
Clovis could not receive any new accessions from the consular dignity.
It was a name, a shadow, an empty pageant; and if the conqueror had been
instructed to claim the ancient prerogatives of that high office, they
must have expired with the period of its annual duration. But the Romans
were disposed to revere, in the person of their master, that antique
title which the emperors condescended to assume: the Barbarian himself
seemed to contract a sacred obligation to respect the majesty of the
republic; and the successors of Theodosius, by soliciting his
friendship, tacitly forgave, and almost ratified, the usurpation of
Gaul.

Twenty-five years after the death of Clovis this important concession
was more formally declared, in a treaty between his sons and the emperor
Justinian. The Ostrogoths of Italy, unable to defend their distant
acquisitions, had resigned to the Franks the cities of Arles and
Marseilles; of Arles, still adorned with the seat of a Praetorian
praefect, and of Marseilles, enriched by the advantages of trade and
navigation.  <span id="fr_1260"></span>[58](#fn_1260) This transaction
was confirmed by the Imperial authority; and Justinian, generously
yielding to the Franks the sovereignty of the countries beyond the Alps,
which they already possessed, absolved the provincials from their
allegiance; and established on a more lawful, though not more solid,
foundation, the throne of the Merovingians.  <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[59](#fn_1261) From that era they enjoyed the right
of celebrating at Arles the games of the circus; and by a singular
privilege, which was denied even to the Persian monarch, the gold coin,
impressed with their name and image, obtained a legal currency in the
empire.  <span id="fr_1262"></span>[60](#fn_1262) A Greek historian of
that age has praised the private and public virtues of the Franks, with
a partial enthusiasm, which cannot be sufficiently justified by their
domestic annals.  <span id="fr_1263"></span>[61](#fn_1263) He celebrates
their politeness and urbanity, their regular government, and orthodox
religion; and boldly asserts, that these Barbarians could be
distinguished only by their dress and language from the subjects of
Rome. Perhaps the Franks already displayed the social disposition, and
lively graces, which, in every age, have disguised their vices, and
sometimes concealed their intrinsic merit. Perhaps Agathias, and the
Greeks, were dazzled by the rapid progress of their arms, and the
splendor of their empire. Since the conquest of Burgundy, Gaul, except
the Gothic province of Septimania, was subject, in its whole extent, to
the sons of Clovis. They had extinguished the German kingdom of
Thuringia, and their vague dominion penetrated beyond the Rhine, into
the heart of their native forests. The Alemanni, and Bavarians, who had
occupied the Roman provinces of Rhaetia and Noricum, to the south of the
Danube, confessed themselves the humble vassals of the Franks; and the
feeble barrier of the Alps was incapable of resisting their ambition.
When the last survivor of the sons of Clovis united the inheritance and
conquests of the Merovingians, his kingdom extended far beyond the
limits of modern France. Yet modern France, such has been the progress
of arts and policy, far surpasses, in wealth, populousness, and power,
the spacious but savage realms of Clotaire or Dagobert.  <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[62](#fn_1264)

The Franks, or French, are the only people of Europe who can deduce a
perpetual succession from the conquerors of the Western empire. But
their conquest of Gaul was followed by ten centuries of anarchy and
ignorance. On the revival of learning, the students, who had been formed
in the schools of Athens and Rome, disdained their Barbarian ancestors;
and a long period elapsed before patient labor could provide the
requisite materials to satisfy, or rather to excite, the curiosity of
more enlightened times.  <span id="fr_1265"></span>[63](#fn_1265) At
length the eye of criticism and philosophy was directed to the
antiquities of France; but even philosophers have been tainted by the
contagion of prejudice and passion. The most extreme and exclusive
systems, of the personal servitude of the Gauls, or of their voluntary
and equal alliance with the Franks, have been rashly conceived, and
obstinately defended; and the intemperate disputants have accused each
other of conspiring against the prerogative of the crown, the dignity of
the nobles, or the freedom of the people. Yet the sharp conflict has
usefully exercised the adverse powers of learning and genius; and each
antagonist, alternately vanquished and victorious has extirpated some
ancient errors, and established some interesting truths. An impartial
stranger, instructed by their discoveries, their disputes, and even
their faults, may describe, from the same original materials, the state
of the Roman provincials, after Gaul had submitted to the arms and laws
of the Merovingian kings.  <span id="fr_1266"></span>[64](#fn_1266)

The rudest, or the most servile, condition of human society, is
regulated, however, by some fixed and general rules. When Tacitus
surveyed the primitive simplicity of the Germans, he discovered some
permanent maxims, or customs, of public and private life, which were
preserved by faithful tradition till the introduction of the art of
writing, and of the Latin tongue.  <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[65](#fn_1267) Before the election of the
Merovingian kings, the most powerful tribe, or nation, of the Franks,
appointed four venerable chieftains to compose the Salic laws;  <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[66](#fn_1268) and their labors were examined and
approved in three successive assemblies of the people. After the baptism
of Clovis, he reformed several articles that appeared incompatible with
Christianity: the Salic law was again amended by his sons; and at
length, under the reign of Dagobert, the code was revised and
promulgated in its actual form, one hundred years after the
establishment of the French monarchy. Within the same period, the
customs of the Ripuarians were transcribed and published; and
Charlemagne himself, the legislator of his age and country, had
accurately studied the two national laws, which still prevailed among
the Franks.  <span id="fr_1269"></span>[67](#fn_1269) The same care was
extended to their vassals; and the rude institutions of the Alemanni and
Bavarians were diligently compiled and ratified by the supreme authority
of the Merovingian kings. The Visigoths and Burgundians, whose conquests
in Gaul preceded those of the Franks, showed less impatience to attain
one of the principal benefits of civilized society. Euric was the first
of the Gothic princes who expressed, in writing, the manners and customs
of his people; and the composition of the Burgundian laws was a measure
of policy rather than of justice; to alleviate the yoke, and regain the
affections, of their Gallic subjects.  <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[68](#fn_1270) Thus, by a singular coincidence, the
Germans framed their artless institutions, at a time when the elaborate
system of Roman jurisprudence was finally consummated. In the Salic
laws, and the Pandects of Justinian, we may compare the first rudiments,
and the full maturity, of civil wisdom; and whatever prejudices may be
suggested in favor of Barbarism, our calmer reflections will ascribe to
the Romans the superior advantages, not only of science and reason, but
of humanity and justice. Yet the laws  <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[\*\_0033](#fn_1272) of the Barbarians were adapted
to their wants and desires, their occupations and their capacity; and
they all contributed to preserve the peace, and promote the improvement,
of the society for whose use they were originally established. The
Merovingians, instead of imposing a uniform rule of conduct on their
various subjects, permitted each people, and each family, of their
empire, freely to enjoy their domestic institutions;  <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[69](#fn_1271) nor were the Romans excluded from the
common benefits of this legal toleration.  <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[70](#fn_1273) The children embraced the law of
their parents, the wife that of her husband, the freedman that of his
patron; and in all causes where the parties were of different nations,
the plaintiff or accuser was obliged to follow the tribunal of the
defendant, who may always plead a judicial presumption of right, or
innocence. A more ample latitude was allowed, if every citizen, in the
presence of the judge, might declare the law under which he desired to
live, and the national society to which he chose to belong. Such an
indulgence would abolish the partial distinctions of victory: and the
Roman provincials might patiently acquiesce in the hardships of their
condition; since it depended on themselves to assume the privilege, if
they dared to assert the character, of free and warlike Barbarians.
 <span id="fr_1274"></span>[71](#fn_1274)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[40](daf03045.htm#fr_1242) Gregory of Tours
(l. iii. c. 19, in tom. ii. p. 197) indulges his genius, or rather
describes some more eloquent writer, in the description of Dijon; a
castle, which already deserved the title of a city. It depended on the
bishops of Langres till the twelfth century, and afterwards became the
capital of the dukes of Burgundy Longuerue Description de la France,
part i. p. 280.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[41](daf03045.htm#fr_1243) The Epitomizer of
Gregory of Tours (in tom. ii. p. 401) has supplied this number of
Franks; but he rashly supposes that they were cut in pieces by
Gundobald. The prudent Burgundian spared the soldiers of Clovis, and
sent these captives to the king of the Visigoths, who settled them in
the territory of Thoulouse.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[42](daf03045.htm#fr_1244) In this Burgundian
war I have followed Gregory of Tours, (l. ii. c. 32, 33, in tom. ii. p.
178, 179,) whose narrative appears so incompatible with that of
Procopius, (de Bell. Goth. l. i. c. 12, in tom. ii. p. 31, 32,) that
some critics have supposed two different wars. The Abbe Dubos (Hist.
Critique, &c., tom. ii. p. 126 - 162) has distinctly represented the
causes and the events.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[43](daf03045.htm#fr_1245) See his life or
legend, (in tom. iii. p. 402.) A martyr! how strangely has that word
been distorted from its original sense of a common witness. St.
Sigismond was remarkable for the cure of fevers

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[44](daf03045.htm#fr_1246) Before the end of
the fifth century, the church of St. Maurice, and his Thebaean legion,
had rendered Agaunum a place of devout pilgrimage. A promiscuous
community of both sexes had introduced some deeds of darkness, which
were abolished (A.D. 515) by the regular monastery of Sigismond. Within
fifty years, his angels of light made a nocturnal sally to murder their
bishop, and his clergy. See in the Bibliotheque Raisonnee (tom. xxxvi.
p. 435 - 438) the curious remarks of a learned librarian of Geneva.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[45](daf03045.htm#fr_1247) Marius, bishop of
Avenche, (Chron. in tom. ii. p. 15,) has marked the authentic dates, and
Gregory of Tours (l. iii. c. 5, 6, in tom. ii. p. 188, 189) has
expressed the principal facts, of the life of Sigismond, and the
conquest of Burgundy. Procopius (in tom. ii. p. 34) and Agathias (in
tom. ii. p. 49) show their remote and imperfect knowledge.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[46](daf03045.htm#fr_1248) Gregory of Tours
(l. ii. c. 37, in tom. ii. p. 181) inserts the short but persuasive
speech of Clovis. Valde moleste fero, quod hi Ariani partem teneant
Galliarum, (the author of the Gesta Francorum, in tom. ii. p. 553, adds
the precious epithet of optimam,) camus cum Dei adjutorio, et, superatis
eis, redigamus terram in ditionem nostram.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[47](daf03045.htm#fr_1249) Tunc rex projecit a
se in directum Bipennem suam quod est Francisca, &c. (Gesta Franc. in
tom. ii. p. 554.) The form and use of this weapon are clearly described
by Procopius, (in tom. ii. p. 37.) Examples of its national appellation
in Latin and French may be found in the Glossary of Ducange, and the
large Dictionnaire de Trevoux.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[48](daf03045.htm#fr_1250) It is singular
enough that some important and authentic facts should be found in a Life
of Quintianus, composed in rhyme in the old Patois of Rouergue, (Dubos,
Hist. Critique, &c., tom. ii. p. 179.)

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[49](daf03045.htm#fr_1251) Quamvis fortitudini
vestrae confidentiam tribuat parentum ves trorum innumerabilis
multitudo; quamvis Attilam potentem reminiscamini Visigotharum viribus
inclinatum; tamen quia populorum ferocia corda longa pace mollescunt,
cavete subito in alean aleam mittere, quos constat tantis temporibus
exercitia non habere. Such was the salutary, but fruitless, advice of
peace of reason, and of Theodoric, (Cassiodor. l. iii. ep. 2.)

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[50](daf03045.htm#fr_1252) Montesquieu (Esprit
des Loix, l. xv. c. 14) mentions and approves the law of the Visigoths,
(l. ix. tit. 2, in tom. iv. p. 425,) which obliged all masters to arm,
and send, or lead, into the field a tenth of their slaves.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[51](daf03045.htm#fr_1253) This mode of
divination, by accepting as an omen the first sacred words, which in
particular circumstances should be presented to the eye or ear, was
derived from the Pagans; and the Psalter, or Bible, was substituted to
the poems of Homer and Virgil. From the fourth to the fourteenth
century, these sortes sanctorum, as they are styled, were repeatedly
condemned by the decrees of councils, and repeatedly practised by kings,
bishops, and saints. See a curious dissertation of the Abbe du Resnel,
in the Memoires de l'Academie, tom. xix. p. 287 - 310

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[52](daf03045.htm#fr_1254) After correcting
the text, or excusing the mistake, of Procopius, who places the defeat
of Alaric near Carcassone, we may conclude, from the evidence of
Gregory, Fortunatus, and the author of the Gesta Francorum, that the
battle was fought in campo Vocladensi, on the banks of the Clain, about
ten miles to the south of Poitiers. Clovis overtook and attacked the
Visigoths near Vivonne, and the victory was decided near a village still
named Champagne St. Hilaire. See the Dissertations of the Abbe le Boeuf,
tom. i. p. 304 - 331.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[53](daf03045.htm#fr_1255) Angouleme is in the
road from Poitiers to Bordeaux; and although Gregory delays the siege, I
can more readily believe that he confounded the order of history, than
that Clovis neglected the rules of war.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[54](daf03045.htm#fr_1256) Pyrenaeos montes
usque Perpinianum subjecit, is the expression of Rorico, which betrays
his recent date; since Perpignan did not exist before the tenth century,
(Marca Hispanica, p. 458.) This florid and fabulous writer (perhaps a
monk of Amiens - see the Abbe le Boeuf, Mem. de l'Academie, tom. xvii.
p. 228-245) relates, in the allegorical character of a shepherd, the
general history of his countrymen the Franks; but his narrative ends
with the death of Clovis.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[55](daf03045.htm#fr_1257) The author of the
Gesta Francorum positively affirms, that Clovis fixed a body of Franks
in the Saintonge and Bourdelois: and he is not injudiciously followed by
Rorico, electos milites, atque fortissimos, cum parvulis, atque
mulieribus. Yet it should seem that they soon mingled with the Romans of
Aquitain, till Charlemagne introduced a more numerous and powerful
colony, (Dubos, Hist. Critique, tom. ii. p. 215.)

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[56](daf03045.htm#fr_1258) In the composition
of the Gothic war, I have used the following materials, with due regard
to their unequal value. Four epistles from Theodoric, king of Italy,
(Cassiodor l. iii. epist. 1 - 4. in tom. iv p. 3 - 5;) Procopius, (de
Bell. Goth. l. i. c 12, in tom. ii. p. 32, 33;) Gregory of Tours, (l.
ii. c. 35, 36, 37, in tom. ii. p. 181 - 183;) Jornandes, (de Reb.
Geticis, c. 58, in tom. ii. p. 28;) Fortunatas, (in Vit. St. Hilarii, in
tom. iii. p. 380;) Isidore, (in Chron. Goth. in tom. ii. p. 702;) the
Epitome of Gregory of Tours, (in tom. ii. p. 401;) the author of the
Gesta Francorum, (in tom. ii. p. 553 - 555;) the Fragments of
Fredegarius, (in tom. ii. p. 463;) Aimoin, (l. i. c. 20, in tom. iii. p.
41, 42,) and Rorico, (l. iv. in tom. iii. p. 14 - 19.)

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[57](daf03045.htm#fr_1259) The Fasti of Italy
would naturally reject a consul, the enemy of their sovereign; but any
ingenious hypothesis that might explain the silence of Constantinople
and Egypt, (the Chronicle of Marcellinus, and the Paschal,) is
overturned by the similar silence of Marius, bishop of Avenche, who
composed his Fasti in the kingdom of Burgundy. If the evidence of
Gregory of Tours were less weighty and positive, (l. ii. c. 38, in tom.
ii. p. 183,) I could believe that Clovis, like Odoacer, received the
lasting title and honors of Patrician, (Pagi Critica, tom. ii. p. 474,
492.)

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[58](daf03045.htm#fr_1260) Under the
Merovingian kings, Marseilles still imported from the East paper, wine,
oil, linen, silk, precious stones, spices, &c. The Gauls, or Franks,
traded to Syria, and the Syrians were established in Gaul. See M. de
Guignes, Mem. de l'Academie, tom. xxxvii. p. 471 - 475.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[59](daf03045.htm#fr_1261) This strong
declaration of Procopius (de Bell. Gothic. l. iii. cap. 33, in tom. ii.
p. 41) would almost suffice to justify the Abbe Dubos.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[60](daf03045.htm#fr_1262) The Franks, who
probably used the mints of Treves, Lyons, and Arles, imitated the
coinage of the Roman emperors of seventy-two solidi, or pieces, to the
pound of gold. But as the Franks established only a decuple proportion
of gold and silver, ten shillings will be a sufficient valuation of
their solidus of gold. It was the common standard of the Barbaric fines,
and contained forty denarii, or silver three pences. Twelve of these
denarii made a solidus, or shilling, the twentieth part of the ponderal
and numeral livre, or pound of silver, which has been so strangely
reduced in modern France. See La Blanc, Traite Historique des Monnoyes
de France, p. 36 - 43, &c.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[61](daf03045.htm#fr_1263) Agathias, in tom.
ii. p. 47. Gregory of Tours exhibits a very different picture. Perhaps
it would not be easy, within the same historical space, to find more
vice and less virtue. We are continually shocked by the union of savage
and corrupt manners.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[62](daf03045.htm#fr_1264) M. de Foncemagne
has traced, in a correct and elegant dissertation, (Mem. de l'Academie,
tom. viii. p. 505-528,) the extent and limits of the French monarchy.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[63](daf03045.htm#fr_1265) The Abbe Dubos
(Histoire Critique, tom. i. p. 29 - 36) has truly and agreeably
represented the slow progress of these studies; and he observes, that
Gregory of Tours was only once printed before the year 1560. According
to the complaint of Heineccius, (Opera, tom. iii. Sylloge, iii. p. 248,
&c.,) Germany received with indifference and contempt the codes of
Barbaric laws, which were published by Heroldus, Lindenbrogius, &c. At
present those laws, (as far as they relate to Gaul,) the history of
Gregory of Tours, and all the monuments of the Merovingian race, appear
in a pure and perfect state, in the first four volumes of the Historians
of France.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[64](daf03045.htm#fr_1266) In the space of
\[about\] thirty years (1728-1765) this interesting subject has been
agitated by the free spirit of the count de Boulainvilliers, (Memoires
Historiques sur l'Etat de la France, particularly tom. i. p. 15 - 49;)
the learned ingenuity of the Abbe Dubos, (Histoire Critique de
l'Etablissement de la Monarchie Francoise dans les Gaules, 2 vols. in
4to;) the comprehensive genius of the president de Montesquieu, (Esprit
des Loix, particularly l. xxviii. xxx. xxxi.;) and the good sense and
diligence of the Abbe de Mably, (Observations sur l'Histoire de France,
2 vols. 12mo.)

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[65](daf03045.htm#fr_1267) I have derived much
instruction from two learned works of Heineccius, the History, and the
Elements, of the Germanic law. In a judicious preface to the Elements,
he considers, and tries to excuse the defects of that barbarous
jurisprudence.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[66](daf03045.htm#fr_1268) Latin appears to
have been the original language of the Salic law. It was probably
composed in the beginning of the fifth century, before the era (A.D.
421) of the real or fabulous Pharamond. The preface mentions the four
cantons which produced the four legislators; and many provinces,
Franconia, Saxony, Hanover, Brabant, &c., have claimed them as their
own. See an excellent Dissertation of Heinecties de Lege Salica, tom.
iii. Sylloge iii. p. 247 - 267.

Note: The relative antiquity of the two copies of the Salic law has been
contested with great learning and ingenuity. The work of M. Wiarda,
History and Explanation of the Salic Law, Bremen, 1808, asserts that
what is called the Lex Antiqua, or Vetustior in which many German words
are mingled with the Latin, has no claim to superior antiquity, and may
be suspected to be more modern. M. Wiarda has been opposed by M. Fuer
bach, who maintains the higher age of the "ancient" Code, which has been
greatly corrupted by the transcribers. See Guizot, Cours de l'Histoire
Moderne, vol. i. sect. 9: and the preface to the useful republication of
five of the different texts of the Salic law, with that of the Ripuarian
in parallel columns. By E. A. I. Laspeyres, Halle, 1833. - M.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[67](daf03045.htm#fr_1269) Eginhard, in Vit.
Caroli Magni, c. 29, in tom. v. p. 100. By these two laws, most critics
understand the Salic and the Ripuarian. The former extended from the
Carbonarian forest to the Loire, (tom. iv. p. 151,) and the latter might
be obeyed from the same forest to the Rhine, (tom. iv. p. 222.)

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[68](daf03045.htm#fr_1270) Consult the ancient
and modern prefaces of the several codes, in the fourth volume of the
Historians of France. The original prologue to the Salic law expresses
(though in a foreign dialect) the genuine spirit of the Franks more
forcibly than the ten books of Gregory of Tours.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[69](daf03045.htm#fr_1272) The Ripuarian law
declares, and defines, this indulgence in favor of the plaintiff, (tit.
xxxi. in tom. iv. p. 240;) and the same toleration is understood, or
expressed, in all the codes, except that of the Visigoths of Spain.
Tanta diversitas legum (says Agobard in the ninth century) quanta non
solum in regionibus, aut civitatibus, sed etiam in multis domibus
habetur. Nam plerumque contingit ut simul eant aut sedeant quinque
homines, et nullus eorum communem legem cum altero habeat, (in tom. vi.
p. 356.) He foolishly proposes to introduce a uniformity of law, as well
as of faith.

Note: It is the object of the important work of M. Savigny, Geschichte
des Romisches Rechts in Mittelalter, to show the perpetuity of the Roman
law from the 5th to the 12th century. - M.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[\*\_0033](daf03045.htm#fr_1271) The most
complete collection of these codes is in the "Barbarorum leges
antiquae," by P. Canciani, 5 vols. folio, Venice, 1781-9. - M.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[70](daf03045.htm#fr_1273) Inter Romanos
negotia causarum Romanis legibus praecipimus terminari. Such are the
words of a general constitution promulgated by Clotaire, the son of
Clovis, the sole monarch of the Franks (in tom. iv. p. 116) about the
year 560.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[71](daf03045.htm#fr_1274) This liberty of
choice has been aptly deduced (Esprit des Loix, l. xxviii. 2) from the
constitution of Lothaire I. (Leg. Langobard. l. ii. tit. lvii. in Codex
Lindenbrog. p. 664;) though the example is too recent and partial. From
a various reading in the Salic law, (tit. xliv. not. xlv.) the Abbe de
Mably (tom. i. p. 290 - 293) has conjectured, that, at first, a
Barbarian only, and afterwards any man, (consequently a Roman,) might
live according to the law of the Franks. I am sorry to offend this
ingenious conjecture by observing, that the stricter sense (Barbarum) is
expressed in the reformed copy of Charlemagne; which is confirmed by the
Royal and Wolfenbuttle MSS. The looser interpretation (hominem) is
authorized only by the MS. of Fulda, from from whence Heroldus published
his edition. See the four original texts of the Salic law in tom. iv. p.
147, 173, 196, 220.

Note: Gibbon appears to have doubted the evidence on which this "liberty
of choice" rested. His doubts have been confirmed by the researches of
M. Savigny, who has not only confuted but traced with convincing
sagacity the origin and progress of this error. As a general principle,
though liable to some exceptions, each lived according to his native
law. Romische Recht. vol. i. p. 123 - 138 - M.

Note: This constitution of Lothaire at first related only to the duchy
of Rome; it afterwards found its way into the Lombard code. Savigny. p.
138. - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis. Part III.](daf03046)
