[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03047) 
[Next](daf03049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis. Part V.

In a century of perpetual, or at least implacable, war, much courage,
and some skill, must have been exerted for the defence of Britain. Yet
if the memory of its champions is almost buried in oblivion, we need not
repine; since every age, however destitute of science or virtue,
sufficiently abounds with acts of blood and military renown. The tomb of
Vortimer, the son of Vortigern, was erected on the margin of the
sea-shore, as a landmark formidable to the Saxons, whom he had thrice
vanquished in the fields of Kent. Ambrosius Aurelian was descended from
a noble family of Romans;  <span id="fr_1345"></span>[138](#fn_1345) his
modesty was equal to his valor, and his valor, till the last fatal
action,  <span id="fr_1346"></span>[139](#fn_1346) was crowned with
splendid success. But every British name is effaced by the illustrious
name of Arthur,  <span id="fr_1347"></span>[140](#fn_1347) the
hereditary prince of the Silures, in South Wales, and the elective king
or general of the nation. According to the most rational account, he
defeated, in twelve successive battles, the Angles of the North, and the
Saxons of the West; but the declining age of the hero was imbittered by
popular ingratitude and domestic misfortunes. The events of his life are
less interesting than the singular revolutions of his fame. During a
period of five hundred years the tradition of his exploits was
preserved, and rudely embellished, by the obscure bards of Wales and
Armorica, who were odious to the Saxons, and unknown to the rest of
mankind. The pride and curiosity of the Norman conquerors prompted them
to inquire into the ancient history of Britain: they listened with fond
credulity to the tale of Arthur, and eagerly applauded the merit of a
prince who had triumphed over the Saxons, their common enemies. His
romance, transcribed in the Latin of Jeffrey of Monmouth, and afterwards
translated into the fashionable idiom of the times, was enriched with
the various, though incoherent, ornaments which were familiar to the
experience, the learning, or the fancy, of the twelfth century. The
progress of a Phrygian colony, from the Tyber to the Thames, was easily
ingrafted on the fable of the Aeneid; and the royal ancestors of Arthur
derived their origin from Troy, and claimed their alliance with the
Caesars. His trophies were decorated with captive provinces and Imperial
titles; and his Danish victories avenged the recent injuries of his
country. The gallantry and superstition of the British hero, his feasts
and tournaments, and the memorable institution of his Knights of the
Round Table, were faithfully copied from the reigning manners of
chivalry; and the fabulous exploits of Uther's son appear less
incredible than the adventures which were achieved by the enterprising
valor of the Normans. Pilgrimage, and the holy wars, introduced into
Europe the specious miracles of Arabian magic. Fairies and giants,
flying dragons, and enchanted palaces, were blended with the more simple
fictions of the West; and the fate of Britain depended on the art, or
the predictions, of Merlin. Every nation embraced and adorned the
popular romance of Arthur, and the Knights of the Round Table: their
names were celebrated in Greece and Italy; and the voluminous tales of
Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram were devoutly studied by the princes and
nobles, who disregarded the genuine heroes and historians of antiquity.
At length the light of science and reason was rekindled; the talisman
was broken; the visionary fabric melted into air; and by a natural,
though unjust, reverse of the public opinion, the severity of the
present age is inclined to question the existence of Arthur.  <span
id="fr_1348"></span>[141](#fn_1348)

Resistance, if it cannot avert, must increase the miseries of conquest;
and conquest has never appeared more dreadful and destructive than in
the hands of the Saxons; who hated the valor of their enemies, disdained
the faith of treaties, and violated, without remorse, the most sacred
objects of the Christian worship. The fields of battle might be traced,
almost in every district, by monuments of bones; the fragments of
falling towers were stained with blood; the last of the Britons, without
distinction of age or sex, was massacred,  <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[142](#fn_1349) in the ruins of Anderida;  <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[143](#fn_1350) and the repetition of such
calamities was frequent and familiar under the Saxon heptarchy. The arts
and religion, the laws and language, which the Romans had so carefully
planted in Britain, were extirpated by their barbarous successors. After
the destruction of the principal churches, the bishops, who had declined
the crown of martyrdom, retired with the holy relics into Wales and
Armorica; the remains of their flocks were left destitute of any
spiritual food; the practice, and even the remembrance, of Christianity
were abolished; and the British clergy might obtain some comfort from
the damnation of the idolatrous strangers. The kings of France
maintained the privileges of their Roman subjects; but the ferocious
Saxons trampled on the laws of Rome, and of the emperors. The
proceedings of civil and criminal jurisdiction, the titles of honor, the
forms of office, the ranks of society, and even the domestic rights of
marriage, testament, and inheritance, were finally suppressed; and the
indiscriminate crowd of noble and plebeian slaves was governed by the
traditionary customs, which had been coarsely framed for the shepherds
and pirates of Germany. The language of science, of business, and of
conversation, which had been introduced by the Romans, was lost in the
general desolation. A sufficient number of Latin or Celtic words might
be assumed by the Germans, to express their new wants and ideas;  <span
id="fr_1351"></span>[144](#fn_1351) but those illiterate Pagans
preserved and established the use of their national dialect.  <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[145](#fn_1352) Almost every name, conspicuous
either in the church or state, reveals its Teutonic origin;  <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[146](#fn_1353) and the geography of England was
universally inscribed with foreign characters and appellations. The
example of a revolution, so rapid and so complete, may not easily be
found; but it will excite a probable suspicion, that the arts of Rome
were less deeply rooted in Britain than in Gaul or Spain; and that the
native rudeness of the country and its inhabitants was covered by a thin
varnish of Italian manners.

This strange alteration has persuaded historians, and even philosophers,
that the provincials of Britain were totally exterminated; and that the
vacant land was again peopled by the perpetual influx, and rapid
increase, of the German colonies. Three hundred thousand Saxons are said
to have obeyed the summons of Hengist;  <span
id="fr_1354"></span>[147](#fn_1354) the entire emigation of the Angles
was attested, in the age of Bede, by the solitude of their native
country;  <span id="fr_1355"></span>[148](#fn_1355) and our experience
has shown the free propagation of the human race, if they are cast on a
fruitful wilderness, where their steps are unconfined, and their
subsistence is plentiful. The Saxon kingdoms displayed the face of
recent discovery and cultivation; the towns were small, the villages
were distant; the husbandry was languid and unskilful; four sheep were
equivalent to an acre of the best land;  <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[149](#fn_1356) an ample space of wood and morass
was resigned to the vague dominion of nature; and the modern bishopric
of Durham, the whole territory from the Tyne to the Tees, had returned
to its primitive state of a savage and solitary forest.  <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[150](#fn_1357) Such imperfect population might have
been supplied, in some generations, by the English colonies; but neither
reason nor facts can justify the unnatural supposition, that the Saxons
of Britain remained alone in the desert which they had subdued. After
the sanguinary Barbarians had secured their dominion, and gratified
their revenge, it was their interest to preserve the peasants as well as
the cattle, of the unresisting country. In each successive revolution,
the patient herd becomes the property of its new masters; and the
salutary compact of food and labor is silently ratified by their mutual
necessities. Wilfrid, the apostle of Sussex,  <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[151](#fn_1358) accepted from his royal convert the
gift of the Vpeninsula of Selsey, near Chichester, with the persons and
property of its inhabitants, who then amounted to eighty-seven families.
He released them at once from spiritual and temporal bondage; and two
hundred and fifty slaves of both sexes were baptized by their indulgent
master. The kingdom of Sussex, which spread from the sea to the Thames,
contained seven thousand families; twelve hundred were ascribed to the
Isle of Wight; and, if we multiply this vague computation, it may seem
probable, that England was cultivated by a million of servants, or
villains, who were attached to the estates of their arbitrary landlords.
The indigent Barbarians were often tempted to sell their children, or
themselves into perpetual, and even foreign, bondage;  <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[152](#fn_1359) yet the special exemptions which
were granted to national slaves,  <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[153](#fn_1360) sufficiently declare that they were
much less numerous than the strangers and captives, who had lost their
liberty, or changed their masters, by the accidents of war. When time
and religion had mitigated the fierce spirit of the Anglo-Saxons, the
laws encouraged the frequent practice of manumission; and their
subjects, of Welsh or Cambrian extraction, assumed the respectable
station of inferior freemen, possessed of lands, and entitled to the
rights of civil society.  <span id="fr_1361"></span>[154](#fn_1361) Such
gentle treatment might secure the allegiance of a fierce people, who had
been recently subdued on the confines of Wales and Cornwall. The sage
Ina, the legislator of Wessex, united the two nations in the bands of
domestic alliance; and four British lords of Somersetshire may be
honorably distinguished in the court of a Saxon monarch.  <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[155](#fn_1362)

The independent Britons appear to have relapsed into the state of
original barbarism, from whence they had been imperfectly reclaimed.
Separated by their enemies from the rest of mankind, they soon became an
object of scandal and abhorrence to the Catholic world.  <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[156](#fn_1363) Christianity was still professed in
the mountains of Wales; but the rude schismatics, in the form of the
clerical tonsure, and in the day of the celebration of Easter,
obstinately resisted the imperious mandates of the Roman pontiffs. The
use of the Latin language was insensibly abolished, and the Britons were
deprived of the art and learning which Italy communicated to her Saxon
proselytes. In Wales and Armorica, the Celtic tongue, the native idiom
of the West, was preserved and propagated; and the Bards, who had been
the companions of the Druids, were still protected, in the sixteenth
century, by the laws of Elizabeth. Their chief, a respectable officer of
the courts of Pengwern, or Aberfraw, or Caermarthen, accompanied the
king's servants to war: the monarchy of the Britons, which he sung in
the front of battle, excited their courage, and justified their
depredations; and the songster claimed for his legitimate prize the
fairest heifer of the spoil. His subordinate ministers, the masters and
disciples of vocal and instrumental music, visited, in their respective
circuits, the royal, the noble, and the plebeian houses; and the public
poverty, almost exhausted by the clergy, was oppressed by the
importunate demands of the bards. Their rank and merit were ascertained
by solemn trials, and the strong belief of supernatural inspiration
exalted the fancy of the poet, and of his audience.  <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[157](#fn_1364) The last retreats of Celtic freedom,
the extreme territories of Gaul and Britain, were less adapted to
agriculture than to pasturage: the wealth of the Britons consisted in
their flocks and herds; milk and flesh were their ordinary food; and
bread was sometimes esteemed, or rejected, as a foreign luxury. Liberty
had peopled the mountains of Wales and the morasses of Armorica; but
their populousness has been maliciously ascribed to the loose practice
of polygamy; and the houses of these licentious barbarians have been
supposed to contain ten wives, and perhaps fifty children.  <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[158](#fn_1365) Their disposition was rash and
choleric; they were bold in action and in speech;  <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[159](#fn_1366) and as they were ignorant of the
arts of peace, they alternately indulged their passions in foreign and
domestic war. The cavalry of Armorica, the spearmen of Gwent, and the
archers of Merioneth, were equally formidable; but their poverty could
seldom procure either shields or helmets; and the inconvenient weight
would have retarded the speed and agility of their desultory operations.
One of the greatest of the English monarchs was requested to satisfy the
curiosity of a Greek emperor concerning the state of Britain; and Henry
II. could assert, from his personal experience, that Wales was inhabited
by a race of naked warriors, who encountered, without fear, the
defensive armor of their enemies.  <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[160](#fn_1367)

By the revolution of Britain, the limits of science, as well as of
empire, were contracted. The dark cloud, which had been cleared by the
Phoenician discoveries, and finally dispelled by the arms of Caesar,
again settled on the shores of the Atlantic, and a Roman province was
again lost among the fabulous Islands of the Ocean. One hundred and
fifty years after the reign of Honorius, the gravest historian of the
times  <span id="fr_1368"></span>[161](#fn_1368) describes the wonders
of a remote isle, whose eastern and western parts are divided by an
antique wall, the boundary of life and death, or, more properly, of
truth and fiction. The east is a fair country, inhabited by a civilized
people: the air is healthy, the waters are pure and plentiful, and the
earth yields her regular and fruitful increase. In the west, beyond the
wall, the air is infectious and mortal; the ground is covered with
serpents; and this dreary solitude is the region of departed spirits,
who are transported from the opposite shores in substantial boats, and
by living rowers. Some families of fishermen, the subjects of the
Franks, are excused from tribute, in consideration of the mysterious
office which is performed by these Charons of the ocean. Each in his
turn is summoned, at the hour of midnight, to hear the voices, and even
the names, of the ghosts: he is sensible of their weight, and he feels
himself impelled by an unknown, but irresistible power. After this dream
of fancy, we read with astonishment, that the name of this island is
Brittia; that it lies in the ocean, against the mouth of the Rhine, and
less than thirty miles from the continent; that it is possessed by three
nations, the Frisians, the Angles, and the Britons; and that some Angles
had appeared at Constantinople, in the train of the French ambassadors.
From these ambassadors Procopius might be informed of a singular, though
not improbable, adventure, which announces the spirit, rather than the
delicacy, of an English heroine. She had been betrothed to Radiger, king
of the Varni, a tribe of Germans who touched the ocean and the Rhine;
but the perfidious lover was tempted, by motives of policy, to prefer
his father's widow, the sister of Theodebert, king of the Franks.  <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[162](#fn_1369) The forsaken princess of the Angles,
instead of bewailing, revenged her disgrace. Her warlike subjects are
said to have been ignorant of the use, and even of the form, of a horse;
but she boldly sailed from Britain to the mouth of the Rhine, with a
fleet of four hundred ships, and an army of one hundred thousand men.
After the loss of a battle, the captive Radiger implored the mercy of
his victorious bride, who generously pardoned his offence, dismissed her
rival, and compelled the king of the Varni to discharge with honor and
fidelity the duties of a husband.  <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[163](#fn_1370) This gallant exploit appears to be
the last naval enterprise of the Anglo-Saxons. The arts of navigation,
by which they acquired the empire of Britain and of the sea, were soon
neglected by the indolent Barbarians, who supinely renounced all the
commercial advantages of their insular situation. Seven independent
kingdoms were agitated by perpetual discord; and the British world was
seldom connected, either in peace or war, with the nations of the
Continent.  <span id="fr_1371"></span>[164](#fn_1371)

I have now accomplished the laborious narrative of the decline and fall
of the Roman empire, from the fortunate age of Trajan and the Antonines,
to its total extinction in the West, about five centuries after the
Christian era. At that unhappy period, the Saxons fiercely struggled
with the natives for the possession of Britain: Gaul and Spain were
divided between the powerful monarchies of the Franks and Visigoths, and
the dependent kingdoms of the Suevi and Burgundians: Africa was exposed
to the cruel persecution of the Vandals, and the savage insults of the
Moors: Rome and Italy, as far as the banks of the Danube, were afflicted
by an army of Barbarian mercenaries, whose lawless tyranny was succeeded
by the reign of Theodoric the Ostrogoth. All the subjects of the empire,
who, by the use of the Latin language, more particularly deserved the
name and privileges of Romans, were oppressed by the disgrace and
calamities of foreign conquest; and the victorious nations of Germany
established a new system of manners and government in the western
countries of Europe. The majesty of Rome was faintly represented by the
princes of Constantinople, the feeble and imaginary successors of
Augustus. Yet they continued to reign over the East, from the Danube to
the Nile and Tigris; the Gothic and Vandal kingdoms of Italy and Africa
were subverted by the arms of Justinian; and the history of the Greek
emperors may still afford a long series of instructive lessons, and
interesting revolutions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[138](daf03048.htm#fr_1345) Bede, who in his
chronicle (p. 28) places Ambrosius under the reign of Zeno, (A.D. 474 -
491,) observes, that his parents had been "purpura induti;" which he
explains, in his ecclesiastical history, by "regium nomen et insigne
ferentibus," (l. i. c. 16, p. 53.) The expression of Nennius (c. 44, p.
110, edit. Gale) is still more singular, "Unus de consulibus gentis
Romanicae est pater meus."

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[139](daf03048.htm#fr_1346) By the unanimous,
though doubtful, conjecture of our antiquarians, Ambrosius is confounded
with Natanleod, who (A.D. 508) lost his own life, and five thousand of
his subjects, in a battle against Cerdic, the West Saxon, (Chron. Saxon.
p. 17, 18.)

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[140](daf03048.htm#fr_1347) As I am a stranger
to the Welsh bards, Myrdhin, Llomarch, and Taliessin, my faith in the
existence and exploits of Arthur principally rests on the simple and
circumstantial testimony of Nennius. (Hist. Brit. c. 62, 63, p. 114.)
Mr. Whitaker, (Hist. of Manchester, vol. ii. p. 31 - 71) had framed an
interesting, and even probable, narrative of the wars of Arthur: though
it is impossible to allow the reality of the round table.

Note: I presume that Gibbon means Llywarch Hen, or the Aged. - The
Elegies of this Welsh prince and bard have been published by Mr. Owen;
to whose works and in the Myvyrian Archaeology, slumbers much curious
information on the subject of Welsh tradition and poetry. But the Welsh
antiquarians have never obtained a hearing from the public; they have
had no Macpherson to compensate for his corruption of their poetic
legends by forcing them into popularity. - See also Mr. Sharon Turner's
Essay on the Welsh Bards. - M.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[141](daf03048.htm#fr_1348) The progress of
romance, and the state of learning, in the middle ages, are illustrated
by Mr. Thomas Warton, with the taste of a poet, and the minute diligence
of an antiquarian. I have derived much instruction from the two learned
dissertations prefixed to the first volume of his History of English
Poetry.

Note: These valuable dissertations should not now be read without the
notes and preliminary essay of the late editor, Mr. Price, which, in
point of taste and fulness of information, are worthy of accompanying
and completing those of Warton. - M.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[142](daf03048.htm#fr_1349) Hoc anno (490)
Aella et Cissa obsederunt Andredes-Ceaster; et interfecerunt omnes qui
id incoluerunt; adeo ut ne unus Brito ibi superstes fuerit, (Chron.
Saxon. p. 15;) an expression more dreadful in its simplicity, than all
the vague and tedious lamentations of the British Jeremiah.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[143](daf03048.htm#fr_1350) Andredes-Ceaster,
or Anderida, is placed by Camden (Britannia, vol. i. p. 258) at
Newenden, in the marshy grounds of Kent, which might be formerly covered
by the sea, and on the edge of the great forest (Anderida) which
overspread so large a portion of Hampshire and Sussex.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[144](daf03048.htm#fr_1351) Dr. Johnson
affirms, that few English words are of British extraction. Mr. Whitaker,
who understands the British language, has discovered more than three
thousand, and actually produces a long and various catalogue, (vol. ii.
p. 235 - 329.) It is possible, indeed, that many of these words may have
been imported from the Latin or Saxon into the native idiom of Britain.

Note: Dr. Prichard's very curious researches, which connect the Celtic,
as well as the Teutonic languages with the Indo-European class, make it
still more difficult to decide between the Celtic or Teutonic origin of
English words. - See Prichard on the Eastern Origin of the Celtic
Nations Oxford, 1831. - M.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[145](daf03048.htm#fr_1352) In the beginning
of the seventh century, the Franks and the Anglo-Saxons mutually
understood each other's language, which was derived from the same
Teutonic root, (Bede, l. i. c. 25, p. 60.)

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[146](daf03048.htm#fr_1353) After the first
generation of Italian, or Scottish, missionaries, the dignities of the
church were filled with Saxon proselytes.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[147](daf03048.htm#fr_1354) Carte's History of
England, vol. i. p. 195. He quotes the British historians; but I much
fear, that Jeffrey of Monmouth (l. vi. c. 15) is his only witness.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[148](daf03048.htm#fr_1355) Bede, Hist.
Ecclesiast. l. i. c. 15, p. 52. The fact is probable, and well attested:
yet such was the loose intermixture of the German tribes, that we find,
in a subsequent period, the law of the Angli and Warini of Germany,
(Lindenbrog. Codex, p. 479 - 486.)

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[149](daf03048.htm#fr_1356) See Dr. Henry's
useful and laborious History of Great Britain, vol. ii. p. 388.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[150](daf03048.htm#fr_1357) Quicquid (says
John of Tinemouth) inter Tynam et Tesam fluvios extitit, sola eremi
vastitudo tunc temporis fuit, et idcirco nullius ditioni servivit, eo
quod sola indomitorum et sylvestrium animalium spelunca et habitatio
fuit, (apud Carte, vol. i. p. 195.) From bishop Nicholson (English
Historical Library, p. 65, 98) I understand that fair copies of John of
Tinemouth's ample collections are preserved in the libraries of Oxford,
Lambeth, &c.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[151](daf03048.htm#fr_1358) See the mission of
Wilfrid, &c., in Bede, Hist. Eccles. l. iv. c. 13, 16, p. 155, 156, 159.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[152](daf03048.htm#fr_1359) From the
concurrent testimony of Bede (l. ii. c. 1, p. 78) and William of
Malmsbury, (l. iii. p. 102,) it appears, that the Anglo- Saxons, from
the first to the last age, persisted in this unnatural practice. Their
youths were publicly sold in the market of Rome.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[153](daf03048.htm#fr_1360) According to the
laws of Ina, they could not be lawfully sold beyond the seas.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[154](daf03048.htm#fr_1361) The life of a
Wallus, or Cambricus, homo, who possessed a hyde of land, is fixed at
120 shillings, by the same laws (of Ina, tit. xxxii. in Leg.
Anglo-Saxon. p. 20) which allowed 200 shillings for a free Saxon, 1200
for a Thane, (see likewise Leg. Anglo-Saxon. p. 71.) We may observe,
that these legislators, the West Saxons and Mercians, continued their
British conquests after they became Christians. The laws of the four
kings of Kent do not condescend to notice the existence of any subject
Britons.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[155](daf03048.htm#fr_1362) See Carte's Hist.
of England, vol. i. p. 278.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[156](daf03048.htm#fr_1363) At the conclusion
of his history, (A.D. 731,) Bede describes the ecclesiastical state of
the island, and censures the implacable, though impotent, hatred of the
Britons against the English nation, and the Catholic church, (l. v. c.
23, p. 219.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[157](daf03048.htm#fr_1364) Mr. Pennant's Tour
in Wales (p. 426 - 449) has furnished me with a curious and interesting
account of the Welsh bards. In the year 1568, a session was held at
Caerwys by the special command of Queen Elizabeth, and regular degrees
in vocal and instrumental music were conferred on fifty-five minstrels.
The prize (a silver harp) was adjudged by the Mostyn family.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[158](daf03048.htm#fr_1365) Regio longe
lateque diffusa, milite, magis quam credibile sit, referta. Partibus
equidem in illis miles unus quinquaginta generat, sortitus more barbaro
denas aut amplius uxores. This reproach of William of Poitiers (in the
Historians of France, tom. xi. p. 88) is disclaimed by the Benedictine
editors.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[159](daf03048.htm#fr_1366) Giraldus
Cambrensis confines this gift of bold and ready eloquence to the Romans,
the French, and the Britons. The malicious Welshman insinuates that the
English taciturnity might possibly be the effect of their servitude
under the Normans.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[160](daf03048.htm#fr_1367) The picture of
Welsh and Armorican manners is drawn from Giraldus, (Descript. Cambriae,
c. 6 - 15, inter Script. Camden. p. 886 - 891,) and the authors quoted
by the Abbe de Vertot, (Hist. Critique tom. ii. p. 259 - 266.)

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[161](daf03048.htm#fr_1368) See Procopius de
Bell. Gothic. l. iv. c. 20, p. 620 - 625. The Greek historian is himself
so confounded by the wonders which he relates, that he weakly attempts
to distinguish the islands of Britia and Britain, which he has
identified by so many inseparable circumstances.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[162](daf03048.htm#fr_1369) Theodebert,
grandson of Clovis, and king of Austrasia, was the most powerful and
warlike prince of the age; and this remarkable adventure may be placed
between the years 534 and 547, the extreme terms of his reign. His
sister Theudechildis retired to Sens, where she founded monasteries, and
distributed alms, (see the notes of the Benedictine editors, in tom. ii.
p. 216.) If we may credit the praises of Fortunatus, (l. vi. carm. 5, in
tom. ii. p. 507,) Radiger was deprived of a most valuable wife.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[163](daf03048.htm#fr_1370) Perhaps she was
the sister of one of the princes or chiefs of the Angles, who landed in
527, and the following years, between the Humber and the Thames, and
gradually founded the kingdoms of East Anglia and Mercia. The English
writers are ignorant of her name and existence: but Procopius may have
suggested to Mr. Rowe the character and situation of Rodogune in the
tragedy of the Royal Convert.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[164](daf03048.htm#fr_1371) In the copious
history of Gregory of Tours, we cannot find any traces of hostile or
friendly intercourse between France and England except in the marriage
of the daughter of Caribert, king of Paris, quam regis cujusdam in
Cantia filius matrimonio copulavit, (l. ix. c. 28, in tom. ii. p. 348.)
The bishop of Tours ended his history and his life almost immediately
before the conversion of Kent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis. Part VI.](daf03049)
