[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03015) 
[Next](daf03017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By Barbarians. Part I.

Invasion Of Italy By Alaric. - Manners Of The Roman Senate And People. -
Rome Is Thrice Besieged, And At Length Pillaged, By The Goths. - Death
Of Alaric. - The Goths Evacuate Italy. - Fall Of Constantine. - Gaul And
Spain Are Occupied By The Barbarians. - Independence Of Britain.

The incapacity of a weak and distracted government may often assume the
appearance, and produce the effects, of a treasonable correspondence
with the public enemy. If Alaric himself had been introduced into the
council of Ravenna, he would probably have advised the same measures
which were actually pursued by the ministers of Honorius.  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412) The king of the Goths would have
conspired, perhaps with some reluctance, to destroy the formidable
adversary, by whose arms, in Italy, as well as in Greece, he had been
twice overthrown. Their active and interested hatred laboriously
accomplished the disgrace and ruin of the great Stilicho. The valor of
Sarus, his fame in arms, and his personal, or hereditary, influence over
the confederate Barbarians, could recommend him only to the friends of
their country, who despised, or detested, the worthless characters of
Turpilio, Varanes, and Vigilantius. By the pressing instances of the new
favorites, these generals, unworthy as they had shown themselves of the
names of soldiers,  <span id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_413) were promoted
to the command of the cavalry, of the infantry, and of the domestic
troops. The Gothic prince would have subscribed with pleasure the edict
which the fanaticism of Olympius dictated to the simple and devout
emperor. Honorius excluded all persons, who were adverse to the Catholic
church, from holding any office in the state; obstinately rejected the
service of all those who dissented from his religion; and rashly
disqualified many of his bravest and most skilful officers, who adhered
to the Pagan worship, or who had imbibed the opinions of Arianism.
 <span id="fr_414"></span>[3](#fn_414) These measures, so advantageous
to an enemy, Alaric would have approved, and might perhaps have
suggested; but it may seem doubtful, whether the Barbarian would have
promoted his interest at the expense of the inhuman and absurd cruelty
which was perpetrated by the direction, or at least with the connivance
of the Imperial ministers. The foreign auxiliaries, who had been
attached to the person of Stilicho, lamented his death; but the desire
of revenge was checked by a natural apprehension for the safety of their
wives and children; who were detained as hostages in the strong cities
of Italy, where they had likewise deposited their most valuable effects.
At the same hour, and as if by a common signal, the cities of Italy were
polluted by the same horrid scenes of universal massacre and pillage,
which involved, in promiscuous destruction, the families and fortunes of
the Barbarians. Exasperated by such an injury, which might have awakened
the tamest and most servile spirit, they cast a look of indignation and
hope towards the camp of Alaric, and unanimously swore to pursue, with
just and implacable war, the perfidious nation who had so basely
violated the laws of hospitality. By the imprudent conduct of the
ministers of Honorius, the republic lost the assistance, and deserved
the enmity, of thirty thousand of her bravest soldiers; and the weight
of that formidable army, which alone might have determined the event of
the war, was transferred from the scale of the Romans into that of the
Goths.

In the arts of negotiation, as well as in those of war, the Gothic king
maintained his superior ascendant over an enemy, whose seeming changes
proceeded from the total want of counsel and design. From his camp, on
the confines of Italy, Alaric attentively observed the revolutions of
the palace, watched the progress of faction and discontent, disguised
the hostile aspect of a Barbarian invader, and assumed the more popular
appearance of the friend and ally of the great Stilicho: to whose
virtues, when they were no longer formidable, he could pay a just
tribute of sincere praise and regret. The pressing invitation of the
malecontents, who urged the king of the Goths to invade Italy, was
enforced by a lively sense of his personal injuries; and he might
especially complain, that the Imperial ministers still delayed and
eluded the payment of the four thousand pounds of gold which had been
granted by the Roman senate, either to reward his services, or to
appease his fury. His decent firmness was supported by an artful
moderation, which contributed to the success of his designs. He required
a fair and reasonable satisfaction; but he gave the strongest
assurances, that, as soon as he had obtained it, he would immediately
retire. He refused to trust the faith of the Romans, unless Aetius and
Jason, the sons of two great officers of state, were sent as hostages to
his camp; but he offered to deliver, in exchange, several of the noblest
youths of the Gothic nation. The modesty of Alaric was interpreted, by
the ministers of Ravenna, as a sure evidence of his weakness and fear.
They disdained either to negotiate a treaty, or to assemble an army; and
with a rash confidence, derived only from their ignorance of the extreme
danger, irretrievably wasted the decisive moments of peace and war.
While they expected, in sullen silence, that the Barbarians would
evacuate the confines of Italy, Alaric, with bold and rapid marches,
passed the Alps and the Po; hastily pillaged the cities of Aquileia,
Altinum, Concordia, and Cremona, which yielded to his arms; increased
his forces by the accession of thirty thousand auxiliaries; and, without
meeting a single enemy in the field, advanced as far as the edge of the
morass which protected the impregnable residence of the emperor of the
West. Instead of attempting the hopeless siege of Ravenna, the prudent
leader of the Goths proceeded to Rimini, stretched his ravages along the
sea-coast of the Hadriatic, and meditated the conquest of the ancient
mistress of the world. An Italian hermit, whose zeal and sanctity were
respected by the Barbarians themselves, encountered the victorious
monarch, and boldly denounced the indignation of Heaven against the
oppressors of the earth; but the saint himself was confounded by the
solemn asseveration of Alaric, that he felt a secret and praeternatural
impulse, which directed, and even compelled, his march to the gates of
Rome. He felt, that his genius and his fortune were equal to the most
arduous enterprises; and the enthusiasm which he communicated to the
Goths, insensibly removed the popular, and almost superstitious,
reverence of the nations for the majesty of the Roman name. His troops,
animated by the hopes of spoil, followed the course of the Flaminian
way, occupied the unguarded passes of the Apennine,  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[4](#fn_415) descended into the rich plains of
Umbria; and, as they lay encamped on the banks of the Clitumnus, might
wantonly slaughter and devour the milk-white oxen, which had been so
long reserved for the use of Roman triumphs. A lofty situation, and a
seasonable tempest of thunder and lightning, preserved the little city
of Narni; but the king of the Goths, despising the ignoble prey, still
advanced with unabated vigor; and after he had passed through the
stately arches, adorned with the spoils of Barbaric victories, he
pitched his camp under the walls of Rome.  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[6](#fn_416)

During a period of six hundred and nineteen years, the seat of empire
had never been violated by the presence of a foreign enemy. The
unsuccessful expedition of Hannibal  <span
id="fr_417"></span>[7](#fn_417) served only to display the character of
the senate and people; of a senate degraded, rather than ennobled, by
the comparison of an assembly of kings; and of a people, to whom the
ambassador of Pyrrhus ascribed the inexhaustible resources of the Hydra.
 <span id="fr_418"></span>[8](#fn_418) Each of the senators, in the time
of the Punic war, had accomplished his term of the military service,
either in a subordinate or a superior station; and the decree, which
invested with temporary command all those who had been consuls, or
censors, or dictators, gave the republic the immediate assistance of
many brave and experienced generals. In the beginning of the war, the
Roman people consisted of two hundred and fifty thousand citizens of an
age to bear arms.  <span id="fr_419"></span>[9](#fn_419) Fifty thousand
had already died in the defence of their country; and the twenty-three
legions which were employed in the different camps of Italy, Greece,
Sardinia, Sicily, and Spain, required about one hundred thousand men.
But there still remained an equal number in Rome, and the adjacent
territory, who were animated by the same intrepid courage; and every
citizen was trained, from his earliest youth, in the discipline and
exercises of a soldier. Hannibal was astonished by the constancy of the
senate, who, without raising the siege of Capua, or recalling their
scattered forces, expected his approach. He encamped on the banks of the
Anio, at the distance of three miles from the city; and he was soon
informed, that the ground on which he had pitched his tent, was sold for
an adequate price at a public auction;  <span
id="fr_420"></span>[\*\_0015](#fn_420) and that a body of troops was
dismissed by an opposite road, to reenforce the legions of Spain.  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[10](#fn_421) He led his Africans to the gates of
Rome, where he found three armies in order of battle, prepared to
receive him; but Hannibal dreaded the event of a combat, from which he
could not hope to escape, unless he destroyed the last of his enemies;
and his speedy retreat confessed the invincible courage of the Romans.

From the time of the Punic war, the uninterrupted succession of senators
had preserved the name and image of the republic; and the degenerate
subjects of Honorius ambitiously derived their descent from the heroes
who had repulsed the arms of Hannibal, and subdued the nations of the
earth. The temporal honors which the devout Paula  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[11](#fn_422) inherited and despised, are carefully
recapitulated by Jerom, the guide of her conscience, and the historian
of her life. The genealogy of her father, Rogatus, which ascended as
high as Agamemnon, might seem to betray a Grecian origin; but her
mother, Blaesilla, numbered the Scipios, Aemilius Paulus, and the
Gracchi, in the list of her ancestors; and Toxotius, the husband of
Paula, deduced his royal lineage from Aeneas, the father of the Julian
line. The vanity of the rich, who desired to be noble, was gratified by
these lofty pretensions. Encouraged by the applause of their parasites,
they easily imposed on the credulity of the vulgar; and were
countenanced, in some measure, by the custom of adopting the name of
their patron, which had always prevailed among the freedmen and clients
of illustrious families. Most of those families, however, attacked by so
many causes of external violence or internal decay, were gradually
extirpated; and it would be more reasonable to seek for a lineal descent
of twenty generations, among the mountains of the Alps, or in the
peaceful solitude of Apulia, than on the theatre of Rome, the seat of
fortune, of danger, and of perpetual revolutions. Under each successive
reign, and from every province of the empire, a crowd of hardy
adventurers, rising to eminence by their talents or their vices, usurped
the wealth, the honors, and the palaces of Rome; and oppressed, or
protected, the poor and humble remains of consular families; who were
ignorant, perhaps, of the glory of their ancestors.  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[12](#fn_423)

In the time of Jerom and Claudian, the senators unanimously yielded the
preeminence to the Anician line; and a slight view of their history will
serve to appreciate the rank and antiquity of the noble families, which
contended only for the second place.  <span
id="fr_424"></span>[13](#fn_424) During the five first ages of the city,
the name of the Anicians was unknown; they appear to have derived their
origin from Praeneste; and the ambition of those new citizens was long
satisfied with the Plebeian honors of tribunes of the people.  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[14](#fn_425) One hundred and sixty-eight years
before the Christian aera, the family was ennobled by the Praetorship of
Anicius, who gloriously terminated the Illyrian war, by the conquest of
the nation, and the captivity of their king.  <span
id="fr_426"></span>[15](#fn_426) From the triumph of that general, three
consulships, in distant periods, mark the succession of the Anician
name.  <span id="fr_427"></span>[16](#fn_427) From the reign of
Diocletian to the final extinction of the Western empire, that name
shone with a lustre which was not eclipsed, in the public estimation, by
the majesty of the Imperial purple.  <span
id="fr_428"></span>[17](#fn_428) The several branches, to whom it was
communicated, united, by marriage or inheritance, the wealth and titles
of the Annian, the Petronian, and the Olybrian houses; and in each
generation the number of consulships was multiplied by an hereditary
claim.  <span id="fr_429"></span>[18](#fn_429) The Anician family
excelled in faith and in riches: they were the first of the Roman senate
who embraced Christianity; and it is probable that Anicius Julian, who
was afterwards consul and praefect of the city, atoned for his
attachment to the party of Maxentius, by the readiness with which he
accepted the religion of Constantine.  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[19](#fn_430) Their ample patrimony was increased by
the industry of Probus, the chief of the Anician family; who shared with
Gratian the honors of the consulship, and exercised, four times, the
high office of Praetorian praefect.  <span
id="fr_431"></span>[20](#fn_431) His immense estates were scattered over
the wide extent of the Roman world; and though the public might suspect
or disapprove the methods by which they had been acquired, the
generosity and magnificence of that fortunate statesman deserved the
gratitude of his clients, and the admiration of strangers.  <span
id="fr_432"></span>[21](#fn_432) Such was the respect entertained for
his memory, that the two sons of Probus, in their earliest youth, and at
the request of the senate, were associated in the consular dignity; a
memorable distinction, without example, in the annals of Rome.  <span
id="fr_433"></span>[22](#fn_433)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_412"></span>[1](daf03016.htm#fr_412) The series of events,
from the death of Stilicho to the arrival of Alaric before Rome, can
only be found in Zosimus, l. v. p. 347 - 350.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[2](daf03016.htm#fr_413) The expression of
Zosimus is strong and lively, sufficient to excite the contempt of the
enemy.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[3](daf03016.htm#fr_414) Eos qui catholicae
sectae sunt inimici, intra palatium militare pro hibemus. Nullus nobis
sit aliqua ratione conjunctus, qui a nobis fidest religione discordat.
Cod. Theodos. l. xvi. tit. v. leg. 42, and Godefroy's Commentary, tom.
vi. p. 164. This law was applied in the utmost latitude, and rigorously
executed. Zosimus, l. v. p. 364.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[4](daf03016.htm#fr_415) Addison (see his
Works, vol. ii. p. 54, edit. Baskerville) has given a very picturesque
description of the road through the Apennine. The Goths were not at
leisure to observe the beauties of the prospect; but they were pleased
to find that the Saxa Intercisa, a narrow passage which Vespasian had
cut through the rock, (Cluver. Italia Antiq. tom. i. p. 168,) was
totally neglected.

Hine albi, Clitumne, greges, et maxima taurus Victima, saepe tuo perfusi
flumine sacro, Romanos ad templa Deum duxere triumphos.

Georg. ii. 147.

Besides Virgil, most of the Latin poets, Propertius, Lucan, Silius
Italicus, Claudian, &c., whose passages may be found in Cluverius and
Addison, have celebrated the triumphal victims of the Clitumnus.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[6](daf03016.htm#fr_416) Some ideas of the
march of Alaric are borrowed from the journey of Honorius over the same
ground. (See Claudian in vi. Cons. Hon. 494 - 522.) The measured
distance between Ravenna and Rome was 254 Roman miles. Itinerar.
Wesseling, p. 126.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[7](daf03016.htm#fr_417) The march and retreat
of Hannibal are described by Livy, l. xxvi. c. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11; and the
reader is made a spectator of the interesting scene.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[8](daf03016.htm#fr_418) These comparisons were
used by Cyneas, the counsellor of Pyrrhus, after his return from his
embassy, in which he had diligently studied the discipline and manners
of Rome. See Plutarch in Pyrrho. tom. ii. p. 459.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[9](daf03016.htm#fr_419) In the three census
which were made of the Roman people, about the time of the second Punic
war, the numbers stand as follows, (see Livy, Epitom. l. xx. Hist. l.
xxvii. 36. xxix. 37:) 270,213, 137,108 214,000. The fall of the second,
and the rise of the third, appears so enormous, that several critics,
notwithstanding the unanimity of the Mss., have suspected some
corruption of the text of Livy. (See Drakenborch ad xxvii. 36, and
Beaufort, Republique Romaine, tom. i. p. 325.) They did not consider
that the second census was taken only at Rome, and that the numbers were
diminished, not only by the death, but likewise by the absence, of many
soldiers. In the third census, Livy expressly affirms, that the legions
were mustered by the care of particular commissaries. From the numbers
on the list we must always deduct one twelfth above threescore, and
incapable of bearing arms. See Population de la France, p. 72.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[\*\_0015](daf03016.htm#fr_420) Compare the
remarkable transaction in Jeremiah xxxii. 6, to 44, where the prophet
purchases his uncle's estate at the approach of the Babylonian
captivity, in his undoubting confidence in the future restoration of the
people. In the one case it is the triumph of religious faith, in the
other of national pride. - M.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[10](daf03016.htm#fr_421) Livy considers these
two incidents as the effects only of chance and courage. I suspect that
they were both managed by the admirable policy of the senate.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[11](daf03016.htm#fr_422) See Jerom, tom. i. p.
169, 170, ad Eustochium; he bestows on Paula the splendid titles of
Gracchorum stirps, soboles Scipionum, Pauli haeres, cujus vocabulum
trahit, Martiae Papyriae Matris Africani vera et germana propago. This
particular description supposes a more solid title than the surname of
Julius, which Toxotius shared with a thousand families of the western
provinces. See the Index of Tacitus, of Gruter's Inscriptions, &c.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[12](daf03016.htm#fr_423) Tacitus (Annal. iii.
55) affirms, that between the battle of Actium and the reign of
Vespasian, the senate was gradually filled with new families from the
Municipia and colonies of Italy.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[13](daf03016.htm#fr_424) Nec quisquam Procerum
tentet (licet aere vetusto Floreat, et claro cingatur Roma senatu) Se
jactare parem; sed prima sede relicta Aucheniis, de jure licet certare
secundo.

Claud. in Prob. et Olybrii Coss. 18.

Such a compliment paid to the obscure name of the Auchenii has amazed
the critics; but they all agree, that whatever may be the true reading,
the sense of Claudian can be applied only to the Anician family.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[14](daf03016.htm#fr_425) The earliest date in
the annals of Pighius, is that of M. Anicius Gallus. Trib. Pl. A. U. C.
506. Another tribune, Q. Anicius, A. U. C. 508, is distinguished by the
epithet of Praenestinus. Livy (xlv. 43) places the Anicii below the
great families of Rome.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[15](daf03016.htm#fr_426) Livy, xliv. 30, 31,
xlv. 3, 26, 43. He fairly appreciates the merit of Anicius, and justly
observes, that his fame was clouded by the superior lustre of the
Macedonian, which preceded the Illyrian triumph.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[16](daf03016.htm#fr_427) The dates of the
three consulships are, A. U. C. 593, 818, 967 the two last under the
reigns of Nero and Caracalla. The second of these consuls distinguished
himself only by his infamous flattery, (Tacit. Annal. xv. 74;) but even
the evidence of crimes, if they bear the stamp of greatness and
antiquity, is admitted, without reluctance, to prove the genealogy of a
noble house.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[17](daf03016.htm#fr_428) In the sixth century,
the nobility of the Anician name is mentioned (Cassiodor. Variar. l. x.
Ep. 10, 12) with singular respect by the minister of a Gothic king of
Italy.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[18](daf03016.htm#fr_429) - Fixus in omnes
Cognatos procedit honos; quemcumque requiras Hac de stirpe virum, certum
est de Consule nasci. Per fasces numerantur Avi, semperque renata
Nobilitate virent, et prolem fata sequuntur. (Claudian in Prob. et Olyb.
Consulat. 12, &c.) The Annii, whose name seems to have merged in the
Anician, mark the Fasti with many consulships, from the time of
Vespasian to the fourth century.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[19](daf03016.htm#fr_430) The title of first
Christian senator may be justified by the authority of Prudentius (in
Symmach. i. 553) and the dislike of the Pagans to the Anician family.
See Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p. 183, v. p. 44. Baron.
Annal. A.D. 312, No. 78, A.D. 322, No. 2.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[20](daf03016.htm#fr_431) Probus ...
claritudine generis et potentia et opum magnitudine, cognitus Orbi
Romano, per quem universum poene patrimonia sparsa possedit, juste an
secus non judicioli est nostri. Ammian Marcellin. xxvii. 11. His
children and widow erected for him a magnificent tomb in the Vatican,
which was demolished in the time of Pope Nicholas V. to make room for
the new church of St.Peter Baronius, who laments the ruin of this
Christian monument, has diligently preserved the inscriptions and
basso-relievos. See Annal. Eccles. A.D. 395, No. 5 - 17.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[21](daf03016.htm#fr_432) Two Persian satraps
travelled to Milan and Rome, to hear St. Ambrose, and to see Probus,
(Paulin. in Vit. Ambros.) Claudian (in Cons. Probin. et Olybr. 30 - 60)
seems at a loss how to express the glory of Probus.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[22](daf03016.htm#fr_433) See the poem which
Claudian addressed to the two noble youths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By
Barbarians. Part II.](daf03017)
