[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03018) 
[Next](daf03020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By Barbarians. Part III.

At the distance of fourteen centuries, we may be satisfied with relating
the military exploits of the conquerors of Rome, without presuming to
investigate the motives of their political conduct. In the midst of his
apparent prosperity, Alaric was conscious, perhaps, of some secret
weakness, some internal defect; or perhaps the moderation which he
displayed, was intended only to deceive and disarm the easy credulity of
the ministers of Honorius. The king of the Goths repeatedly declared,
that it was his desire to be considered as the friend of peace, and of
the Romans. Three senators, at his earnest request, were sent
ambassadors to the court of Ravenna, to solicit the exchange of
hostages, and the conclusion of the treaty; and the proposals, which he
more clearly expressed during the course of the negotiations, could only
inspire a doubt of his sincerity, as they might seem inadequate to the
state of his fortune. The Barbarian still aspired to the rank of
master-general of the armies of the West; he stipulated an annual
subsidy of corn and money; and he chose the provinces of Dalmatia,
Noricum, and Venetia, for the seat of his new kingdom, which would have
commanded the important communication between Italy and the Danube. If
these modest terms should be rejected, Alaric showed a disposition to
relinquish his pecuniary demands, and even to content himself with the
possession of Noricum; an exhausted and impoverished country,
perpetually exposed to the inroads of the Barbarians of Germany.  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[82](#fn_494) But the hopes of peace were
disappointed by the weak obstinacy, or interested views, of the minister
Olympius. Without listening to the salutary remonstrances of the senate,
he dismissed their ambassadors under the conduct of a military escort,
too numerous for a retinue of honor, and too feeble for any army of
defence. Six thousand Dalmatians, the flower of the Imperial legions,
were ordered to march from Ravenna to Rome, through an open country
which was occupied by the formidable myriads of the Barbarians. These
brave legionaries, encompassed and betrayed, fell a sacrifice to
ministerial folly; their general, Valens, with a hundred soldiers,
escaped from the field of battle; and one of the ambassadors, who could
no longer claim the protection of the law of nations, was obliged to
purchase his freedom with a ransom of thirty thousand pieces of gold.
Yet Alaric, instead of resenting this act of impotent hostility,
immediately renewed his proposals of peace; and the second embassy of
the Roman senate, which derived weight and dignity from the presence of
Innocent, bishop of the city, was guarded from the dangers of the road
by a detachment of Gothic soldiers.  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[83](#fn_495)

Olympius  <span id="fr_496"></span>[84](#fn_496) might have continued to
insult the just resentment of a people who loudly accused him as the
author of the public calamities; but his power was undermined by the
secret intrigues of the palace. The favorite eunuchs transferred the
government of Honorius, and the empire, to Jovius, the Praetorian
praefect; an unworthy servant, who did not atone, by the merit of
personal attachment, for the errors and misfortunes of his
administration. The exile, or escape, of the guilty Olympius, reserved
him for more vicissitudes of fortune: he experienced the adventures of
an obscure and wandering life; he again rose to power; he fell a second
time into disgrace; his ears were cut off; he expired under the lash;
and his ignominious death afforded a grateful spectacle to the friends
of Stilicho. After the removal of Olympius, whose character was deeply
tainted with religious fanaticism, the Pagans and heretics were
delivered from the impolitic proscription, which excluded them from the
dignities of the state. The brave Gennerid,  <span
id="fr_497"></span>[85](#fn_497) a soldier of Barbarian origin, who
still adhered to the worship of his ancestors, had been obliged to lay
aside the military belt: and though he was repeatedly assured by the
emperor himself, that laws were not made for persons of his rank or
merit, he refused to accept any partial dispensation, and persevered in
honorable disgrace, till he had extorted a general act of justice from
the distress of the Roman government. The conduct of Gennerid in the
important station to which he was promoted or restored, of
master-general of Dalmatia, Pannonia, Noricum, and Rhaetia, seemed to
revive the discipline and spirit of the republic. From a life of
idleness and want, his troops were soon habituated to severe exercise
and plentiful subsistence; and his private generosity often supplied the
rewards, which were denied by the avarice, or poverty, of the court of
Ravenna. The valor of Gennerid, formidable to the adjacent Barbarians,
was the firmest bulwark of the Illyrian frontier; and his vigilant care
assisted the empire with a reenforcement of ten thousand Huns, who
arrived on the confines of Italy, attended by such a convoy of
provisions, and such a numerous train of sheep and oxen, as might have
been sufficient, not only for the march of an army, but for the
settlement of a colony. But the court and councils of Honorius still
remained a scene of weakness and distraction, of corruption and anarchy.
Instigated by the praefect Jovius, the guards rose in furious mutiny,
and demanded the heads of two generals, and of the two principal
eunuchs. The generals, under a perfidious promise of safety, were sent
on shipboard, and privately executed; while the favor of the eunuchs
procured them a mild and secure exile at Milan and Constantinople.
Eusebius the eunuch, and the Barbarian Allobich, succeeded to the
command of the bed-chamber and of the guards; and the mutual jealousy of
these subordinate ministers was the cause of their mutual destruction.
By the insolent order of the count of the domestics, the great
chamberlain was shamefully beaten to death with sticks, before the eyes
of the astonished emperor; and the subsequent assassination of Allobich,
in the midst of a public procession, is the only circumstance of his
life, in which Honorius discovered the faintest symptom of courage or
resentment. Yet before they fell, Eusebius and Allobich had contributed
their part to the ruin of the empire, by opposing the conclusion of a
treaty which Jovius, from a selfish, and perhaps a criminal, motive, had
negotiated with Alaric, in a personal interview under the walls of
Rimini. During the absence of Jovius, the emperor was persuaded to
assume a lofty tone of inflexible dignity, such as neither his
situation, nor his character, could enable him to support; and a letter,
signed with the name of Honorius, was immediately despatched to the
Praetorian praefect, granting him a free permission to dispose of the
public money, but sternly refusing to prostitute the military honors of
Rome to the proud demands of a Barbarian. This letter was imprudently
communicated to Alaric himself; and the Goth, who in the whole
transaction had behaved with temper and decency, expressed, in the most
outrageous language, his lively sense of the insult so wantonly offered
to his person and to his nation. The conference of Rimini was hastily
interrupted; and the praefect Jovius, on his return to Ravenna, was
compelled to adopt, and even to encourage, the fashionable opinions of
the court. By his advice and example, the principal officers of the
state and army were obliged to swear, that, without listening, in any
circumstances, to any conditions of peace, they would still persevere in
perpetual and implacable war against the enemy of the republic. This
rash engagement opposed an insuperable bar to all future negotiation.
The ministers of Honorius were heard to declare, that, if they had only
in voked the name of the Deity, they would consult the public safety,
and trust their souls to the mercy of Heaven: but they had sworn by the
sacred head of the emperor himself; they had sworn by the sacred head of
the emperor himself; they had touched, in solemn ceremony, that august
seat of majesty and wisdom; and the violation of their oath would
exposethem to the temporal penalties of sacrilege and rebellion.  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[86](#fn_498)

While the emperor and his court enjoyed, with sullen pride, the security
of the marches and fortifications of Ravenna, they abandoned Rome,
almost without defence, to the resentment of Alaric. Yet such was the
moderation which he still preserved, or affected, that, as he moved with
his army along the Flaminian way, he successively despatched the bishops
of the towns of Italy to reiterate his offers of peace, and to
congradulate the emperor, that he would save the city and its
inhabitants from hostile fire, and the sword of the Barbarians.  <span
id="fr_499"></span>[87](#fn_499) These impending calamities were,
however, averted, not indeed by the wisdom of Honorius, but by the
prudence or humanity of the Gothic king; who employed a milder, though
not less effectual, method of conquest. Instead of assaulting the
capital, he successfully directed his efforts against the Port of Ostia,
one of the boldest and most stupendous works of Roman magnificence.
 <span id="fr_500"></span>[88](#fn_500) The accidents to which the
precarious subsistence of the city was continually exposed in a winter
navigation, and an open road, had suggested to the genius of the first
Caesar the useful design, which was executed under the reign of
Claudius. The artificial moles, which formed the narrow entrance,
advanced far into the sea, and firmly repelled the fury of the waves,
while the largest vessels securely rode at anchor within three deep and
capacious basins, which received the northern branch of the Tyber, about
two miles from the ancient colony of Ostia.  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[89](#fn_501) The Roman Port insensibly swelled to
the size of an episcopal city,  <span id="fr_502"></span>[90](#fn_502)
where the corn of Africa was deposited in spacious granaries for the use
of the capital. As soon as Alaric was in possession of that important
place, he summoned the city to surrender at discretion; and his demands
were enforced by the positive declaration, that a refusal, or even a
delay, should be instantly followed by the destruction of the magazines,
on which the life of the Roman people depended. The clamors of that
people, and the terror of famine, subdued the pride of the senate; they
listened, without reluctance, to the proposal of placing a new emperor
on the throne of the unworthy Honorius; and the suffrage of the Gothic
conqueror bestowed the purple on Attalus, praefect of the city. The
grateful monarch immediately acknowledged his protector as
master-general of the armies of the West; Adolphus, with the rank of
count of the domestics, obtained the custody of the person of Attalus;
and the two hostile nations seemed to be united in the closest bands of
friendship and alliance.  <span id="fr_503"></span>[91](#fn_503)

The gates of the city were thrown open, and the new emperor of the
Romans, encompassed on every side by the Gothic arms, was conducted, in
tumultuous procession, to the palace of Augustus and Trajan. After he
had distributed the civil and military dignities among his favorites and
followers, Attalus convened an assembly of the senate; before whom, in a
format and florid speech, he asserted his resolution of restoring the
majesty of the republic, and of uniting to the empire the provinces of
Egypt and the East, which had once acknowledged the sovereignty of Rome.
Such extravagant promises inspired every reasonable citizen with a just
contempt for the character of an unwarlike usurper, whose elevation was
the deepest and most ignominious wound which the republic had yet
sustained from the insolence of the Barbarians. But the populace, with
their usual levity, applauded the change of masters. The public
discontent was favorable to the rival of Honorius; and the sectaries,
oppressed by his persecuting edicts, expected some degree of
countenance, or at least of toleration, from a prince, who, in his
native country of Ionia, had been educated in the Pagan superstition,
and who had since received the sacrament of baptism from the hands of an
Arian bishop.  <span id="fr_504"></span>[92](#fn_504) The first days of
the reign of Attalus were fair and prosperous. An officer of confidence
was sent with an inconsiderable body of troops to secure the obedience
of Africa; the greatest part of Italy submitted to the terror of the
Gothic powers; and though the city of Bologna made a vigorous and
effectual resistance, the people of Milan, dissatisfied perhaps with the
absence of Honorius, accepted, with loud acclamations, the choice of the
Roman senate. At the head of a formidable army, Alaric conducted his
royal captive almost to the gates of Ravenna; and a solemn embassy of
the principal ministers, of Jovius, the Praetorian praefect, of Valens,
master of the cavalry and infantry, of the quaestor Potamius, and of
Julian, the first of the notaries, was introduced, with martial pomp,
into the Gothic camp. In the name of their sovereign, they consented to
acknowledge the lawful election of his competitor, and to divide the
provinces of Italy and the West between the two emperors. Their
proposals were rejected with disdain; and the refusal was aggravated by
the insulting clemency of Attalus, who condescended to promise, that, if
Honorius would instantly resign the purple, he should be permitted to
pass the remainder of his life in the peaceful exile of some remote
island.  <span id="fr_505"></span>[93](#fn_505) So desperate indeed did
the situation of the son of Theodosius appear, to those who were the
best acquainted with his strength and resources, that Jovius and Valens,
his minister and his general, betrayed their trust, infamously deserted
the sinking cause of their benefactor, and devoted their treacherous
allegiance to the service of his more fortunate rival. Astonished by
such examples of domestic treason, Honorius trembled at the approach of
every servant, at the arrival of every messenger. He dreaded the secret
enemies, who might lurk in his capital, his palace, his bed-chamber; and
some ships lay ready in the harbor of Ravenna, to transport the
abdicated monarch to the dominions of his infant nephew, the emperor of
the East.

But there is a Providence (such at least was the opinion of the
historian Procopius)  <span id="fr_506"></span>[94](#fn_506) that
watches over innocence and folly; and the pretensions of Honorius to its
peculiar care cannot reasonably be disputed. At the moment when his
despair, incapable of any wise or manly resolution, meditated a shameful
flight, a seasonable reenforcement of four thousand veterans
unexpectedly landed in the port of Ravenna. To these valiant strangers,
whose fidelity had not been corrupted by the factions of the court, he
committed the walls and gates of the city; and the slumbers of the
emperor were no longer disturbed by the apprehension of imminent and
internal danger. The favorable intelligence which was received from
Africa suddenly changed the opinions of men, and the state of public
affairs. The troops and officers, whom Attalus had sent into that
province, were defeated and slain; and the active zeal of Heraclian
maintained his own allegiance, and that of his people. The faithful
count of Africa transmitted a large sum of money, which fixed the
attachment of the Imperial guards; and his vigilance, in preventing the
exportation of corn and oil, introduced famine, tumult, and discontent,
into the walls of Rome. The failure of the African expedition was the
source of mutual complaint and recrimination in the party of Attalus;
and the mind of his protector was insensibly alienated from the interest
of a prince, who wanted spirit to command, or docility to obey. The most
imprudent measures were adopted, without the knowledge, or against the
advice, of Alaric; and the obstinate refusal of the senate, to allow, in
the embarkation, the mixture even of five hundred Goths, betrayed a
suspicious and distrustful temper, which, in their situation, was
neither generous nor prudent. The resentment of the Gothic king was
exasperated by the malicious arts of Jovius, who had been raised to the
rank of patrician, and who afterwards excused his double perfidy, by
declaring, without a blush, that he had only seemed to abandon the
service of Honorius, more effectually to ruin the cause of the usurper.
In a large plain near Rimini, and in the presence of an innumerable
multitude of Romans and Barbarians, the wretched Attalus was publicly
despoiled of the diadem and purple; and those ensigns of royalty were
sent by Alaric, as the pledge of peace and friendship, to the son of
Theodosius.  <span id="fr_507"></span>[95](#fn_507) The officers who
returned to their duty, were reinstated in their employments, and even
the merit of a tardy repentance was graciously allowed; but the degraded
emperor of the Romans, desirous of life, and insensible of disgrace,
implored the permission of following the Gothic camp, in the train of a
haughty and capricious Barbarian.  <span
id="fr_508"></span>[96](#fn_508)

The degradation of Attalus removed the only real obstacle to the
conclusion of the peace; and Alaric advanced within three miles of
Ravenna, to press the irresolution of the Imperial ministers, whose
insolence soon returned with the return of fortune. His indignation was
kindled by the report, that a rival chieftain, that Sarus, the personal
enemy of Adolphus, and the hereditary foe of the house of Balti, had
been received into the palace. At the head of three hundred followers,
that fearless Barbarian immediately sallied from the gates of Ravenna;
surprised, and cut in pieces, a considerable body of Goths; reentered
the city in triumph; and was permitted to insult his adversary, by the
voice of a herald, who publicly declared that the guilt of Alaric had
forever excluded him from the friendship and alliance of the emperor.
 <span id="fr_509"></span>[97](#fn_509) The crime and folly of the court
of Ravenna was expiated, a third time, by the calamities of Rome. The
king of the Goths, who no longer dissembled his appetite for plunder and
revenge, appeared in arms under the walls of the capital; and the
trembling senate, without any hopes of relief, prepared, by a desperate
resistance, to defray the ruin of their country. But they were unable to
guard against the secret conspiracy of their slaves and domestics; who,
either from birth or interest, were attached to the cause of the enemy.
At the hour of midnight, the Salarian gate was silently opened, and the
inhabitants were awakened by the tremendous sound of the Gothic trumpet.
Eleven hundred and sixty-three years after the foundation of Rome, the
Imperial city, which had subdued and civilized so considerable a part of
mankind, was delivered to the licentious fury of the tribes of Germany
and Scythia.  <span id="fr_510"></span>[98](#fn_510)

The proclamation of Alaric, when he forced his entrance into a
vanquished city, discovered, however, some regard for the laws of
humanity and religion. He encouraged his troops boldly to seize the
rewards of valor, and to enrich themselves with the spoils of a wealthy
and effeminate people: but he exhorted them, at the same time, to spare
the lives of the unresisting citizens, and to respect the churches of
the apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, as holy and inviolable
sanctuaries. Amidst the horrors of a nocturnal tumult, several of the
Christian Goths displayed the fervor of a recent conversion; and some
instances of their uncommon piety and moderation are related, and
perhaps adorned, by the zeal of ecclesiastical writers.  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[99](#fn_511) While the Barbarians roamed through the
city in quest of prey, the humble dwelling of an aged virgin, who had
devoted her life to the service of the altar, was forced open by one of
the powerful Goths. He immediately demanded, though in civil language,
all the gold and silver in her possession; and was astonished at the
readiness with which she conducted him to a splendid hoard of massy
plate, of the richest materials, and the most curious workmanship. The
Barbarian viewed with wonder and delight this valuable acquisition, till
he was interrupted by a serious admonition, addressed to him in the
following words: "These," said she, "are the consecrated vessels
belonging to St. Peter: if you presume to touch them, the sacrilegious
deed will remain on your conscience. For my part, I dare not keep what I
am unable to defend." The Gothic captain, struck with reverential awe,
despatched a messenger to inform the king of the treasure which he had
discovered; and received a peremptory order from Alaric, that all the
consecrated plate and ornaments should be transported, without damage or
delay, to the church of the apostle. From the extremity, perhaps, of the
Quirinal hill, to the distant quarter of the Vatican, a numerous
detachment of Goths, marching in order of battle through the principal
streets, protected, with glittering arms, the long train of their devout
companions, who bore aloft, on their heads, the sacred vessels of gold
and silver; and the martial shouts of the Barbarians were mingled with
the sound of religious psalmody. From all the adjacent houses, a crowd
of Christians hastened to join this edifying procession; and a multitude
of fugitives, without distinction of age, or rank, or even of sect, had
the good fortune to escape to the secure and hospitable sanctuary of the
Vatican. The learned work, concerning the City of God, was professedly
composed by St. Augustin, to justify the ways of Providence in the
destruction of the Roman greatness. He celebrates, with peculiar
satisfaction, this memorable triumph of Christ; and insults his
adversaries, by challenging them to produce some similar example of a
town taken by storm, in which the fabulous gods of antiquity had been
able to protect either themselves or their deluded votaries.  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[100](#fn_512)

In the sack of Rome, some rare and extraordinary examples of Barbarian
virtue have been deservedly applauded. But the holy precincts of the
Vatican, and the apostolic churches, could receive a very small
proportion of the Roman people; many thousand warriors, more especially
of the Huns, who served under the standard of Alaric, were strangers to
the name, or at least to the faith, of Christ; and we may suspect,
without any breach of charity or candor, that in the hour of savage
license, when every passion was inflamed, and every restraint was
removed, the precepts of the Gospel seldom influenced the behavior of
the Gothic Christians. The writers, the best disposed to exaggerate
their clemency, have freely confessed, that a cruel slaughter was made
of the Romans;  <span id="fr_513"></span>[101](#fn_513) and that the
streets of the city were filled with dead bodies, which remained without
burial during the general consternation. The despair of the citizens was
sometimes converted into fury: and whenever the Barbarians were provoked
by opposition, they extended the promiscuous massacre to the feeble, the
innocent, and the helpless. The private revenge of forty thousand slaves
was exercised without pity or remorse; and the ignominious lashes, which
they had formerly received, were washed away in the blood of the guilty,
or obnoxious, families. The matrons and virgins of Rome were exposed to
injuries more dreadful, in the apprehension of chastity, than death
itself; and the ecclesiastical historian has selected an example of
female virtue, for the admiration of future ages.  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[102](#fn_514) A Roman lady, of singular beauty and
orthodox faith, had excited the impatient desires of a young Goth, who,
according to the sagacious remark of Sozomen, was attached to the Arian
heresy. Exasperated by her obstinate resistance, he drew his sword, and,
with the anger of a lover, slightly wounded her neck. The bleeding
heroine still continued to brave his resentment, and to repel his love,
till the ravisher desisted from his unavailing efforts, respectfully
conducted her to the sanctuary of the Vatican, and gave six pieces of
gold to the guards of the church, on condition that they should restore
her inviolate to the arms of her husband. Such instances of courage and
generosity were not extremely common. The brutal soldiers satisfied
their sensual appetites, without consulting either the inclination or
the duties of their female captives: and a nice question of casuistry
was seriously agitated, Whether those tender victims, who had inflexibly
refused their consent to the violation which they sustained, had lost,
by their misfortune, the glorious crown of virginity.  <span
id="fr_515"></span>[103](#fn_515) Their were other losses indeed of a
more substantial kind, and more general concern. It cannot be presumed,
that all the Barbarians were at all times capable of perpetrating such
amorous outrages; and the want of youth, or beauty, or chastity,
protected the greatest part of the Roman women from the danger of a
rape. But avarice is an insatiate and universal passion; since the
enjoyment of almost every object that can afford pleasure to the
different tastes and tempers of mankind may be procured by the
possession of wealth. In the pillage of Rome, a just preference was
given to gold and jewels, which contain the greatest value in the
smallest compass and weight: but, after these portable riches had been
removed by the more diligent robbers, the palaces of Rome were rudely
stripped of their splendid and costly furniture. The sideboards of massy
plate, and the variegated wardrobes of silk and purple, were irregularly
piled in the wagons, that always followed the march of a Gothic army.
The most exquisite works of art were roughly handled, or wantonly
destroyed; many a statue was melted for the sake of the precious
materials; and many a vase, in the division of the spoil, was shivered
into fragments by the stroke of a battle-axe. The acquisition of riches
served only to stimulate the avarice of the rapacious Barbarians, who
proceeded, by threats, by blows, and by tortures, to force from their
prisoners the confession of hidden treasure.  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[104](#fn_516) Visible splendor and expense were
alleged as the proof of a plentiful fortune; the appearance of poverty
was imputed to a parsimonious disposition; and the obstinacy of some
misers, who endured the most cruel torments before they would discover
the secret object of their affection, was fatal to many unhappy
wretches, who expired under the lash, for refusing to reveal their
imaginary treasures. The edifices of Rome, though the damage has been
much exaggerated, received some injury from the violence of the Goths.
At their entrance through the Salarian gate, they fired the adjacent
houses to guide their march, and to distract the attention of the
citizens; the flames, which encountered no obstacle in the disorder of
the night, consumed many private and public buildings; and the ruins of
the palace of Sallust  <span id="fr_517"></span>[105](#fn_517) remained,
in the age of Justinian, a stately monument of the Gothic conflagration.
 <span id="fr_518"></span>[106](#fn_518) Yet a contemporary historian
has observed, that fire could scarcely consume the enormous beams of
solid brass, and that the strength of man was insufficient to subvert
the foundations of ancient structures. Some truth may possibly be
concealed in his devout assertion, that the wrath of Heaven supplied the
imperfections of hostile rage; and that the proud Forum of Rome,
decorated with the statues of so many gods and heroes, was levelled in
the dust by the stroke of lightning.  <span
id="fr_519"></span>[107](#fn_519)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[82](daf03019.htm#fr_494) Zosimus, l. v. p. 367
368, 369.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[83](daf03019.htm#fr_495) Zosimus, l. v. p.
360, 361, 362. The bishop, by remaining at Ravenna, escaped the
impending calamities of the city. Orosius, l. vii. c. 39, p. 573.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[84](daf03019.htm#fr_496) For the adventures of
Olympius, and his successors in the ministry, see Zosimus, l. v. p. 363,
365, 366, and Olympiodor. ap. Phot. p. 180, 181.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[85](daf03019.htm#fr_497) Zosimus (l. v. p.
364) relates this circumstance with visible complacency, and celebrates
the character of Gennerid as the last glory of expiring Paganism. Very
different were the sentiments of the council of Carthage, who deputed
four bishops to the court of Ravenna to complain of the law, which had
been just enacted, that all conversions to Christianity should be free
and voluntary. See Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A.D. 409, No. 12, A.D. 410,
No. 47, 48.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[86](daf03019.htm#fr_498) Zosimus, l. v. p.
367, 368, 369. This custom of swearing by the head, or life, or safety,
or genius, of the sovereign, was of the highest antiquity, both in Egypt
(Genesis, xlii. 15) and Scythia. It was soon transferred, by flattery,
to the Caesars; and Tertullian complains, that it was the only oath
which the Romans of his time affected to reverence. See an elegant
Dissertation of the Abbe Mossieu on the Oaths of the Ancients, in the
Mem de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 208, 209.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[87](daf03019.htm#fr_499) Zosimus, l. v. p.
368, 369. I have softened the expressions of Alaric, who expatiates, in
too florid a manner, on the history of Rome

<span id="fn_500"></span>[88](daf03019.htm#fr_500) See Sueton. in Claud.
c. 20. Dion Cassius, l. lx. p. 949, edit Reimar, and the lively
description of Juvenal, Satir. xii. 75, &c. In the sixteenth century,
when the remains of this Augustan port were still visible, the
antiquarians sketched the plan, (see D'Anville, Mem. de l'Academie des
Inscriptions, tom. xxx. p. 198,) and declared, with enthusiasm, that all
the monarchs of Europe would be unable to execute so great a work,
(Bergier, Hist. des grands Chemins des Romains, tom. ii. p. 356.)

<span id="fn_501"></span>[89](daf03019.htm#fr_501) The Ostia Tyberina,
(see Cluver. Italia Antiq. l. iii. p. 870 - 879,) in the plural number,
the two mouths of the Tyber, were separated by the Holy Island, an
equilateral triangle, whose sides were each of them computed at about
two miles. The colony of Ostia was founded immediately beyond the left,
or southern, and the Port immediately beyond the right, or northern,
branch of hte river; and the distance between their remains measures
something more than two miles on Cingolani's map. In the time of Strabo,
the sand and mud deposited by the Tyber had choked the harbor of Ostia;
the progress of the same cause has added much to the size of the Holy
Islands, and gradually left both Ostia and the Port at a considerable
distance from the shore. The dry channels (fiumi morti) and the large
estuaries (stagno di Ponente, di Levante) mark the changes of the river,
and the efforts of the sea. Consult, for the present state of this
dreary and desolate tract, the excellent map of the ecclesiastical state
by the mathematicians of Benedict XIV.; an actual survey of the Agro
Romano, in six sheets, by Cingolani, which contains 113,819 rubbia,
(about 570,000 acres;) and the large topographical map of Ameti, in
eight sheets.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[90](daf03019.htm#fr_502) As early as the
third, (Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel, part ii. vol. iii. p. 89 -
92,) or at least the fourth, century, (Carol. a Sancta Paulo, Notit.
Eccles. p. 47,) the Port of Rome was an episcopal city, which was
demolished, as it should seem in the ninth century, by Pope Gregory IV.,
during the incursions of the Arabs. It is now reduced to an inn, a
church, and the house, or palace, of the bishop; who ranks as one of six
cardinal-bishops of the Roman church. See Eschinard, Deserizione di
Roman et dell' Agro Romano, p. 328.

Note: Compare Sir W. Gell. Rome and its Vicinity vol. ii p. 134. - M.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[91](daf03019.htm#fr_503) For the elevation of
Attalus, consult Zosimus, l. vi. p. 377 - 380, Sozomen, l. ix. c. 8, 9,
Olympiodor. ap. Phot. p. 180, 181, Philostorg. l. xii. c. 3, and
Godefroy's Dissertat. p. 470.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[92](daf03019.htm#fr_504) We may admit the
evidence of Sozomen for the Arian baptism, and that of Philostorgius for
the Pagan education, of Attalus. The visible joy of Zosimus, and the
discontent which he imputes to the Anician family, are very unfavorable
to the Christianity of the new emperor.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[93](daf03019.htm#fr_505) He carried his
insolence so far, as to declare that he should mutilate Honorius before
he sent him into exile. But this assertion of Zosimus is destroyed by
the more impartial testimony of Olympiodorus; who attributes the
ungenerous proposal (which was absolutely rejected by Attalus) to the
baseness, and perhaps the treachery, of Jovius.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[94](daf03019.htm#fr_506) Procop. de Bell.
Vandal. l. i. c. 2.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[95](daf03019.htm#fr_507) See the cause and
circumstances of the fall of Attalus in Zosimus, l. vi. p. 380 - 383.
Sozomen, l. ix. c. 8. Philostorg. l. xii. c. 3. The two acts of
indemnity in the Theodosian Code, l. ix. tit. xxxviii. leg. 11, 12,
which were published the 12th of February, and the 8th of August, A.D.
410, evidently relate to this usurper.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[96](daf03019.htm#fr_508) In hoc, Alaricus,
imperatore, facto, infecto, refecto, ac defecto ... Mimum risit, et
ludum spectavit imperii. Orosius, l. vii. c. 42, p. 582.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[97](daf03019.htm#fr_509) Zosimus, l. vi. p.
384. Sozomen, l. ix. c. 9. Philostorgius, l. xii. c. 3. In this place
the text of Zosimus is mutilated, and we have lost the remainder of his
sixth and last book, which ended with the sack of Rome. Credulous and
partial as he is, we must take our leave of that historian with some
regret.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[98](daf03019.htm#fr_510) Adest Alaricus,
trepidam Romam obsidet, turbat, irrumpit. Orosius, l. vii. c. 39, p.
573. He despatches this great event in seven words; but he employs whole
pages in celebrating the devotion of the Goths. I have extracted from an
improbable story of Procopius, the circumstances which had an air of
probability. Procop. de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 2. He supposes that the
city was surprised while the senators slept in the afternoon; but Jerom,
with more authority and more reason, affirms, that it was in the night,
nocte Moab capta est. nocte cecidit murus ejus, tom. i. p. 121, ad
Principiam.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[99](daf03019.htm#fr_511) Orosius (l. vii. c.
39, p. 573 - 576) applauds the piety of the Christian Goths, without
seeming to perceive that the greatest part of them were Arian heretics.
Jornandes (c. 30, p. 653) and Isidore of Seville, (Chron. p. 417, edit.
Grot.,) who were both attached to the Gothic cause, have repeated and
embellished these edifying tales. According to Isidore, Alaric himself
was heard to say, that he waged war with the Romans, and not with the
apostles. Such was the style of the seventh century; two hundred years
before, the fame and merit had been ascribed, not to the apostles, but
to Christ.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[100](daf03019.htm#fr_512) See Augustin, de
Civitat. Dei, l. i. c. 1 - 6. He particularly appeals to the examples of
Troy, Syracuse, and Tarentum.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[101](daf03019.htm#fr_513) Jerom (tom. i. p.
121, ad Principiam) has applied to the sack of Rome all the strong
expressions of Virgil: - Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando,
Explicet, &c.

Procopius (l. i. c. 2) positively affirms that great numbers were slain
by the Goths. Augustin (de Civ. Dei, l. i. c. 12, 13) offers Christian
comfort for the death of those whose bodies (multa corpora) had remained
(in tanta strage) unburied. Baronius, from the different writings of the
Fathers, has thrown some light on the sack of Rome. Annal. Eccles. A.D.
410, No. 16 - 34.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[102](daf03019.htm#fr_514) Sozomen. l. ix. c.
10. Augustin (de Civitat. Dei, l. i. c. 17) intimates, that some virgins
or matrons actually killed themselves to escape violation; and though he
admires their spirit, he is obliged, by his theology, to condemn their
rash presumption. Perhaps the good bishop of Hippo was too easy in the
belief, as well as too rigid in the censure, of this act of female
heroism. The twenty maidens (if they ever existed) who threw themselves
into the Elbe, when Magdeburgh was taken by storm, have been multiplied
to the number of twelve hundred. See Harte's History of Gustavus
Adolphus, vol. i. p. 308.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[103](daf03019.htm#fr_515) See Augustin de
Civitat. Dei, l. i. c. 16, 18. He treats the subject with remarkable
accuracy: and after admitting that there cannot be any crime where there
is no consent, he adds, Sed quia non solum quod ad dolorem, verum etiam
quod ad libidinem, pertinet, in corpore alieno pepetrari potest;
quicquid tale factum fuerit, etsi retentam constantissimo animo
pudicitiam non excutit, pudorem tamen incutit, ne credatur factum cum
mentis etiam voluntate, quod fieri fortasse sine carnis aliqua voluptate
non potuit. In c. 18 he makes some curious distinctions between moral
and physical virginity.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[104](daf03019.htm#fr_516) Marcella, a Roman
lady, equally respectable for her rank, her age, and her piety, was
thrown on the ground, and cruelly beaten and whipped, caesam fustibus
flagellisque, &c. Jerom, tom. i. p. 121, ad Principiam. See Augustin, de
Civ. Dei, l. c. 10. The modern Sacco di Roma, p. 208, gives an idea of
the various methods of torturing prisoners for gold.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[105](daf03019.htm#fr_517) The historian
Sallust, who usefully practiced the vices which he has so eloquently
censured, employed the plunder of Numidia to adorn his palace and
gardens on the Quirinal hill. The spot where the house stood is now
marked by the church of St. Susanna, separated only by a street from the
baths of Diocletian, and not far distant from the Salarian gate. See
Nardini, Roma Antica, p. 192, 193, and the great I'lan of Modern Rome,
by Nolli.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[106](daf03019.htm#fr_518) The expressions of
Procopius are distinct and moderate, (de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 2.) The
Chronicle of Marcellinus speaks too strongly partem urbis Romae
cremavit; and the words of Philostorgius (l. xii. c. 3) convey a false
and exaggerated idea. Bargaeus has composed a particular dissertation
(see tom. iv. Antiquit. Rom. Graev.) to prove that the edifices of Rome
were not subverted by the Goths and Vandals.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[107](daf03019.htm#fr_519) Orosius, l. ii. c.
19, p. 143. He speaks as if he disapproved all statues; vel Deum vel
hominem mentiuntur. They consisted of the kings of Alba and Rome from
Aeneas, the Romans, illustrious either in arms or arts, and the deified
Caesars. The expression which he uses of Forum is somewhat ambiguous,
since there existed five principal Fora; but as they were all contiguous
and adjacent, in the plain which is surrounded by the Capitoline, the
Quirinal, the Esquiline, and the Palatine hills, they might fairly be
considered as one. See the Roma Antiqua of Donatus, p. 162 - 201, and
the Roma Antica of Nardini, p. 212 - 273. The former is more useful for
the ancient descriptions, the latter for the actual topography.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By
Barbarians. Part IV.](daf03020)
