[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03019) 
[Next](daf03021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By Barbarians. Part IV.

Whatever might be the numbers of equestrian or plebeian rank, who
perished in the massacre of Rome, it is confidently affirmed that only
one senator lost his life by the sword of the enemy.  <span
id="fr_520"></span>[108](#fn_520) But it was not easy to compute the
multitudes, who, from an honorable station and a prosperous fortune,
were suddenly reduced to the miserable condition of captives and exiles.
As the Barbarians had more occasion for money than for slaves, they
fixed at a moderate price the redemption of their indigent prisoners;
and the ransom was often paid by the benevolence of their friends, or
the charity of strangers.  <span id="fr_521"></span>[109](#fn_521) The
captives, who were regularly sold, either in open market, or by private
contract, would have legally regained their native freedom, which it was
impossible for a citizen to lose, or to alienate.  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[110](#fn_522) But as it was soon discovered that the
vindication of their liberty would endanger their lives; and that the
Goths, unless they were tempted to sell, might be provoked to murder,
their useless prisoners; the civil jurisprudence had been already
qualified by a wise regulation, that they should be obliged to serve the
moderate term of five years, till they had discharged by their labor the
price of their redemption.  <span id="fr_523"></span>[111](#fn_523) The
nations who invaded the Roman empire, had driven before them, into
Italy, whole troops of hungry and affrighted provincials, less
apprehensive of servitude than of famine. The calamities of Rome and
Italy dispersed the inhabitants to the most lonely, the most secure, the
most distant places of refuge. While the Gothic cavalry spread terror
and desolation along the sea-coast of Campania and Tuscany, the little
island of Igilium, separated by a narrow channel from the Argentarian
promontory, repulsed, or eluded, their hostile attempts; and at so small
a distance from Rome, great numbers of citizens were securely concealed
in the thick woods of that sequestered spot.  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[112](#fn_524) The ample patrimonies, which many
senatorian families possessed in Africa, invited them, if they had time,
and prudence, to escape from the ruin of their country, to embrace the
shelter of that hospitable province. The most illustrious of these
fugitives was the noble and pious Proba,  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[113](#fn_525) the widow of the praefect Petronius.
After the death of her husband, the most powerful subject of Rome, she
had remained at the head of the Anician family, and successively
supplied, from her private fortune, the expense of the consulships of
her three sons. When the city was besieged and taken by the Goths, Proba
supported, with Christian resignation, the loss of immense riches;
embarked in a small vessel, from whence she beheld, at sea, the flames
of her burning palace, and fled with her daughter Laeta, and her
granddaughter, the celebrated virgin, Demetrias, to the coast of Africa.
The benevolent profusion with which the matron distributed the fruits,
or the price, of her estates, contributed to alleviate the misfortunes
of exile and captivity. But even the family of Proba herself was not
exempt from the rapacious oppression of Count Heraclian, who basely
sold, in matrimonial prostitution, the noblest maidens of Rome to the
lust or avarice of the Syrian merchants. The Italian fugitives were
dispersed through the provinces, along the coast of Egypt and Asia, as
far as Constantinople and Jerusalem; and the village of Bethlem, the
solitary residence of St. Jerom and his female converts, was crowded
with illustrious beggars of either sex, and every age, who excited the
public compassion by the remembrance of their past fortune.  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[114](#fn_526) This awful catastrophe of Rome filled
the astonished empire with grief and terror. So interesting a contrast
of greatness and ruin, disposed the fond credulity of the people to
deplore, and even to exaggerate, the afflictions of the queen of cities.
The clergy, who applied to recent events the lofty metaphors of oriental
prophecy, were sometimes tempted to confound the destruction of the
capital and the dissolution of the globe.

There exists in human nature a strong propensity to depreciate the
advantages, and to magnify the evils, of the present times. Yet, when
the first emotions had subsided, and a fair estimate was made of the
real damage, the more learned and judicious contemporaries were forced
to confess, that infant Rome had formerly received more essential injury
from the Gauls, than she had now sustained from the Goths in her
declining age.  <span id="fr_527"></span>[115](#fn_527) The experience
of eleven centuries has enabled posterity to produce a much more
singular parallel; and to affirm with confidence, that the ravages of
the Barbarians, whom Alaric had led from the banks of the Danube, were
less destructive than the hostilities exercised by the troops of Charles
the Fifth, a Catholic prince, who styled himself Emperor of the Romans.
 <span id="fr_528"></span>[116](#fn_528) The Goths evacuated the city at
the end of six days, but Rome remained above nine months in the
possession of the Imperialists; and every hour was stained by some
atrocious act of cruelty, lust, and rapine. The authority of Alaric
preserved some order and moderation among the ferocious multitude which
acknowledged him for their leader and king; but the constable of Bourbon
had gloriously fallen in the attack of the walls; and the death of the
general removed every restraint of discipline from an army which
consisted of three independent nations, the Italians, the Spaniards, and
the Germans. In the beginning of the sixteenth century, the manners of
Italy exhibited a remarkable scene of the depravity of mankind. They
united the sanguinary crimes that prevail in an unsettled state of
society, with the polished vices which spring from the abuse of art and
luxury; and the loose adventurers, who had violated every prejudice of
patriotism and superstition to assault the palace of the Roman pontiff,
must deserve to be considered as the most profligate of the Italians. At
the same aera, the Spaniards were the terror both of the Old and New
World: but their high- spirited valor was disgraced by gloomy pride,
rapacious avarice, and unrelenting cruelty. Indefatigable in the pursuit
of fame and riches, they had improved, by repeated practice, the most
exquisite and effectual methods of torturing their prisoners: many of
the Castilians, who pillaged Rome, were familiars of the holy
inquisition; and some volunteers, perhaps, were lately returned from the
conquest of Mexico The Germans were less corrupt than the Italians, less
cruel than the Spaniards; and the rustic, or even savage, aspect of
those Tramontane warriors, often disguised a simple and merciful
disposition. But they had imbibed, in the first fervor of the
reformation, the spirit, as well as the principles of Luther. It was
their favorite amusement to insult, or destroy, the consecrated objects
of Catholic superstition; they indulged, without pity or remorse, a
devout hatred against the clergy of every denomination and degree, who
form so considerable a part of the inhabitants of modern Rome; and their
fanatic zeal might aspire to subvert the throne of Anti-christ, to
purify, with blood and fire, the abominations of the spiritual Babylon.
 <span id="fr_529"></span>[117](#fn_529)

The retreat of the victorious Goths, who evacuated Rome on the sixth
day,  <span id="fr_530"></span>[118](#fn_530) might be the result of
prudence; but it was not surely the effect of fear.  <span
id="fr_531"></span>[119](#fn_531) At the head of an army encumbered with
rich and weighty spoils, their intrepid leader advanced along the Appian
way into the southern provinces of Italy, destroying whatever dared to
oppose his passage, and contenting himself with the plunder of the
unresisting country. The fate of Capua, the proud and luxurious
metropolis of Campania, and which was respected, even in its decay, as
the eighth city of the empire,  <span id="fr_532"></span>[120](#fn_532)
is buried in oblivion; whilst the adjacent town of Nola  <span
id="fr_533"></span>[121](#fn_533) has been illustrated, on this
occasion, by the sanctity of Paulinus,  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[122](#fn_534) who was successively a consul, a monk,
and a bishop. At the age of forty, he renounced the enjoyment of wealth
and honor, of society and literature, to embrace a life of solitude and
penance; and the loud applause of the clergy encouraged him to despise
the reproaches of his worldly friends, who ascribed this desperate act
to some disorder of the mind or body.  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[123](#fn_535) An early and passionate attachment
determined him to fix his humble dwelling in one of the suburbs of Nola,
near the miraculous tomb of St. Faelix, which the public devotion had
already surrounded with five large and populous churches. The remains of
his fortune, and of his understanding, were dedicated to the service of
the glorious martyr; whose praise, on the day of his festival, Paulinus
never failed to celebrate by a solemn hymn; and in whose name he erected
a sixth church, of superior elegance and beauty, which was decorated
with many curious pictures, from the history of the Old and New
Testament. Such assiduous zeal secured the favor of the saint,  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[124](#fn_536) or at least of the people; and, after
fifteen years' retirement, the Roman consul was compelled to accept the
bishopric of Nola, a few months before the city was invested by the
Goths. During the siege, some religious persons were satisfied that they
had seen, either in dreams or visions, the divine form of their tutelar
patron; yet it soon appeared by the event, that Faelix wanted power, or
inclination, to preserve the flock of which he had formerly been the
shepherd. Nola was not saved from the general devastation;  <span
id="fr_537"></span>[125](#fn_537) and the captive bishop was protected
only by the general opinion of his innocence and poverty. Above four
years elapsed from the successful invasion of Italy by the arms of
Alaric, to the voluntary retreat of the Goths under the conduct of his
successor Adolphus; and, during the whole time, they reigned without
control over a country, which, in the opinion of the ancients, had
united all the various excellences of nature and art. The prosperity,
indeed, which Italy had attained in the auspicious age of the Antonines,
had gradually declined with the decline of the empire. The fruits of a
long peace perished under the rude grasp of the Barbarians; and they
themselves were incapable of tasting the more elegant refinements of
luxury, which had been prepared for the use of the soft and polished
Italians. Each soldier, however, claimed an ample portion of the
substantial plenty, the corn and cattle, oil and wine, that was daily
collected and consumed in the Gothic camp; and the principal warriors
insulted the villas and gardens, once inhabited by Lucullus and Cicero,
along the beauteous coast of Campania. Their trembling captives, the
sons and daughters of Roman senators, presented, in goblets of gold and
gems, large draughts of Falernian wine to the haughty victors; who
stretched their huge limbs under the shade of plane-trees,  <span
id="fr_538"></span>[126](#fn_538) artificially disposed to exclude the
scorching rays, and to admit the genial warmth, of the sun. These
delights were enhanced by the memory of past hardships: the comparison
of their native soil, the bleak and barren hills of Scythia, and the
frozen banks of the Elbe and Danube, added new charms to the felicity of
the Italian climate.  <span id="fr_539"></span>[127](#fn_539)

Whether fame, or conquest, or riches, were the object or Alaric, he
pursued that object with an indefatigable ardor, which could neither be
quelled by adversity nor satiated by success. No sooner had he reached
the extreme land of Italy, than he was attracted by the neighboring
prospect of a fertile and peaceful island. Yet even the possession of
Sicily he considered only as an intermediate step to the important
expedition, which he already meditated against the continent of Africa.
The Straits of Rhegium and Messina  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[128](#fn_540) are twelve miles in length, and, in
the narrowest passage, about one mile and a half broad; and the fabulous
monsters of the deep, the rocks of Scylla, and the whirlpool of
Charybdis, could terrify none but the most timid and unskilful mariners.
Yet as soon as the first division of the Goths had embarked, a sudden
tempest arose, which sunk, or scattered, many of the transports; their
courage was daunted by the terrors of a new element; and the whole
design was defeated by the premature death of Alaric, which fixed, after
a short illness, the fatal term of his conquests. The ferocious
character of the Barbarians was displayed in the funeral of a hero whose
valor and fortune they celebrated with mournful applause. By the labor
of a captive multitude, they forcibly diverted the course of the
Busentinus, a small river that washes the walls of Consentia. The royal
sepulchre, adorned with the splendid spoils and trophies of Rome, was
constructed in the vacant bed; the waters were then restored to their
natural channel; and the secret spot, where the remains of Alaric had
been deposited, was forever concealed by the inhuman massacre of the
prisoners, who had been employed to execute the work.  <span
id="fr_541"></span>[129](#fn_541)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[108](daf03020.htm#fr_520) Orosius (l. ii. c.
19, p. 142) compares the cruelty of the Gauls and the clemency of the
Goths. Ibi vix quemquam inventum senatorem, qui vel absens evaserit; hic
vix quemquam requiri, qui forte ut latens perierit. But there is an air
of rhetoric, and perhaps of falsehood, in this antithesis; and Socrates
(l. vii. c. 10) affirms, perhaps by an opposite exaggeration, that many
senators were put to death with various and exquisite tortures.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[109](daf03020.htm#fr_521) Multi ... Christiani
incaptivitatem ducti sunt. Augustin, de Civ Dei, l. i. c. 14; and the
Christians experienced no peculiar hardships.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[110](daf03020.htm#fr_522) See Heineccius,
Antiquitat. Juris Roman. tom. i. p. 96.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[111](daf03020.htm#fr_523) Appendix Cod.
Theodos. xvi. in Sirmond. Opera, tom. i. p. 735. This edict was
published on the 11th of December, A.D. 408, and is more reasonable than
properly belonged to the ministers of Honorius.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[112](daf03020.htm#fr_524) Eminus Igilii
sylvosa cacumina miror; Quem fraudare nefas laudis honore suae. Haec
proprios nuper tutata est insula saltus; Sive loci ingenio, seu Domini
genio. Gurgite cum modico victricibus obstitit armis, Tanquam longinquo
dissociata mari. Haec multos lacera suscepit ab urbe fugates, Hic fessis
posito certa timore salus. Plurima terreno populaverat aequora bello,
Contra naturam classe timendus eques: Unum, mira fides, vario discrimine
portum! Tam prope Romanis, tam procul esse Getis. Rutilius, in Itinerar.
l. i. 325

The island is now called Giglio. See Cluver. Ital. Antiq. l. ii.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[113](daf03020.htm#fr_525) As the adventures of
Proba and her family are connected with the life of St. Augustin, they
are diligently illustrated by Tillemont, Mem. Eccles. tom. xiii. p. 620
- 635. Some time after their arrival in Africa, Demetrias took the veil,
and made a vow of virginity; an event which was considered as of the
highest importance to Rome and to the world. All the Saints wrote
congratulatory letters to her; that of Jerom is still extant, (tom. i.
p. 62 - 73, ad Demetriad. de servand Virginitat.,) and contains a
mixture of absurd reasoning, spirited declamation, and curious facts,
some of which relate to the siege and sack of Rome.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[114](daf03020.htm#fr_526) See the pathetic
complaint of Jerom, (tom. v. p. 400,) in his preface to the second book
of his Commentaries on the Prophet Ezekiel.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[115](daf03020.htm#fr_527) Orosius, though with
some theological partiality, states this comparison, l. ii. c. 19, p.
142, l. vii. c. 39, p. 575. But, in the history of the taking of Rome by
the Gauls, every thing is uncertain, and perhaps fabulous. See Beaufort
sur l'Incertitude, &c., de l'Histoire Romaine, p. 356; and Melot, in the
Mem. de l'Academie des Inscript. tom. xv. p. 1 - 21.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[116](daf03020.htm#fr_528) The reader who
wishes to inform himself of the circumstances of his famous event, may
peruse an admirable narrative in Dr. Robertson's History of Charles V.
vol. ii. p. 283; or consult the Annali d'Italia of the learned Muratori,
tom. xiv. p. 230 - 244, octavo edition. If he is desirous of examining
the originals, he may have recourse to the eighteenth book of the great,
but unfinished, history of Guicciardini. But the account which most
truly deserves the name of authentic and original, is a little book,
entitled, Il Sacco di Roma, composed, within less than a month after the
assault of the city, by the brother of the historian Guicciardini, who
appears to have been an able magistrate and a dispassionate writer.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[117](daf03020.htm#fr_529) The furious spirit
of Luther, the effect of temper and enthusiasm, has been forcibly
attacked, (Bossuet, Hist. des Variations des Eglises Protestantes, livre
i. p. 20 - 36,) and feebly defended, (Seckendorf. Comment. de
Lutheranismo, especially l. i. No. 78, p. 120, and l. iii. No. 122, p.
556.)

<span id="fn_530"></span>[118](daf03020.htm#fr_530) Marcellinus, in
Chron. Orosius, (l. vii. c. 39, p. 575,) asserts, that he left Rome on
the third day; but this difference is easily reconciled by the
successive motions of great bodies of troops.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[119](daf03020.htm#fr_531) Socrates (l. vii. c.
10) pretends, without any color of truth, or reason, that Alaric fled on
the report that the armies of the Eastern empire were in full march to
attack him.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[120](daf03020.htm#fr_532) Ausonius de Claris
Urbibus, p. 233, edit. Toll. The luxury of Capua had formerly surpassed
that of Sybaris itself. See Athenaeus Deipnosophist. l. xii. p. 528,
edit. Casaubon.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[121](daf03020.htm#fr_533) Forty-eight years
before the foundation of Rome, (about 800 before the Christian aera,)
the Tuscans built Capua and Nola, at the distance of twenty-three miles
from each other; but the latter of the two cities never emerged from a
state of mediocrity.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[122](daf03020.htm#fr_534) Tillemont (Mem.
Eccles. tom. xiv. p. 1 - 46) has compiled, with his usual diligence, all
that relates to the life and writings of Paulinus, whose retreat is
celebrated by his own pen, and by the praises of St. Ambrose, St. Jerom,
St. Augustin, Sulpicius Severus, &c., his Christian friends and
contemporaries.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[123](daf03020.htm#fr_535) See the affectionate
letters of Ausonius (epist. xix. - xxv. p. 650-698, edit. Toll.) to his
colleague, his friend, and his disciple, Paulinus. The religion of
Ausonius is still a problem, (see Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions,
tom. xv. p. 123 - 138.) I believe that it was such in his own time, and,
consequently, that in his heart he was a Pagan.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[124](daf03020.htm#fr_536) The humble Paulinus
once presumed to say, that he believed St. Faelix did love him; at
least, as a master loves his little dog.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[125](daf03020.htm#fr_537) See Jornandes, de
Reb. Get. c. 30, p. 653. Philostorgius, l. xii. c. 3. Augustin. de Civ.
Dei, l.i.c. 10. Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A.D. 410, No. 45, 46.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[126](daf03020.htm#fr_538) The platanus, or
plane-tree, was a favorite of the ancients, by whom it was propagated,
for the sake of shade, from the East to Gaul. Plin. Hist. Natur. xii. 3,
4, 5. He mentions several of an enormous size; one in the Imperial
villa, at Velitrae, which Caligula called his nest, as the branches were
capable of holding a large table, the proper attendants, and the emperor
himself, whom Pliny quaintly styles pars umbroe; an expression which
might, with equal reason, be applied to Alaric

<span id="fn_539"></span>[127](daf03020.htm#fr_539) The prostrate South
to the destroyer yields Her boasted titles, and her golden fields; With
grim delight the brood of winter view A brighter day, and skies of azure
hue; Scent the new fragrance of the opening rose, And quaff the pendent
vintage as it grows. See Gray's Poems, published by Mr. Mason, p. 197.
Instead of compiling tables of chronology and natural history, why did
not Mr. Gray apply the powers of his genius to finish the philosophic
poem, of which he has left such an exquisite specimen?

<span id="fn_540"></span>[128](daf03020.htm#fr_540) For the perfect
description of the Straits of Messina, Scylla, Clarybdis, &c., see
Cluverius, (Ital. Antiq. l. iv. p. 1293, and Sicilia Antiq. l. i. p. 60
- 76, who had diligently studied the ancients, and surveyed with a
curious eye the actual face of the country.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[129](daf03020.htm#fr_541) Jornandes, de Reb
Get. c. 30, p. 654.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Invasion Of Italy, Occupation Of Territories By
Barbarians. Part V.](daf03021)
