[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred Time](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smd20)  [Next](smd22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIX

### Friday--The Day of Freya

In the stories of the gods and goddesses of the Angles and Saxons we
find two goddesses, Frigga, the wife of Odin and queen of the gods, and
Freya, the Goddess of Love. Some people think that Friday was named
after Frigga, and others that it was Freya's day. Since very similar
stories are told of each of them, it is quite probable that they were
really the same person. The Roman name for the day was Dies Veneris, the
day of Venus, who, it will be remembered, was the Goddess of Love, and
so corresponded to Freya. The modern French name is taken from the Latin
and is vendredi.

Frigga was the Goddess of the Clouds, and, when she was not with her
husband Odin, spent her time in spinning clouds. Her spinning-wheel was
studded with jewels, and at night could be seen in the sky as the
constellation to which the Romans gave the name of Orion's Belt, as we
have seen in the story of Orion.

Frigga was also the Goddess of Spring, and as such was known as Eastre,
whom we have already mentioned as giving us the word Easter.

Freya, the Goddess of Love and Beauty, like the Venus of the Romans,
received a great welcome when she came to the home of the gods, and was
given a special kingdom called Folk Meadow, where was a vast hall known
as the Hall of Many Seats. Here she received half of those slain in
battle, the other half being entertained by Odin, as we have seen.

Freya is depicted as having blue eyes and golden hair, and often as
wearing a robe of feathers, which enabled her to fly through the air
like a bird.

The goddess is said to have married Odur, who was probably Odin under
another name. Odur once had occasion to leave Freya and travel over the
world, and the goddess was broken-hearted at his departure. Her tears
fell among the rocks and were changed to gold, while some which fell
into the sea were transformed into amber. All nature mourned with her:
the trees shed their leaves, the grass withered, and the flowers drooped
their heads. At last Freya in her distress set out to find her husband,
and, passing through many lands, where her golden tears were afterwards
found, came to the sunny south, and there overtook the wandering Odur.
As the lovers returned, the fields and the flowers rejoiced with them.
The frost and snow fled before them, and the earth became green again as
they passed.

"And Freya next came nigh, with golden tears;  
The loveliest Goddess she in Heaven, by all  
Most honour'd after Frea, Odin's wife.  
Her long ago the wandering Odur took  
To mate, but left her to roam distant lands;  
Since then she seeks him, and weeps tears of gold."  
MATTHEW ARNOLD--Balder Dead.

This story, of course, reminds us of Ceres and Persephone, and is only
another fanciful explanation of summer and winter.

Freya was the proud possessor of a dazzling necklace of gold, which had
been made by the dwarfs, and which she wore night and day. On one
occasion only did she lend the necklace, when Thor, disguised as Freya,
went to the land of the giants to recover his hammer, which had been
stolen by the Giant Thrym. Loki, by borrowing Freya's robe of feathers
and flying over the country of the giants, had discovered the thief, but
had also found that Thrym would only return the hammer on condition that
Freya would become his wife. When Freya heard of the giant's
presumption, she became greatly enraged, and vowed that she would never
leave her beloved Odur and go to live in that dreary and desolate land
of cold. Heimdall, the guardian of the bridge Bifrost, then suggested
that Thor should go to Thrym disguised as Freya, in company with Loki
disguised as Freya's attendant. The gods at last allowed themselves to
be persuaded, and Thor, having borrowed Freya's clothes and necklace and
wearing a thick veil, set out with Loki, who was dressed as a
handmaiden. On reaching the giant's palace, they were welcomed by Thrym,
who was delighted at the success of his plan, and who led them to the
banqueting hall, where a great feast was held. At the end of the feast,
Thrym ordered the famous hammer to be brought in, and he himself laid it
in his bride's lap as a marriage gift. Thor's hand immediately closed
over the hammer, and in a few moments Thrym and all the guests invited
to the wedding feast lay dead.

Freya was greatly relieved to have her necklace returned in safety, but
the evil Loki, attracted by its wonderful beauty, determined to steal
it. One night the god, by changing himself into a fly, succeeded in
entering Freya's palace. He then resumed his own shape, and, creeping
stealthily to Freya's bed, gently removed the necklace from the
goddess's neck. The watchful Heimdall, however, had heard Loki's
footsteps, and, looking in the direction of the Folk Meadow, became a
witness of the theft. He at once set off in pursuit of Loki, and,
overtaking him, drew his sword and was about to kill the thief, when
Loki changed himself into a flame. Heimdall immediately changed himself
into a cloud, and sent down a shower of rain to put out the fire. Loki
then took the form of a bear, and opened his mouth to catch the water.
Heimdall also took the form of a bear and attacked Loki, who, finding
that he was being overpowered, changed himself yet again, into a seal.
Heimdall followed suit, and fought again with Loki, and at length
compelled him to give up the necklace, which was returned to Freya.

On another occasion Freya was sought by one of the giants, and it was
only by the cunning of Loki and by an act of bad faith on the part of
the gods that she was saved. The gods, ever anxious lest the giants
should invade Asgard, decided to build a stronghold which would prove
impregnable. They received an offer from a stranger, who was willing to
undertake the work in return for the sun, the moon, and the goddess
Freya. By Loki's advice they accepted the offer on condition that he
should complete the work in one winter, aided only by his horse. To the
surprise of the gods the stranger agreed to these conditions, and with
the help of his horse, which could haul the heaviest stone, set to work.
The gods, who at first felt sure that their conditions had made the task
impossible, were alarmed to find as time went on that the stranger was
working so quickly that it seemed certain that he would be able to keep
his promise. The gods on their side had no intention whatever of keeping
their promise, since they could not possibly part with the sun and the
moon and the Goddess of Love, and they angrily pointed out to Loki that
since it was he who had got them into this difficulty, he must find some
way out of it. Loki replied that the gods need have no fear, for with
his usual cunning he had thought of a plan whereby the stranger might be
made to forfeit his reward. On the last day, when only one stone
remained to be dragged into position, Loki changed himself into a horse,
and, trotting out from the forest, neighed loudly to attract the
attention of the stranger's horse. Tired of his continual labour and
longing for freedom and rest, the horse broke free from its load and
galloped after Loki. The stranger, after pursuing it vainly through the
forest, at last made his way to Asgard, and, full of anger at the trick
which had been played upon him, took on his real shape, for he was a
frost-giant, and was about to attack the gods when Thor hurled his
hammer at him and killed him.

Frey, the god mentioned in the story of Loki and Sif's golden hair, was
Freya's brother. He was the God of the Fields, and sacrifices were made
to him for the crops. In the early spring his wooden image was driven in
a chariot through the countryside, in order that he might bless the
fields and bring a fruitful harvest: Frey, as we have seen, became the
possessor of a ship which could travel over land and sea, and though
large enough to contain all the gods, yet could be folded up like a
cloth, and he also possessed a boar with golden bristles. The god often
rode on this boar, which was swifter than a horse, and was no doubt a
symbol of the sun, which ripened the crops. We find the same idea of
sunshine in Frey's flashing sword, which fought of its own accord as
soon as it was drawn from its sheath.

The month of the Angles and Saxons which begins just before our
Christmas was sacred to both Frey and Thor, and it was customary at that
time, as we have already mentioned, to bind a huge wooden wheel with
straw, and, setting fire to it, to roll it down a hill. The wheel was a
symbol of the sun, which at that time began to chase away the winter. At
this time, too, was held a great feast to all the gods, and the chief
meat eaten was a boar's head, in honour of Frey. The missionaries who
first brought Christianity to the Northmen, finding this feast was of
great importance and was celebrated by all the people, did not try to do
away with it. Instead, they changed it from a heathen to a Christian
festival by putting Christ in the place of the Norse gods, and calling
it the Feast or Mass of Christ. A similar change was made, it will be
remembered, in the case of the Easter festival, held in honour of Eastre
or Frigga, the wife of Odin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Saturday--The Day of Saturn](smd22)
