[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Buddhism](../../bud/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ioe09.md) 
[Next](ioe11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### THE HEIAN PERIOD

800 TO 900 A.D.

THE idea of the union of mind and matter was destined to grow still
stronger in Japanese thought, till the complete fusion of the two
conceptions should be reached. It is remarkable to find that this fusion
rather centres in the material, and the symbol is regarded as
realisation, the common act as if it were beatitude, the world itself as
the ideal world. There is no Maya after all. In India, while it may be
that this feeling of the physical and concrete as a luminous sacrament
of spirituality, leads on the one side to Tantrikism and phallic
worship, it forms on the other, as we must remember, the living poetry
of the home and of experience.

From such conceptions, the sannyasin

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

life is a sequestration, and so it comes that when the Japanese monk of
the Shingon sect attempts to express in his worship this notion that the
everyday life is not like but is the true life, he adopts for the moment
the symbolic marks of the householder.

In this fusion of spirit and form, popular superstitions are raised to
the same dignity and seriousness as the authentic sciences. There is no
activity that may not receive the attention of the highest intellect. In
this way fine thought and special emotions become democratised; the
people lay up immense stores of latent energy, and we accomplish the
preparation for some outburst of dynamic faculty at a later era.

In that epoch in Japanese history which is known--from the fact that the
capital was then again removed in 794 A.D. from Nara to Heian, or
Kyoto--as the Heian period, we find a new wave of Buddhist development,
called the Mikkio or Esoteric

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

doctrine, whose philosophic basis is such as to make it capable of
including the two extremes, of ascetic self-torture and the worship of
physical rapture.

This movement was first represented in China by Vajrabodhi and his
nephew Amoghavajra, of Southern India, the latter having gone back to
India in quest of such ideas in 741 A.D. This may be considered as the
point at which Buddhism merges itself in the larger influx of Hinduism,
so that Indian influence at the period is overwhelming, in art as in
religion.

The origin of the school in India itself is obscure. There are apparent
traces of its existence even in very early days, but its systematisation
seems only to be completed in the seventh and eighth centuries, when a
need arose for combining the Brahminical and Buddhist doctrines. This
was the moment at which the Ramayana received its final form, as a
protest against the over-monasticising of life. In

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Japan the new philosophical standpoint was an
advance upon the Hosso and Kegon schools which had taught the union of
mind and matter, and the realisation of the Supreme Spirit, in concrete
forms, for these thinkers went further than their predecessors, in the
effort to demonstrate the idea in practice, claiming their own descent
from direct communion with Vairochana, the Supreme Godhead, of which the
Sakya-Buddha was only one manifestation. They aimed at finding truth in
all religions and all teachings, each of them being its own method of
attaining to the highest.

The union of mind, body, and word in meditation was considered
essential, though any one of the three, by itself, carried to its utmost
possibility, was productive of the highest results. Thus they made the
Word, or the pronouncing of sacred charms, which they considered as
lying on the borderland between mind and body, the most important way of

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

attaining the result, so that this sect was sometimes called the True
Word, or Shingon.

Art and Nature were now regarded in a new light, for in every object
alike was contained [Vairochana](errata.htm#1.md), the
Impersonal-Universal, a supreme realisation of which was to be the quest
of the believer. Crime, from this point of view of transcendent
one-ness, becomes as sacred as self-sacrifice, the lowest demon as
naturally the centre of the pantheon as the highest god. The minutest
details must be guarded and conserved, the object being to see the whole
of life as an embodiment of Godhead. And mythology comes to be treated
as a shimmering iridescence, of which any point may at any moment be
made the centre, throwing all others into relative subordination.

The idea is one of many possible issues of the great Indian aspiration
towards Same-Sightedness (Samadarsana). At the same time, curiously
enough, in spite of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the profoundly intellectual analysis inherent in Buddhism, the
scientific ideas of this period are expressed as magic, or the study of
the supernatural. This was perhaps because the philosophy which divided
the Existent into five elements--earth, air, fire, water, and ether
understood as Mind, declaring that without the last, no one of the other
four could be, and that into it all were alike resolvable--was too
subtle for the understanding of the untrained masses. Under this school
of thought every act of life became loaded with ritual, like Indian
architecture, as regulated by Varahamihira in his Vrihat Samhita, and
sculpture in the Manasara. In erecting a temple, for instance, the
acharya, or master, would lay out the ground with a cosmic design, in
which every stone had its place, and even the rubbish found within the
outline represented the imperfections and shortcomings of his own
development. Architecture, sculpture, and the whole arrangement of

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the temple, were all made expressive of this idea of the universe.

It was under this influence that Buddhism acquired its great masses of
gods and [goddesses](errata.htm#2.md), alien to the faith itself, but made
possible by the new teaching as manifestations of the supreme original
Divinity. We find now a systematised pantheon, grouped around the idea
of Vairochana, in four main subdivisions--first Fudo, second Hosho,
third Amida, and fourth Sakya, as representations (1) of Power, which is
knowledge; (2) of Wealth, which is creative force; (3) of Mercy, which
is Divine intelligence descending upon man; and (4) of Work, or Karma,
the realisation of the first three in actual life on earth, that is,
Sakya-Muni.

Such is the abstract significance of the symbols. On their concrete
side, Fudo, the immovable, the God of Samadhi, stands for the terrible
form of Siva, the grand vision of the eternal blue, rising

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

out of fire. Corresponding to the Indian idea of the period, he has the
gleaming third eye, the trident sword, and the lasso of snakes. In
another form, as Kojin, the Fierce God (Rudra?), or Makeisura
(Maha-Iswara), he wears a garland of skulls, armlets of snakes, and the
tiger-skin of meditation.

His feminine counterpart appears as Aizen, of the mighty bow,
lion-crowned and awful, the God of Love--but love in its strong form,
whose fire of purity is death, who slays the beloved that he may attain
the highest. Vairochana becomes a trinity with Fudo and Aizen, by means
of the symbol of the Chintamani jewel, whose mystic form is that of a
circle striving to make itself a triangle--for life, it is said, never
completes itself, but is for ever breaking through perfection, in its
struggle upwards to the higher rounds of realisation.

The Indian idea of Kali is also represented by Kariteimo, the
Mother-Queen

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of Heaven, to whom is made offering daily of the pomegranate, under a
strange interpretation that points to the transformation of an ancient
sacrifice of blood into this form under Buddhistic influences.
Saraswati, as Benten, with her vina, which quells the waves; Kompira, or
the Gandharva, the Eagle-headed, sacred to mariners; Kichijoten, or
Lakshmi, who confers fortune and love; Taigensui, the Commander-in-chief
(Kartikeya), who bestows the banner of victory; Shoden, the
elephant--headed Ganesh, Breaker of the Path, to whom the first
salutations are offered in all village-worship, and whose dread power is
held in check by the counsels of the eleven-headed Kwannon, now
attaining the female form, in expression of the Indian thought of
motherhood--all these suggest the direct adoption of Hindu deities.

This new conception of the divinities is different from the distant
attitude of

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

earlier Buddhists, inasmuch as they are now real, concrete, and actual
in the forms represented.

The artistic works of the period are full of this intense fervour and
nearness to the gods, such as is unknown in any other era. We have seen
that the introduction of the Mikkio doctrine into China dates from
Vajrabodhi, who came to that land in 719, translated a sûtra on the
Yoga, and was followed by Amoghavajra, bringing further knowledge on his
return from India in 746. Its introduction into Japan dates similarly
from Kukai, who was taught by Keika, the disciple of Amoghavajra. These
teachers were considered to have magical powers, and were held in great
reverence, and Kukai, one of the greatest figures in Japanese Buddhism,
is supposed to be still sitting in meditation on Mount Koya, where he
entered into Samadhi in 833, as a yogi. Kukai's works are numerous, "The
Seven Patriarchs of the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sect of the True Word," painted by him, are now
handed down in the Toji temple of Kyoto, amongst its priceless
treasures, and are deeply suggestive of the great virility and grandeur
of this master-mind. His immediate disciples, Jitte, Jikaku, and Chisho,
all of whom studied the doctrine in China, carried the movement still
further. The creed and temples of the early Nara period succumbed in the
main to this new influence, inasmuch as its comprehensive view
engendered no conflict with any earlier tenets.

One of the best specimens of the sculpture of this period is the Yakshi
Buddha, the Great Healer, carved under the orders of Kukai, now extant
in the Zhingoji temple near Kyoto. Another, the eleven-headed Kwannon of
Toganji in Omi, is attributed to Saicho, Kukai's great rival. We may
also mention the Nioirin Kwannon of Kansinji, and the graceful Kwannon
of Hokkiji in Nara.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

In painting, the twelve devas by Kukai, preserved at present in Saidaiji
in Nara, with the Riokaimandara of Senjuin, of the same province, are
the foremost examples of the strong brushwork of the period.

Heian art is thus a synonym for work that is strong and vital, because
concrete. It is full of a certain vigour of assurance. But it is not
free, lacking the spontaneity and detachment of great idealism. It is at
the same time representative of an essential stage in the appropriation
of Buddhist conceptions. Up to this point they have been regarded and
treated as something apart from the believer himself. Now, in their
slightly commonplace energising of the Heian consciousness, this
separatedness is lost, and the succeeding era shows their absorption and
re-expression in the national life as emotion.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

NOTES

*Fudo*.--The Immovable. One of the Indian names of Siva, similarly, is
Achala, the Unmoving.

The Twelve Devas.--The twelve devas are: *Bonten* (Brahma), attended by
the white bird *Ha Kuga*, or Swan; *Khaten* (Agni); *Ishanna*;
*Thaishak* (Indra); *Futen*; *Vishamon*, whose consort is Kichjoten
(Goddess of Fortune); *Em-ma* (Yama), riding on a buffalo, and bearing
the great staff of death, surmounted by two heads; *Nitten*, the
Sun-God; *Getten*, the Moon-God; *Suiten*, the God of Waters on a
tortoise; and *Shoden* (Ganesh).

At the time of a monk's initiation the acharya, or master, represented
Vairochana; the postulant, the potential Vairochana; pictures of the
twelve devas were hung about the hall as guardian witnesses, and at the
back was placed the screen, bearing the representation of mountains and
waters, behind which the secret text was spoken in the ear.

Samadhi, or realisation through concentration. In Japan we distinguish
three stages, beginning with the trance of super-consciousness, produced
by meditation, and culminating in a perfect union with the Absolute,
which is compatible with work in the world, and is the same as
Buddhahood. This last phase is that known in India as jivan-mukti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fujiwara Period: 900 to 1200 A.D.](ioe11.md)
