[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa08)  [Next](tsa10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

# II.--JUDICIAL PROCEDURE

### Those who are Eligible and those who are Ineligible as Judges or Witnesses.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>III. 1. Non-capital cases are tried
by three judges. Each of the contending parties chooses one, and the two
together choose a third,--so R. Meir; but the majority hold that the two
judges choose the third. Each may refuse to accept the other's
judges,--so R. Meir; but the majority hold this to be the case only when
proof is brought against them to the effect that they are kinsfolk or
otherwise ineligible. But if they are eligible or authorized by the
court, they cannot be disqualified.

Each may refuse to accept the other's witnesses,--so R. Meir; but
according to the majority this is the case only when proof is brought
against them to the effect that they are kinsfolk or otherwise
ineligible.

2\. If a man say, "I place confidence in my father," or "I place
confidence in thy father," or " I place confidence in three herdsmen,"
 <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_200)--R. Meir holds that he may
retract; but the majority hold that he cannot retract.

If a man is bound to his neighbour on oath, his neighbour saying to him,
"Vow to me by the life of thine head!"--R. Meir holds that he may
retract; but the majority hold that he cannot retract.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

V. 1. Either party in a suit may refuse to accept the judges chosen by
the opposing party; but the majority hold that no one is empowered to
refuse a judge regarded by all as expert.

If a man say, "I place confidence in my father," "I place confidence in
thy father," or "I place confidence in three herdsmen," he may
retract. <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_201)

If a man is bound to his neighbour on oath, his neighbour saying to him,
"Swear to me by thy life " or "by this or these objects held in my hand"
he may retract until he take the oath in the presence of the judge,--so
R. Meir; but the majority hold that he cannot retract. R. Jehuda said:
The oath may not be administered before a single judge. To this it was
replied: This is only thine own opinion; if the contending parties
accept a single judge they cannot retract. R. Jehuda used also to say:
If a man is bound to his neighbour on oath, his neighbour saying to him
"Swear to me by thy life" and he have accepted such an oath, he cannot
retract. It happened in the case of one who was bound to his neighbour
on oath in the court, that he had sworn by a definite object, and his
neighbour had accepted the oath.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>III. 3. These are disqualified (as
witnesses or judges): a dice-player, a usurer, pigeon-flyers, and those
who trade with the Sabbatic growth. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_202) R. Shimeon said: At first only the
description *gatherers of the Sabbatic growth* was used, but since
oppressors <span id="fr_204"></span>[3](#fn_203) have grown many, the
prohibition is narrowed down to those who trade with the Sabbatic
growth. R. Jehuda maintained that

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>when such is a man's only occupation
(he is disqualified), but if he have another occupation he is eligible.

**T**. V. 2. One who gambles or plays with dice--and it is all one
whether he play with blocks of wood or nutshells or pomegranate
peel--can never be regarded as reformed until he agree to break up his
dice and effect a complete reformation. One who lends money on usury
cannot be regarded as reformed until he tear up his account-books and
effect a complete reformation. A pigeon-flier--that is to say, one who
trains pigeons, and it is all one whether he train pigeons or any other
beast or living creature or bird--can never be regarded as reformed
until he destroy those things which cause his disqualification and
effect a complete reformation. One who trades with the Sabbatic
growth--that is to say, one who remains idle the other six years and
when the year of release <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204) arrives
begins to stretch his hands and feet and trade with the fruits of
transgression--can never be regarded as reformed until, when the next
year of release approaches, he is examined and found to have effected a
complete reformation. R. Nehemia says: It must be a reformation in deed
and not merely in word. What form does it take? (He must say) "These two
hundred denarii have I amassed from the fruits of transgression. Divide
them among the poor."

R. Meir called them "gatherers of the Sabbatic growth," while R. Jehuda
called them "traders in the Sabbatic growth." Of both sort R. Jehuda
said: If they have also another occupation they are disqualified; but if
they reform they are eligible. The majority, however, hold that if they
have another occupation they are disqualified (as witnesses) in such
matters as the hallowing of the month or the intercalation of the year,
and in non-capital and

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

capital case; but for testimony which a woman is eligible to give, they
too are eligible. <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_205)

M. III. 4. These are reckoned as kinsfolk: a brother, paternal or
maternal uncle, brother-in-law, father's and mother's brother-in-law,
step-son, father-in-law, wife's sister's husband;--these together with
their sons, their sons-in-law, and a man's step-son (but not the
latter's children). R. Jose said: Such is the Mishnah of R. Akiba <span
id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_206) but the first Mishnah <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_206) included uncle, first-cousin, and all
eligible to be heirs, <span id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_207) and those
who at the time were relatives; but relatives who had since become
estranged were eligible (as judges or witnesses). R. Jehuda holds that
if a man's daughter die and leave children, her husband is still
reckoned as a relative.

5\. A friend or an enemy (is disqualified). Who is counted as a friend?
One's groomsman. And an enemy? A man who from hostility has not spoken
with his neighbour for three days. But to this it was replied:
Israelites should not for this be suspected.

T. V. 3. A wife's brother-in-law is disqualified, but not a wife's
brother-in-law's children. A stepson is disqualified, but not a
stepson's children.

4\. Kinsfolk may not judge each other, or with each other, or on behalf
of each other, or in the presence of each other.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

If a man became possessed of evidence at a time when he was the
son-in-law of the accused, though the daughter be since dead; or while
he was a trader in the Sabbatic growth, though he be now reformed; or
while dumb but be since cured; or while blind but have since received
his sight; or while mad but have since become sane; or while a foreigner
but have since become a proselyte;--such a man is disqualified. But if
he became possessed of the evidence before he was the son-in-law of the
accused, and have since become his son-in-law, and afterward the
daughter died; or before he traded in the Sabbatic growth, and have
since become a trader in the Sabbatic growth, and afterward reformed; or
while he was possessed of hearing, and have since become deaf, and
afterward recovered; or before being blind, and he again received his
sight after being blind; or before he was mad, and after being mad he
again became sane;--such a one is eligible. The general rule is, that
one who was eligible in the first case, and is at present
eligible,--such a one is eligible. If he was ineligible in the first
case and is at present ineligible, or if he was ineligible in the first
case, but is at present eligible,--such a one is ineligible.

5*a*. If one were possessed of evidence in writing against the accused,
and have since become his son-in-law, he cannot bring forward his
handwriting to support his evidence, but others may do so.

If he have received from him a house or field for the payment of a
hundred *manae*, <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_208) and he have
evidence concerning the fact, he cannot bring forward the evidence; for
no man may testify on his own behalf.

Among persons disqualified to act as judges or witnesses are also to be
included robbers, herdsmen and extortioners, and all suspect concerning
property. <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_209) Their evidence is always
invalid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[57:1](tsa09.htm#fr_201) The most disreputable
of the population.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[58:1](tsa09.htm#fr_202) The Vienna MS. and the
Venice edition (the textus receptus) add: "from the verdict,--so R.
Meir; but the majority say that he cannot retract."

<span id="fn_202"></span>[58:2](tsa09.htm#fr_203) Lev. 25. 1 ff.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[58:3](tsa09.htm#fr_204) In the matter of
taxation and economic pressure.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[59:1](tsa09.htm#fr_205) Deut. 15. 2.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[60:1](tsa09.htm#fr_206) According to *Rosh
ha-Shana* 22 *a*, their evidence is valid only in matters relating to
marriage.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[60:2](tsa09.htm#fr_208) Referring to earlier,
and presumably oral, compilations from which R. Jehuda ha-Nasi drew for
his final authoritative Mishnah.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[60:3](tsa09.htm#fr_209) Relatives on the
father's side. See *B. Bathra* 8. 1 ff

<span id="fn_208"></span>[61:1](tsa09.htm#fr_210) A *manê* was
equivalent to the earlier shekel.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[61:2](tsa09.htm#fr_211) That is, any one whose
honesty has ever been called in question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Method of Legal Procedure in Non-Capital Cases](tsa10)
