[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa00)  [Next](tsa02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### INTRODUCTION

#### GENERAL CHARACTER AND CONTENTS

*SANHEDRIN* is the title given to the fourth *tract* in the fourth of
the six *orders* or *series* which make up the *Mishnah*. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) This *order*, called *nezikin*, "damages"
(or, in the *Tosefta*, *yeshu‘oth*, "redemptions"), deals more or less
directly with the various branches of Jewish jurisprudence; and
*Sanhedrin*, as its name implies, treats of the higher legislative
courts, their constitution, authority, and method of procedure.

The *Mishnah* and *Tosefta*, which are here translated, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) may be regarded as together giving the bulk
of the traditions on the subject in the form in which they existed at
the close of the second century A.D. The *Mishnah* gives an ordered,
comprehensive sketch of the regulations which

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

governed the legal courts; while the *Tosefta* goes over similar ground
in a freer manner, frequently repeating, occasionally contradicting, and
constantly supplementing--not always relevantly--the substance of the
more authoritative and final code. The *Tosefta* must not, however, be
regarded as a later addition to the existing *Mishnah;* its similarities
and differences lend themselves rather to a hypothesis which would see
in the *Tosefta* a supplement to an earlier form of the *Mishnah* than
is now in our possession. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

The *Mishnah* opens by passing in review the less serious cases which
come up for trial or adjudication, such as can be settled, if need be,
on the basis of a money payment. They are passed by with just the
briefest mention; they are not a real part of the subject-matter, since
they do not come before the Sanhedrin, but may be decided by a court or
jury consisting of as few as three members. The constitution of the
greater and lesser Sanhedrins is then given, with a summary of the types
of case which comes before each--normal capital cases before the
inferior court, and those of more national significance, such as
communal

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

apostasy ("the beguiled city," Deut. xiii. 12 ff.), and the condemnation
of a high priest, a false prophet, or a tribe, before the higher court.
Then follows a section defining the relations which the king and
high-priest hold to the court; characteristically the *Mishnah* wanders
away from the main point in treating of the king, and gives us a verse
by verse commentary on Deut. xvii. 16 ff.

The real subject of the tract is now entered upon. The qualities and
disabilities which make a man eligible or ineligible to act as a judge
or witness are stated, as well as the rights the two parties to a suit
have in the selection of their judges. We are then told the method of
conducting trials in non-capital cases, and a comparison with the
details peculiar to the management of capital cases serves to emphasize
the importance and seriousness of the latter. The method of carrying out
the four death penalties is next discussed in the order of their
relative severity: stoning, burning, decapitation, and strangulation.
This again is followed by a catalogue, in four corresponding divisions,
of the criminals who are respectively liable to these capital
punishments.

The *Tosefta*, while preserving this same outline of the subject, allows
itself a much greater licence in the way of digressions and minute
detail. Thus, we are treated to lengthy excursuses on the principles of
arbitration and the intercalation of leap-years; by an odd train of
thought we are led away from the subject of the Sanhedrin and structural
alterations in Jerusalem, to some verbal

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

gymnastics on Deut. xiv. 23; while the *Mishnah's* digression on the
king develops in the *Tosefta* into a discussion on the script of Ezra's
Book of the Law. In the matter of the court's procedure we are granted
the amplest details, though here it becomes more and more clear that we
are getting fewer traditions of the older historic Sanhedrin, and more
of its academic survival at Jabne or Usha. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

When we come to the section treating of the four capital punishments,
the *Tosefta's* contributions become scanty: on many points it is
silent, while on a few others it only repeats the Mishnah with a few
unimportant variations.

Between the account of the murderer and the men of "a beguiled
city"--the two types of criminal who are to suffer death by
decapitation--two sections are inserted: a brief one (not in *Tosefta*)
giving a list of cases when it is permissible for men to take the law
into their own hands; and a longer one (expanded to a great length in
*Tosefta*) treating in a freer, more edifying or "haggadic" fashion the
subject, "Those who have no share in the world to come." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md)

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

#### IMPORTANCE AND HISTORICAL VALUE

The general interest of the tract is evident since trials before the
Jewish authorities form a prominent feature of the *Gospels* and *Acts
of the Apostles*. More particularly the justice and regularity of our
Lord's trial and condemnation have long been called in question, and a
voluminous literature has grown round the subject. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) We have the New Testament accounts of the
procedure adopted by the Jews in their examination and condemnation of
Jesus; and, since we also possess a detailed code, drawn up by the Jews
themselves, purporting to embody the regulations governing such a trial,
it should be open to all to make the comparison and arrive at a
conclusion.

This has often been done: at first sight nothing seems simpler. If we
assume that the *Gospels* give us an essentially complete account of a
formal trial before the Sanhedrin of a prisoner charged with blasphemy,
and if likewise we assume that all the details of procedure laid down in
the *Tract Sanhedrin* were in operation in the first half of the first
century, only one conclusion is open to us: our Lord's trial was no
trial at all, and his condemnation was illegal. Arguing from these
premises it is perfectly fair to sum up, as does one of the best of the
investigators along these lines, in such terms as--

"Our conclusion on the question of Hebrew law must be this: that a
process begun, continued,

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

and apparently finished, in the course of one night; commencing with
witnesses against the accused who were sought for by the judges, but
whose evidence was -not sustained even by them; continued by
interrogatories which Hebrew law does not sanction, and ending with a
demand for confession which its doctors expressly forbid; all followed,
twenty-four hours too soon, by a sentence which described a claim to be
the Fulfiller of the hopes of Israel as blasphemy--that such a process
had neither the form nor the fairness of a judicial trial." <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

Unfortunately the matter does not lend itself to such a straightforward
comparative method: the assumptions are too precarious to admit of our
reaching a valid result by their means. Neither of our documents is such
that we can use it as a standard by which to judge the other. We may
assume the historical truth of the details given in the *Gospels*, but
it is too much to assume that we are given all the details; on the other
hand, though the Hebrew sources may give us a general conception of the
conduct of a trial before the Sanhedrin, the details they give us are
such that we cannot be assured that what Jewish scholars thought to be
correct at the end of the second century was necessarily the normal
practice at the beginning of the first. An important point to remember
in this connexion is, that while the *Tract Sanhedrin* 

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

embodies the views of the *Pharisaic* Doctors of the Law regarding
criminal procedure, the earlier Sanhedrin down to 70 A.D. was largely
under the control of the *Sadducean* priesthood, whose views did not
harmonize with those of the Pharisees (see Box, art. "Who were the
Sadducees?" *Expositor*, January 1918).

In estimating the value to be attached to the contents of the tract it
should be remembered that apart from the details given us in this early
rabbinical literature our knowledge of the Sanhedrin is singularly thin.
The external evidence for testing the traditions here set forth, is, for
all practical purposes, confined to the New Testament and the writings
of Josephus. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) Both these sources are,
as written documents, earlier than the rabbinic, but it should not be
forgotten that the former is available for a period of hardly more than
thirty years, *circa* 27-60 A.D.; while the latter, though covering a
wider period, roughly 200 B.C. to 70 A.D., can be described as neither
detailed nor direct. On the basis of such evidence alone it would be
unwise to dogmatize about the nature of an institution which by the time
that the *Tract Sanhedrin* was reduced to writing, had had an existence,
necessarily far from uniform, for some five hundred years. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md)

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

On the other hand, it has to be admitted that the *Tract Sanhedrin*
possesses many deficiencies as a source of information about the
judicial procedure in the first century.

To speak of the details which it gives us as "historical" or
"unhistorical" is to assume the existence of limitations which the
compilers of these traditions never recognized; for they neither attempt
to give what we should describe as "a historical survey," nor do they
aim at presenting a picture of the Sanhedrin as it appeared at any
prescribed time. As a reaction against the humiliating circumstances
following their loss of independence, the Jews tended to idealize their
past history and institutions; and their object here is not to describe
their present conditions, but to amass whatever details they can,
concerning the former nature of the Sanhedrin. Their mentality was such
that they looked upon their institutions not as progressive, but as
inferior survivals of the past. Therefore they find no interest in
depicting the present or even the immediate past; they seek rather to
gather such material--no matter how far

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

it may be removed from recent fact--as shall portray their subject in
its more perfect shape, nearer to the ideal which in their opinion it
one time approached. The practice of the Sanhedrin of their own time
must of necessity have formed the starting-point of their researches;
but they overlaid this with whatever other matter they could discover
relating to it, either direct from tradition or from what they could, by
their peculiar logical processes, infer from Scripture. The only canon
of truth which they recognized was, that both current usage and
tradition should conform, or be explainable <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) as conforming, to the Mosaic legislation.

What New Testament students hope for, and consequently tend to expect,
in such a production as the present tract, is a picture of that highest
legislative court of the Jews as it existed in the early half of the
first century. But such an account is given to us only in a very
modified form. Much of what it tells us of the Sanhedrin must, it is
impossible to doubt, have held good for that particular time, but the
picture, as a whole, suffers from a double distortion.

I.--On the one hand the account is largely influenced by facts and
theories as they were known and believed at the end of the second
century, when the compilers’ personal knowledge of Jewish law-courts was
confined to the groups of scholars who assembled, a Sanhedrin in name,
at Jabne or Usha, but whose authority was scarcely

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

more than that with which the piety of their fellow Jews chose to invest
them. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) Their influence over the
religious life of the Jews was admittedly great. They busied themselves
with the interpretation of the Scriptures and preservation of their
traditions; and it was through their labours that the *Mishnah*, a
complete *corpus juris* of Judaism, was made possible. But their
functions were scarcely more than academic, and their legislation tended
to wander farther from political actuality into the regions of abstract
perfection. It is, for example, difficult to suppose that the picture
given us of the procedure of the Sanhedrin is not coloured more highly
than can ever have been the fact in practice, with what is known as the
*middath r’ḥzamim*, "the quality of mercy." One of the rabbinic canons
was that their code must show "mercy in judgement" in the highest
degree. Their judicial body was regarded as best fulfilling its
functions when it sought to act as "counsel for the defence"; if there
seemed to be no extenuating circumstances in the prisoner's favour, the
judges were to do their utmost to find some. It was even illegal for the
judges to be unanimous in passing an unfavourable verdict. A like
attitude is apparent in the fact that a verdict of acquittal can be
reached quickly, but one of conviction only as a result of most
leisurely deliberation. The prisoner must be robbed of no chance which
might in any way

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

tell in his favour. This particular standpoint receives its strongest
expression in *Makkoth* I. 10 "The Sanhedrin which condemns to death one
man in seven years is accounted murderous. According to R. Eleazar b.
Azaria, it would be a murderous court even if it condemned one man in
seventy years. R. Tarphon and R. Akiba assert that if they had been in
the Sanhedrin \[*i.e.* when it possessed capital powers\] no man would
ever have been condemned to death by it."

II.--The other factor which makes for unreality is the rabbinic writers’
desire to attain a theoretical completeness. This is usually perceptible
and can easily be discounted. They saw in the Sanhedrin an institution
which, they held, had existed from the time when Moses appointed the
Seventy Elders, and had since exercised an authority little less than
supreme. And so it comes about that the tract finds it necessary to
discuss what were the relations of the Sanhedrin to kings and
high-priests, <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) what part they can
take in the court's deliberations and how far they are subject to its
rulings. It even insists that the Sanhedrin shall have a veto in matters
of foreign policy. The whole of the Mosaic legislation involving capital
punishments, however temporary it may have been or however
impracticable, <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md) is tabulated and
systematized, and the method of procedure fully discussed. The outcome

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

is a penal code which one suspects to be at times nothing more than the
laborious product of students with more knowledge of the minutiae of
vocabulary <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) than recognition of
practical needs, or even of prosaic possibility.

The result of all this is, that we are given a body of genuine historic
tradition about the Sanhedrin, difficult to ascertain precisely, largely
influenced by what the court *was* at the end of the second century, and
by an ideal view of what it *night* have been when the Jewish state was
at the height of its power.

### TEXT AND SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

The text of the Mishnah from which the following translation is made, is
that of the Cambridge University Library Manuscript, Add. 470, 1, as
given in the edition by W. H. Lowe: *The Mishnah on which the
Palestinian Talmud Rests*. Cambridge, 1883 (referred to in the notes as
"*C*"). The more important variants in the Bomberg text (the *editio
princeps* of *Talmud Babli*, the basis of the *Mishnaioth* printed
texts) are indicated in the notes, and where necessary *C* is emended on
the basis of the *editio princeps* of the *Mishnah*, Naples 1492,
(referred to as "*N*"). Occasional use is also made of readings in
*Talmud Yerushalmi*, ed. Venice

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1523 ("*P*"), the
*Mishnah Codex De Rossi*, no. 138, Parma ("*R*''), and Kauffmann's *MS.
of Mishnah* in the Budapest Academy ("*K*").

The *Tosefta* translation is based on Zuckermandel's text, Passewalk and
Treves, 1877-82.

Commentaries on the text of Sanhedrin:--

Krauss (Samuel): *The Mishnah Treatise Sanhedrin, edited with an
introduction, notes and glossary*. Leiden, 1909.  
Gives the text of the 1492 Naples edition, with useful critical
apparatus.

Strack (H. L.): *Sanhedrin-Makkoth, die Mishnatraktate über Strafrecht
und Gerichtsverfahren, nach Handschriften und alten Drucken
herausgegeben, übersetzt und erläutert*. Leipzig, 1910.

Goldschmidt (Lazarus): *Der Babylonische Talmud, herausgegeben nach der
ersten Zensurfreien Bombergischen Ausgabe* (*Venedig* 1520-23) . . .
*und wortgetreu übersetzt und mit kurzen Anmerkungen versehen*.
Siebenter Band, Berlin, 1903.

Hölscher (Gustav): *Die Mischna-tractate* "*Sanhedrin*" *und*
"*Makkoth*" *ins Deutsche übersetzt . . . mit Anmerkungen versehen*.
Tübingen, 1910.

English translations:--

Barclay (Joseph): *The Talmud*, London, 1878 \[pp. 176-203\].  
Contains translation of seventeen of the *Mishnah* tracts.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

Rodkinson (M. L.): New edition of the Babylonian Talmud . . . translated
into English. Vol. 8. New York, 1902.  
Contains translations of *Mishnah* and *Gemara*. Disfigured by
occasional arbitrary omissions.

For the bearing of the tract on the trial of our Lord, see--

Husband (R. N.): *The Prosecution of Jesus, its date, history and
legality*. Oxford Press, 1916.  
Innes (A. T.): *The Trial of Jesus Christ: a legal monograph*.
Edinburgh, 1899.

A discussion of the question whether the Jews, under the Romans, were
empowered to inflict the death penalty is to be found in--

Liberty (Stephen): *The Political Relations of Christ's Ministry*,
Oxford, 1916.

Of less value is

Rosadi (Giovanni): Il Processo de Gesu. Florence, 1904.  
\[English translation, London, 1905.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](tsa01.htm#fr_0.md) On the general questions
introductory to the study of Jewish literature, see the (forthcoming)
volume in this series: *A Short Survey of the Literature of Rabbinical
Judaism*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[v:2](tsa01.htm#fr_1.md) It is hardly necessary to
say that the arrangement of alternate paragraphs of *Mishnah* and
*Tosefta* employed in the present translation is not that found in the
original texts. The two are quite distinct. It is adopted here in order
to keep together the subjects treated of, and to illustrate the relation
which exists between the two works. The sequence of subjects in
*Mishnah* and *Tosefta* being identical, this arrangement can be carried
out without changing the original order in any way.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[vi:1](tsa01.htm#fr_2.md) The relation which the
*Tosefta* hears to the *Mishnah* has never been satisfactorily
determined. That the relation is very close is clear: the sequence of
subjects in the two is identical, and the verbal similarity in certain
cases extends over complete paragraphs. It is equally noteworthy that
where the one gives scanty details, the other is generally diffuse,
pointing to a conclusion that the one is complementary, or even a
commentary on the other. The fragmentary style, inequality of treatment,
frequent lacunae, and what would be obscurity it we lacked the *Mishnah*
text, are conclusive against the possibility of the *Tosefta* being a
separate, self-sufficient study of the same subject.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:1](tsa01.htm#fr_3.md) Compare especially *T*.
vii. 8 f.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[viii:2](tsa01.htm#fr_4.md) It is probable that the
second of these sections is a late comer into the tract. Both in its
treatment and in its subject-matter it is out of place in its present
context: it is difficult to see what logical connection it can have
either with what follows or goes before. As a result of its present
position it separates the phrase, "The members of a beguiled city" (*M*.
x. 4), a whole chapter from its necessary antecedent (*M*. ix. r b); and
in most editions of the text has induced the wrong reading, "The men of
a beguiled city have no share in the world to come," in the attempt to
find the missing antecedent. Further, in the *Mishnah* of the Babylonian
Talmud its position is different: there, the two final chapters of the
tract have their order reversed.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[ix:1](tsa01.htm#fr_5.md) See the bibliography in
Husband's *Prosecution of Jesus*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[x:1](tsa01.htm#fr_6.md) A. Taylor Innes, *The Trial
of Jesus Christ: a legal monograph*, pp. 58 ff.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xi:1](tsa01.htm#fr_7.md) A few points may be
gleaned from the apocryphal books, and some hazardous conclusions,
little removed from guess-work, may be derived from a study of the
courts of law which the Chronicler describes; see 2 Chron. xix. 5-11; 1
Macc. vii. 33; xi. 23; xii. 6, 35; xiii. 36; xiv. 28; 2 Macc. i. 10; iv.
44; Judith iv. 8; xi. 14; xv. 8.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xi:2](tsa01.htm#fr_8.md) It is not possible in such
a brief introduction as the present to deal with the origin and
development of the Sanhedrin; most of what is known, adduced, or
guessed, may be found in Schürer, <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>
*History of the Jewish People*, II. i. 163. ff.; Bacher on "Sanhedrin,"
in Hastings' *Dictionary of the Bible;* and Thomson on "Sanhedrin," in
Hastings' *Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels;* there, also, will be
found discussed the problems arising out of the differences which are so
conspicuous between the Greek and Jewish sources. For the theory which
seeks to solve these difficulties by the hypothesis that there were
*two* Sanhedrins existing at the same time, one dealing exclusively with
secular matters (that described in N. T. and Josephus), and the other
with the religious side of the Jewish life (with which alone the Jewish
sources are alleged to concern themselves), see Büchler, *Das Synhedrium
in Jerusalem*, Vienna, 1902; Lauterbach on "Sanhedrin," in *Jewish
Encyclopedia;* and, opposing the theory, G. A. Smith, *Jerusalem*, vol.
i. pp. 421 ff.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiii:1](tsa01.htm#fr_9.md) For an extreme instance
of this see *M*. i. 6 (7: iii. 7) on the Lesser Sanhedrin.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiv:1](tsa01.htm#fr_10.md) But see Origen,
*Epistola ad Africanum*, 14, where it is alleged that the Presidents of
these courts assumed to themselves powers of life and death. For
possible recognition by the Romans, cf. Josephus, *Ant*. XIV. x. 57.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xv:1](tsa01.htm#fr_11.md) The tract never
recognizes that the high-priest was the regular President of the
Sanhedrin as we are led to believe from the non-Hebrew sources.
According to T. iv. 1 (which here contradicts the *Mishnah*, ii. 1) he
may not even be a member of the court.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xv:2](tsa01.htm#fr_12.md) That certain legislation
was only of theoretical interest is recognized; see *T*. xiv. 1, xi. 6
a.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xvi:1](tsa01.htm#fr_13.md) For the way in which
the *gezera shawa* rule of interpretation (see [p.
72](tsa11.htm#page_72), n. [6](tsa11.htm#fn_237).md) was utilized to
determine which death should be applied to criminals when Scripture does
not enjoin the particular method, see *Jewish Encyclopedia*, art.
"Capital Punishment." Should this rule fail to apply, the criminal is to
die by the non-biblical penalty of strangulation. See. [p.
95](tsa17.htm#page_95), n. [3](tsa17.htm#fn_292.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synopsis of Contents](tsa02.md)
