[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa07)  [Next](tsa09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Duties and Restrictions relating to the King.

**M**. II. 2. The king can neither judge nor be judged, he may not bear
witness nor be witnessed against. He may not perform the *ḥaliṣa*
ceremony nor may it be performed in the case of his wife. He may not
marry his deceased brother's wife, if she be childless, nor may any of
his brothers marry his widow. R. Jehuda said: If he were willing to
perform the *ḥaliṣa* ceremony or to marry his deceased brother's wife,
it would be remembered to his credit. It was answered: If he were
willing he should not be listened to. No one may marry his widow. But R.
Jehuda holds that a king may marry a king's widow, since it is written:
AND I WILL GIVE THEE THY MASTER'S HOUSE, AND THY MASTER'S WIVES INTO THY
BOSOM. <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_146)

3\. If a death occur in his family, he may not leave the palace. R.
Jehuda maintains that he may, if he wish, follow the bier, just as David
followed Abner's bier, as it is written: DAVID THE KING WENT AFTER THE
BIER. <span id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_147) But it was said in reply:
That was done only to placate the people. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_148) When they hold the funeral meal with

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>him, all the people sit round on the
ground while he sits on the couch.

4\. He may undertake an aggressive war by permission of the court of
seventy-one judges. He may force a way through (private property) and
none may check him; the king's road has no limit. When the people have
indulged in plunder they must first give it to him, and he takes his
share before others.

HE MAY NOT HAVE NUMEROUS WIVES <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_149)--only eighteen. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_150) R. Jehuda holds that he may have many
provided they do not turn aside his heart. R. Shimeon asserts: He may
not marry even one if she should turn aside his heart; else why should
it say, HE MAY NOT HAVE NUMEROUS WIVES, even though they be the like of
Abigail?

HE MAY NOT HAVE NUMEROUS HORSES--only such as suffice for his chariot.
AND SILVER AND GOLD HE MAY NOT MULTIPLY TO HIMSELF--only such as
suffices for wages. HE SHALL WRITE FOR HIMSELF A COPY OF THE LAW; when
he goes out to war it shall go with him, and when he comes in it shall
be with him. It shall be beside him when he sits in judgment, and when
he sits at meat it shall be before him, for it is written: IT SHALL BE
WITH HIM AND HE SHALL READ THEREIN ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>5. None may ride on his horse, and
none may sit on his throne, and none may wield his sceptre. He may not
be seen naked, nor when he is having his hair cut, nor when he is in the
bath; for it is written: <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_151) THOU
SHALT SURELY SET OVER THEE A KING whose fear shall be upon thee.

**T**. IV. 2. The king of Israel may not stand in the row to be
consoled, nor to console others; nor may he go to hold the funeral meal
with others, but others may go to hold the funeral meal with him, as it
is written: AND THE PEOPLE WENT TO HOLD THE FUNERAL MEAL WITH
DAVID, <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_152) etc. If he have
transgressed a positive or negative command he is treated as an ordinary
commoner in every respect.

He does not perform the *ḥaliṣa* ceremony, nor is it performed in the
case of his wife. He does not marry his deceased brother's wife if she
be childless, nor does his brother marry his wife. R. Jehuda says: If he
wish to perform the *ḥaliṣa* ceremony he may. But it was replied: A
king's honour must not receive hurt. No one may marry his widow, for it
is written: So THEY WERE SHUT UP TO THE DAY OF THEIR DEATH, LIVING IN
WIDOWHOOD. <span id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_153) He may choose for
himself wives wheresoever he please from among the priestly, Levitic,
and Israelitish families. <span id="fr_155"></span>[4](#fn_154) None may
ride on his horse, or sit on his royal chair, and none may make use of
his crown or sceptre or any of the regalia. When he dies these are all
buried with him at his burial, for it is written: <span
id="fr_156"></span>[5](#fn_155) THOU SHALT DIE IN PEACE, AND WITH THE
BURNINGS OF THY FATHERS, THE FORMER KINGS.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

3\. As are the burnings at the burial of kings, so also are the burnings
at the burial of princes, but not at the burial of commoners. What is
burnt? Their couch and other regalia.

4\. When the king is present, all the people stand, and he keeps seated.
(And none may sit in the temple courtyard except the kings of the house
of David.) And all the people maintain silence when he speaks. He used
to address them: "My brethren and my people," as it is written: <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_156) HEAR YE, MY BRETHREN AND MY PEOPLE:
while they address him: "Our lord and our master," as it is
written: <span id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_157) BUT OUR LORD DAVID THE
KING HATH MADE SOLOMON KING.

5\. HE MAY NOT HAVE NUMEROUS WIVES--Such as Jezebel; but the like of
Abigail are permitted--so R. Jehuda. HE MAY NOT HAVE NUMEROUS
HORSES--not even one horse that remains idle, for it is written: LEST HE
SHOULD MULTIPLY HORSES. R. Jehuda says, Behold it is written: <span
id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_158) AND SOLOMON HAD FORTY THOUSAND STALLS OF
HORSES, and he did well, since it is written: <span
id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_159) AND JUDAH AND ISRAEL WERE MANY AS THE
SAND THAT IS ON THE SEASHORE FOR MULTITUDE. And since it is
written: <span id="fr_161"></span>[5](#fn_160) TWELVE THOUSAND HORSEMEN,
it follows that there were some of the horses left idle.

The above prohibitions do not apply to a mere commoner. R. Jose says:
All that is ordained in the "paragraph of the king " <span
id="fr_162"></span>[6](#fn_161) is permitted. R. Jehuda says: This
chapter <span id="fr_163"></span>[7](#fn_162) was only uttered to
impress the people with fear, for it is written: THOU SHALT SURELY SET
OVER THEE A KING. <span id="fr_164"></span>[8](#fn_163)

R. Jehuda also said: Three commands were given to Israel when they
entered the land of Israel:--they were commanded to appoint a king,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

to build them a chosen temple, <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_164) and
to cut off the seed of Amalek. <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_165) If
this be so, why were they punished in the days of Samuel? Because they
did so too soon. R. Nehorai <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_166) says:
This paragraph was written in anticipation of future murmurings, for it
is written: AND THOU SHALT SAY, I WILL SET A KING OVER ME. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_167) R. Eleazar, <span
id="fr_169"></span>[5](#fn_168) the son of R. Jose, says: The elders
asked according to the Law, as it is written: GIVE US A KING TO JUDGE
US; <span id="fr_170"></span>[6](#fn_169) but the common people went and
dealt corruptly, as it is written: THAT WE ALSO MAY BE LIKE ALL THE
NATIONS, AND OUR KING SHALL JUDGE US AND GO BEFORE US TO FIGHT OUR
BATTLES. <span id="fr_171"></span>[7](#fn_170)

6\. The property of those put to death by the court goes to their heirs,
while that of those put to death by the king belongs to the king. But
the majority hold that the property of those put to death by the king
goes to their heirs. R. Jehuda said to them, It is written: BEHOLD HE
(AHAB) IS IN THE VINEYARD OF NABOTH WHITHER HE IS GONE DOWN TO POSSESS
IT. <span id="fr_172"></span>[8](#fn_171) They replied: Since he was the
son of his father's brother, <span id="fr_173"></span>[9](#fn_172) it
was right for him to inherit. Said R. Jehuda, But had Naboth no

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

sons? They replied: Did not the king kill both him and his sons? as it
is written: SURELY I HAVE SEEN YESTERDAY THE BLOOD OF NABOTH, AND THE
BLOOD OF HIS SONS, SAITH THE LORD; AND I WILL REQUITE THEE IN THIS PLAT,
SAITH THE LORD. <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_173)

7\. AND HE SHALL WRITE FOR HIMSELF A COPY OF THE LAW--that he be not
dependent on that of his fathers, but on his own, for it is written: HE
SHALL WRITE FOR HIMSELF--it must be written for himself only; and a
commoner may not read therein, for it is written, *HE* SHALL READ
THEREIN-the king, and no other. Also, the copy shall be revised in a
court of the priests, and in a court of the Levites, and in a court of
the Israelites who are eligible for marriage into the priestly families.
When he goes to war, it shall be with him; when he enters in, it shall
be with him; and when he goes to the court, it shall be beside him. When
he goes to the toilet chamber, it is kept ready for him by the door. And
thus David says: I HAVE SET GOD ALWAYS BEFORE ME (AND HE IS ON MY RIGHT
HAND). <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_174) R. Jehuda, says: The book
of the Law is on his right hand and the *tefillin* <span
id="fr_176"></span>[3](#fn_175) on his arm.

R Jose said: It was fitting that the Law should have been given through
Ezra even if Moses had not gone before him. A *going up* is mentioned in
the case of Moses, and a *going up* in the case of Ezra; of Moses, as it
is written: <span id="fr_177"></span>[4](#fn_176) AND MOSES WENT UP UNTO
GOD; and of Ezra, as it is written: AND HE, EZRA, WENT UP FROM
BABYLON. <span id="fr_178"></span>[5](#fn_177) As the *going up* of
Moses taught the Law to Israel (as it is written: AND THE LORD COMMANDED
ME AT THAT TIME TO TEACH YOU STATUTES AND JUDGMENTS), <span
id="fr_179"></span>[6](#fn_178) so the *going up* of Ezra taught the Law
to

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel (as it is
written: FOR EZRA HAD PREPARED HIS HEART TO EXPOUND THE LAW OF THE LORD,
AND TO DO IT AND TO TEACH IN ISRAEL STATUTES AND JUDGMENTS <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_179)).

Also a writing and language was given through him, as it is written: AND
THE WRITING OF THE LETTER WAS WRITTEN IN THE ARAMAIC CHARACTER AND
INTERPRETED IN THE ARAMAIC TONGUE <span id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_180);
as its interpretation was in Aramaic so its writing was in Aramaic. And
it is written: BUT THEY COULD NOT READ THE WRITING, NOR MAKE KNOWN TO
THE KING THE INTERPRETATION THEREOF, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_181) showing that it was not made known till
the time of Ezra. Moreover it is written: AND HE SHALL WRITE A *COPY*
(*mishneh*) OF THIS LAW, *i.e.* a Law which was at a future time to be
*changed*. <span id="fr_183"></span>[4](#fn_182)

And why is the name of the writing called *Assyrian*? Because it came up
with them from Assyria. Rabbi says: The Law was given to Israel in the
Assyrian writing, and when they sinned it was changed to *Roaṣ*; <span
id="fr_184"></span>[5](#fn_183) but when they repented in the days of
Ezra it was changed again to Assyrian, as it is written: <span
id="fr_185"></span>[6](#fn_184) TURN YE TO THE STRONGHOLD, YE PRISONERS
OF HOPE: EVEN TO-DAY DO I DECLARE THAT I WILL BRING BACK THE
*CHANGE* <span id="fr_186"></span>[7](#fn_185) UNTO YOU.

8\. R. Shimeon, <span id="fr_187"></span>[8](#fn_186) the son of
Eleazar, said in the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

name of R. Eleazar, <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187) the son of
Parta, who spoke in the name of R. Eleazar <span
id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188) of Modin: The Law was given to Israel in
the present writing, for it is written: THE HOOKS (*Hebr*. "the *waws*")
OF THE PILLARS; <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_189) that is, waws that
are like pillars. And it says: AND UNTO THE JEWS ACCORDING TO THEIR
WRITING AND LANGUAGE; <span id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_190) as their
language has not changed, so their writing has not changed.

Why is it called *Assyrian?* Because the characters of their writing
were made *upright*. <span id="fr_192"></span>[5](#fn_191)

Why is it written: AND HE SHALL WRITE FOR HIMSELF A *COPY* OF THIS LAW?
TO show that he must write *two* books of the Law: one with which he
goes in and out, and another that is placed for him within the house.
The one that goes in and out with him does not go in with him to the
bath-house or toilet chamber, for it is written: AND IT SHALL BE WITH
HIM, AND HE SHALL *READ* THEREIN ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE; *i.e.* it
shall only go with him in places where it is possible to read.

And is there not here an argument *a fortiori?* <span
id="fr_193"></span>[6](#fn_192) Since, even of the king of Israel who is
entirely engrossed with the needs of the community, it is said: AND IT
SHALL BE WITH HIM AND HE SHALL READ THEREIN ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE,
still more should the rule apply to the rest of the children of men.

9\. Similarly with Joshua: AND JOSHUA THE SON

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

OF NUN WAS FULL OF THE SPIRIT OF WISDOM; FOR MOSES HAD LAID HIS HAND
UPON HIM; <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_193) and further it says: AND
HIS MINISTER JOSHUA THE SON OF NUN, A YOUNG MAN, STIRRED NOT FROM THE
MIDST OF THE TENT. <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_194) Yet even to him
it is said: THIS BOOK OF THE LAW SHALL NOT DEPART OUT OF THY
MOUTH. <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_195) Still more should the rule
apply to the rest of the children of men.

10\. A king cannot be appointed outside the land of Israel, nor can one
be appointed unless he be eligible for marriage into the priestly
families. And kings cannot be anointed except over a spring, for it is
written: <span id="fr_197"></span>[4](#fn_196) AND HE SAID TO THEM, TAKE
WITH YOU THE SERVANTS OF YOUR LORD, AND MOUNT SOLOMON MY SON UPON MINE
OWN MULE, AND BRING HIM DOWN TO GIHON. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[5](#fn_197)

11\. Kings are only anointed when there is a dissension (as to who is
the rightful king). Why did they anoint Solomon? Because of the
dissension of Adonijah. And Jehu? Because of Joram. And Joash? Because
of Athaliah. And Jehoahaz? Because of Jehoiakim his brother, who was his
senior by two years.

A king must be anointed, but not one who is the son <span
id="fr_199"></span>[6](#fn_198) of a king. Yet a high-priest, even
though he be descended from a line of high-priests as far back as ten
generations, must be anointed.

Kings are only anointed from a horn. Saul and Jehu were anointed from a
pot, <span id="fr_200"></span>[7](#fn_199) because their kingdom was
destined to be broken. David and Solomon were anointed from a horn, for
their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[48:1](tsa08.htm#fr_147) 2 Sam. 12. 8.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[48:2](tsa08.htm#fr_148) 2 Sam. 3. 31.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[48:3](tsa08.htm#fr_149) To show that he was
not the cause of Abner's death. See 2 Sam. 3. 37.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[49:1](tsa08.htm#fr_150) Deut. 17. 17. What
follows is in the nature of a midrashic excursus on Deut. 17. 16 ff.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[49:2](tsa08.htm#fr_151) The number is derived
from 2 Sam. 12. 8, lit. "I would have added unto thee *the like of these
and the like of these*," which is taken to mean twice as many more. And
since David is already spoken of (2 Sam. 3. 2) as having six wives, the
total number permissible is therefore eighteen.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[50:1](tsa08.htm#fr_152) Deut. 17. 15.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[50:2](tsa08.htm#fr_153) 2 Sam. 3. 35.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[50:3](tsa08.htm#fr_154) 2 Sam. 20. 3.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[50:4](tsa08.htm#fr_155) Israelites of pure
descent who are eligible for marriage into priestly families. See
*Kiddushim* IV. I, 4, 5.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[50:5](tsa08.htm#fr_156) Jer. 34. 5.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[51:1](tsa08.htm#fr_157) Chron. 28. 2.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[51:2](tsa08.htm#fr_158) 1 Kings 5. 43.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[51:3](tsa08.htm#fr_159) 1 Kings 4. 26.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[51:4](tsa08.htm#fr_160) 1 Kings 4. 20.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[51:5](tsa08.htm#fr_161) 1 Kings 4. 26.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[51:6](tsa08.htm#fr_162) 1 Sam. 8. 11 ff.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[51:7](tsa08.htm#fr_163) Deut. 17. 14 ff.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[51:8](tsa08.htm#fr_164) Deut. 17. 14.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[52:1](tsa08.htm#fr_165) Deut. 12. 11.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[52:2](tsa08.htm#fr_166) Deut. 25. 19.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[52:3](tsa08.htm#fr_167) R. Nehorai was a
contemporary of R. Jose b. Halafta, and appears to have lived at
Sepphoris.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[52:4](tsa08.htm#fr_168) Deut. 17. 14.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[52:5](tsa08.htm#fr_169) One of the five sons
of R. Jose b. Halafta (see T. 2. I). He accompanied R. Shimeon b. Jochai
on his mission to Rome, which succeeded in securing the withdrawal of
the persecuting Hadrianic decrees. Though quoted in the *Tosefta*, he is
never mentioned in the *Mishnah*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[52:6](tsa08.htm#fr_170) 1 Sam. 8. 6.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[52:7](tsa08.htm#fr_171) 1 Sam. 8. 20.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[52:8](tsa08.htm#fr_172) 1 Kings 21. 18.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[52:9](tsa08.htm#fr_173) This curious statement
has no biblical basis. Although the remark appears to be accepted by R.
Jehuda it would appear to be a *petitio principii* of the crudest kind.
It is taken for granted that because Jezebel regarded the death of
Naboth as the only obstacle to Ahab's possessing the vineyard, therefore
Ahab was Naboth's nearest relation. And since it is possible to show
that he was not Naboth's brother, father, or son, he must have been his
nephew. According to B. 48 *b*, he was his cousin.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[53:1](tsa08.htm#fr_174) 2 Kings 9. 26.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[53:2](tsa08.htm#fr_175) Psalm 16. 8.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[53:3](tsa08.htm#fr_176) The phylacteries; cf.
Matt. 23. 5.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[53:4](tsa08.htm#fr_177) Exod. 19. 3.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[53:5](tsa08.htm#fr_178) Ezra 7. 6.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[53:6](tsa08.htm#fr_179) Deut. 4. 14.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[54:1](tsa08.htm#fr_180) Ezra 7. 10.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[54:2](tsa08.htm#fr_181) Ezra 4. 7,

<span id="fn_181"></span>[54:3](tsa08.htm#fr_182) Dan. 5. 8.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[54:4](tsa08.htm#fr_183) Deut. 17. 18. Playing
on the double meaning of the root *Shana*, "to repeat " and also " to
change."

<span id="fn_183"></span>[54:5](tsa08.htm#fr_184) Lit., "broken,
rugged;" is supposed to refer to the peculiar shape of the letters in
the Samaritan script. There is a variant *da’aṣ*, which might mean
"wedge-like," and so refer to the cuneiform writing. See A. E. Cowley in
*J. Th. S.* vol. XI, p. 542. What is in the text called *Assyrian
writing* clearly refers to the modern Hebrew square character.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[54:6](tsa08.htm#fr_185) Zech. 9. 12.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[54:7](tsa08.htm#fr_186) R. V. "double;" the
same word-play as above.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[54:8](tsa08.htm#fr_187) R. Shimeon b. Eleazar
was a pupil of R. Meir and a contemporary of Rabbi Jehuda ha-Nasi,

<span id="fn_187"></span>[55:1](tsa08.htm#fr_188) R. Eleazar b. Parta
(or Perata), although suffering imprisonment for participating in the
revolt of Bar Kokba, survived the resulting persecution.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[55:2](tsa08.htm#fr_189) R. Eleazar of Modin
(or Modaim), whose dictum he hands on, was an elder contemporary who
lost his life in the siege of Bethar.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[55:3](tsa08.htm#fr_190) Exod. 27. 10.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[55:4](tsa08.htm#fr_191) Esth. 8. 9.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[55:5](tsa08.htm#fr_192) Playing on the
assonance *ashshur*, "Assyria," and *m’ushshar*, "upright" or "square."

<span id="fn_192"></span>[55:6](tsa08.htm#fr_193) This argument *kal
we-ḥomer* (*i.e.* the inference from a *lighter* to a *heavier*
necessity) is of frequent occurrence in all rabbinical discussions.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[56:1](tsa08.htm#fr_194) Deut. 34. 9.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[56:2](tsa08.htm#fr_195) Exod. 33. 11.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[56:3](tsa08.htm#fr_196) Josh. 1. 8.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[56:4](tsa08.htm#fr_197) 1 Kings 1. 33.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[56:5](tsa08.htm#fr_198) A well-known spring
near Jerusalem; cf. 2 Chron. 32. 30.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[56:6](tsa08.htm#fr_199) Presumably the eldest
son of a king about whose succession is no possibility of dissension.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[56:7](tsa08.htm#fr_200) Or "vial." Cf. 1 Sam.
10. 1; 2 Kings 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Those who are Eligible and those who are Ineligible as Judges or
Witnesses](tsa09)
