[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa10)  [Next](tsa12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Differences in Legal Procedure distinguishing Capital from Non-Capital Cases.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>IV. i. Non-capital and capital cases
are identical with regard to examination and inquiry, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_230) as it is written; YE SHALL HAVE ONE
MANNER OF LAW. <span id="fr_233"></span>[2](#fn_231)

What is the difference between capital and non-capital cases?
Non-capital cases are tried by three, and capital by twenty-three
judges. Non-capital cases may begin either with the argument for
acquittal or the argument for conviction; while capital cases begin with
the argument for acquittal and not with the argument for conviction. In
non-capital cases the conviction or acquittal can depend on a majority
of one; in capital cases the acquittal can depend on one, but the
conviction must depend on a majority of two. In non-capital cases the
judges may change their verdict either from conviction to acquittal, or
from acquittal to conviction; but in capital cases they may change their
verdict from conviction to acquittal but not from acquittal to
conviction.

In non-capital cases they may all plead either

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span> in favour of conviction or of
acquittal; but in capital cases they may all plead in favour of
acquittal but not of conviction. In non-capital cases one who pleads in
favour of conviction may subsequently plead in favour of acquittal, and
one who pleads in favour of acquittal may subsequently plead in favour
of conviction; but in capital cases one who pleads in favour of
conviction may subsequently plead in favour of acquittal, but he who
pleads in favour of acquittal cannot change and plead in favour of
conviction.

In non-capital cases the trial may take place in daytime and the verdict
be given in the night; but in capital cases the trial takes place in
daytime and the verdict is given in daytime. In non-capital cases a
verdict of acquittal or of conviction may be reached the same day; while
in capital cases a verdict of acquittal may be reached the same day, but
a verdict of conviction not until the following day. Therefore such a
case is not tried on the eve of a Sabbath or festival.

2\. In non-capital cases, and in cases of purity and impurity, the
opinion of the eldest is asked first; in capital cases that of those
sitting at the side.

All are eligible to try non-capital cases; but capital--only priests,
Levites, and Israelites who are eligible for marriage into the priestly
families.

**T**. VII. 2 *b*. In the hallowing of the month and the intercalation
of the year, and in non-capital - cases, they vote in order of
seniority, beginning

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

with the eldest; but in capital cases they begin with those at the side,
the junior members of the court, so that their opinion shall not be
based on that of their elders. In capital cases they begin not with the
case for prosecution, but with the case for the defence, except only in
the case of a beguiler to idolatry, <span
id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_232) and, according to R. Jehoshua, the son
of Karha, the case of one who leads a town astray. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[2](#fn_233)

3\. In the case of those liable to the penalty of exile, <span
id="fr_236"></span>[3](#fn_234) the court may change a verdict of
conviction into a verdict of acquittal (but not one of acquittal into
one of conviction), for it is written: YE SHALL TAKE NO RANSOM FOR THE
LIFE OF A MAN-SLAYER WHICH IS GUILTY OF DEATH <span
id="fr_237"></span>[4](#fn_235); and also, AND THIS IS THE CASE OF THE
MANSLAYER . . . WHOSO KILLETH HIS NEIGHBOUR UNAWARES. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[5](#fn_236) Since the term *manslayer* is thus used
both of intentional and unintentional homicide, the trial of the latter
is subject to the rules for trials in capital cases. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[6](#fn_237)

4\. In the case of those liable to the penalty of scourging, the court
may change a verdict of conviction into a verdict of acquittal (but not
one of acquittal into one of conviction), for it is written: AND THEY
SHALL JUSTIFY THE RIGHTEOUS AND CONDEMN THE GUILTY . . . . AND IF THE
GUILTY MAN BE WORTHY TO BE BEATEN, <span id="fr_240"></span>[7](#fn_238)
etc. Since the term *guilty* is used both here, of the one liable to

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

scourging, and also of the murderer, this trial also is subject to the
rules of trials in capital cases.

5\. The eunuch and such as have no children are eligible to try
non-capital cases but not capital cases; and according to R. Jehuda,
they also who are biased in the direction of severity or forbearance are
subject to the same restriction.

6\. They may not argue a case afresh (after the vote has been taken),
but R. Jehuda says they may.

If there be two of whom one would prohibit and the other allow, or one
who would declare unclean and the other clean, the one who prohibits or
declares unclean must bring proof; all who tend to the harsher opinion
must bring proof. And some say that the same applies to the one who
would take a more lenient view.

They may not give their attention to a case except in the place where
they vote, nor indulge in too long a session. When a case has been
dismissed it cannot be rediscussed. Why is this? Because of the rule
that they cannot argue a case afresh.

When (in a debate) the speaker has completed his statement, he cannot
take back what he has said unless his opponent grant him the right. When
the main subject of the case has been dealt with, secondary points
become the main subject. A man may not answer his neighbour more than
three times lest his mind become confused. One argues against two, or
two against one, or two against three, or three against two; but never
three against three, or greater numbers, lest the court get into
confusion.

7\. In non-capital cases they may say "The matter is too obvious," <span
id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_239) but not in capital cases; and such a
statement can only be made by the chief judge.

They may not ask or answer questions while standing too high up, too far
away, or behind the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="margnote">T.</span>

members of the court. They may only ask relevant questions, and answer
to the point. They may not put a question on a matter which involves
more than three legal decisions.

If one member put a question while another speaks not asking a question,
attention is given to him who puts the question. If one ask for a
precedent, he must say "I ask for a precedent." If one ask a relevant
question and another ask an irrelevant question, they answer him who
puts the relevant question. If one ask an irrelevant question he must
say "My question is not relevant,"--so R. Meir; but the majority hold
that the practice of the law need not be wholly bound up with what is
relevant. <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_240)

Attention is paid to what is relevant rather than to what is not
relevant, to what is a precedent rather than to what is no precedent, to
Halaka <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_241) rather than to
Midrash, <span id="fr_244"></span>[3](#fn_242) to Midrash rather than to
Haggada, <span id="fr_245"></span>[4](#fn_243) to the argument *from
less to greater* <span id="fr_246"></span>[5](#fn_244) rather than to
Midrash, to the argument *from less to greater* rather than the argument
from analogy, <span id="fr_247"></span>[6](#fn_245) to a member of the
court rather than to a disciple, and to a disciple rather than to an
ignorant man. But when it is a case of deciding between two members of
the court, or two disciples, or two ignorant men, or two *halakoth*, or
two questions, or two answers, or two precedents, the authority for the
decision at such a point lies with the speaker <span
id="fr_248"></span>[7](#fn_246) of the court.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[70:1](tsa11.htm#fr_232) The two terms are
derived from Deut. 13. 14 (v. 15 in Hebr.). They seem to be used here
with no real difference of meaning. They refer to the investigation of
the main points, leading questions, as opposed to
cross-examination"--questions as to subsidiary details.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[70:2](tsa11.htm#fr_233) Lev. 24. 22.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[72:1](tsa11.htm#fr_234) Deut. 13. 6-11; see
*Mishnah* VII. 10*a*.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[72:2](tsa11.htm#fr_235) Deut. 13. 12 ff; see
*Mishnah* VII. 10*b*.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[72:3](tsa11.htm#fr_236) Guilty of
unintentional homicide; Numb. 35. 15.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[72:4](tsa11.htm#fr_237) Numb. 35. 31.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[72:5](tsa11.htm#fr_238) Deut. 19.4.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[72:6](tsa11.htm#fr_239) This and the following
paragraph are examples of the rabbinical argument *gezera shawa*, the
argument from analogy: *i.e.* if the force of an expression is ambiguous
in one passage, its meaning may be deduced from another where its use is
not ambiguous. The argument must often result in a fallacy when, as in
the following example, the passages cited for the analogy have nothing
in common except one particular word which has no bearing on the
conclusion.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[72:7](tsa11.htm#fr_240) Deut. 25. 1-2.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[73:1](tsa11.htm#fr_241) Lit. "become old,
stale," *i.e.* a commonplace in law unworthy of debate, or of any
further investigation.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[74:1](tsa11.htm#fr_242) That is, the Torah is
not an utterly inelastic system.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[74:2](tsa11.htm#fr_243) An actual previous
legal decision.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[74:3](tsa11.htm#fr_244) Interpretation of a
text. For the contradistinction of Halaka and Midrash, cf. Kiddushim
49*a* (end).

<span id="fn_243"></span>[74:4](tsa11.htm#fr_245) Interpretation more
edifying than exact.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[74:5](tsa11.htm#fr_246) For examples of this
*a fortiori* argument, see above, *T*. iv. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[74:6](tsa11.htm#fr_247) See previous note on
*gezera shawa*.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[74:7](tsa11.htm#fr_248) *Turg’man*, lit.
"interpreter," not used elsewhere in this connexion. Probably the
*Hakam*, "advising sage" to the court, is meant. Cf. note on R. Meir,
*Mishnah* I. 1, [p. 23](tsa03.htm#page_23), n. [9](tsa03.htm#fn_22).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arrangement of the Court, and the Method adopted for adding
to the Number of the Judges](tsa12)
