[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa11)  [Next](tsa13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### The Arrangement of the Court, and the Method adopted for adding to the Number of the Judges.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>IV. 3. The Sanhedrin sat in the form
of a semi-circle so that they might all see each other; and two judges’
clerks stood in front, one on the right and one on the left, taking down
the evidence for the prosecution and the defence. R. Jehuda holds that
there were three: one taking down evidence for the prosecution, the
second for the defence, and the third taking down both. Before them sat
three rows of disciples, each knowing his own place. If it became
necessary to appoint another judge, he was appointed from the front row,
while one from the second row took his place, and one from the third row
that of the second. And for the third row one of the assembled audience
was chosen. He did not sit in the place just vacated, but in a place for
which he was suited.

**T**. VII. 8. When the "Prince" <span id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_247.md)
enters, all the people stand, and do not sit until he bids them do so.
When the "father of the court" <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_247.md)
enters, they stand up on either side to make a passage for him, until he
has come in and taken his place. When a member of the court enters, one
after another stands up to make room for him until he has come in and
taken his place. When the services of the children and disciples of the
members of the court are required,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

they pass over the heads of the assembled people. And although they say
that it is not praiseworthy in a disciple of the wise to come in late,
he may yet go out if necessity demand it, and come in again and take his
place.

9\. The children and disciples of the members of the court, if they can
understand the proceedings, turn their faces to their fathers; if not,
they turn their faces towards the assembled people. R. Eleazar, the son
of R. Zadok, says: "Also at a feast, children are placed by the side of
their fathers."

10\. When a member of the court comes in, his opinion is not asked until
he has had time to make up his mind. Similarly a disciple should not be
asked his opinion as soon as he comes in. If, on his entering, he finds
the court occupied in some legal discussion, he may not break in upon
their talk until he has sat down and discovered what is the subject with
which they are occupied. If he should do so, it is of such a one that it
is said: "There are seven marks of the clod, and seven of the wise
man," <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_248.md) etc.

11\. Seven rules of interpretation did the elder Hillel <span
id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_249.md) expound before the elders of Bethyra:
the argument *a fortiori*, the analogy of expressions, the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

generalization from one instance, the generalization from two instances,
universal and particular terms, analogy drawn from another passage, and
the conclusion to be drawn from the context. These seven rules did the
elder Hillel expound before the elders of Bethyra.

VIII\. 1. Every Sanhedrin in which are two members competent to speak,
and all to comprehend, is worthy of being a Sanhedrin. If there are
three, it is an average assembly; if four, a wise one.

The Sanhedrin was arranged in the form of a semicircle, so that they
might all see each other. The Prince sat in the middle with the elders
on his right and left. R. Eleazar, the son of Zadok, said: "When Rabban
Gamaliel <span id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_250.md) sat in Jabne, my father
and another sat on his right, and the other elders on his left." And why
does one sit in accordance with age on the right? Because of the
reverence due to age.

2\. There were three rows of disciples sitting in front of them: the
most important first, the second in importance next, and the third in
the last row. After this there was no fixed order, except that each
should be placed four cubits away from his fellow.

The officers of the court, the defendant, the witnesses and their
refuters, and the refuters of their refuters, used to stand within the
front row, near the people. And it was always easy to know which was the
defendant, since he was always stationed next to the chief witness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[75:1](tsa12.htm#fr_250.md) Except for the
isolated passage, Hagiga 2. 2, there is no mention in the *Mishnah* of
these two, the Nasi and *Ab beth din*. They probably did not exist till
the Jabne period, *i.e.* after the destruction of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[76:1](tsa12.htm#fr_251.md) *Pirke Aboth*, V. 10.
The quotation continues: "The wise man speaks not before one who is
greater than he in wisdom, and does not interrupt the words of his
companion."

<span id="fn_249"></span>[76:2](tsa12.htm#fr_252.md) The great Jewish
teacher of the period immediately preceding the birth of Jesus, and the
first of the great family which included the two Gamaliels. His life is
estimated to have covered the period 70 B.C. to 10 A.D. He was a pupil
of Shemaiah and Abtalion, and with Shammai formed the fifth of the
*Zugoth*. (See *Pirke Aboth*, I. 1 ff.) Nothing definite is known of the
Elders (or Sons) of Bethyra who are here spoken of in the text. They
appear to have been a body of teachers who were overshadowed by Hillel's
greater learning, and who, as a result, ceded their position of
leadership to him. The exposition of his "seven rules of interpretation"
seems to have constituted part of his armoury in this conflict. His
seven rules were afterwards increased to thirteen by R, Ishmael b.
Shamua at the end of the first century A.D. (See Singer, *Authorised
Daily Jewish Prayer Book*, p. 13.)

<span id="fn_250"></span>[77:1](tsa12.htm#fr_253.md) Rabban Gamaliel (the
Second), was grandson of the Gamaliel referred to in Acts v. 34. He
succeeded Jochanan b. Zakkai as President of the Jabne Sanhedrin, and
aimed at a policy of interpretation which should reconcile the opposing
Schools of Hillel and Shammai. He was a powerful influence in the
community which centred at Jabne, and seems to have been the first to
whom the title *Nasi*, "Prince," was applied. He died shortly before the
revolt of 135 A.D.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Method of admonishing Witnesses in Capital Cases](tsa13.md)
