[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa15)  [Next](tsa17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Hanging and Ultimate Disposal of the Corpse.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>VI. 4*b*. Every one stoned is to be
hanged,--so R. Eleazar; but the majority hold that only blasphemers and
idolaters are to be hanged. A

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>man is hanged with his face to the
people, and a woman with her face to the gallows,--so R. Eleazar. But
the majority hold that a man is to be hanged, but not a woman. R.
Eleazar replied, "Did not Shimeon, the son of Shatah, hang women in
Ashkelon?" They answered, "He hanged eighty women, whereas two cases
must not be judged in one day." <span id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_279.md)

How was a man hanged? A beam was fixed in the ground with a cross-piece;
the corpse's hands were fastened together, and it was so hanged.
According to R. Jose the beam leaned against a wall, the corpse being
suspended on it after the manner adopted by butchers. It was then taken
down immediately, for if it remain, a negative command is broken, since
it is written: <span id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_280.md) HIS CORPSE SHALL
NOT REMAIN ON THE TREE, BUT MUST BE BURIED THE SAME DAY; FOR THAT WHICH
IS HANGED IS A CURSE OF GOD, <span id="fr_284"></span>[3](#fn_281.md)--as
if to say, "Why is this one hanged? Because he cursed the Name, and the
Name of Heaven was found defiled."

5*a*. R. Meir said: When men are in trouble, what says the tongue? I am
pained in my head, I am pained in my arm. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[4](#fn_282.md) If Scripture speak thus,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> "I am troubled at the blood of the wicked," how much
more at the blood of the righteous which is shed?

**T**. IX. 6*b*. Also, when a man is hanged, at the moment when one is
tying him up, another is loosening the knot, in order to carry out what
the law of hanging demands.

7\. R. Meir said: What means the Scripture: FOR THAT WHICH IS HANGED IS
A CURSE OF GOD? It is as though there were two brothers, twins, who were
like one another in appearance; one became king of the world, while the
other went off and consorted with thieves. After a time the latter was
captured and crucified on a cross, and all who came and went said, "It
is like as though the king were crucified." Therefore it is said: FOR
THAT WHICH IS HANGED IS A CURSE OF GOD.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>VI. 5*b*. Furthermore, any one who
allows the dead to remain overnight transgresses a negative command; but
if it has been allowed to remain for purposes of honour, to bring
wrappings or a coffin, there is no transgression. Criminals were not
buried in their fathers’ burying places; but two burying places were
prepared by the court: one for the stoned and burnt, and one for the
decapitated and strangled. 6. When the flesh had been consumed, the
bones were gathered and buried in their proper place. The kinsfolk came
and saluted the witnesses and the judges, to show that they bore no
ill-will, since the trial was just. They did not make (open)
lamentation <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_283.md) for the criminal: they
mourned, but only in their own heart.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

**T**. IX. 8. The sword with which a man is beheaded, the wrap with
which he is strangled, the stone with which he is stoned, and the beam
on which he is hanged, were immersed for purification and not buried
with him. When the flesh was consumed, the messengers of the court used
to collect the bones and bury them in a coffin; and even if the criminal
were the king of kings <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_284.md) he could
not be buried in the burying place of his fathers, but only in that
prepared by the court. 9. Two burying places were prepared by the court:
one for the stoned and burnt, and one for the decapitated and strangled.
And so David says: GATHER NOT MY SOUL WITH THE SINNERS. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_285.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_279"></span>[91:1](tsa16.htm#fr_282.md) And having violated
one rule, the occurrence cannot be brought forward as a valid precedent
for the method of observing another rule.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[91:2](tsa16.htm#fr_283.md) Deut. 21. 23.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[91:3](tsa16.htm#fr_284.md) Such is the literal
rendering. *Mishnah* interprets as an "objective genitive" *a curse*
(*or cursing*) *against God;* while the illustrative parable in
*Tosefta* implies the interpretation *a cause of cursing against God*,
something which brings God into disrepute; man being in the image of God
must not be allowed to suffer the indignity of hanging.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[91:4](tsa16.htm#fr_285.md) So B. C
untranslatable.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[92:1](tsa16.htm#fr_286.md) The word used has
special reference to the seven days of public mourning ceremonies; cf.
*Moed Katon* 20*a*.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[93:1](tsa16.htm#fr_287.md) The Emperor himself.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[93:2](tsa16.htm#fr_288.md) Psalm 26. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The other Forms of Death Penalty: Burning, Decapitation, and
Strangulation](tsa17.md)
