[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsa34)  [Next](tsa36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Sanhedrin*, Herbert Danby tr. \[1919\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (1) The Murderer.

A murderer who has struck his neighbour with iron or stone, or held him
down in fire or water so that he could not rise, and he die, is guilty.
If he pushed him in water or fire so that he could rise, yet he die, he
is innocent. If he incited a dog or snake against the victim, he is
innocent. If the snake bit him, R. Jehuda would convict, but the
majority acquit.

A murderer who has struck his neighbour with a stone, or with his fist,
so that he was expected to die yet afterwards improved, and then grew
worse and died, is guilty. R. Nehemia would acquit, since the death may
be attributable to other causes.

**T**. XII. 3. R. Shimeon, <span id="fr_377"></span>[3](#fn_373) the
Temanite, says: "As *the fist* <span id="fr_378"></span>[4](#fn_374)
with which a murder is alleged to have been committed is such a thing as
is known to the judges and witnesses (as being able to produce death),
so *the stone* <span id="fr_379"></span>[5](#fn_375) (with which a
murder is alleged to have been committed) ought to be subject to
examination by the judges and witnesses, unless the stone be lost." R.
Akiba said to him: "Supposing that

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="margnote">**T**.</span>

even the stone were not lost, and it or the weapon be hung up in the
court, would the judges know whether the defendant struck the victim on
the leg or on 'the bird of life'? <span id="fr_380"></span>[1](#fn_376)
Or suppose the victim had been pushed from the top of a tower and he
die, could we say, 'Let the tower come to the court'? And even if thou
say, 'Let the court go and see the tower,' suppose that it have fallen
in the meantime, could we say, 'Let the builders come and build it up
again'? In that case what reason would there be to trust in witnesses at
all? Therefore, even in capital cases, dependence must be placed on the
word of the witnesses."

4*a*. If the stone be mingled with other objects, they decide which of
them are harmless; if there be sufficient (stone) to cause death the
culprit is guilty, if not he is free. If the missile be such that if it
falls into fire it is burnt up, or if into water it dissolves, he is
free.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>IX. 2. The following are innocent:
one who intended to kill a beast but killed a man; or a foreigner but
killed an Israelite; or a miscarriage but killed a mature birth; one who
intended to strike some one on the loins such that a blow on the loins
would not kill, but reached the heart in such a way that a blow on the
heart would be fatal, and the victim die; or one who intended to strike
some one on the heart in such a way that on the heart it would be fatal,
but struck him on the loins where it would not be fatal, and yet the
victim die; or one who intended to strike an adult with a blow which
would not be fatal to an adult but it fell on a child, being such that
it would be fatal to a child,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>and the child die; or one who
intended to strike a child with a blow which to a child would be fatal
but it fell on an adult, being such as would not be fatal to an adult,
and yet the adult die--such a one is innocent.

If one intended to strike a person on the loins with a blow such as
would there be fatal, and it fall on his heart, and he die; or intended
to strike an adult with a blow such as to him would be fatal and it fall
on a child, and the child die--he is guilty. R. Shimeon holds that even
if he intend to kill one man and kill another he is innocent.

T. XII. 4*b*. If he intended to strike one person and he struck another,
R. Jehuda convicts, whereas R. Shimeon acquits. But R. Jehuda admits
that if he intended to kill a beast but killed a man; or a foreigner but
killed an Israelite; or a miscarriage but killed a mature birth,---he is
innocent.

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>IX. 3. If one murderer is associated
with others they are all free from penalty. R. Jehuda maintains that
they are all put together in prison. If a number of offenders are all
liable to death, and are associated together, they are to be condemned
to the more lenient death; e.g. those liable to stoning are to suffer
burning. R. Shimeon maintained that they should be condemned to stoning,
since burning is the severer death. But the majority held that he should
be condemned to burning, since stoning is the severer death. R. Shimeon
maintained that if burning were not the severer death it would not be
applied to a priest's daughter who had sinned; it was replied, that if
stoning

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>were not the severer death it would
not be applied to blasphemy and idolatry. Further, decapitation is
relaxed to strangling; R. Shimeon favoured the sword, but the majority
strangling.

**T**. XII. 5. They who are condemned for crimes punishable by severe
deaths, and at the same time for crimes punishable by easier deaths, are
to be killed by the easier. R. Jose says strangling is the easiest
death. R. Jose said, further, the culprit is condemned for the first
crime of which he was guilty. Thus, if a man has had criminal connexion
with his mother-in-law, who was likewise a man's wife, if she was in the
first instance his mother-in-law and later became a man's wife, he is
condemned to burning. If she was in the first instance a man's wife and
later became his mother-in-law, he is condemned to strangling.

<span class="margnote">**M**</span>. IX. 4. If a man become liable in
the court to two death-penalties, he should be condemned to the severer
one. If a man commit a transgression for which there are two kinds of
death-penalty, he should be condemned to the severer one. R. Jose holds
that he should be condemned to the first obligation to which he becomes
liable.

**T**. XII. 6. If a man commit a transgression for which there are two
kinds of death-penalty, he should be condemned to the severer one. In
the case of any one condemned to death-penalties enjoined in the Law, if
thou canst not put him to death by a severer means, put him to death by
any means, be it severe or easy, for it is written: AND THOU SHALT
EXTERMINATE THE EVIL FROM THY MIDST. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[1](#fn_377)

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>IX. 5. If a man has been scourged,
and then scourged a second time in the court, he is taken

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="margnote">**M**.</span>to prison and fed with barley till
his belly bursts. If a man has committed murder, and there be no
witnesses, he is taken to prison and fed with the BREAD OF ANGUISH AND
WATER OF AFFLICTION. <span id="fr_382"></span>[1](#fn_378)

**T**. XII. 7. If a man about to commit a crime be warned and he keep
silent, or if, when he is warned, he shake his head, they are to warn
him a first time and a second time, and the third time to take him to
prison. Abba Shaul says: He is warned a third time; and on the fourth is
taken to prison and fed with BREAD OF ANGUISH AND WATER OF AFFLICTION.
In the same way, they who have been found guilty and condemned to
scourging, and have repeated the offence and been scourged a second
time, on the third occasion are to be taken to prison. Abba Shaul says:
They are scourged a third time, and on the fourth occasion they are
taken to prison and fed with barley till their belly bursts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[115:3](tsa35.htm#fr_377) R. Shimeon, the
Temanite, was one of the second generation of the *Tannaim*, *c*. 120
A.D.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[115:4](tsa35.htm#fr_378) Exod. 21. 18.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[115:5](tsa35.htm#fr_379) Numb. 35. 17.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[116:1](tsa35.htm#fr_380) A euphemism; unless,
as in the following section of the *Mishnah*, the heart is meant.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[118:1](tsa35.htm#fr_381) Deut. 17. 7.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[119:1](tsa35.htm#fr_382) Isa. 30. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irregular Justice](tsa36)
