<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpu16)  [Next](gpu18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16PNW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Garuda Purana*, by Ernest Wood and S.V. Subrahmanyam, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### CHAPTER XV.

#### An Account of the Coming to Birth of People who have done Good.

1-2. Garuḍa said: The righteous man having enjoyed heaven, is born in a
stainless family. Now tell me how he is produced in the womb of the
mother.

I wish to hear what, in this body, the man of good deeds thinks. Tell
me, O Treasure-house of Compassion!

3-4. The Blessed. Lord said: You have asked well, O Tārkṣya. I will tell
you that supreme secret, even by knowing which one becomes all-knowing.

I will tell you the real nature of that body which possesses the
attributes of the universal Egg,--the object of concentration of Yogins.

5-6. Hear how the Yogins perform the meditation upon the six
chakras <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_155) within it, and likewise
meditation upon the nature of Chit and Ānanda in the Brahmarandhra,

And how he of good deeds is born in the house of the pure and
prosperous. I will tell you also about the rites and observances of the
parents.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

7-10. After menstruation the women should be avoided for four days.
Their face should not be seen during that time, lest sin should arise in
the body.

Having bathed, and washed her clothes, a woman becomes pure on the
fourth day. From the seventh day she becomes fit to perform the rites of
worship to the forefathers and the Shining Ones.

During the seven days the embryo continues impure. Here the sons
gradually enter during the eighth day.

Sons are born on even nights, daughters on odd. Keeping away from, her
during the first seven days, on even nights he enters.

11-12. Sixteen nights are declared to be common for women. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_156) On the fourteenth night the seed remains
there certainly.

Then is produced the righteous son, a store of auspicious qualities.
That night is never obtained by vulgar people.

13\. On the firth. day women should eat sweet foods. Pungent, acid,
astringent and hot things should be entirely avoided.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

14-18. The husband, like a husbandman, having sown the seed of great
potentiality in the field which is productive of grain, reaps a good
harvest.

The man, having chewed betel, <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_157) put
on flowers and sandal-paste, and clean clothes, and with righteous
thoughts in his mind, should unite with his good wife.

According to the thoughts in his mind at the time of union will be the
nature of the one who enters the womb.

The intelligence joined with the seed remains always in the sperm, When
desire, thought and sperm become united,

Then the man obtains semen, and in the interior of the womb the
formation of ovum takes place, by the union of sperm and germ \[cells\]

19\. The good son who enters the womb is the giver of the highest bliss.
For him there are numerous rites, such as the Punsavana. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_158)

20-23. The meritorious soul obtains birth in a high family. At the time
of his birth Brāhmiṇs receive much wealth.

He grows up in his parents' house, endowed with learning and modesty,
becoming skilful in all the sciences, by association with the wise.

In his youth he is divinely handsome, wealthy and benevolent, arising as
the result of great merit, austerities, and pilgrimages to sacred
waters, formerly done.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Then he constantly strives to discriminate between the self and the
not-self. By adhyāropa <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_159) and
apavāda <span id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_160) he meditates upon Brāhmaṇ.

24\. For the understanding of the dissociation of Brāhmaṇ from that with
which he is associated, I will tell you the attributes of earth and the
others, which are of the genus "Not-self."

25-30. Earth, water, fire, air and ether--these are called the stable
elements. This body is made up of the five elements.

Skin, bones, nerves, hair and flesh,--these are the five attributes of
earth, O Lord of birds, declared to you by me.

Saliva, urine, sperm, marrow, and blood, the fifth,--are said to be the
five attributes of water. Now hear those of fire:--

Hunger, thirst, sloth, sleep and sexual desire--are called the five
attributes of fire by Yogins everywhere, O Tārkṣya.

Bending, running, jumping, stretching and moving,--these are declared
the five attributes of air.

Speech, thought, vacuity, delusion and mental instability--the five
attributes of ether, may be understood by you with effort.

31\. Mind, reason, individualisation, analysis--these four are called
the Internal Means, and have the flavour of past karma.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

32\. Ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose are the sense organs. The organs
of speech, hands, feet, the organs of generation and of excretion are
the organs of action.

33\. Dik, Vāta, Arka, Prachetas, the two Aśvins, Vahni, Indra, Upeudra,
Mitra, are declared to be the duties of the organs of sense and action,

34-35. Iḍā, <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_161) Pingalā, <span
id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_162) Suṣumnā, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[3](#fn_163) thirdly, and also Gāndhārī, <span
id="fr_167"></span>[4](#fn_164) Gajajihva, <span
id="fr_168"></span>[5](#fn_165) Pūṣā, <span
id="fr_169"></span>[6](#fn_166) Yaśasvinī, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[7](#fn_167)

Alambuṣa, <span id="fr_171"></span>[8](#fn_168) and Kuhū, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[9](#fn_169) and Saṅkhinī, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[10](#fn_170) the tenth as well--are situated in the
interior of the body, and are the ten principal Naḍīs. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[11](#fn_171)

36-39. Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna, and Vyāna also,--Nāga, Kūrma,
Kṛikala, Devadatta and Dhanañjaya <span
id="fr_175"></span>[12](#fn_172):--

In the heart, Prāṇa; in the anus, Apāna; in the navel, Samāna; in the
region of the throat, Udāna; and distributed all over the body, Vyāna:

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Vomiting is called Nāga; opening and shutting the eyes is known as
Kūrma; the cause of hunger is to be known as Kṛikala; Yawning,
Devadatta;

Dhanañjaya, all-pervading, does not leave even the corpse, and carries
all over the body the nourishment which is obtained by eating mouthfuls
of food.

40-43. The air called Vyāna carries the essential part in all the Nāḍīs.
Food, as soon as eaten, is split into two by that air.

Having entered near the anus it separates the solid and liquid portions,
placing the water over the fire, and the solid over the water,

The Prāna standing under the fire, inflames it slowly. The fire,
inflamed by the air, separates the substance from the waste.

The Vyāna air makes the essence go all over, and the waste, forced
through the twelve gateways, is ejected from the body.

44\. Ears, eyes, nostrils, tongue, teeth, navel, nails, anus, generative
organs, head, trunk, hair--are called unclean places.

45\. Thus the airs, having [derived](errata.htm#20) their power from the
self, perform their own functions, affecting people, just as does the
rising of the sun.

46\. Now hear, O Bird, the two-fold nature of the body of man. One is
Vyāvahārika, and the second Pāramārthika.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

47-52. On the Vyāvahārika there are thirty-five millions of hairs of the
body, seven hundred thousands of hairs of the head, it is said, and
twenty nails;

There are said to be thirty-two teeth usually, O son of Vinatā; the
flesh is said to be one thousand *palās* <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_173) and blood one hundred *palās*;

Fat is ten *palās*; skin is seven *palās*, marrow is twelve *palās*; the
"great blood" is three palas;

Seed is known to be two *kuḍavas*; ovum one *kuḍava*; and bones in the
body are said to be three hundred and sixty;

The *nāḍīs*, both dense and subtle, number tens of million; bile is
fifty *palās*; phlegm is half of that;

The waste materials are not measurable, as they are constantly changing.
The body which possesses these attributes is Vyāvahārika. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_174)

53\. All the worlds, mountains, continents, oceans, suns and planets are
in the Pāramārthika <span id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_175) body.

54\. In the Pāramārthika body, there are six chakras in which are said
to be located the attributes of the egg of Brahmā.

55\. I will tell you about these, which are the objects of meditation of
Yogins. By pondering upon them one becomes the enjoyer of the nature of
Vairāja. <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_176)

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

56-59. Below the feet is called Atala; above the feet, Vitala; at the
knees know it as Sutala; at the thighs Mahātala;

At the hips, Talātala; at the secret part Rasātala; at the loins Pātāla;
these are declared to be the seven worlds:

Bhūloka, at the middle of the navel; above it the Bhuvarloka; in the
heart, Svarloka; at the throat it should be known as Maharloka;

Janaloka, in the region of the mouth; Tapolaka, at the forehead;
Satyaloka in the Brahmarandhra--these are the fourteen worlds.

60-61. Meru is situated in the triangle <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_177); Mandara is in the inverted triangle;
Kailāśa is in the right triangle; Himāchala, in the left triangle.

Niṣada is in the upper lines Gandhamādana in the lines on the right;
Ramaṇa in the lines on the left;--the seven great mountains.

62-65. Jambu is in the place of the bones; Sāka is situated in the
marrow; the Kuśa continent is situated in the flesh; the Krauncha
continent in the nerves;

The Śālmalī continent is in the skin; Gomeda, in the mass of hair;
Puṣkara, in the place of the nails;--and next the oceans:

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

In the urine the Kṣāra ocean; the Kṣīra ocean in the milk; the Sura
ocean is situated in the phlegm; in the [marrow](errata.htm#21), the
Ghṛita ocean;

The Rasa ocean in the juices; the Dadhi ocean is known to be in the ova;
the Swādu ocean in the region of the soft palate; you should know son of
Vinatā.

66-68. The sun is situated in the Nāda chakra; the moon is in the Bindu
chakra; Mars is situated, it should be known, in the eyes; Mercury is in
the heart, it is declared;

Jupiter is in the Viṣṇu-sthāna, it should be known; Venus is situated in
the seed; Saturn is in the navel; Rāhu, in the face, it is declared;

Ketu is situated in the lungs;--in the body is the circle of the
planets. In all these forms one should meditate on his own body.

69-71. Always at dawn, sitting steadily cross-legged, one should
meditate upon the six chakras, in the order of the Ajapā. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_178)

The Gāyatrī called Ajapā is the giver of liberation to the sages; by
merely thinking upon it one is released from all sin.

Listen, O Tārkṣya, and I will explain the best method of Ajapā, by doing
which the individual always gives up his separateness.

72-73. Mūlādhāra, Swādhishthāna, Maṇipūraka, Anāhatam, Viśuddhi and also
Ājñā,--are spoken of as the six chakras.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

One should meditate in order upon the chakras, at the root of the
generative organ; in the region of the pelvis; in the navel; in the
heart; in the throat; between the eyebrows; at the top of the head.

74-75. The mūlādhāra is four-petalled and resplendent, with letters from
va to sa; the Svādhiṣṭhāna resembles the sun, is six-petalled, and has
the letters from ba to la; the Maṇipūraka is red in colour and has ten
petals, from da to pha; the Anāhata is twelve-petalled, from ka to tḥa,
and is golden-coloured;

The viśuddhi lotus is sixteen-petalled, with the vowels, and has the
light of the moon; the Mātra <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_179) lotus
is two-petalled, has the letters ha and kṣa, and is red in colour; the
one at the top of the head is the most resplendent, this lotus has a
thousand petals, and is the seat of truth and bliss, ever auspicious,
light-possessing and eternal.

76\. One should meditate, in order, in the chakras, on Gaṇeṣa, on
Vidhi, <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_180) on Viṣhṇu, on Śiva, on
Jīva, on Guru, and on Parambrahmaṇ, all-pervading.

17-80. It is said by the wise that the subtle movements of the breath in
one day and night number twenty-one thousand six hundred.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

It goes out with the sound of "ha," and enters again with the sound of
"sa." The individual is, indeed, always repeating the mantra. "Haṁsa,
haṁsa,"--

Six hundred for Gaṇeśa; six thousand for Vedhas <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_181); six thousand for Hari <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_182); six thousand for Hara. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_183)

A thousand for the Jīvātman; a thousand for Guru; a thousand or the
Chidātman;--thus one should understand the respective numbers of the
repetitions.

81-82. Aruṇa and other sages, who know the succession of Teachers,
meditate upon the deities presiding over the chakras, who are rays of
Brahmaṇ.

The sages, Śuka and ethers, teach it to their pupils; therefore a wise
man, after meditating upon the path of the Great Ones, should always
meditate thus.

83\. Having worshipped mentally in all the chakras, with unwavering
mind, he should repeat the Ajapā-gāyatrī according to the instructions
of the Teacher.

84-88. He should meditate in the Ranḍhra, with the thousand-petalled
lotus inverted, upon the Blessed Teacher within the Haṁsa, whose
lotus-hand frees from fear.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

He should regard his body as being washed in the flow of nectar from His
feet. Having worshipped in the five-fold way he should prostrate,
singing His praise.

Then he should meditate on the Kuṇḍalinī, as moving upwards and
downwards, as making a tour of the six chakras, placed in
three-and-a-half coils.

Then he should meditate on the place called Suṣumnā, which goes out of
the Randhra; thereby he goes to the highest state of Viṣṇu.

Then he should always meditate, between four o'clock and sunrise, on my
form, self-illumined, eternal and ever-blissful.

89\. He should bring his mind to a state of steadiness, not by efforts
alone, but under the instruction of a teacher, without whom he falls.

90\. Having done the inward-sacrifice he should perform the
outward-sacrifice. Having done the purificatory ablution, and the
Sandhyā, he should worship Hari and Hara.

91-94. For those who are attached to the body facing-inward <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_184) does not come about. For then devotion
is easier, and that gives liberation.

Tapas, and Yoga, and others, are also ways to liberation, but for those
who are attached to the world of change the path by devotion to me is
far superior.

This is the conclusion of the all-knowing Brahma and others, after
having conned the Vedas and the Śāstras for three periods.

Sacrifices and other righteous duties purify the mind. The devotion to
me has a form of fruit from which the obtainer never falls away.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

95\. The good man who follows this, O Tārkṣya, by the union due to
devotion to me, goes to eternal liberation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[141:1](gpu17.htm#fr_158) Certain centres in
the etheric and higher bodies, which revolves like wheels when set in
motion by meditation; hence the name chakra.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[142:1](gpu17.htm#fr_159) Sixteen are
favourable, but the fourteenth of them is best, if some other cause doer
not render it inauspicious.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[143:1](gpu17.htm#fr_160) To augment the virile
power.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[143:2](gpu17.htm#fr_161) A rite performed when
living conception is observed.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[144:1](gpu17.htm#fr_162) False ascription, and
...

<span id="fn_160"></span>[144:2](gpu17.htm#fr_163) refutation, two sorts
of arguments.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[145:1](gpu17.htm#fr_164) The left hand *nāḍī*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[145:2](gpu17.htm#fr_165) The right hand one.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[145:3](gpu17.htm#fr_166) The central one.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[145:4](gpu17.htm#fr_167) This goes to the left
eye.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[145:5](gpu17.htm#fr_168) This goes to the
right eye.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[145:6](gpu17.htm#fr_169) This goes to the
right ear.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[145:7](gpu17.htm#fr_170) This goes to the left
ear.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[145:8](gpu17.htm#fr_171) This goes to the
mouth.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[145:9](gpu17.htm#fr_172) This goes to the
liṅgam.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[145:10](gpu17.htm#fr_173) This gees to the
mūla.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[145:11](gpu17.htm#fr_174) An inner nerve,
channel for the vital breath.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[145:12](gpu17.htm#fr_175) Various forms of the
vital breath.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[147:1](gpu17.htm#fr_176) Pala is a little more
than an ounce (6/5 oz.)

<span id="fn_174"></span>[147:2](gpu17.htm#fr_177) Individual and common
physical body.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[147:3](gpu17.htm#fr_178) Universal and
spiritual body.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[147:4](gpu17.htm#fr_179) Viraj means "to
shine."

<span id="fn_177"></span>[148:1](gpu17.htm#fr_180) The triangle in the
triangle. Meru is the sacred *mountain* or pakk.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[149:1](gpu17.htm#fr_181) The saying of
"Haṁsa."

<span id="fn_179"></span>[150:1](gpu17.htm#fr_182) That is, the Ājñā.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[150:2](gpu17.htm#fr_183) Brahmā.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[151:1](gpu17.htm#fr_184) Brahmā.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[151:2](gpu17.htm#fr_185) Viṣṇu.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[151:3](gpu17.htm#fr_186) Śiva.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[152:1](gpu17.htm#fr_187) Their meditation is
[unsuccessful](errata.htm#22), because they are thinking of outer
things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. An Account of the Law for Liberation](gpu18)

</div>
