[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](alp86.md) 
[Next](alp88.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Armenian Legends and Poems* \[1916\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Armenians took advantage of the weakening of the Arab power to form
independent kingdoms. One of the principal noble families during the
period of Arab dominion was that of the Bagratuni. This family was rich
and powerful and had much land in its possession. Under the Arsacidae,
the head of this family was hereditary "coronator" (*i.e.*, he had the
privilege of putting the crown on the king's head, on the occasion of a
new sovereign). During the rule of the Arabs, the command of the
Armenian army was given to this family. The Bagratuni, though extremely
courageous and patriotic, were also cautious and tactful in their
relations with the Arabs, whom they served faithfully, thus gaining the
respect of the Khalifs. As they also won the love and esteem of their
own countrymen by rebuilding and restoring what the Arabs had destroyed,
they were able to act as mediators between the Khalifs and the Armenian
people. In wars against the enemies of the Arabs, members of this family
had many successes. Once a Persian prince revolted against the Khalif
and a Persian army of 80,000 marched into Armenia. The Arabs were too
weak to make any resistance, but Ashot Bagratuni with his troops
defeated the invaders. After the victory, the Khalif of Bagdad sent a
crown to Ashot, thus making him a king, thinking, "He is so powerful
that, if I do not give him a crown, he will seize one for himself."

Thus in 885 Ashot became the first king of the Bagratuni dynasty. The
Greek emperor, Basil I., also sent a crown to Ashot, with a view to
gaining the friendship and influence of Armenia. During the dominion of
the Bagratuni, the régime of the Arsacidae was restored and the country
prospered. Ani, which was the seat of government during the greater part
of this period, though formerly it was little more than a fortress,
became one of the most flourishing cities of the time. It was full of
fine edifices--churches, palaces, museums, etc.--and was called "the
city of a thousand and one churches." Its fame even spread to foreign
lands.

There were several other noble Armenian families with ambitions. In 908
one of these--the Ardzruni family--made the lands they held into a
kingdom, called Vaspurakan, with Van as a capital city. In taking this
step they were encouraged by the Arabs, who were watching with alarm the
growing power of the Bagratuni.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

In 908 another Armenian kingdom was set up with Kars as its capital.

Ashot III., who was then the king of the Bagratuni dynasty, was quite
aware that the Arabs were encouraging the formation of small Armenian
kingdoms, but he offered no opposition, leaving his rivals alone to
serve the people each in his own way.

This Ashot was one of the greatest sovereigns of this dynasty. He was
called "Ashot the Compassionate" because of his love of the people and
his numerous charitable provisions for their benefit. It was said that
he would never dine without sending for some beggars out of the street
to share the meal with him.

The most renowned as well as the wisest and most powerful king of this
dynasty was Gagik I. (990-1020), under whom the country enjoyed its
period of greatest prosperity.

The danger of the Arabs was past, but now a new peril threatened the
East, that of the Seljukian Turks, who came from Central Asia in search
of a new country. Persia and Mesopotamia fell before them and they
entered Armenia. Several of the Armenian princes offered them stout
resistance with some success, but, fearing that this success was only
temporary, others transferred themselves and their subjects to more
secure parts of the country.

The Seljuks conquered Persia and established a Persian kingdom of their
own, but the new Persia was no longer Zoroastrian, but Mohammedan.
Armenia again became a battlefield. The Greeks also claimed the city of
Ani, and this led to many conflicts in which the Armenians made a brave
defence. The town, however, fell through treachery and the Greeks
devastated some parts of the country, treating the inhabitants no better
than the Arabs and the Seljuks had done. In order to weaken the power of
Armenia, they also made attempts to exterminate the native princes and
nobles.

About the same time, the Seljuks again invaded Armenia and completed the
desolation which the Greeks had begun. They wrought great destruction in
Ani.

The last king of the Bagratuni dynasty was unable to re-establish his
kingdom and was killed by the Greeks. His two sons and his grandson were
poisoned. So ended the race of the Bagratuni whose dynasty had lasted
160 years.

During the rule of this house, the country had a period of rest and the
energies of the people were directed to the restoration and development
of the country. The ruined monasteries and churches were rebuilt,
schools were again established; commerce, arts, and handicrafts throve.
This was a particularly flourishing time for the national architecture,
which now assumed a new character. Most of the Armenian abbeys and
churches were built during

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

this time, and as these places had always been seats of learning,
alternative erudition revived, original writing and the transcription of
manuscripts going on briskly within the convent walls. The literature of
this period is chiefly of a religious character. In it we see traces of
Arabic influence--the influence of the eighth century, when Arabic
literature was at its zenith. The chief debt of Armenian literature to
the Arabs is the introduction of rhyme, which is first found in Armenian
verse in the eleventh century.

In dealing with this period, as we are only concerned with Armenian
poetry, we must leave unmentioned the historians and other famous prose
writers.

The most remarkable Armenian poet under the Bagratuni dynasty was GRIGOR
NAREKATZI (951-1009), who has been called the Pindar of Armenia and has
also been canonised as a saint. From his pen came elegies, odes,
panegyrics, and homilies. His sacred elegies (ninety-five in number) are
elevated in style, showing Arabian influence, and very pure in
sentiment. His canticles and melodies are still chanted in the Armenian
Church. Verbosity is a characteristic of his work; in one passage the
word "God" is accompanied by ninety adjectives.

He was greatly loved and revered by the people, but he aroused jealousy
in some of his ecclesiastical colleagues. On one occasion, they went to
the Catholicos with accusations against him. The Catholicos appointed
priests to investigate the case. These priests repaired to the abbey
where Grigor Narekatzi was, arriving about dinner time on a Friday. To
their surprise they found roast pigeons on the table, and reminded
Grigor that it was fast-day, whereupon the latter said, addressing
himself to the pigeons: "If that be so, off with you!" and the roasted
birds took to themselves wings and flew away. The astonished
investigators, without going into the case, turned back and reported the
miracle to the Catholicos. Of course this is an extravagant legend, but
it shows the high estimation in which Grigor Narekatzi was held by his
contemporaries.

The greatest work of this writer and the one on which his fame rests is
*Narek*. It is divided into ninety-five chapters, and is a tragic
devotional monologue composed of poetical prayers. Here the author
reveals his heart and soul in converse with God. Hope, fear, love,
faith, repentance, entreaty, aspiration, breathe as if mingled with
tears in fine and noble lines and periods. There is a copious stream of
epithets, a flood of rhetoric, an unfailing flow of ideas. With all this
wealth of diction, this work is sincere and strikingly original, and
gives evidence of the author's high-soaring imagination. He begins with
an address to God, in which he represents himself as one of the vilest
of creatures, saying that, if all the trees in all the forests of the
world were pens and all the seas ink, they would not suffice to write
down

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

his sins, but towards even such sinfulness as this the mercy of God is
great, and the Creator is so powerful that it will be possible for Him
to bleach the sins as white as snow.

This work gives evidence that its author had, on the one hand, great
love of God and a firm faith, and on the other hand a vivid imagination
and poetic fire. All this he has worded together with great skill.

Narek is a mingling of prose and verse. It begins in prose and then
breaks into verse, then again, after continuing to some length, returns
to prose, and so on. It was printed for the first time in 1673 at
Constantinople; in all thirty editions have been published in different
places. It stands by itself, being the only long mystic work in Armenian
literature, mysticism being quite alien to the typical Armenian mind.
Even the mysticism of *Narek* and a few other works of the same period
has its own peculiarities. It is not so obscure as ordinary mysticism,
partaking, rather, of the nature of allegory. Notwithstanding its
unusual character, *Narek* was formerly regarded with veneration little
short of that accorded to the Bible itself. Within recent times
superstitious people ascribed to it miraculous medical qualities,
believing that if certain chapters were read over a patient he would be
cured. It was also believed that if any one read certain chapters--forty
in number--with concentrated attention, banishing thought of everything
else, he would have the power of controlling devils, but this it is said
is very difficult and even dangerous, because while the reading is going
on, evil spirits come and try to distract the mind of the reader,
annoying, terrifying, and even torturing him; if his attention wanders,
he may become possessed. All this shows the value and importance that
were attached to *Narek*. At the end of this work, the author states
that he finished writing it in the year 1001-2. Gregory of Narek also
wrote several songs. Some of his prayers and sharakans are used in the
church services. Another great writer of this period was Grigor
Magistros (     -1058) who produced poetry of some value. He was of
princely lineage and, unlike the Armenian authors who were his
predecessors or contemporaries, he was a layman. He gained reputation as
a linguist, a scholar, and a writer, and was one of the greatest
politicians of his time. He received the title of "duke" from the Greek
emperors Constantine and Monomachus. Early in life he gave up politics
and retired to his estate, where he devoted himself to literary
pursuits. He wrote both poetry and prose. His chief poetical work is a
long metrical narration (a thousand lines in extent) of the principal
events recorded in the Bible, from the Creation to the Resurrection of
Christ. The author states that this work was written in three days at
the request of a Mohammedan noble who wished to make acquaintance with
the Christian Scriptures and who, after reading the poem, became
converted to Christianity. Grigor Magistros was almost the first poet to
adopt the use of rhyme, introduced

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

into Armenia by the Arabs. In his work Grigor Magistros tells some
interesting stories which he has learnt from the peasants. One is the
following. The lark, fearing that heaven would fall down, lay on her
back, stretching up her feet towards the sky, thinking she would thus
prevent the catastrophe. Some laughed at her and said, "With your
spindle legs, you want to become a tree, O bird, with a mind capacious
as the sea." The lark replied, "I am doing what I can."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Crusades](alp88.md)
