[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](alp83) 
[Next](alp85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Armenian Legends and Poems* \[1916\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The most momentous event in the national life of Armenia--an event which
was the chief determining factor in the early history of the
country--was the change of religion made by the adoption of
Christianity, the foundation of which had been already laid by King
Abgarus (A.D. 3-34) and the preaching of the Apostles St. Thaddeus (A.D.
33-48) and St. Bartholomew (A.D. 49), and finally established by
Tiridates (A.D. 286-342). By this the Armenians were entirely severed
from the pagan Persians and brought into close contact with the Greeks,
whose representative was then the Emperor of Byzantium. As a result of
this religious agreement, a treaty was concluded in 319 between
Tiridates and Constantine, the first Christian Emperor of Rome, by which
the two Christian monarchs bound themselves to defend each other against
all pagans.

The adoption of Christianity meant, to the Armenians, a revolution in
their whole view of life, a severance from their ancestral beliefs,
though these beliefs have left traces in Armenian folklore which are
visible even to this day. These beliefs and the folklore arising out of
them were regarded by the Christian clergy as a poisonous flower grown
up in the fields of paganism. The historians of the period have
chronicled the efforts of the clergy to exterminate every relic of the
old faith. Temples were pulled down and churches built in their stead;
images and other monuments were broken in pieces; heathen books and
records were destroyed; pagan festivals were turned into Christian ones.
We learn from Faustus of Byzantium that laws were even made against the
use and the singing of pagan songs, but, notwithstanding this
persecution, according to Faustus and other historians, the Armenians
"languished for these songs." Even as late as the fifth century, when
there was an attempt to restore paganism in Armenia, Vasak Suni had
books of these songs copied and distributed among the people in order to
win them back to heathenism. This had the effect of rekindling hostility
against the songs, and the books were destroyed when Christianity
finally triumphed, although, as we have shown above, echoes of the songs
are to be heard as late as the eleventh century.

Gregory the Illuminator (A.D. 239-325), who converted Armenia to
Christianity, belonged

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

to the royal race of the Arsacidae. He had studied at Caesarea. He and
his family had hellenising tendencies in religion, education, and
politics. There was a section opposed to Hellenism which favoured Syrian
ideas and, in politics, inclined to Persia. At this early period of
Christianity, the Bible was read in Greek in the north-west provinces of
Armenia, while in the south-east provinces it was read in Syriac. During
this period, schools were established for the education of the young on
Christian principles. Out of the pupils in these schools about 100 were
chosen to be sent to educational centres abroad, where Greek learning
was taught. At the time when this contact of Armenians with Greek
culture took place, the ancient glories of Hellas were past, and Greek
scholars busied themselves chiefly with theological subtilties. Of
course the main object of educating the students from the Christian
schools was to indoctrinate them in religious lore and fit them for the
priesthood, but, nevertheless, the youths also brought away with them a
tincture of Greek culture, and this led to the rise of the Golden Age of
Armenian literature.

It was the aim of the Greek Empire at this time to make the Armenian
Church a branch of the Greek Church and to gain a political ascendency
over the Armenians, but the head of the Armenian Church and the leaders
of the intellectual movement were resolved on religious. and national
independence. Towards that end two important steps were taken. In 404,
the Armenian alphabet was invented, and, in 491, the Armenian Church was
separated from the Greek Church.

The Armenian language belongs to the Indo-European group. Though it has
been regarded by some as an offshoot of the Iranic branch, recent
scholars of eminence have maintained its right to rank as a distinct
branch, intermediate between the Iranic and the European. It has a very
independent character and many peculiarities of its own; it has also
great strength and flexibility. It has a great number of roots, and is
capable of expressing ideas of all kinds and denoting fine shades of
meaning. It is read from left to right like European languages. It is
rich in particles, to which circumstance its expressiveness is partly
due. It has also a treasure of dialectic words, which have the effect of
importing vigour to Armenian speech. It is not harsh in sound, as has
been alleged by some who are imperfectly acquainted with it. Its
alphabet consists of thirty-six characters, with which it is possible to
represent every variety of sound, consisting of vowels as well as
consonants; it has no vowel points, in this respect resembling the
European, and differing from most oriental, alphabets. The spelling is
almost perfectly phonetic.

The language of the period with which we are dealing was *Grabar* or
Ancient Armenian, which remained the literary language till the
beginning of the nineteenth century and is still

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the Church language, being used in all religious services. Modern
Armenian has not departed very widely from *Grabar*. During pagan times,
the Armenians had an alphabet of their own, but, on the introduction of
Christianity, it was discarded on account of its pagan origin.

The honour of being the inventor of the new Armenian alphabet belongs to
St. Mesrop (361-440), a former secretary of King Tiridates. He found
some of the ancient letters and invented others to complete the alphabet
in 404. St. Mesrop and St. Sahak (353-439) were the forerunners of the
Armenian intellectual movement, the former as the inventor of the
alphabet, the latter, together with his pupils, as the translator of the
Bible into Armenian. This translation is called "the Queen of
Translations." The language is so simple and direct, and, at the same
time, so beautiful, that there is nothing to be compared with it.

The Armenian translation of the Bible is the foundation-stone of
Armenian Christianity. Perhaps no translation of the Scriptures has ever
made so deep an impression on a people as this one has made on the
Armenians. By them it was taken as a symbolical history of their own
country. Did not the events recorded in the very first chapters happen
in Armenia? and also the second Creation after the Flood? Did not their
beloved mountain, Ararat, figure in the latter story? In the Bible they
found even the names of their national heroes, Haik and Vahagn, though,
as we have seen, for the latter names only the translators are
responsible. Other Bible stories resemble the records of Armenian
history. Moses led his tribe from the land of bondage into a land of
freedom, just as Haik did. All the stories of suffering under a foreign
yoke and of revolt against oppression have their parallels in the annals
of Armenia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[151:1](alp83.htm#fr_36) Translations of Moses
of Khorene: *Latin* (with Armenian text), Whiston (G. & G.), *London*,
1736; *Italian*, Cappelletti (G.), Venice, 1841; Tommaseo (H.), Venice,
1849-50; *German*, Lauer (M.), Regensburg, 1869; *French* (with Armenian
text), Le Vaillant de Florivel (P. E.), Paris, 1841 (2 vols.), and in
Langlois’ Collection, vol. ii.; *Russian*, M. Emin, Moscow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Golden Age of Armenian Literature](alp85)
