[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](alp91) 
[Next](alp93) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Armenian Legends and Poems* \[1916\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the last years of the eighteenth century, the Russian conquest of
Armenia began.

At the end of the eighteenth century an Armenian monk named MKHITAR
SEPASTATZI established at St. Lazare in Venice an Armenian Brotherhood,
who devoted themselves to literature. This Brotherhood is still in
existence, and has a branch in Vienna. During this period of more than a
century its members have printed hundreds of old MSS. of historical
value. They have also produced many works dealing with history and other
branches of learning, and translations of foreign classics, thus
rendering a great service to Armenian literature.

It will be remembered that Byron stayed at St. Lazare and studied
Armenian. He actually took part in the publication of an
Armenian-English dictionary and grammar.

For centuries music and song have become a joy to Armenians through
minstrels called *ashoughs*. *Ashoughs* are invited to all weddings and
other festivities, where they are the life of the party and the makers
of merriment. They sing also on the bridges and in the squares,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

and wander from courtyard to courtyard. Their song is not always merry;
it is sometimes sad, sometimes even bitter. They always carry with them
their *saz* or *tar* or *kamancha*, oriental instruments, on which they
accompany their songs. Many of the *ashoughs* are blind. To be an
*ashough* is considered a high attainment. In order to acquire the art,
any one who aspires to become an *ashough* first observes a fast of
seven weeks, then goes to the monastery of *Sourb Karapet*, which is the
Parnassus of Armenian musicians. "Sourb Karapet" is John the Baptist,
who is the patron saint of Armenian minstrels. In the Near East,
*ashoughs* (who are mostly Armenians) are greatly admired not only by
Armenians, but by Persians, Turks, and other races, as some of them sing
in other languages besides Armenian. Some *ashoughs* sing their own
verses, but as a rule the songs are the composition of a special class
of poets. The songs of these other *ashoughs* often reveal deep feelings
and many of them are high-class poems.

As a typical *ashough* author, I will only mention SAYAT NOVA. His lyre
attained extreme sweetness; he combines all the vivid colouring of the
East with soft and refined shading. He was born in 1712. He was a
special favourite at the court of the Georgian king. In his own words,
he "sat in the palace among the beauties and sang to them," but his
songs seem not merely to be poems in praise of court beauties, or for
their amusement; they seem an expression of the deep feelings of his
heart. A word-picture of his lady-love will be found on page
[74](alp53.htm#page_74) of this volume ("Thy Voice is Sweet").

His love is so intense that one sees at once that he is capable of deep
feelings and one is drawn to him; yet this love is pure and unselfish.
He describes his love as a sea and himself as a little barque floating
on it. For ten years he has wooed the lady as a prince, but without
success; he will not relinquish the pursuit of her, but resolves now for
seven years to pay court to her in the character of a pilgrim-minstrel.

He is even content only to sleep on her doorstep. There is something
else that is a part of his life, namely, his *kamancha*. He threatens to
cut the strings of his instrument if he is a week without seeing his
beloved.

Once he comes face to face with his lady-love and says:--

"What avails me now a physician? The ointment burns, and does not heal
the wound, but your medicine is a different one."

But she replies that she has no remedy for him. In another poem he is in
despair, and says:--

"Without thee, of what use is the world's wealth? I will don the habit
of a monk and visit the monasteries one by one. Perhaps in one of them I
shall discover a way of redemption

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

from my hopeless love." (See "Without Thee what are Song and Dance to
Me?" on page [85](alp61.htm#page_85) of this volume.)

In another poem he expresses the wavering between earthly and heavenly
life, saying:--

"If one obeys the will of the soul, then the body is offended. How shall
I escape this sorrow?

At last he carries out his declaration and becomes a monk. He secludes
himself from the world in a lonely monastery, far away from Tiflis; but
once he hears that a minstrel has come to that city whom none can equal,
whereupon he steals out of the monastery, disguised as a layman, and
taking his *saz* with him, goes to Tiflis, enters into contest with the
new minstrel, and conquering him, saves the honour of his native town.

In 1795 Agha Mohammed Khan laid waste Tiflis and many other towns of
that region. His soldiers entered the monastery where Sayat Nova was
praying and commanded him to come out and become a Mohammedan if he
wished to save his life; but he replied, in verse, that he was an
Armenian and would not deny his Christ. He was therefore martyred on the
spot. Other poems of his appear on pages [35](alp31.htm#page_35) ("I
have a Word I fain would say"), [14](alp17.htm#page_14) ("I beheld my
Love this Morning"), [110](alp71.htm#page_110) ("Thou art so Sweet").

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Characteristics of Armenian Poetry](alp93)
