[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](alp93) 
[Next](alp95) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Armenian Legends and Poems* \[1916\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The occupation of the Armenian provinces by Russia in 1828, with the
attendant emigration of thousands from Persia and Turkey into Russian
Armenia, strengthened the nation. National schools were soon opened,
supported by the Armenians themselves. An Armenian Academy was
established in Moscow in 1815 and a Seminary in Tiflis in 1826. Many
Armenians went to Moscow and Petrograd, and also to foreign
universities, especially to those of Germany, Switzerland, and France.
The educational revival produced a new era, and a new Armenian
literature came into being. Many Armenian newspapers and reviews were
founded and published in different places. Tiflis was the centre of the
literature and learning of Russian Armenia. A similar revival of letters
occurred in Turkish Armenia. In 1860 a national and ecclesiastical
constitution was granted to the Armenians in Turkey. For Turkish
Armenians the literary centres were Constantinople and Smyrna. In the
latter city, good work was done in translating western classics, but
Constantinople was the chief seat of Armenian culture in Turkey. Thus
Armenian literature became divided into two branches--Russian Armenian
and Turkish Armenian--each of which has its own peculiarities of
language, style, and tone. It was poetry that first burst into bloom and
reached maturity soonest. At first the motifs of the poems were mainly
national. The imagination of the poets was kindled by the past, present,
and future of Armenia, its sufferings, its national beauty, its
shortcomings. They looked forward to a national regeneration. They were
apostles of light, science, learning; and pointed out new paths of
national salvation. The result of all this was the production of some
beautiful national songs. These songs are not triumphant anthems like
those of other countries; they are songs of suffering, but with a note
of hope. Then Armenian poetry developed a truer relation with what had
been created in literature and art, and the poets looked at things in a
new way, and assumed new poetical forms. It combined poetry and
imagination with passionate feeling for life and truth. Some of the
poems of this period are of exquisite workmanship, breathing the very
spirit of the time.

As we have said, Armenian poetry of the nineteenth century is so full of
merit and of such intense interest that it would be impossible to do it
justice without writing at great length. We have already exhausted the
space at our disposal, and hope to devote a separate work to it.

Persian and Arabic poetry are things of the past, but Armenian poetry,
like the Armenian nation, has an unquenchable vitality, ever advancing
towards new horizons, and soaring to loftier heights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addenda and Corrigenda](alp95)
