[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm04)  [Next](pnm06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="dropcap">I</span>n the last half of 1509 and the first
months of 1510, Cornelius Agrippa, known in his day as a Magician,
gathered together all the Mystic lore he had obtained by the energy and
ardor of youth and compiled it into the elaborate system of Magic, in
three books, known as Occult Philosophy, the first book of which—Natural
Magic—constitutes the present volume. Agrippa published his Occult
Philosophy, with additional chapters, in 1533. The only English
translation appeared in London in 1651. It is a thoroughly edited and
revised edition of this latter work that we produce. Some translating
has been done and missing parts supplied. The reader is assured that
while we have modified some of the very broad English of the seventeenth
century, that he has a thoroughly valid work. Due care has been taken to
preserve all the quaintness of the English text as far as consistent
with plain reading. We have endeavored to do full justice to our author,
the demands of those purely mystical, and the natural conservatism of
the antiquary and collector. In this we believe we have fully succeeded.

The life of Agrippa, up to the time of writing his Occult Philosophy, is
also given, drawn mostly from Henry Morley's excellent life of Cornelius
Agrippa.

That part of the volume credited to Mr. Morley maybe designated as an
honest skeptic's contribution to Mysticism, and his chapters are
produced entire, as justice to both him and Agrippa cannot be done
otherwise, and they are an especially valuable part of Mystic
literature.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The table of the Cabala, newly compiled for this volume, will be found
to possess superior features over all others.

Following the above we give a chapter on the Empyrean Heaven, which will
explain much that our author has written. It is derived mainly from an
old occult work on "Physic."

The Symbols of the Alchemists will be found both useful and instructive.
The chapter on the Magic Mirror, which ends the work, is believed to be
the best contribution on the subject extant.

All the original illustrations and some new and selected ones will be
found, as also various etchings of characters. That one on the Empyrean
Heaven contains, we have cause to believe, some of the very hidden
knowledge relating to the Lost Word. It is a much older plate than the
work it was taken from.

Some parts of the volume will interest those who love to work out hidden
things.

The editor conveys his warmest thanks to those friends who have
encouraged him in the work—on the Cabala table, the illustration of the
Grand Solar Man and the translating—outside of which he has not asked or
received any help. This being the case our friends will please excuse
any particular thing that may not sound pleasantly to the ear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Early Life of Cornelius Agrippa](pnm06.md)
