[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm17)  [Next](pnm19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Virtues of Things Natural, Depending Immediately upon Elements</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Of</span> the natural virtues of things, some
are Elementary, as to heat, to cool, to moisten, to dry; and they are
called operations, or first qualities; and the second act: for these
qualities only do wholly change the whole substance, which none of the
other qualities can do. And some are in things compounded of Elements,
and these are more than first qualities, and such are those that are
maturating, digesting, resolving, mollifying, hardening, restringing,
absterging, corroding, burning, opening, evaporating, strengthening,
mitigating, conglutinating, obstructing, expelling, retaining,
attracting, repercussing, stupefying, bestowing, lubrifying and many
more. Elementary qualities do many things in a mixed body which they
cannot do in the Elements themselves. And these operations are called
secondary qualities, because they follow the nature and proportion of
the mixtion of the first virtues, as largely it is treated of in physic
books. As maturation, which is the operation of natural heat, according
to a certain proportion in the substance of the matter, so induration is
the operation of cold; so also is congelation, and so of the rest. And
these operations sometimes act upon a certain member, as such which
provoke water, milk, the flow, and they are called third qualities,
which follow the second, as the second do the first. According,
therefore, to these first, second, and third qualities many diseases are
both cured and caused. Many things also there are artificially made,
which men much wonder at; as is Fire which burns Water,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

which they call the Greek Fire, of which Aristotle teacheth many
compositions in his particular treatise of this subject. In like manner
there is made a Fire that is extinguished with oil, and is kindled with
cold water, when it is sprinkled upon it; and a Fire which is kindled
either with Rain, Wind or the Sun; and there is made a Fire which is
called burning Water, the confection whereof is well known, and it
consumes nothing but itself. And also there are made Fires that cannot
be quenched, and *incombustible Oils* and *perpetual Lamps*, which can
be extinguished neither with wind, nor water, nor any other way; which
seems utterly incredible, but that there had been such a most famous
Lamp, which once did shine in the Temple of Venus, in which the stone
Asbestos did burn, which being once fired can never be extinguished.
Also, on the contrary, Wood, or any other combustible matter may be so
ordered, that it can receive no harm from the Fire; and there are made
certain confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry
red-hot iron in them, or put them into melted metal; or go with our
whole bodies, being first anointed therewith, into the Fire without any
manner of harm; and such like things as these may be done. There is also
a kind of flax, which Pliny calls Asbestum, the Greeks call *Asbeson*,
which is not consumed by Fire, of which Anaxilaus saith, that a tree
compassed about with it may be cut down with insensible blows, that
cannot be heard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of the Occult Virtues of Things](pnm19.md)
