[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm15)  [Next](pnm17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Kinds of Compounds, what Relation They Stand in to the Elements, and What Relation There Is Betwixt the Elements Themselves and the Soul, Senses and Dispositions of Men</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Next</span> after the four simple Elements
follow the four kinds of perfect Bodies compounded of them, and they are
Stones, Metals, Plants and Animals: and although unto the generation of
each of these all the Elements meet together in the composition, yet
every one of them follows, and resembles one of the Elements, which is
most predominant. For all Stones are earthy for they are naturally heavy
and descend, and so hardened with dryness that they cannot be melted.
But Metals are waterish and may be melted, which naturalists confess,
and chemists find to be true, viz., that they are generated of a viscous
Water or waterish argent vive. Plants have such an affinity with the
Air, that unless they be abroad in the open air, they do neither bud nor
increase. So also all Animals

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Have in their Natures a most fiery force,  
And also spring from a Celestial source.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Fire is so
natural to them, that that being extinguished they presently die. And,
again, every one of those kinds is distinguished within itself by reason
of degrees of the Elements. For amongst the Stones they especially are
called earthy that are dark and more heavy; and those waterish which are
transparent and are compacted of water, as crystal, beryl and pearls in
the shells of fishes; and they are called airy which swim upon the
water, and are spongeous, as the stones of a sponge, the pumice stone
and the stone sophus; <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) and they are
called fiery out of which fire is extracted, or which are produced of
fire, as thunder-bolts, fire-stones and the stone asbestos. Also amongst
Metals, lead and silver are earthy; quicksilver is waterish; copper and
tin are airy; and gold and iron are fiery. In Plants also, the roots
resemble the earth by reason of their thickness; and the leaves water,
because of their juice; flowers the air, because of their subtility, and
the seeds the fire, by reason of their multiplying spirit. Besides, they
are called some hot, some cold, some moist, some dry, borrowing their
names from the qualities of the Elements. Amongst Animals also, some are
in comparison of others earthy, and dwell in the bowels of the earth, as
worms and moles, and many other small creeping vermin; others are
watery, as fishes; others airy, which cannot live out of the air; <span
id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10) others also are fiery, living in the fire,
as salamanders, and crickets, such as are of a fiery heat, as pigeons,
ostriches, lions, and such as the wise men call beasts breathing fire.
Besides, in animals the bones resemble the earth, flesh the air, the
vital spirit the fire, and the humors the water. And these humors also
partake of the Elements, for yellow choler is instead of fire, blood
instead of air, phlegm instead of water, and black choler, or
melancholy,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

instead of earth. And lastly, in the Soul itself, according to Austin,
the understanding resembles fire, reason the air, imagination the water,
and the senses the earth. And these senses also are divided amongst
themselves by reason of the Elements, for the sight is fiery, neither
can it perceive without fire and light; the hearing is airy, for a sound
is made by the striking of the air; the smell and taste resemble the
water, without the moisture of which there is neither smell nor taste;
and lastly, the feeling is wholly earthy, and taketh gross bodies for
its object. The actions, also, and the operations of man are governed by
the Elements. The earth signifies a slow and firm motion; the water
signifies fearfulness and sluggishness, and remissness in working; air
signifies cheerfulness and an amiable disposition; but fire a fierce,
quick and angry disposition. The Elements, therefore, are the first of
all things, and all things, are of and according to them, and they are
in all things, and diffuse their virtues through all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[57:\*](pnm16.htm#fr_9) Probably meerschaum
(sea-froth), or sepiolite, one of the bisilicates.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[57:†](pnm16.htm#fr_10) Birds in general are
undoubtedly here meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. How the Elements Are in the Heavens, in Stars, in
Devils, in Angels, and lastly in God Himself](pnm17)
