[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm25)  [Next](pnm27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How by Enmity and Friendship the Virtues of Things Are to be Tried and Found Out</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the next place it is requisite that we
consider that all things have a friendliness and enmity amongst
themselves, and every thing hath something that it fears and dreads,
that is an enemy and destructive to it; and, on the contrary, something
that it rejoiceth and delighteth in and is strengthened by. So in the
Elements, Fire is an enemy to Water, and Air to Earth, but yet they
agree amongst themselves. And, again, in Celestial bodies, Mercury,
Jupiter, the Sun and Moon are friends to Saturn; Mars and Venus enemies
to him. All the planets besides Mars are friends to Jupiter, also all
besides Venus hate Mars; Jupiter and Venus love the Sun, Mars, Mercury
and the Moon are enemies to him. All besides Saturn love Venus. Jupiter,
Venus and Saturn are friends to Mercury; the Sun, Moon and Mars his
enemies. Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are friends to the Moon; Mars and
Mercury her enemies. There is another kind of enmity amongst the stars,
viz., when they have opposite houses, as Saturn to the Sun and Moon,
Jupiter to Mercury, and Mars to Venus. And their enmity is stronger
whose exaltations are opposite, as of Saturn and the Sun, of Jupiter and
Mars, and of Venus and Mercury. But their friendship is the strongest
who agree in nature, quality, substance and power, as Mars with the Sun,
as Venus with the Moon, and as Jupiter with Venus; as also their
friendship whose exaltation is in the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

house of another, as that of Saturn with Venus, of Jupiter with the
Moon, of Mars with Saturn, of the Sun with Mars, of Venus with Jupiter,
and of the Moon with Venus. And of what sort the friendships and
enmities of the superiors be, such are the inclinations of things
subjected to them in those inferior. These dispositions, therefore, of
friendship and enmity are nothing else but certain inclinations of
things of the one to another, desiring such-and-such a thing if it be
absent, and to move towards it unless it be hindered; and to acquiesce
in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary and dreading the
approach of it, and not resting in or being contented with it.
Heraclitus, <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md) therefore, being guided
by this opinion, professed that all things were made by enmity and
friendship.

Now the inclinations of Friendship are such in all Vegetables and
Minerals, as is that attractive virtue or inclination which the
loadstone hath upon iron, and the emerald upon riches and favor, the
jasper upon the birth of any thing, and the stone achates upon
eloquence. In like manner there is a kind of bituminous clay that draws
fire, and leaps into it, wheresoever it sees it. Even so doth the root
of the herb aproxis draw fire from afar off. Also the same inclination
there is betwixt the male palm-tree and female; whereof, when the bough
of one shall touch the bough of the other, they fold themselves into
mutual embraces; neither doth the female palm-tree bring forth fruit
without the male. And the almond tree, when she is alone is less
fruitful. The vines

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

love the elm, and the olive-tree and myrtle love one the other; also the
olive-tree and fig-tree.

Now, in Birds and Animals, there is amity betwixt the blackbird and
thrush, betwixt the crow and heron, betwixt peacocks and pigeons,
turtles and parrots. When Sappho writes to Phaon:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">To Birds unlike oftimes joyned are white Doves;  
Also the Bird that’s green, black Turtle loves.</span>

</div>

Again, the whale and the little fish, his guide, are friendly. Neither
is this amity in Animals amongst themselves, but also with other things,
as with Metals, Stones and Vegetables: So the cat delights in the herb
catnip and rubbeth herself upon it, and there be mares in Cappadocia
that expose themselves to the blast of the wind. So frog, toads, snakes,
and all manner of creeping poisonous things, delight in the plant called
pas-flower, of whom, as the physicians say, if any one eat he shall die
with laughing. The tortoise, also, when he is hunted by the adder, eats
origanum, and is thereby strengthened; and the stork, when he hath eat
snakes, seeks for a remedy in origanum; and the weasel, when he goes to
fight with the basilisk, eats rue—whence we come to know that origanum
and rue are effectual against poison. So in some Animals there is an
imbred skill and medicinal art; for when the toad is wounded with a bite
or poison of another animal, he is wont to go to rue or sage and rub the
place wounded, and so escape the danger of the poison. So men have
learned many excellent remedies of diseases and virtues of things, from
brutes; so swallows have shewed us that sallendine is very medicinable
for the sight, with which they cure the eyes of their young; and the
pyet, when she is sick puts a bay-leaf into her nest, and is recovered.
In like manner, cranes, jackdaws, partridges, and black-birds purge
their nauseous stomachs with the same, with which also crows allay the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

poison of the chameleon; and the lion, if he be feverish, is recovered
by eating of an ape. The lapwing, being surfeited with eating of grapes,
cures himself with southernwood; so the harts have taught us that the
herb ditany is very good to draw out darts; for they, being wounded with
an arrow, cast it out by eating of this herb; the same do goats in
Candy. So hinds, a little before they bring forth, purge themselves with
a certain herb called mountain osier. Also they that are hurt with
spiders seek a remedy by eating of crabs. Swine also being hurt by
snakes cure themselves by eating of them; and cows, when they perceive
they are poisoned with a kind of French poison, seek for cure in the
oak. Elephants, when they have swallowed a chameleon, help themselves
with the wild olive. Bears, being hurt with mandrakes, escape the danger
by eating of ants. Geese, ducks, and such like watery fowls, cure
themselves with the herb called wall-sage. Pigeons, turtles, and hens,
with the herb called pellitory of the wall. Cranes, with bulrushes.
Leopards cure themselves, being hurt, with the herb called wolf's-bane;
boars, with ivy; hinds, with the herb called cinnara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[79:\*](pnm26.htm#fr_15.md) Sometimes given as
Heracleitus, a Greek philosopher who lived about 500 B. C. He was known
as the "weeping philosopher," so impressed was he by the weaknesses of
mankind. Only fragments of his philosophical work, "Peri Physeos" (On
Nature) remain. These fragments go to show that Heraclitus held "fire to
be the first principle of all phenomena, and the original substance out
of which they have all been evolved." Agrippa, In the above, throws
further light on his philosophy. The fragments of the teachings of
Heraclitus were collected, at Berlin, in 1805, while Agrippa wrote some
three hundred years earlier.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Of the Inclinations of Enmities](pnm27.md)
