[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm27)  [Next](pnm29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How the Virtues of Things Are to Be Tried and Found Out, Which Are in Them Specially, or in Any One Individual by Way of Special Gift</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, thou must consider that the
Virtues of things are in some things according to the Species, as
boldness and courage in a lion and cock, fearfulness in a hare or lamb,
ravenousness in a wolf, treachery and deceitfulness in a fox, flattery
in a dog, covetousness in a crow and jackdaw, pride in a horse, anger in
a tiger and boar, sadness and melancholy in a cat, lust in a sparrow,
and so of the rest. For the greatest part of Natural Virtues doth follow
the Species. Yet some are in things Individually; as there be some men
which do so wonderfully abhor the sight of a cat that they cannot look
upon her without quaking; which fear, it is manifest, is not in them, as
they are men. And Avicen tells of a man that lived in his time, whom all
poisonous things did shun, all of them dying which did by chance bite
him, he himself not being hurt; and Albertus reports that in a city of
the Ubians he saw a wench who would catch spiders to eat them, and being
much pleased with such a kind of meat, was wonderfully nourished
therewith. So is boldness in a wanton, and fearfulness in a thief. And
upon this account it is that philosophers say that any particular thing
that never was sick is good against any manner of sickness; therefore
they say that a bone of a dead man, who never had a fever, being laid
upon the patient, frees him of his quartan. There are also many singular
virtues infused into particular things by Celestial bodies, as we have
shewed before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Natural Virtues Are in Some Things Throughout
Their Whole Substance, and in Other Things in Certain Parts and
Members](pnm29.md)
