[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm22)  [Next](pnm24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Spirit of the World, What It Is, and How by Way of Medium It Unites Occult Virtues to Their Subjects</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Democritus</span> and Orpheus, and many
Pythagoreans, having most diligently searched into the virtues of
celestial things and natures of inferior things, said: That all things
are full of God and not without cause. For there is nothing of such
transcending virtues, which being destitute of Divine assistance, is
content with the nature of itself. Also they called those Divine Powers
which are diffused in things, Gods; which Zoroaster called Divine
Allurements; Synesius, Symbolical Inticements; others called them Lives,
and some also Souls, saying that the virtues of things did depend upon
these because it is the property of the Soul to be from one matter
extended into divers things about which it operates: So is a man who
extends his intellect unto intelligible things, and his imagination unto
imaginable things; and this is that which they understood when they
said, viz.: That the Soul of one thing went out and went into another
thing, altering it, and hindering the operations of it: as the diamond
hinders the operation of the loadstone, that it cannot attract iron. Now
seeing the Soul is the first thing that is movable and, as they say, is
moved of itself; but the body, or the matter, is of itself unable and
unfit for motion, and doth much degenerate from the Soul, therefore they
say there is need of a more excellent *medium*, viz., such a one that
may be, as it were, no body, but, as it were, a *Soul;* or, as it were,
no Soul, but, as it were, a *body*, viz., by which the soul may be
joined to the body. Now they conceive such a *medium* to be the Spirit
of the World, viz., that which we call the quintessence, because it is
not from the four Elements, but

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

a certain first thing, having its being above and besides them. There
is, therefore, such a kind of *spirit* required to be, as it were the
*medium*, whereby Celestial Souls are joined to gross bodies, and bestow
upon them wonderful gifts. This Spirit is after the same manner in the
body of the world, as ours is in the body of man. For as the powers of
our soul are communicated to the members of the body by the spirit, so
also the Virtue of the Soul of the World is diffused through all things
by the quintessence: For there is nothing found in the whole world that
hath not a spark of the virtue thereof. Yet it is more, nay, most of
all, infused into those things which have received or taken in most of
this Spirit. Now this Spirit is received or taken in by the rays of the
Stars, so far forth as things render themselves conformable to them. By
this Spirit, therefore, every occult property is conveyed into herbs,
stones, metals, and animals *through the Sun*, Moon, Planets, and
through Stars higher than the Planets.

Now this Spirit may be more advantageous to us if any one knew how to
separate it from the Elements; or at least to use those things chiefly
which do most abound with this Spirit. For these things, in which this
Spirit is less drowned in a body and less checked by matter, do more
powerfully and perfectly act, and also more readily generate their like;
for in it are all generative and seminary virtues. For which cause the
Alchemists endeavored to separate this Spirit from Gold and Silver;
which being rightly separated and extracted, if thou shalt afterward
project it upon any matter of the same kind (*i. e.*), any metal,
presently will turn it into Gold or Silver. And we know how to do that,
and have seen it done; but we could make *no more* Gold than the weight
of that was out of which we extracted the Spirit; for seeing that
\[*gold*\] is an *extense* form, and not intense, it cannot beyond its
own bounds change an imperfect body

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

into a perfect; which I deny not, but may be done by another way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. How We Must Find Out and Examine the Virtues of
Things by Way of Similitude](pnm24)
