[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm28)  [Next](pnm30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### CHAPTER XX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Natural Virtues Are in Some Things Throughout Their Whole Substance, and in Other Things in Certain Parts and Members</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Again</span> thou must consider that the Virtues
of things are in some things in the whole (*i. e.*), the whole substance
of them, or in all their parts, as that little fish echeneis, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17) which is said to stop a ship by its mere
touch; this it doth not do according to any particular part, but
according to the whole substance. So the civet cat hath this in its
whole substance, that dogs, by the very touch of his shadow, hold their
peace. So salendine is good for the sight, not according to any one but
all its parts; not more in the root than in the leaves and seeds, and so
of the rest. But some Virtues are in things according to some parts of
it, viz., only in the tongue, or eyes, or some other members and parts;
so in the eyes of a basilisk is a most violent power to kill men as soon
as they see them. The like power is there in the eyes of the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

civet cat, which makes any animal that it hath looked upon to stand
still, to be amazed, and not able to move itself. The like virtue is
there in the eyes of some wolves, who, if they see a man first, make him
amazed and so hoarse, that if he would cry out, he hath not the use of
his voice. Of this Virgil makes mention when he sings:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Mœris is dumb, hath lost his voice, and why?  
The Wolf on Mœris first hath cast his eye.</span>

</div>

So also there were some certain women in Scythia, and amongst the
Illyrians and Triballians, who as often as they looked angrily upon any
man, were said to slay him. Also we read of a certain people of Rhodes,
called Telchines, who corrupted all things with their sight, wherefore
Jupiter drowned them. Therefore witches, when they would after this
manner work by witchcraft, use the eyes of such kind of animals in their
waters for the eyes, for the like effects. In like manner do ants fly
from the heart of a lapwing and not from the head, foot or eyes. So the
gall of lizards, being bruised in water, is said to gather weasels
together; not the tail or the head of it. The gall of goats, put into
the earth in a brazen vessel, gathers frogs together; and a goat's liver
is an enemy to butterflies and all maggots. Dogs shun them that have the
heart of a dog about them; and foxes will not touch those poultry that
have eaten the liver of a fox. So divers things have divers virtues
dispersed variously through several parts, as they are from above
infused into them according to the diversity of things to be received;
as in a man's body the bones receive nothing but life, the eyes sight,
and the ears hearing. And there is in man's body a certain little bone,
which the Hebrews call LVZ, of the bigness of a pulse that is husked,
which is subject to no corruption, neither is it overcome with fire, but
is always preserved unhurt,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

out of which, as they say, as a plant out of the seed, our animal bodies
shall in the resurrection of the dead spring up. And these Virtues are
not cleared by reason, but by experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[86:\*](pnm29.htm#fr_17) The belief that the
Echeneis, a fish of the Remora or Sucker family, has the power of
stopping ships was formerly quite prevalent. In Goodwin's translation of
Plutarch's Morals, volume three, we find the following story:
"Chaeremomanus, the Trallian, when we were at a very noble fish-dinner,
pointing to a little, long, sharp-headed fish, said the echeneis
(ship-stopper) was like that, for he had often seen it as he sailed in
the Sicilian sea, and wondered at its strange force, for it stopped the
ship when under full sail, until one of the seamen perceived it sticking
to the outside of the ship, and took it off." Oppian says, describing
its occult virtue:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"But through the canvas bellies with the blast,  
 And boistrous winds bend down the cracking mast,  
 The bark stands firmly rooted on the sea  
 And all unmov’d, as tower, or towering tree."

</div>

Pliny says: "Why should our fleets and armadas at sea make such turrets
on the walls and forecastles, when one little fish is able to arrest and
stay, per force, our goodly and tall ships."—Nat. Hist., Vol. XI., p.
41. Ovid writes, "there, too, is the little sucking fish, wondrous to
behold, a vast obstruction to ships," and Lucan says the echeneis stops
ships on the ocean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Of the Virtues of Things Which Are in Them Only in
Their Life Time, and Such as Remain in Them Even After Their
Death](pnm30)
