[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm21)  [Next](pnm23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Whence the Occult Virtues of Things Proceed</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is well known to all that there is a
certain virtue in the Loadstone by which it attracts iron, and that the
Diamond doth by its presence take away that virtue of the Loadstone. So
also, Amber and Jet, rubbed and warmed, draw a straw to them; and the
stone Asbestos, being once fired, is never or scarce extinguished. A
Carbuncle shines in the dark; the stone Aetites put above the young
fruit of women or plants strengthens them, but being put under,
weakeneth. The Jasper stauncheth blood; the little fish Echeneis stops
the ships; Rhubarb expels choler; the liver of the Chameleon, burnt,
raiseth showers and thunders. The stone Heliotrope dazzles the sight,
and makes him that wears it to be invisible; the stone Lyucurius takes
away delusions from before the eyes, the perfume of the stone Lypparis
calls forth all the beasts, the stone Synochitis brings up infernal
ghosts, the stone Anachitis makes the images of the Gods appear. The
Ennectis, put under them that dream, causeth oracles. There is an herb
in Æthiopia with which, they report, ponds and

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

lakes are dried up, and all things that are shut to be opened; and we
read of an herb, called Latace, which the Persian kings give to their
embassadors, that whithersoever they shall come they shall abound with
plenty of all things. There is also a Scythian herb with which, being
tasted or at least held in the mouth, they report the Scythians will
endure twelve days’ hunger and thirst; and Apuleius saith that he was
taught by an Oracle that there were many kinds of herbs and stones with
which men might prolong their lives forever, but that it was not lawful
for men to understand the knowledge of those things because, whereas
they have but a short time to live, they study mischief with all their
might and attempt all manner of wickedness; if they should be sure of a
very long time, they would not spare the Gods themselves. But from
whence these virtues are none of all these have shewed who have set
forth huge volumes of the properties of things, not Hermes, not Bochus,
not Aaron, not Orpheus, not Theophrastus, not Thebith, not Zenothemis,
not Zoroaster, not Evax, not Dioscorides, not Isaaick the Jew, not
Zacharias the Babylonian, not Albertus, not Arnoldus; and yet all these
have confessed the same, that Zacharias writes to Mithridites, the great
power and human destinies are couched in the virtues of Stones and
Herbs. But to know from whence these come, a higher speculation is
required. Alexander the peripatetic, not going any further than his
senses and qualities, is of the opinion that these proceed from
Elements, and their qualities, which haply might be supposed to be true,
if those were of the same species; but many of the operations of the
Stones agree neither in *genere* nor *specie*. Therefore Plato and his
scholars attribute these virtues to *Ideas*, the formers of things. But
Avicen reduceth these kinds of operations to Intelligence, Hermes to the
Stars, Albertus to the specifical forms of things. And although these

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

authors seem to thwart one the other, yet none of them, if they be
rightly understood, goes beside the truth; since all their sayings are
the same in effect in most things. For God, in the first place, is the
end and beginning of all Virtues; he gives the seal of the *Ideas* to
his servants, the Intelligences; who, as faithful officers, sign all
things intrusted to them with an Ideal Virtue; the Heavens and Stars, as
instruments, disposing the matter in the mean while for the receiving of
those forms which reside in Divine Majesty (as saith Plato in Timeus)
and to be conveyed by Stars; and the Giver of Forms distributes them by
the Ministry of his Intelligences, which he hath set as Rulers and
Controllers over his Works, to whom such a power is intrusted in things
committed to them that so all Virtues of Stones, Herbs, Metals, and all
other things may come from the Intelligences, the Governors. The Form,
therefore, and Virtue of things comes first from the *Ideas*, then from
the ruling and governing Intelligences, then from the aspects of the
Heavens disposing, and lastly from the tempers of the Elements disposed,
answering the influences of the Heavens, by which the Elements
themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations,
therefore, are performed in these inferior things by express forms, and
in the Heavens by disposing virtues, in Intelligences by mediating
rules, in the Original Cause by *Ideas* and exemplary forms, all of
which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect and virtue
of everything.

There is, therefore, a wonderful virtue and operation in every Herb and
Stone, but greater in a Star, beyond which, even from the governing
Intelligences every thing receiveth and obtains many things for itself,
especially from the Supreme Cause, with whom all things do mutually and
exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent, as it were in
hymns, always praising the highest Maker of all things, as

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

by the three children in the fiery furnace were all things called upon
to praise God with singings. Bless ye the Lord all things that grow upon
the Earth, and all things which move in the Waters, all fowls of the
Heavens, beasts and cattle, together with the sons of men. There is,
therefore, no other cause of the necessity of effects than the
connection of all things with the First Cause, and their correspondency
with those Divine patterns and eternal *Ideas* whence every thing hath
its determinate and particular place in the exemplary world, from whence
it lives and receives its original being: And every virtue of herbs,
stones, metals, animals, words and speeches and all things that are of
God, is placed there. Now the First Cause, which is God, although he
doth by Intelligences and the Heavens work upon these inferior things,
Both sometimes (these *mediums* being laid aside, or their officiating
being suspended) works those things immediately by himself, which works
then are called Miracles. But whereas secondary causes, which Plato and
others call handmaids, do by the command and appointment of the First
Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to produce their effects,
if God shall notwithstanding, according to his pleasure, so discharge
and suspend them, that they shall wholly desist from the necessity of
that command and appointment; then they are called the greatest Miracles
of God. So the fire in the Chaldeans’ furnace did not burn the Children.
So also the Sun at the command of Joshua went back from its course the
space of a whole day; so also at the prayer of Hezekiah it went back ten
degrees or hours. So when Christ was crucified the Sun was darkened,
though at full Moon. And the reason of these operations can be by no
rational discourse, no Magic, or occult or profound Science whatsoever
be found out or understood, but are to be learned and inquired into by
Divine Oracles only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of the Spirit of the World, What It Is, and How by
Way of Medium It Unites Occult Virtues to Their Subjects](pnm23.md)
