[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm26)  [Next](pnm28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVIII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Inclinations of Enmities</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> the contrary, there are Inclinations
of Enmities, and they are, as it were, the odium, and anger,
indignation, and a certain kind of obstinate contrariety of nature, so
that any thing *shuns* its contrary and drives it away out of its
presence. Such kinds of inclinations hath rhubarb against choler,
treacle against poison, the sapphire stone against hot boils and
feverish heats and diseases of the eyes; the amethyst against
drunkenness, the jasper against

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

flux of blood and offensive imaginations, the emerald and angus castus
against lust, achates against poison, piony against the falling
sickness, coral against the ebullition of black choler and pains in the
stomach. The topaz against spiritual heats, such as are covetousness,
lust, and all manner of excesses of love. The like inclinations is there
also of ants against the herb origanum; and the wing of a bat and the
heart of a lapwing, from the presence of which they fly. Also origanum
is contrary to a certain poisonous fly, which cannot endure the Sun, and
resists salamanders, and loathes cabbage with such a deadly hatred that
they destroy one the other. So cucumbers hate oil, and will run
themselves into a ring lest they should touch it. And it is said that
the gall of a crow makes men afraid and drives them away from where it
is, as also certain other things. So a diamond doth disagree with the
loadstone, that being set by it, it will not suffer iron to be drawn to
it; and sheep fly from frog-parsley as from some deadly thing, and that,
which is more wonderful, Nature hath pictured the sign of this death in
the livers of sheep, in which the very figure of frog-parsley, being
described, doth naturally appear. So goats do so hate garden basil as if
there were nothing more pernicious. And again, amongst animals, mice and
weasels do disagree; whence it is said that mice will not touch cheese
if the brains of a weasel be put in the rennet, and besides that the
cheese will not be corrupt with age. So a lizard is so contrary to
scorpions that it makes them afraid with its very sight, as also it puts
them into a cold sweat; therefore they are killed with the oil of
lizards, which oil also cures the wounds made by scorpions. There is
also an enmity betwixt scorpions and mice; wherefore if a mouse be
applied to a prick or wound made by a scorpion, it cures it, as it is
reported. There is also an enmity betwixt scorpions and stalabors,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

asps and wasps. It is reported, also that no thing is so much an enemy
to snakes as crabs, and that if swine be hurt therewith they eat them
and are cured. The sun, also being in Cancer, serpents are tormented.
Also scorpion and crocodile kill one the other; and if the bird ibis
doth but touch a crocodile with one of his feathers, he makes him
immovable. The bird called bustard flies away at the sight of a horse,
and a hart runs away at the sight of a ram, as also a viper. An elephant
trembles at the hearing of the grunting of a hog, so doth a lion at the
sight of a cock; and panthers will not touch them that are anointed all
over with the broth of a hen, especially if garlic hath been boiled in
it. There is also enmity betwixt foxes and swans, bulls and jackdaws.
Amongst birds, also, some are at perpetual strife one with another, as
also with other animals, as jackdaws and owls, the kite and crows, the
turtle and ring-tail, egepis and eagles, harts and dragons. Also amongst
water animals there is enmity, as betwixt dolphins and whirlpools,
mullets and pikes, lampreys and congers. Also the fish called
pourcontrel makes the lobster so much afraid that the lobster seeing the
other but near him, is struck dead. The lobster and conger tear one the
other. The civet cat is said to stand so in awe of the panther that he
hath no power to resist him or touch his skin; and they say that if the
skins of both of them be hanged up one against the other, the hairs of
the panther's skin fall off. And Orus Apollo saith in his hieroglyphics,
if any one be girt about with the skin of the civet cat that he may pass
safely through the middle of his enemies and not at all be afraid. Also
the lamb is very much afraid of the wolf and flies from him. And they
say that if the tail or skin or head of a wolf be hanged upon the
sheep-coate the sheep are much troubled and cannot eat their meat for
fear. And Pliny makes mention of a bird, called marlin, that

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

breaks crows’ eggs, whose young are so annoyed by the fox that she also
will pinch and pull the fox's whelps, and the fox herself also; which
when the crows see, they help the fox against her, as against a common
enemy. The little bird called a linnet, living in thistles, hates asses,
because they eat the flowers of thistles. Also there is such a bitter
enmity betwixt the little bird called easlon and the ass that their
blood will not mix together, and that at the braying of the ass both the
eggs and young of the easlon perish. There is also such a disagreement
betwixt the olive-tree and a wanton, that if she plant it, it will
either be always unfruitful or altogether wither. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md) A lion fears nothing so much as fired
torches, and will be tamed by nothing so much as by these; and the wolf
fears neither sword nor spear, but a stone—by the throwing of which, a
wound being made, worms breed in the wolf. A horse fears a camel so that
he cannot endure to see so much as his picture. An elephant, when he
rageth, is quieted by seeing a cock. A snake is afraid of a man that is
naked, but pursues a man that is clothed. A mad bull is tamed by being
tied to a fig-tree. Amber draws all things to it besides garden basil
and those things which are smeared with oil, betwixt which there is a
kind of a natural antipathy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[84:\*](pnm27.htm#fr_16.md) This illustration of a
natural antipathy said to exist between a wanton and an olive-tree, as
well as other illustrations herein of the occult virtues of things, may
be regarded as somewhat fanciful, but the reader will be able to bring
to mind plenty of natural phenomena that fully prove the leading truths
that Agrippa here seeks to convey. For instance, the writer knows one
person of whom it may be justly claimed that every plant grows that he
touches, while his mother, rendering the same care, finds it impossible
to raise a plant. All women know, who have had the experience, that at
certain times each month they cannot make pickles that will not spoil.
The explanation of these things are found in the occult virtues of
Nature; the inherent sympathy, amity or antipathy <span
class="smallcaps">in</span> all things <span class="smallcaps">to</span>
all other things, which Agrippa so admirably sets forth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. How the Virtues of Things Are to Be Tried and Found
Out, Which Are in Them Specially, or in Any One Individual by Way of
Special Gift](pnm28.md)
