[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm30)  [Next](pnm32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How Inferior Things Are Subjected to Superior Bodies, and How the Bodies, the Actions, and Dispositions of Men Are Ascribed to Stars and Signs</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">It is</span> manifest that all things inferior
are subject to the superior, and after a manner (as saith Proclus) they
are one in the other, viz., in inferiors are superior and in superiors
are inferior: So in the Heaven are things terrestrial, but as in their
cause, and in a celestial manner; and in the Earth are things celestial,
but after a terrestrial manner, as in an effect. So we say that there be
here certain things which are Solary and certain which are Lunary, in
which the Sun and Moon make a strong impression of their virtues. Whence
it is that these kind of things receive more operations and properties,
like to those of the Stars and Signs which they are under. So we know
that Solary things respect the heart and

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

head by reason that Leo is the house of the Sun, and Aries the
exaltation of the Sun. So things under Mars are good for the head and
secrets by reason of Aries and Scorpio. Hence they whose senses fail and
heads ache by reason of drunkenness, find cold water and vinegar good to
bathe the head and secrets. But in reference to these it is necessary to
know how man's body is distributed to Planets and Signs. Know,
therefore, that according to the doctrine of the Arabians, the Sun rules
over the brain, heart, the thigh, the marrow, the right eye, and the
spirit; also the tongue, the mouth, and the rest of the organs of the
senses, as well internal as external; also the hands, feet, legs,
nerves, and the power of imagination. That Mercury rules over the
spleen, stomach, bladder, womb, and right ear, as also the faculty of
the common sense. That Saturn rules over the liver and fleshy part of
the stomach. That Jupiter rules over the abdomen and navel, whence it is
written by the Ancients, that the effigy of a navel was laid up in the
temple of Jupiter Hammon. Also some attribute to him the ribs, breasts,
bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand and left ear, and the powers
natural. And some set Mars over the blood, the veins, the kidneys, the
bag of the gall, the buttocks, the back, motion of the sperm, and the
irascible power. Again they set Venus over the kidneys, the secrets, the
womb, the seed, and concupiscible power; as also the flesh, fat, belly,
breast, navel, and the venereal parts and such as serve thereto; as also
the *os sacrum*, the back-bone, and loins; as also the head, and the
mouth, with which they give a kiss as a token of love. Now the Moon,
although she may challenge the whole body, and every member thereof
according to the variety of the Signs, yet more particularly they
ascribe to her the brain, lungs, marrow of the backbone, the stomach,
the menstrual and excretory parts, and the left eye, as also the power
of increasing. But

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hermes saith: That
there are seven holes in the head of an animal, distributed to the seven
Planets, viz.: The right ear to Saturn, the left to Jupiter, the right
nostril to Mars, the left to Venus, the right eye to the Sun, the left
to the Moon, and the mouth to Mercury.

The several Signs, also, of the Zodiac take care of their members: So
Aries governs the head and face; Taurus, the neck; Gemini, the arms and
shoulders; Cancer, the breast, lungs, stomach and arms; Leo, the heart,
stomach, liver and back; Virgo, the bowels and bottom of the stomach;
Libra, the kidneys, thighs and buttocks; Scorpius, the secrets;
Sagittarius, the thighs and groins; Capricornus, the knees; Aquarius,
the legs and shins; Pisces, the feet. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18.md) And as the triplicities of these Signs
answer one the other, and agree in celestials, so also they agree in the
members; which is sufficiently manifest by experience, because with the
coldness of the feet the belly and breast are affected, which members
answer the same triplicity; whence it is, if a medicine be applied to
the one it helps the other, as by the warming of the feet the pain of
the belly ceaseth. Remember, therefore, this order, and know that things
which are under any one of the Planets have a certain particular aspect
or inclination to those members that are attributed to that planet, and
especially to the Houses and exaltation's thereof. For the rest of the
dignities, as those triplicities and marks and face, are of little
account in this. Upon this account, therefore, peony, balm,
clove-gilly-flowers, citron-peel, sweet-marjoram, cinnamon, saffron,
lignum aloes, frankincense, amber, musk, and myrrh help the head and
heart, by reason of the Sun and Aries and Leo. So

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

doth ribwort, the herb of Mars, help the head and secrets by reason of
Aries and Scorpio; and so of the rest. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md) Also all things under Saturn conduce to
sadness and melancholy; those under Jupiter to mirth and honor; those
under Mars to boldness, contention and anger; those under the Sun to
glory, victory and courage; those under Venus to love, lust and
concupiscence; those under Mercury to eloquence; those under the Moon to
a common life. Also all the actions and dispositions of men are
distributed according to the Planets; for Saturn governs old men, monks,
melancholy men, and hidden treasures and those things which are obtained
with long journeys and difficulty; but Jupiter governs those that are
religious, prelates, kings and dukes, and such kind of gains that are
got lawfully; Mars rules over barbers, chirurgeons, physicians,
sergeants, butchers executioners,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

all that make fires, bakers, and soldiers, who are every where called
martial men. Also do the other Stars signify their office, as they are
described in the books of Astrologers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[93:\*](pnm31.htm#fr_18.md) The several parts of
the physical body, it will be seen, run in order from the head to the
feet in their correspondence with the twelve Signs or Houses of the
Zodiac, from Aries, the first house, to Pisces, the twelfth and last.
The Zodiac, as a whole, in symbolizing all parts of a complete man,
typifies a perfect celestial being known as the Grand Solar Man.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[94:\*](pnm31.htm#fr_19.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Note on Punctuation</span>: We find all semicolons
used in this sentence in the English edition of 1651. Mr. Henry Morley,
in his "Life of Cornelius Agrippa" (London, 1856), Vol. I., page 140, in
a note referring to a quotation be makes there from the Latin edition of
Agrippa of 1531, says: "I have preserved the punctuation in this passage
to show the use of the colon before semicolons were invented." The
passage Mr. Morley quotes from the Latin edition of 1531 ("De Occulta
Philosophia Libri Tres," Antwerp, Belgium, one book only of which was
published of the three) contains six colons, whereas the English edition
of 1651 (see etching for title page), also used by Mr. Morley, and
published complete one hundred and twenty years later, contains none.
This indicates, apparently, the general period when semicolons were
invented and came into use. The characters of punctuation are supposed
to have been generally invented and introduced near the close of the
fifteenth century by Aldus Manutus, a noted printer and publisher of
Venice. The semicolon, as above, originated later on, between 1531 and
1651. Further, the m-dash, "—," as now used, is of comparatively modern
introduction. I fail to find a single m-dash in the English edition of
Agrippa of 1651, though 3-m-dashes, "——," were occasionally used before
quotations from the poets. Eight years later, in 1659, I find the
2-m-dash used, in the second edition of Lilly's "Christian Astrology,"
page 60, thus: "His least——30." As this was an ordinary paragraph, of
itself, it shows that they did not at that time use the m-dash but were
evolving towards it. The truth regarding punctuation is that it has
slowly and steadily evolved, especially since the art of printing, to
its present status. The object of punctuation, primarily, is to present
a writer's thought clearly, concisely, and correctly, by pointing out
his salient words, using the "marks" like all artist does his "hues," to
give prominence and pith thereto.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. How We Shall Know What Stars Natural Things Are
Under, and What Things Are Under the Sun, Which Are Called
Solary](pnm32.md)
