[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm38)  [Next](pnm40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">That the Whole Sublunary World, and Those Things Which Are in It, Are Distributed to Planets</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, whatsoever is found in the
whole world is made according to the governments of the Planets, and
accordingly receives its virtue. So in fire, the enlivening light
thereof is under the government of the Sun; the heat of it under Mars,
in the Earth; the various superficies thereof under the Moon and
Mercury, and the starry heaven; the whole mass of it under Saturn. But
in the middle Elements, air is

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

under Jupiter, and water under the Moon; but being mixed, are under
Mercury and Venus. In like manner natural active causes observe the Sun,
the matter the Moon, the fruitfulness of active causes, Jupiter; the
fruitfulness of the matter, Venus; the sudden effecting of any thing,
Mars; and Mercury, that for his vehemency, this for his dexterity and
manifold virtue. But the permanent continuation of all things is
ascribed to Saturn. Also, amongst vegetables, every thing that bears
fruit is from Jupiter, and every thing that bears flowers is from Venus;
all seed and bark is from Mercury, and all roots from Saturn, and all
wood from Mars, and leaves from the Moon. Wherefore, all that bring
forth fruit, and not flowers, are of Saturn and Jupiter; but they that
bring forth flowers and seed, and not fruit, are of Venus and Mercury;
those which are brought forth of their own accord, without seed, are of
the Moon and Saturn. All beauty is from Venus, all strength from Mars,
and every planet rules and disposeth that which is like to it. Also in
stones, their weight, clamminess and slipticness is of Saturn, their use
and temperament of Jupiter, their hardness from Mars, their life from
the Sun, their beauty and fairness from Venus, their occult virtue from
Mercury, and their common use from the Moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. How Provinces and Kingdoms Are Distributed to
Planets](pnm40.md)
