[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm34)  [Next](pnm36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">What Things Are Under the Power of Jupiter, and Are Called Jovial</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Things</span> under Jupiter, amongst Elements,
are the air; amongst humors, blood and the Spirit of Life; also all
things which respect the increase, nourishment, and vegetation of the
life. Amongst tastes, such as are sweet and pleasant. Amongst metals,
tin, silver and gold, by reason of their temperateness. Amongst stones,
the hyacinth, beryl, sapphire, emerald, green jasper, and those of airy
colors. Amongst plants and trees, sea-green, garden basil, bugloss,
mace, spike, mint, mastic, elecampane, the violet, darnel, henbane, the
poplar-tree, and those which are called lucky trees, as the oak, the
æsculus, or horse-chestnut, which is like an oak but much larger; the
holm or holly-tree, the beech-tree, the hazel-tree, the service-tree,
the white fig-tree, the pear-tree, the apple-tree, the vine, the
plum-tree, the ash, the dogwood tree, and the olive-tree, and also
oil-tree. Also all manner of corn, as barley and wheat; also raisins,
licorice, sugar, and all such things whose sweetness is manifest and
subtile, partaking somewhat of an astringent and sharp taste, as are
nuts, almonds, pine-apples, filberts, pistachio-nuts, roots of peony,
myrobalan, rhubarb, and manna; Orpheus adds

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

storax. Amongst animals, such as have some stateliness and wisdom in
them, and those which are mild, well trained up, and of good
dispositions, as the hart and elephant; and those which are gentle, as
sheep and lambs. Amongst birds, those that are of a temperate
complexion, as hens, together with the yolk of their eggs. Also the
partridge, the pheasant, the swallow, the cuckoo, and the stork and
pelican, birds given to a kind of devotion, which are emblems of
gratitude. The eagle is dedicated to Jupiter—she is the ensign of
emperors, and an emblem of Justice and Clemency. Amongst fish, the
dolphin, the fish, called anchia or anchovy; and the sheath or
sheat-fish, by reason of his devoutness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. What Things Are Under the Power of Mars, and Are
Called Martial](pnm36.md)
