[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm36)  [Next](pnm38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVIII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">What Things Are Under the Power of Venus, and Are Called Venereal</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">These</span> things are under Venus: Amongst
Elements, air and water. Amongst humors, phlegm, with blood, spirit, and
seed. Amongst tastes, those which are sweet, unctuous, and delectable.
Amongst metals, silver, and brass, both yellow and red. Amongst stones,
the beryl, chrysolite, emerald, sapphire, green jasper, carnelian, the
stone aetites, the lazuli stone, coral, and all of a fair, various,
white, and green color. Amongst plants and trees, the vervain, violet,
maiden-hair; valerian, which by the Arabians is called phu! and
tithymal, for its fragrant and sweet smell; also thyme, the gum ladanum,
amber-gris, sanders or red sandal-wood, coriander, and all sweet
perfumes; and delightful and sweet fruits,

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

as sweet pears, figs, pomegranates, which, the poets say, were, in
Cyprus, first sown by Venus. Also the Rose of Lucifer was dedicated to
her; also the Myrtle-tree of Hesperus. Moreover, all luxurious,
delicious animals, and of a strong love, as dogs, conies, odorous sheep
and goats, both female and male, which generate sooner than any other
animal; also the bull, for his disdain, and the calf, for his
wantonness. Amongst birds, the swan, the wagtail, the swallow, the
pelican, the bergander, which are very loving to their young. Also the
crow, and the pigeon, which is dedicated to Venus; and the turtle-dove,
one whereof was commanded to be offered at the purification, after
bringing forth. The sparrow also was dedicated to Venus, which was
commanded in the law to be used in the purification, after the leprosy,
a martial disease, than which nothing was of more force to resist it.
Also, the Egyptians called the Eagle by the name of Venus, because she
never fails to answer the call of her mate. Amongst fishes, these are
venereal: The lustful pilchard, the lecherous gilt-head, the whiting,
for her love to her young, and the crab, fighting for his mate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. What Things Are Under the Power of Mercury, and Are
Called Mercurial](pnm38)
