[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm29)  [Next](pnm31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Virtues of Things Which Are in Them Only in Their Life Time, and Such as Remain in Them Even After Their Death</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, we must know that there are
some properties in things only whilst they live, and some that remain
after their death. So the little fish echeneis stops the ships, and the
basilisk and catablepa kill with their sight when they are alive; but
when they are dead do no such thing. So they say that in the colic, if a
live duck be applied to the abdomen it takes away the pain and herself
dies. Like to this is that which Archytas says: If you take a heart,
newly taken out of an animal, and, whilst it is yet warm, hang it upon
one that hath a quartan fever, it drives it away. So if any one swallow
the heart of a lapwing, or a swallow, or a weasel, or a mole, whilst it
is yet warm with natural heat it shall be helpful to him for
remembering, understanding, and for foretelling. Hence is this general
rule, viz.: That whatsoever things are taken out of animals, whether
they be any member, the hair, nails, or such like, they must be taken
from those animals whilst they be yet living; and, if it be possible,
that so they may be alive afterwards. Whence they say, when you take the
tongue of a frog, you must put the frog into the water again; and if you
take the tooth of a wolf, you must not kill the wolf; and so of the
rest. So writes Democritus, if any one take out the tongue of a
water-frog, yet living, no other part of the body

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

sticking to it, and she be let go into the water again, and lay it upon
the place where the heart beats of a woman, she shall answer truly
whatsoever you ask her. Also they say, that if the eyes of a frog be
before sunrising bound to the sick party, and the frog be let go again,
blind, into the water, they will drive away tertian ague; as also that
they will, being bound with the flesh of a nightingale in the skin of a
hart, keep one always watchful without sleep. Also the ray of the
fork-fish, being bound to the navel, is said to make a woman have an
easy travail, if the ray be taken from the fish alive and it put into
the sea again. So they say the right eye of a serpent, being applied,
doth help the watering of the eyes if the serpent be let go alive. And
there is a certain fish or great serpent, called Myrus, whose eye, if it
be pulled out, and bound to the forehead of the patient, is said to cure
the inflammation of the eyes; and that the eye of the fish grows again;
and that he is taken blind who will not let the fish go. Also the teeth
of all serpents, being taken out whilst they are alive, and hanged about
the patient, are said to cure the quartan. So doth the tooth of a mole,
taken out whilst she is alive, being afterwards let go, cure the
toothache; and dogs will not bark at those that have the tail of a
weasel that is escaped. And Democritus relates that the tongue of a
chameleon, if it be taken from her alive, doth conduce to a good success
in trials, and is profitable for women that are in travail, if it be
about the outside of the house, for you must take heed that it be not
brought into the house, because that would be most dangerous.

Moreover, there be some properties that remain *after* death, and of
these the Platonists say, that they are things in which the *Idea* of
the matter is less swallowed up. In these, even after death, that which
is immortal in them doth not cease to work wonderful things. So in the
herbs and plants, pulled asunder

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span id="img_09000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GRAND SOLAR
MAN.](tn/09000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09000.jpg)  
GRAND SOLAR MAN.  
</span>

and dried, that Virtue is quick and operative which was infused at first
into them by the *Idea*. Thence it is that as the eagle all her life
time doth overcome

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

all other birds, so also her feathers, after her death, destroy and
consume the feathers of all other birds. Upon the same account doth a
lion's skin destroy all other skins; and the skin of the civet cat
destroys the skin of the panther; and the skin of a wolf corrodes the
skin of a lamb. And some of these do not do it by way of a corporeal
contact, but also sometimes by their very sound. So a drum made of the
skin of a wolf makes a drum made of a lamb-skin not so sound. Also a
drum made of the skin of the fish called rochet drives away all creeping
things, at what distance soever the sound of it is heard; and the
strings of an instrument made of the intestines of a wolf, and being
strung upon a harp or lute with strings made of the intestines of a
sheep, will make no harmony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. How Inferior Things Are Subjected to Superior
Bodies, and How the Bodies, the Actions, and Dispositions of Men Are
Ascribed to Stars and Signs](pnm31)
