[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm47)  [Next](pnm49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">That We May, By Some Certain Matters of the World, Stir Up the Gods of the World and Their Ministering Spirits</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">No</span> <span class="smallcaps">man</span> is
ignorant that evil spirits, by evil and profane arts, may be raised up
as Psellus saith sorcerers are wont to do, whom most detestable and
abominable filthiness did follow and accompany, such as were in times
past in the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the worship of the idol which
was called Panor, to whom they did sacrifice with shameful nakedness.
Neither to these is that unlike (if it be true and not a fable) which is
read concerning the detestable heresy of old churchmen, and like to
these

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

are manifest in witches and mischievous women, which wickednesses the
foolish dotage of women is subject to fall into. By these, and such as
these, evil spirits are raised. As a wicked spirit spake once to John of
one Cynops, a sorcerer: "All the power," saith he, "of Satan dwells
there; and he is entered into a confederacy with all the principalities
together, and likewise we with him; and Cynops obeys us and we, again,
obey him." Again, on the contrary side, no man is ignorant that
super-celestial angels or spirits may be gained by us through good
works, a pure mind, secret prayers, devout humiliation, and the like.
Let no man, therefore, doubt that in like manner by some certain matters
of the world, the gods of the world may be raised by us, or, at least,
the ministering spirits, or servants of these gods, and, as Mercurius
saith, the airy spirits (not supercelestial, but less higher). So we
read that the ancient priests made statues and images, -foretelling
things to come, and infused into them the Spirits of the Stars, which
were not kept there by constraint in some certain matters, but rejoiced
in them, viz., as acknowledging such kinds of matter to be suitable to
them, they do always and willingly abide in them, and speak and do
wonderful things by them; no otherwise than evil spirits are wont to do
when they possess men's bodies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL. Of Bindings; What Sort They Are Of, and in What Ways
They Are Wont to Be Done](pnm49)
