[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm48)  [Next](pnm50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XL.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of Bindings; What Sort They Are Of, and in What Ways They Are Wont to Be Done</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have spoken concerning the virtues and
wonderful efficacy of natural things. It remains now that we understand
a thing of great wonderment—and it is a binding of men into love or
hatred, sickness

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

or health, or such like. Also the binding of thieves and robbers, that
they cannot steal in any place; the binding of merchants, that they
cannot buy or sell in any place; the binding of an army, that they
cannot pass over any bound; the binding of ships, that no winds, though
never so strong, shall be able to carry them out of the haven. Also the
binding of a mill, that it can by no force whatsoever be turned round;
the binding of a cistern or fountain, that the water cannot be drawn up
out of them; the binding of the ground, that it cannot bring forth
fruit; the binding of any place, that nothing can be built upon it; the
binding of fire, that though it be never so strong, can burn no
combustible thing that is put to it. Also the bindings of lightnings and
tempests, that they shall do no hurt; the binding of dogs, that they
cannot bark; the binding of birds and wild beasts, that they shall not
be able to fly or run away. And such like as these, which are scarce
credible, yet often known by experience. Now, there are such kind of
bindings as these made by sorceries, collyries, unguents, and love
potions; by binding to or hanging up of things; by rings, by charms, by
strong imaginations and passions, by images and characters, by
enchantments and imprecations, by lights, by numbers, by, sounds, by
words, and names, invocations, and sacrifices; by swearing, conjuring,
consecrations, devotions, and by divers superstitions, and observations,
and such like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLI. Of Sorceries, and Their Power](pnm50.md)
