[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm45)  [Next](pnm47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How, By Some Certain Natural and Artificial Preparations, We May Attract Certain Celestial and Vital Gifts</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Platonists</span>, together with Hermes, say,
and Jarchus Brachmanus and the Mecubals of the Hebrews confess, that all
sublunary things are subject to generation and corruption, and that also
there are the same things in the Celestial World, but after a celestial
manner, as also in the Intellectual World, but in a far more perfect and
better fashion and manner, and in the most perfect manner of all in the
Exemplary. And, after this course, that every inferior thing should, in
its kind, answer its superior thing, and through this the Supreme
Itself, and receive from heaven that celestial power they call the
quintessence, or the Spirit of the World, or the Middle Nature; and from
the Intellectual World a spiritual and enlivening virtue, transcending
all qualities whatsoever; and, lastly, from the Exemplary, or original,
World, through the mediation of the other, according to their degree
receive the original power of the whole perfection. Hence, every thing
may be aptly reduced from these Inferiors to the Stars, from the Stars
to their Intelligences, and from thence to the First Cause itself—from
the series and order whereof all Magic and all Occult Philosophy flows:
For every day some natural thing is drawn by art, and some divine thing
is drawn by Nature, which, the Egyptians, seeing, called Nature a
Magicianess (*i. e.*), the very Magical

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

power itself, in the attracting of like by like, and of suitable things
by suitable.

Now, such kind of attraction, by the mutual correspondency of things
amongst themselves, of superiors with inferiors, the Grecians called
*sympathies*. So the earth agrees with cold water, the water with moist
air, the air with fire, the fire with the heaven in water; neither is
fire mixed with water, but by air; nor the air with the earth, but by
water. So neither is the soul united to the body, but by the spirit; nor
the understanding to the spirit, but by the soul. So we see that when
Nature hath framed the body of an infant, by this very preparative she
presently fetcheth its spirit from the Universe. This spirit is its
instrument to obtain of God its understanding and mind in its soul and
body, as in wood the dryness is fitted to receive oil, and the oil,
being imbibed, is food for the fire, the fire is the vehicle of light.
By these examples you see how by some certain natural and artificial
preparations we are in a capacity to receive certain celestial gifts
from above. For stones and metals have a correspondency with herbs,
herbs with animals, animals with the heavens, the heavens with
Intelligences, and they with divine properties and attributes and with
God himself, after whose image and likeness all things are created.

Now, the first image of God is the world; of the world, man; of man,
beasts; of beasts, the zeophyton or zoophyte (*i. e.*), half animal and
half plant; of the zeophyton, plants; of plants, metals; and of metals,
stones. And, again, in things spiritual, the plant agrees with a brute
in vegetation, a brute with a man in sense, man with an angel in
understanding, and an angel with God in immortality. Divinity is annexed
to the mind, the mind to the intellect, the intellect to the intention,
the intention to the imagination, the imagination to the senses, and the
senses,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

at last, to things. For this is the band and continuity of Nature, that
all superior virtue doth flow through every inferior with a long and
continued series, dispersing its rays even to the very last things; and
inferiors, through their superiors, come to the very Supreme of all. For
so inferiors are successively joined to their superiors, that there
proceeds an influence from their head, the First Cause, as a certain
string stretched out to the lowermost things of all; of which string, if
one end be touched the whole doth presently shake, and such a touch doth
sound to the other end; and at the motion of an inferior the superior
also is moved, to which the other doth answer, as strings in a lute well
tuned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII. How We May Draw Not Only Celestial and Vital,
but Also Certain Intellectual and Divine Gifts From Above](pnm47.md)
