[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm40)  [Next](pnm42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### CHAPTER XXXII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">What Things Are Under the Signs, the Fixed Stars, and Their Images</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> like consideration is to be had in
all things concerning the Figures of the Fixed Stars: Therefore they
will have the terrestrial ram to be under the rule of the celestial
Aries, and the terrestrial bull and ox to be under the celestial Taurus.
So also that Cancer should rule over crabs, and Leo over lions; Virgo
over virgins, and Scorpio over scorpions; Capricornus over goats,
Sagittarius over horses, and Pisces over fishes. Also the celestial Ursa
over bears, the Hydra over serpents, and the Dog Star over dogs, and so
of the rest. Now, Apuleius distributes certain and peculiar herbs to the
Signs and Planets, viz: To Aries, the herb sage; to Taurus, the vervain
that grows straight; to Gemini, the vervain that grows bending; to
Cancer, comfrey; to Leo, sow-bread; to Virgo, calamint; to Libra,
mug-wort; to Scorpio, scorpion-grass; to Sagittarius, pimpernel; to
Capricornus, the dock; to Aquarius, dragon's wort; to Pisces, hart-wort.
And to the Planets these, viz.: To Saturn, sengreen; to Jupiter,
agrimony; to Mars, sulphur-wort; to the Sun, mari-gold; to Venus,
wound-wort; to Mercury, mullein; to the Moon, peony. But Hermes, whom
Albertus follows, distributes to the Planets these, viz.: To Saturn, the
daffodil; to Jupiter, henbane; to Mars, rib-wort; to the Sun,
knot-grass; to Venus, vervain; to Mercury, cinque-foil; to the Moon,
goose-foot. We also know by experience that asparagus is under Aries,
and garden basil under Scorpio; for of the shavings of ram's-horn,
sowed, comes forth asparagus; and garden basil, rubbed betwixt two
stones, produceth scorpions. Moreover, I will, according to the doctrine
of Hermes, and of Thebit,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

reckon up some of the more eminent Stars, whereof the first is called
the Head of Algol, and, amongst stones, rules over the diamond; amongst
plants, black hellebore and mug-wort. The second are the Pleiades, or
Seven Stars, which, amongst stones, rule over crystal and the stone
diodocus; amongst plants, the herb diacedon, and frankincense and
fennel; and amongst metals, quicksilver. The third is the star
Aldeboran, which hath under it, amongst stones, the carbuncle and ruby;
amongst plants, the milky thistle and matry-silva. The fourth is called
the Goat Star, which rules, amongst stones, the sapphire; amongst
plants, horehound, mint, mug-wort and mandrake. The fifth is called the
great Dog Star, which, amongst stones, rules over the beryl; amongst
plants, savin, mug-wort and dragon's-wort; and, amongst animals, the
forked tongue of a snake. The sixth is called the lesser Dog Star, and,
amongst stones, rules over achate or agate; amongst plants, the flowers
of marigold and pennyroyal. The seventh is called the Heart of the Lyon,
which, amongst stones, rules over the granate or garnet; amongst plants,
sallendine, mug-wort and mastic. The eighth is the Taile of the lesser
Bear, which, amongst stones, rules over the loadstone; amongst herbs,
over succory or chicory, whose leaves and flowers turn towards the
north; also mug-wort and the flowers of periwinkle; and, amongst
animals, the tooth of a wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the Crow,
under which, amongst stones, are such stones as are of the color of the
black onyx stone; amongst plants, the bur, quadraginus, henbane and
comfrey; and, amongst animals, the tongue of a frog. The tenth is called
Spica, which hath under it, amongst stones, the emerald; amongst plants,
sage, trifoil, periwinkle, mug-wort and mandrake. The eleventh is called
Alchamech, which, amongst stones, rules over the jasper; amongst plants,
the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

plantain. The twelfth is called Elpheia; under this, amongst stones, is
the topaz; amongst plants, rosemary, trifoil and ivy. The thirteenth is
called the Heart of the Scorpion, under which, amongst stones, is the
sardonius and amethyst; amongst plants, long aristolochy and saffron.
The fourteenth is the Falling Vultur, under which, amongst stones, is
the chrysolite; amongst plants, succory and fumitory. The fifteenth is
the Taile of Capricorn, under which, amongst stones, is chalcedony;
amongst plants, marjoram, mug-wort, and catnip, and the root of
mandrake.

Moreover, this we must know, that every stone or plant or animal, or any
other thing, is not governed by one star alone, but many of them receive
influence, not separated, but conjoined, from many stars. So amongst
stones, the chalcedon is under Saturn and Mercury, together with the
Taile of Scorpion, and Capricorn. The sapphire, under Jupiter, Saturn
and the star Alhajoth; tutia is under Jupiter and the Sun and Moon; the
emerald, under Jupiter, Venus and Mercury and the star Spica. The
amethyst, as saith Hermes, is under Mars, Jupiter and the Heart of the
Scorpion. The jasper, which is of divers kinds, is under Mars, Jupiter
and the star Alchamech. The chrysolite is under the Sun, Venus and
Mercury, as also under the star which is called the Falling Vultur. The
topaz, under the Sun and the star Elpheia; the diamond, under Mars and
the Head of Algol. In like manner, amongst vegetables, the herb dragon
is under Saturn and the celestial Dragon; mastic and mint are under
Jupiter and the Sun, but mastic is also under the Heart of the Lyon, and
mint, under the Goat Star. Hellebore is dedicated to Mars and the Head
of Algol; moss and sanders to the Sun and Venus; coriander to Venus and
Saturn. Amongst animals, the sea calf is under the Sun and Jupiter; the
fox

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

and ape, under Saturn and Mercury; and domestical dogs under Mercury and
the Moon. And thus we have shewed more things in these inferiors by
their superiors. <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[114:\*](pnm41.htm#fr_25) Agrippa's historian,
Mr. Henry Morley, says: "Here ends the detail of the theory of Nature,
upon which were based, so far as concerned natural things, the arts of
sorcery and divination. From theory to practice, therefore, the young
student passes."—"Life of Cornelius Agrippa," Vol. I., p. 136.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. Of the Seals and Characters of Natural
Things](pnm42)
