[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm44)  [Next](pnm46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Union of Mixed Things, and the Introduction of a More Noble Form and the Senses of Life</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, we must know, that by how much
the more noble the form of anything is, by so much the more prone and
apt it is to receive, and powerful to act. Then the virtues of things do
then become wonderful, viz., when they are put to matters that are
mixed, and prepared in fit seasons, to make them *alive*, by procuring
life for them from the Stars, as also a sensible Soul as a more noble
form. For there is so great a power in *prepared* matters, which, we
see, do then receive life when a perfect mixtion of qualities seems to
break the former contrariety. For so much the more perfect life things
receive, shews by how much their temper is more remote from contrariety.

Now, the Heaven, as a prevalent cause, doth (from the beginning of every
thing to be generated by the due concoction and perfect digestion of the
matter), together with life, bestow celestial influences and wonderful
gifts, according to the Capacity that is in that Life and sensible Soul
to receive more noble and sublime virtues. For the Celestial Virtue doth
otherwise lie asleep, as sulphur kept from the flame,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

but in Living Bodies it doth always burn, as kindled sulphur; and then
by its vapor, like the lighted sulphur, it fills all the places that are
next to it.

So certain wonderful works are wrought, such as are read of in the book
of Nemith, which is titled a Book of the Laws of Pluto, because such
kind of monstrous generations are not produced according to the Laws of
Nature. For we know that of worms are generated gnats; of a horse,
wasps; of a calf or ox, bees; of a crab, his legs being taken off and he
buried in the ground, a scorpion; of a duck, dried into powder and put
into hot water, are generated frogs; but if the duck be baked in a pie,
and cut into pieces, and then put into a moist place under the ground,
toads are generated of it. Of the herb garden basil, bruised betwixt two
stones, are generated scorpions; and of the hairs of a catameniel
person, buried under compost, are bred serpents; and the hair of a
horse's tail, put into water, receiveth life and is turned into a
pernicious worm. And there is an art wherewith, by a hen sitting upon
eggs, may be generated a form like to a man (which I have seen and know
how to make), which magicians say hath in it wonderful virtues; and this
they call the true mandrake. You must, therefore, know which and what
kind of matters are either of Nature or Art, begun or perfected, or
compounded of more things, and what celestial influences they are able
to receive. For a congruity of natural things is sufficient for the
receiving of influence from those celestial; because when nothing doth
hinder the Celestials to send forth their lights upon Inferiors, they
suffer no matter to be destitute of their virtue. Wherefore, as much
matter as is perfect and pure, is not unfit to receive the celestial
influence. For that is the binding and continuity of the matter to the
Soul of the World, which doth so daily flow in upon things natural, and
all things which Nature

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

hath prepared, that it is impossible that a prepared matter should not
receive life, or a more noble form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. How, By Some Certain Natural and Artificial
Preparations, We May Attract Certain Celestial and Vital Gifts](pnm46)
