[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm46)  [Next](pnm48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVIII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How We May Draw Not Only Celestial and Vital, but Also Certain Intellectual and Divine Gifts From Above</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Magicians</span> teach that celestial gifts may,
through inferiors being conformable to superiors, be drawn down by
opportune influences of the heaven; and so, also, by these celestial
gifts, the celestial angels (as they are servants of the stars) may be
procured and conveyed to us. Iamblichus, Proclus and Synesius, with the
whole school of Platonists, confirm that not only celestial and vital
but also certain intellectual, angelical and divine gifts may, be
received from above by some certain matters having a natural power of
divinity (*i. e.*), which have a natural correspondency with the
superiors, being rightly received and opportunely gathered together
according to the rules of natural philosophy and astronomy. And
Mercurius Trismegistus writes, that an Image, rightly made of certain
proper things, appropriated

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

to any one certain angel will presently be animated by that angel. Of
the same, also, Austin (St. Augustine) makes mention in his eighth book,
De Civitate Dei (the City of God). For this is the harmony of the world,
that things supercelestial be drawn down by the celestial, and the
supernatural by those natural, because there is One Operative Virtue
that is diffused through all kinds of things; by which virtue, indeed,
as manifest things are produced out of occult causes, so a magician doth
make use of things manifest to draw forth things that are occult, viz.,
through the rays of the Stars, through fumes, lights, sounds, and
natural things which are agreeable to those celestial, in which, aside
from their corporeal qualities, there is, also, a kind of reason, sense
and harmony, and incorporeal and divine measures and orders.

So we read that the ancients were wont often to receive some divine and
wonderful thing by certain natural things: So the stone that is bred in
the apple of the eye of a civet eat, held under the tongue of a man, is
said to make him to divine or prophesy; the same is selenite, the
moon-stone, reported to do. So they say that the Images of Gods may be
called up by the stone called anchitis; <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28.md) and that the ghosts of the dead may be,
being called up, kept up by the stone synochitis. The like doth the herb
aglauphotis do, which is also called marmorites, growing upon the
marbles of Arabia, as saith Pliny, and the which magicians use. Also
there is an herb called rheangelida with which magicians drinking of can
prophesy. Moreover, there are some herbs by which the dead are raised to
life; whence Xanthus the historian tells that with a certain herb called
balus, a young dragon being killed, was made alive again;

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

also, that by the same herb a certain man of Tillum, whom a dragon
killed, was restored to life; and Juba reports, that in Arabia a certain
man was by a certain herb restored to life. But whether or no any such
things can be done, indeed, upon man by the virtue of herbs or any other
natural thing, we shall discourse in the following chapter. Now, it is
certain and manifest, that such things can be done upon other animals.
So if flies, that are drowned, be put into warm ashes they revive. And
bees, being drowned, do in like matter recover life in the juice of the
herb catnip; and eels, being dead for want of water, if with their whole
bodies they be put under mud in vinegar and the blood of a vulture being
put to them, will all of them, in a few days, recover life. They say
that if the fish echeneis be cut into pieces and cast into the sea, the
parts will within a little time come together and live. Also we know
that the pelican doth restore her young to life, being killed, with her
own blood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[126:\*](pnm47.htm#fr_28.md) This was, in all
probability, some mineral that resembled Dr. Dee's celebrated stone,
which was cannel-coal, a black mineral coal sufficiently hard to be cut
and polished and used by him as a Magic Mirror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX. That We May, By Some Certain Matters of the World,
Stir Up the Gods of the World and Their Ministering Spirits](pnm48.md)
