[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm39)  [Next](pnm41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How Provinces and Kingdoms Are Distributed to Planets</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, the whole orb of the earth is
distributed by kingdoms and provinces to the Planets and Signs: For
Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, Arriana, Gordiana, India, many of which
countries are in the lesser Asia, are under Saturn with Capricornus; but
with Aquarius

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

under him are the Sauromatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia,
Phazania, Media and [Æthiopia](errata.htm#3.md), which countries, for the
most part, belong to the more inward Asia. Under Jupiter, with
Sagittarius, are Tuscana, Celtica, Spaine, and happy Arabia; and under
him, with Pisces, are Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia,
Nasamonia, and Lybia. Mars, with Aries, governs Britany, France,
Germany, Bastarnia, the lower parts of Syria, Idumea, and Judea; with
Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena, Cappadocia, Metagonium, Mauritania,
and Getulia. The Sun, with Leo, governs Italy, Apulia, Sicilia,
Phenicia, Chaldea, and the Orchenians. Venus, with Taurus, governs the
Isles Cyclades, the seas of little Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia;
but, with Libra, she commands the people of the Island Bractia, of
Caspia, of Seres, of Thebais, of Oasis, and of Troglodys. Mercury, with
Gemini, rules Hircania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the
lower Egypt; but, with Virgo, he rules Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon,
Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Ela, whence they of that place are in
Scripture called Elamites. The Moon, with Cancer, governs Bithivia,
Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and all Carchedonia.

These we have, in this manner, gathered from Ptolemy's opinion, to
which, according to the writings of other astrologers, many more may be
added. But he who knows how to compare these divisions of provinces
according to the Divisions of the Stars, with the Ministry of the Ruling
Intelligences, and Blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the Lots of the
Apostles, and Typical Seals of the Sacred Scripture, shall be able to
obtain great and prophetical oracles, concerning every region, of things
to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. What Things Are Under the Signs, the Fixed Stars,
and Their Images](pnm41.md)
