[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm53)  [Next](pnm55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLV.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and Their Virtues</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Moreover</span>, collyries and unguents,
conveying the virtues of things natural and celestial to our spirit, can
multiply, transmute, transfigure, and transform it accordingly, as also
transpose those virtues which are in them into it; that so, it cannot
act only upon its own body, but also upon that which is near it, and
affect that by visible rays, charms, and by touching it with some like
quality. For because our spirit is the subtile, pure, lucid, airy, and
unctuous vapor of the blood, it is therefore fit to make collyries of
the like vapors, which are more suitable to our spirit in substance, for
then, by reason of their likeness, they do the more stir up, attract,
and transform the spirit. The like virtues have certain ointments and
other

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

confections. Hence by the touch sometimes sickness, poisonings, and love
is induced; some things, as the hands or garments, being anointed. Also
by kisses, some things being held in the mouth, love is induced; as in
Virgil we read that Venus prays Cupid

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">That when glad Dido hugs him in her lap  
At royal feasts, crown’d with the cheering grape,  
When she, embracing, shall sweet kisses give,  
Inspire hid flame, with deadly bane deceive,  
He would——</span>

</div>

Now the sight, because it perceives more purely and clearly than the
other senses, and fastening in us the marks of things more acutely and
deeply, doth most of all and before others, agree with the phantastic
spirit, as is apparent in dreams, when things seen do more often present
themselves to us than things heard, or any thing coming under the other
senses. Therefore, when collyries or eye-waters transform visual
spirits, that spirit doth easily affect the imagination, which indeed
being affected with divers species and forms, transmits the same by the
spirit unto the outward sense of sight; by which occasion there is
caused in it a perception of such species and forms in that manner, as
if it were moved by external objects, that there seem to be seen
terrible images and spirits and such like. So there are made collyries,
making us forthwith to see the images of spirits in the air or
elsewhere; as I know how to make of the gall of a man, and the eyes of a
black cat, and of some other things. The like is made also of the blood
of a lapwing, of a bat, and a goat; and, they say, if a smooth, shining
piece of steel be smeared over with the juice of mug-wort, and made to
fume, it will make invoked spirits to be seen in it. So, also, there are
some suffumigations, or unctions, which make men speak in their sleep,
to walk, and to do those things which are done by men that are awake;
and sometimes to do those things

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

which men that are awake cannot or dare not do. Some there are that make
us to hear horrid or delectable sounds, and such like. And this is the
cause why maniacal and melancholy men believe they see and hear those
things without which their imagination doth only fancy within; hence
they fear things not to be feared, and fall into wonderful and most
false suspicions, and fly when none pursueth them; are also angry and
contend, nobody being present, and fear where no fear is. Such like
passions also can magical confections induce, by suffumigations, by
collyries, by unguents, by potions, by poisons, by lamps and lights, by
looking-glasses, by images, enchantments, charms, sounds and music. Also
by divers rites, observations, ceremonies, religions and superstitions;
all which shall be handled in their places. And not only by these kind
of arts are passions, apparitions and images induced, but also things
themselves, which are really changed and transfigured into divers forms,
as the poet relates of Proteus, Periclimenus, Acheloas, and Merra, the
daughter of Erisichthon. So, also, Circe changed the companions of
Ulysses; and of old, in the sacrifices of Jupiter Lycæus, the men that
tasted of the inwards of the sacrifices were turned into wolves which,
Pliny saith, befell a certain man called Demarchus. The same opinion was
Austin of, for, he saith, whilst he was in Italy, he heard of some women
that by giving sorceries in cheese to travelers, turned them into
working cattle, and when they had done such work as they would have
them, turned them into men again; and that this befell a certain priest
called Prestantius. The Scriptures themselves testify that Pharao's
sorceries turned their rods into serpents and water into blood, and did
other such like things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI. Of Natural Alligations and Suspensions](pnm55)
