[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm52)  [Next](pnm54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIV.

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Composition of Some Fumes Appropriated to the Planets</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> make a suffumigation for the Sun in
this manner, viz., of saffron, ambergris, musk, lignum aloes, lignum
balsam, the fruit of the laurel, cloves, myrrh, and frankincense; all
which being bruised and mixt in such a proportion as may make a sweet
odor, must be incorporated with the brain of an eagle, or the blood of a
white cock, after the manner of pills or troches.

For the Moon we make a suffumigation of the head of a dried frog, the
eyes of a bull, the seed of white

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

poppy, frankincense, and camphor; which must be incorporated with
catamenia, or the blood of a goose.

For Saturn, take black poppy seed, henbane, root of mandrake, the
loadstone, and myrrh, and make them up with the brain of a cat or the
blood of a bat.

For Jupiter, take the seed of ash, lignum aloes, storax, the gum
benjamin or benzoin, the lazuli stone, and the tops of the feathers of a
peacock; and incorporate them with the blood of a stork, or a swallow,
or the brain of a hart.

For Mars, take euphorbium, bedellium, gum ammoniac, the roots of both
hellebores, the loadstones, and a little sulphur; and incorporate them
all with the brain of a hart, the blood of a man and the blood of a
black cat.

For Venus, take musk, ambergris, lignum aloes, red roses and red coral,
and make them up with the brain of sparrows and the blood of pigeons.

For Mercury, take mastic, frankincense, cloves, and the herb
cinque-foil, and the stone achate, and incorporate them all with the
brain of a fox or weasel, and the blood of a magpie.

Besides, to Saturn are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous roots, as
pepper-wort root, etc., and the frankincense tree; to Jupiter,
odoriferous fruits, as nutmegs and cloves; to Mars, all odoriferous
wood, as sanders, cypress, lignum balsam and lignum aloes; to the Sun,
all gums, frankincense, mastic, benjamin, storax, ladanum, ambergris and
musk; to Venus, sweet flowers, as roses, violets, saffron, and such
like; to Mercury, all the peels of wood and fruit, as cinnamon, lignum
cassia, mace, citron or lemon peel, and bayberries, and whatsoever seeds
are odoriferous; to the Moon, the leaves of all vegetables, as the leaf
indum, and the leaves of the myrtle and bay-tree.

Know, also, that according to the opinion of the magicians, in every
good matter, as love, good will,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

and the like, there must be a good fume, odoriferous and precious; and
in every evil matter, as hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must
be a stinking fume, that is of no worth.

The twelve Signs, also, of the Zodiac have their proper fumes, as Aries
hath myrrh; Taurus, pepper-wort; Gemini, mastic; Cancer, camphor; Leo,
frankincense; Virgo, sanders; Libra, galbanum; Scorpio, opopanax;
Sagittarius, lignum aloes; Capricornus, benjamin; Aquarius, euphorium;
Pisces, red storax. But Hermes describes the most powerful fume to be
that which is compounded of the Seven Aromatics, according to the powers
of the Seven Planets—for it receives from Saturn, pepper-wort; from
Jupiter, nutmeg; from Mars, lignum aloes; from the Sun, mastic; from
Venus, saffron; from Mercury, cinnamon; and from the Moon, the myrtle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and Their
Virtues](pnm54)
