[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm50)  [Next](pnm52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Wonderful Virtues of Some Kinds of Sorceries</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span> I will shew you what some of the
Sorceries are, that by the example of these there may be a way opened
for the consideration of the whole subject of them. Of these, therefore,
the first is the catamenia, which, how much power it hath in sorcery, we
will now consider; for, as they say, if it comes over new wine it makes
it sour, and if it doth but touch

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the vine, it spoils it forever; and, by its very touch, it makes all
plants and trees barren, and they that be newly set to die; it burns up
all the herbs in the garden and makes fruit fall off from the trees; it
darkens the brightness of a looking-glass, dulls the edges of knives and
razors, and dims the beauty of ivory. It makes iron presently rusty; it
makes brass rust and smell very strong; it makes dogs mad if they do but
taste of it, and if they, being thus mad, shall bite any one, that wound
is incurable. It kills whole hives of bees, and drives them from the
hives that are but touched with it. It makes linen black that is boiled
with it; it makes mares cast their foal if they do but touch it, and
makes asses barren as long as they eat of the corn that hath been
touched with it. The ashes of catamenious clothes, if they be cast upon
purple garments that are to be washed, change the color of them, and
takes away colors from flowers. They say that it drives away tertian and
quartan agues if it be put into the wool of a black ram, and tied up in
a silver bracelet; as, also, if the soles of the patient's feet be
anointed therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman herself,
the patient not knowing of it. Moreover, it cures the fits of the
falling sickness; but most especially it cures them that are afraid of
water, or drink after they are bitten with a mad dog, if only a
catamenious cloth be put under the cup. Besides, they report, that if
catamenious persons shall walk, being nude, about the standing corn,
they make all cankers, worms, beetles, flies, and all hurtful things, to
fall off from the corn; but they must take heed that they do it before
sun-rising, or else they will make the corn to wither. Also, they say,
they are able to expel hail, tempests, and lightnings, more of which
Pliny makes mention of. Know this, that they are a greater poison if
they happen in the decrease of the Moon, and yet much greater if

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

they happen betwixt the decrease and change of the Moon; but if they
happen in the eclipse of the Moon or the Sun, they are an incurable
poison. But they are of the greatest force of all when they happen in
the first early years, even in the years of virginity, for if they do
but touch the posts of the house there can no mischief take effect in
it. Also, they say, that the threads of any garment touched therewith
cannot be burnt, and if they be cast into the fire it will spread no
further. Also, it is said, that the root of peony, being given with
castor oil smeared over, using the catamenious cloth, cureth the falling
sickness. Moreover, if the stomach of a hart be burnt or roasted, and to
it be put a perfuming made with a catamenious cloth, it will make
cross-bows useless for the killing of any game. The hairs of a
catamenious person, put under compost, breed serpents; and, if they be
burnt, will drive away serpents with their smell. So great a poisonous
force is in them that they are poison to poisonous creatures.

There is, also, hippomanes, which amongst sorceries is not the least
taken notice of, and it is a little venemous piece of flesh as big as a
fig, and black, which is in the forehead of a colt newly foaled, which
unless the mare herself presently eat, she will never after love her
foal or let it suckle. And for this cause, they say, there is a most
wonderful power in it to procure love, if it be powdered and drank in a
cup with the blood of him that is in love. There is another sorcery of
the same name, hippo-manes, a venemous humor of the mare in her mating
season, of which Virgil makes mention when he sings:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hence comes that poison which the Shepherds call  
Hippomanes, and from the Mares doth fall,  
The woeful bane which cruel stepdames use,  
And with a charme ’mongst pow’rful drugs infuse.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

Of this doth Juvenal, the satirist, make mention:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hippomanes, poysons that boyled are, and charmes  
Are given to Sons in law, with such like harmes.</span>

</div>

Apollonius, also, in his Argonautica, makes mention of the herb of
Prometheus, which he saith groweth from corrupt blood dropping upon the
earth, whilst the vulture was gnawing upon the liver of Prometheus upon
the hill Caucasus. The flower of this herb, he saith, is like saffron,
having a double stalk hanging out, one further than the other the length
of a cubit; the root under the earth, as flesh newly cut, sends forth a
blackish juice as it were of a beech, with which, saith he, if any one
shall, after he hath performed his devotion to Proserpina, smear over
his body, he cannot be hurt either with sword or fire. Also Saxo
Gramaticus writes, that there was a certain man, called Froton, who had
a garment which, when he had put on, was such he could not be hurt with
the point or edge of any weapon. The civet cat also abounds with
sorceries, for, as Pliny reports, the posts of a door being touched with
her blood, the arts of jugglers and sorcerers are so invalid that the
gods cannot be called up, and will by no means be persuaded to talk with
them. Also, that they are anointed with the ashes of the ankle-bone of
her left foot, being decocted with the blood of a weasel, shall become
odious to all. The same, also, is done with the eye, being, decocted.
Also, it is said, that the straight-gut is administered against the
injustice and corruption of princes and great men in power, and for
success of petitions, and to conduce to the ending of suits and
controversies, if any one hath never so little of it about him; and that
if it be bound unto the left arm, it is such a perfect charm that if any
man do but look upon a woman, it will make her follow him presently; and
that the skin of the civet cat's

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

forehead doth withstand bewitchings. They say, also, that the blood of a
basilisk, which they call the blood of Saturn, hath such great force in
sorcery that it procures for him that carries it about him good success
of his petitions from great men in power, and of his prayers from God,
and also remedies of diseases, and grant of any privilege. They say,
also, that a tyke, if it be pulled out of the left ear of a dog, and if
be it is altogether black, hath great virtue in the prognosticating of
life, for if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, and
who, standing at his feet, shall ask of him concerning his disease,
there is certain hope of life; and that he shall die if he make no
answer.

They say, also, that a stone that is bit with a mad dog hath power to
cause discord, if it be put in drink, and that lie shall not be barked
at by dogs that puts the tongue of a dog in his shoe under his great
toe, especially if the herb of the same name, viz., hound's-tongue, be
joined with it. And that a membrane of the secondines of a dog doth the
same; and that dogs will shun him that hath a dog's heart. And Pliny
reports that there is a red toad that lives in briers and brambles, and
is full of sorceries and doth wonderful things, for the little bone
which is in his left side, being cast into cold water, makes it
presently very hot; by which also the rage of dogs is restrained, and
their love is procured if it be put in their drink; and, if it be bound
to any one, it stirreth up desire. On the contrary, the little bone
which is on the right side makes hot water cold, and that it can never
be hot again unless that be taken out; also it is said to cure quartans
if it be bound to the sick in a snake's skin, as also all other fevers,
and to restrain love and desire. And that the spleen and heart is an
effectual remedy against the poisons of the said toad. Thus much Pliny
writes. Also, it is said, that the sword with which

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

a man is slain hath wonderful power in sorceries. For if the snaffle of
the bridle, or spurs, be made of it, they say that with these any horse,
though never so wild, may be tamed and gentled; and that if a horse
should be shod with shoes made of it, he would be most swift and fleet,
and never, though never so hard rode, tire. But yet they will that some
certain characters and names should be written upon it. They say, also,
if any man shall dip a sword, wherewith men were beheaded, in wine, and
the sick drink thereof, he shall be cured of his quartan. They say,
also, that a cup of liquor being made with the brains of a bear, and
drank out of the skull, shall make him that drinks it be as fierce and
as raging as a bear, and think himself to be changed into a bear, and
judge all things he sees to be bears, and so to continue in that madness
until the force of that draught shall be dissolved, no other distemper
being all this while perceived in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII. Of Perfumes or Suffumigations; Their Manner and
Power](pnm52.md)
