[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm64)  [Next](pnm66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LVI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Soothsayings of Flashes and Lightnings, and how Monstrous and Prodigious Things are to be Interpreted</span>.

Now, the soothsayings of flashes and lightnings, and of wonders, and how
monstrous and prodigious

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

things are to be interpreted, the prophets and priests of Hetruscus have
taught the art. For they have ordained sixteen regions of the heavens
and have ascribed Gods to every one of them, besides eleven kinds of
lightning, and nine gods which should dart them forth, by showing rules
for understanding the signification of them. But as often as monstrous,
prodigious and wondrous things happen, they do presage, as is most
certain, some great matter. Now, their interpreter must be some
excellent conjector of similitudes, as also some curious searcher, and
of them who at that time are employed about the affairs of princes and
provinces. For the celestials take such care only for princes, peoples
and provinces that before the rest they might be prefigured and
admonished by stars, by constellations and by prodigies. Now, if the
same thing, or the like, hath been seen in former ages, we must consider
that very thing and what happened after that, and according to these, to
foretell the same, or the like, because the same signs are for the same
things, and the like for like. So prodigies have come before the birth
and death of many eminent men and kings, as Cicero makes mention of
Midas, a boy, into whose mouth whilst he was sleeping, the ant put corns
of wheat, which was an omen of great riches. So bees sat upon the mouth
of Plato when he was sleeping in the cradle, by which was foretold the
sweetness of his speech. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, saw
a burning torch, which should set on fire Troy and all Asia. There
appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury pouring forth
blood upon the earth, with which the whole house was overflowed. The
mother of Dionysius dreamed she brought forth a satyr, which prodigious
dream the event that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius Priscus,
seeing a flame lick the head of Servius Tullius, foretold that he should
have the kingdom.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In like manner,
after Troy was taken, Æneas disputing with Anchises, his father,
concerning a fight, there appeared a flame licking the head of the crown
of Ascanius and doing him no hurt. Which thing, seeing it did portend
the kingdom to Ascanius, persuaded him to depart, for monstrous
prodigies did forerun great and eminent destruction. So we read in Pliny
that M. Attilius and C. Portius, being consuls, it rained milk and
blood, which did presage that a very great pestilence should the next
year overspread Rome. In Lucania it rained spongeous iron, and in the
year before Marcus Crassus was slain in Parthia, with which, also, all
the soldiers of Lucania, being a very numerous army, were slain. L.
Paulus and C. Marcellus, being consuls, it rained wool about the castle
of Corisanum, near which place, a year after, T. Annius was slain by
Milus. And in the wars of Denmark, the noise of arms and the sound of a
trumpet was heard in the air. And Livy, concerning the Macedonian wars,
saith, in the year when Annibal died it rained blood for two days.
Concerning the second Punic war, he saith that water mixed with blood
came down from heaven like rain at the time when Annibal did spoil
Italy. A little before the destruction of Leuctra, the Lacedemonians
heard a noise of arms in the temple of Hercules, and at the same time in
the temple of Hercules the doors that were shut with bars opened
themselves, and the arms that were hanged on the wall were found on the
ground. The like events may be prognosticated of other like things, as
oftentimes in times past something hath been foretold of them. But
concerning these, also, the judgments of the celestial influences must
not be neglected, concerning which we shall more largely treat in the
following chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII. Of Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy,
Four Divinations of Elements](pnm66)
