[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm70)  [Next](pnm72.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Passions of the Mind, their Original Source, Differences, and Kinds</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> passions of the human mind are
nothing else but certain motions or inclinations proceeding from the
apprehension of any thing, as of good or evil, convenient or
inconvenient. Now these kind of apprehensions

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

are of three sorts, viz., Sensual, Rational, and Intellectual. According
to these three are three sorts of passions in the soul; for when they
follow the sensitive apprehension then they respect a temporary good or
evil, under the notion of profitable or unprofitable, or delightful or
offensive, and are called natural or animal passions. When they follow
the rational apprehension, and so respect good or bad, under the notions
of virtue or vice, praise or disgrace, profitable or unprofitable, or
honest or dishonest, they are called rational or voluntary passions.
When they follow the intellectual apprehension, and respect good or bad,
under the notion of just or unjust, or true or false, they are called
intellectual passions, or syncrisis, the faculty of choosing from
comparison. Now, the subject of the passions of the soul is the
concupitive power of the soul, and is divided into that concupiscible
and that irascible, and both respect good and bad, but under a different
notion. For when the concupiscible power respects good and evil
absolutely, love or lust, or, on the contrary, hatred is caused. When it
respects good, though absent, so desire is caused; or evil, though
absent or at hand, and so is caused horror, flying from, or loathing;
or, if it respects good, though present, then there is caused delight,
mirth or pleasure; but if evil, though present, then sadness, anxiety,
or grief; but the irascible power respects good or bad, under the notion
of some difficulty, to obtain the one, or to avoid the other, and this
sometimes with confidence. And so there is caused hope or boldness; but
when with diffidency, then despair and fear. But when that irascible
power riseth into revenge, and this be only about some evil past, as it
were, of injury or hurt offered, there is caused anger. And so we find
eleven passions in the mind, which are: love, hatred, desire, horror,
joy, grief, hope, despair, boldness, fear, and anger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII. How the Passions of the Mind Change the Proper
Body by Changing Its Accidents and Moving the Spirit](pnm72.md)
