[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm76)  [Next](pnm78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXVIII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How Our Mind Can Change and Bind Inferior Things to the Ends Which We Desire</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> is also a certain virtue in the
minds of men of changing, attracting, hindering, and binding to that
which they desire; and all things obey them when they are carried into a
great excess of any passion or virtue, so as to exceed those things
which they bind. For the superior binds that which is inferior, and
converts it to itself; and the inferior is, by the same reason,
converted to the superior, or is otherwise affected, and wrought upon.
By this reason, things that receive a superior degree of any star, bind,
or attract, or hinder things which have an inferior, according as they
agree or disagree amongst themselves. Whence a lion is afraid of a cock,
because the presence of the Solary virtue is more agreeable to a cock
than to a lion. So a loadstone draws iron, because, in its order, it
hath a superior degree of the Celestial Bear.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

So the diamond hinders the loadstone, because, in the order of Mars, it
is superior to it. In like manner any man, when he is opportunely
exposed to the celestial influences (as by the affections of his mind
and due applications of natural things), if he become stronger in a
Solary virtue, he binds and draws the inferior into admiration and
obedience—in the order of the Moon, to servitude or infirmities; in a
Saturnine order, to quietness or sadness; in the order of Jupiter, to
worship; in the order of Mars, to fear and discord; in a Venus order, to
love and joy; in a Mercurial order, to persuasion and obsequiousness,
and the like. The ground of such a kind of binding is the very vehement
and boundless affection of the soul with the concourse of the celestial
order. But the dissolutions or hinderances of such a like binding are
made by a contrary effect, and that more excellent or strong; for as the
greater excess of the mind binds, so, also, it looseth and hindereth.
And, lastly, when the mind feareth Venus, it opposes Saturn; when Saturn
or Mars, it opposes Venus or Jupiter; for astrologers say that these are
most at enmity, and contrary the one to the other (*i. e.*), causing
contrary effects in these inferior bodies. For in the Heavens, where
there is nothing wanting, and where all things are governed with love,
there can in no wise be hatred or enmity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX. Of Speech, and the Occult Virtue of Words](pnm78)
