[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm75)  [Next](pnm77.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

### CHAPTER LXVII.

#### <span class="smallcaps">How the Mind of Man May Be Joined With the Mind of the Stars, and Intelligences of the Celestials, and, Together With Them, Impress Certain Wonderful Virtues Upon Inferior Things</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> philosophers, especially the
Arabians, say that man's mind, when it is most intent upon any work,
through its passion and effects, is joined with the mind of the stars
and intelligences; and, being so joined, is the cause of some wonderful
virtue being infused into our works and things; and this, because there
is in the mind an apprehension and power of all things, so all things
have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity an efficacy; and more
to that which desires them with a strong desire. And according to this
is verified the art of characters, images, enchantments, and some
speeches, and many other wonderful experiments as to everything which
the mind affects. By this means, whatsoever the mind of him that is in
vehement love, affects, hath an efficacy to cause love; and whatsoever
the mind of him that strongly hates, dictates, hath an efficacy to hurt
and destroy. The like is in other things, which the mind affects with a
strong desire. For all those things which the mind acts and dictates by
characters, figures, words, speeches, gestures, and the like, help the
appetite of the soul and acquire certain wonderful virtues; as from the
soul of the operator, in that hour when such a like appetite doth invade
it, so from the opportunity and celestial influence, moving the mind in
that manner. For our mind, when it is carried upon the great excess of
any passion or virtue, oftentimes presently takes of itself a strong,
better and more convenient hour or opportunity, which Thomas Aquinas, in
his third

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

book against the Gentiles, confesseth. So many wonderful virtues both
cause and follow certain admirable operations by great affections in
those things which the soul doth dictate in that hour to them. But know
that such things confer nothing, or very little, to the author of them,
and to him which is inclined to them, as if he were the author of them.
And this is the manner by which their efficacy is found out. And it is a
general rule in them, that every mind that is more excellent in its love
and affection makes such like things more fit for itself, becoming
efficacious to that which it desires. Every one, therefore, that is
willing to work in Magic must know the virtue, measure, order, and
degree of his own soul, in relation to the Power of the Universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII. How Our Mind Can Change and Bind Inferior Things
to the Ends Which We Desire](pnm77.md)
