[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm77)  [Next](pnm79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIX.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of Speech, and the Occult Virtue of Words</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> being shown that there is a great
power in the affections of the soul, you must know, moreover, that there
is no less virtue in words and the names of things, and greatest of all
in speeches and motions; by which we chiefly differ from the brutes, and
are called rational; not from reason, which is taken for

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

that part of the soul which contains the affections (which Galen saith
is also common to brutes, although in a less degree), but we are called
rational from that reason which is, according to the voice, understood
in words and speech, which is called Declarative Reason; by which part
we do chiefly excel all other animals. For logos, in Greek, signifies
reason, speech, and a word. Now, a word is twofold, viz., internal and
uttered. An internal word is a conception of the mind and motion of the
soul, which is made without a voice; as in dreams we seem to speak and
dispute with ourselves, and whilst we are awake, we run over a whole
speech silently. But an uttered word hath a certain act in the voice,
and properties of locution, and is brought forth with the breath of a
man, with opening of his mouth and with the speech of his tongue; in
which nature hath coupled the corporeal voice and speech to the mind and
understanding, making that a declarer and interpreter of the conception
of our intellect to the hearers; and of this we now speak. Words,
therefore, are the fittest medium betwixt the speaker and the hearer,
carrying with them not only the conception of the mind, but also the
virtue of the speaker, with a certain efficacy, unto the hearers; and
this oftentimes with so great a power, that often they change not only
the hearers but also other bodies and things that have no life. Now
those words are of greater efficacy than others which represent greater
things—as intellectual, celestial, and supernatural; as more expressly,
so more mysteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or
from any of a more holy order; for these (as it were certain signs and
representations) receive a power of celestial and supercelestial things,
as from the virtue of things explained, of which they are the vehicle,
and from a power put into them by the virtue of the speaker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX. Of the Virtue of Proper Names](pnm79)
