[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm82)  [Next](pnm84.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXIV.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of the Proportion, Correspondency, and Reduction of Letters to the Celestial Signs and Planets, According to Various Tongues, and a Table Thereof</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">God</span> gave to man a mind and speech, which
(as saith Mercurius Trismegistus) are thought to be a gift of the same
virtue, power, and immortality. The omnipotent God hath by his
providence divided the speech of men into divers languages, which
languages have, according to their diversity, received divers and proper
characters of writing, consisting in their certain order, number, and
figure, not so disposed and formed by hap or chance, nor by the weak
judgment of man, but from above, whereby they agree with the celestial
and divine bodies and virtues. But before all notes of languages, the
writing of the Hebrews is, of all, the most sacred in the figures of
characters, points of vowels, and tops of accents; or consisting in
matter, form, and spirit.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The position of the Stars being first made in the seat of God, which is
Heaven, after the figure of them (as the masters of the Hebrews testify)
are most fully formed the letters of the Celestial Mysteries, as by
their figure, form, and signification, so by the numbers signified by
them, and also by the various harmonies of their conjunction. Whence the
more curious Mecubals of the Hebrews do undertake—by the figure of their
letters, the forms of characters, and their signature, simpleness or
composition, separation, crookedness or directness, defect, abounding,
greatness or littleness, crowning, opening or shutting, order,
transmutation, joining together, revolution of letters, and of points,
and tops, by the supputation of numbers, and by the letters of things
signified—to explain all things; how they proceed from the first cause,
and are again to be reduced into the same. Moreover, they divide the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet, viz., into twelve simple, seven double,
and three mothers, which, they say, signify as characters of things—the
Twelve Signs, Seven Planets, and Three Elements, viz., Fire, Water, and
Earth; for they account Air no element, but as the glue and spirit of
the elements. To these, also, they appoint points and tops. As,
therefore, by the aspects of planets and signs, together with the
Elements (the working spirit and truth), all things have been and are
brought forth. So, by these characters of letters and points, signifying
those things that are brought forth, the names of all things are
appointed, as certain Signs and vehicles of things explained, carrying
with them everywhere their essence and virtues. The profound meanings
and Signs are inherent in those characters, and figures of them, as also
numbers, place, order, and revolution; so that Origenes, therefore,
thought that those names, when translated into another idiom, do not
retain their proper virtue. For only the original

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

names, which are rightly imposed, because they signify naturally and
have a natural activity. It is not so with them which signify at
pleasure, which have no activity as they are signifying, as they are but
certain natural things in themselves. Now, if there be any language
whose words have a natural signification, it is manifest that this is
the Hebrew; the order of which he that shall profoundly and radically
observe, and shall know to resolve proportionably the letters thereof,
shall have a rule exactly to find out any idiom. There are, therefore,
two and twenty letters, which are the foundation of the world, and of
creatures that are, and are named in it, and every saying and every
creature are of them, and by their revolutions receive their name,
being, and virtue.

He, therefore, that will find them out, must by each joining together of
the letters so long examine them, until the voice of God is manifest,
and the framing of the most sacred letters be opened and discovered; for
hence voices and words have efficacy in magical works, because that in
which Nature first exerciseth magical efficacy is the voice of God. But
these are of more deep speculation than to be handled in this book. To
return to the division of the letters: of these, amongst the Hebrews,
are three mothers, viz., ‏י‎, ‏ו‎, ‏א‎; seven double, viz., ‏ת‎, ‏ר‎,
‏פ‎, ‏כ‎, ‏ד‎, ‏נ‎, ‏ב‎. The other twelve, viz., ‏ש‎, ‏ק‎, ‏צ‎, ‏ע‎,
‏ס‎, ‏ג‎, ‏מ‎, ‏ל‎, ‏ט‎, ‏ח‎, ‏ז‎, ‏ה‎, are simple. The rule is the same
amongst the Chaldeans, and, by the imitation of those above, also the
letters of other tongues are distributed to the Signs, Planets, and
Elements, after their order. For the vowels in the Greek tongue answer
to the Seven Planets, and the others are attributed to the Twelve Signs
of the Zodiac, the Four Elements, and the Spirit of the World. Amongst
the Latins there is the same signification of them. For the five vowels
A, E, I, O, U, and J and V, consonants, are ascribed

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

to the Seven Planets, and the consonants, B, C, D, F, G, L, M, N, P, R,
S, T, are answerable to the Twelve Signs. The rest, viz., K, Q, X, Z,
make the Elements. H the aspiration, represents the Spirit of the World.
Y, because it is a Greek, and not a Latin character, and serving only to
Greek words, follows the nature of its idiom.

But this you must not be ignorant of, that it is observed by all wise
men, that the Hebrew letters are the most efficacious of all, because
they have the greatest similitude with celestials and the world, and
that the letters of the other tongues have not so great an efficacy
because they are more distant from them. Now the disposition of these
the following table will explain. Also all the letters have double
numbers of their order, viz., extended, which simply express of what
number the letters are, according to their order; and collected, which
re-collect with themselves the numbers of all the preceding letters.
Also they have integral numbers, which result from the names of letters,
according to their various manners of numbering. The virtues of which
numbers, he that shall know, shall be able in every tongue to draw forth
wonderful mysteries by their letters, as also to tell what things have
been past, and foretell things to come. There are also other mysterious
joinings of letters with numbers, but we shall abundantly discourse of
all these in the following books. Wherefore we will now put an end to
this first book.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The table above referred to, on the following page, is from the English
edition of 1651. The reader will also find a table of the Cabala
elsewhere in this volume. At this place we insert Mr. Henry Morley's
appropriate criticism on Agrippa's book of Natural Magic.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span id="img_22300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/22300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22300.jpg.md)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Henry Morley's Criticism](pnm84.md)
