[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm87)  [Next](pnm89) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REUCHLIN THE MYSTIC.

<span class="smallcaps">Such</span> were the mysteries of the Hebrew
Cabala, strangely blending a not unrefined philosophy with basest
superstition. It remains for us to form some just opinion of the charm
they had for many Christian scholars in the first years of the sixteenth
century. Reuchlin, or Capnio, was of such scholars the leader and the
type; as such, indeed, he was accepted by the young Cornelius Agrippa.
He was the greatest Hebrew scholar of his day, and had become so by his
own natural bent. Born at Pfortzheim, of the poorest parents, two and
thirty years before Agrippa came into the world, taught Latin at the
town school, and winning in his youth a ducal patron by his tunable
voice as chorister in the court chapel at Baden, by his quick wit, and
his serene, lively, amiable temper, he never afterwards lacked powerful
assistance.

The life of Reuchlin is the story of the origin of Greek and Hebrew
studies among learned Europeans. He was sent with the Margrave's son,
afterwards Bishop of Utrecht, to Paris. The fall of Constantinople, in
1453, had caused fugitive Greeks to betake themselves to many European
cities, where

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

they sometimes gave instruction in their language. Reuchlin, at Paris,
learned Greek from a Spartan, who gave him instruction also in
caligraphy and made him so clever a workman with his pen, that he could
eke out his means and buy books with money earned as a Greek copyist. He
studied Aristotle with the Spartan. Old John Wessel, of Groningen, a
disciple of Thomas a Kempis, taught him Hebrew, and invited him to a
direct study of the Bible. At the age of twenty he was engaged by
publishers to write a Latin dictionary, which he called *Breviloquus*.
At the age of twenty he taught Greek publicly, laying his main stress on
a study of the grammar; the good sense he spoke emptied the benches of
the sophisters around him, and produced complaints from old-fashioned
professors. It was then urged that all the views disclosed in Greek
books were essentially opposed to the spirit and belief of Rome. The
monks had no commerce with the language; and when they came to a Greek
quotation in a book that they were copying, were used to inscribe the
formula "Græca sunt, non leguntur." Reuchlin maintained his ground, at
twenty-five wrote a Greek grammar, lectured at Poictiers, and was made
licentiate of civil law. His notion of law studies was expressed in a
formula that has been applied in other terms to other things: In his
first year the young lawyer knows how to decide all causes, in the
second begins to be uncertain, in the third acknowledges that he knows
nothing, and then first begins to learn. In the last of these stages of
progress the licentiate of Poictiers repaired to Tubingen, and practiced
as an advocate with such success that he made money and married. At
Tubingen, Reuchlin won the confidence of Eberhard of the Beard, became
his private secretary and one of his privy-councillors, and went with
him to Rome in 1482, his age then being eight and twenty. At Rome he
distinguished himself as an orator before the

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pope, and was
considered to speak Latin wonderfully well for a German. After his
return to Germany, John Reuchlin remained with Eberhard in Stuttgard,
became assessor of the Supreme Court at the age of thirty, and a year
afterwards was elected proctor for the body of the Dominicans throughout
all Germany, which unpaid office he held for nearly thirty years. At the
age of thirty-one he received at Tubingen his doctorate, and in the year
following, that is to say, in the year of Cornelius Agrippa's birth, he
was sent with two others to Frankfort, Cologne, and Aix-la-Chapelle, on
the occasion of the coronation of Maximilian as Roman emperor. Then it
was that Maximilian first became acquainted with him. Reuchlin had then
a house at Stuttgard, and was known as a great cultivator of the learned
languages, while he was also high in the favor of his own prince, and in
constant request as a practitioner of law. In 1490 he was sent to Rome
on another mission, and on his way through Florence enjoyed personal
intercourse with Giovanni Pico di Mirandola, the scholar who, although a
determined antagonist to the astrologers, was a great friend to cabalism
and the introducer of the cabalistic mysteries into the favor of Italian
scholars. By him Reuchlin was further stimulated to the love of Hebrew
lore. When, two years afterwards, Reuchlin was at Linz on state business
with the Emperor Frederic III., it was something, indeed, that the
base-born scholar was raised to the dignity of court palatine, but it
was more to Reuchlin that the court physician was a learned Jew, Jehiel
Loans, who perfected his intimacy with the Hebrew. His aim then was,
above all things, first to study the original text of the Old Testament,
and secondly to read the writings of the Cabalists. The emperor, whose
life was then about to close (he died while Reuchlin was at Linz), saw
here another way of gratifying the agreeable and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

kindly scholar, for he not only made Reuchlin a count palatine (his arms
were a golden altar, from which smoke arose, with the inscription "Ara
Capnionis"), but he also presented to him a very ancient Hebrew Bible,
written carefully on parchment, a treasure then worth three hundred gold
crowns, which is to be seen still in the library of the Grand Duke of
Carlsruhe, where it is regarded as the oldest of its kind in Europe.
With the knowledge imparted by Jehiel Loans, and the actual text in
which all mysteries lay hidden, Reuchlin went home enriched as much as
he had been ennobled. Hebrew writing was at that time very rare, and was
to be met with chiefly in the hands of Jews. At Hebrew Reuchlin labored,
collecting Hebrew books and works expounding the Cabala, whenever
possible; and eventually he gave life in Germany, as Giovanni Pico di
Mirandola was giving life in Italy, to the cabalistical philosophy, the
great impulse to this German revival being the publication of the book
on the Mirific Word. It first appeared at Basle, in the year 1495, the
author's age then being forty-one. It was not published at Tubingen till
1514. The book was regarded as a miracle of heavenly wisdom. Philip
Beroaldus told of the Pope's enjoyment, and wrote word also to its
author that he had caused not only men of letters, but even statesmen
and warriors, to betake themselves to studying the mysteries of the
Cabala.

The death of Reuchlin's patron, Eberhard the elder, soon after his
elevation to the rank of duke in 1495, was followed by a period of
misrule in the little state. One of the first acts of Eberhard the
younger was to release his favorite, a dissolute priest, named
Holzinger, from the prison in which he had been kept by the good counsel
of Reuchlin; and for the further discomfiture of the scholar this man
was appointed chancellor over the university of

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tubingen. Reuchlin
of course resigned. He had been long wanted at Heidelberg, and went
there to be cherished by a new patron in the Elector Palatine. He
showed, as usual, his lively energy by the establishment of a Greek
chair, which the monks pronounced upon the spot to be a heresy; and by
venting his wrath against Holzinger in a Latin comedy, denouncing
dissolute priests, which he called Sergius, or the Head of the Head. It
was written to be acted by the students. A Latin comedy was then a rare
thing in the land; and the news that John Reuchlin had written one was
noised abroad. Prudent friends counseled him to beware of such
unscrupulous and powerful enemies as he would make if he attacked abuses
of the priesthood; he submitted to advice, and as he was notoriously
answerable for a comedy, and gossip must be satisfied, he suddenly
composed a substitute for that first written. When, therefore, the day
of the performance came, it was found that the Greek professor had
composed a comedy against abuses in his own profession; it was a
castigation of dishonest advocates. Scenica Progymnastica the piece was
called.

After two years of misrule Eberhard the younger took its consequences;
he was then deposed, and Holzinger, the monk, sent back to prison. "When
the bricks are doubled, Moses comes," said Reuchlin, and returned to his
old post at Tubingen. Hitherto his life of study had not been
unprofitable, nor, much benefit as he received through patronage, was it
a life wanting independence. "Whatever," he says, "I spent in learning,
I acquired by teaching."

An anecdote of this good-humored scholar may be here interpolated, which
displays his character in half a dozen points of view. He was detained
once in an inn when it was raining very heavily, and of course had his
book with him. The rain had driven into the common room a large number
of country

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

people, who were making a great noise. To quiet them Reuchlin called for
a piece of chalk, and drew with it a circle on the table before which he
sat. Within the circle he then drew a cross, and also within it, on the
right side of the cross, he placed with great solemnity a cup of water,
on the left he stuck a knife upright. Then placing a book—doubtless a
Hebrew one—within the mysterious circle, he began to read, and the
rustics who had gathered round him, with their mouths agape, patiently
waited for the consequence of all this conjuration. The result was that
Reuchlin finished comfortably the chapter he was reading without being
distressed even by a whisper of disturbance.

In the year 1502 Reuchlin was elected to the post of general judge of
alliance under the terms of the Suabian league. His office was to
adjudicate in all matters of dispute among confederates and vassals,
concerning the interests of the emperor as Archduke of Austria, the
electors and princes. There was a second judge for prelates, counts, and
nobles, a third for imperial cities. This post he held during eleven
years; he was holding it, therefore, at the time when the young
Cornelius Agrippa undertook to comment publicly at Dole upon his book
concerning the Mirific Word, Reuchlin then being fifty-five years old,
and at the summit of his fame, high, also, in the good esteem of
Maximilian. Three years before this date, notwithstanding the great mass
of legal business entailed on him by his judicial office, Reuchlin had,
to the great help of all students, published a volume of the Rudiments
of Hebrew, which included both a grammar and a dictionary. This book, he
wrote, "cost me the greatest trouble, and a large part of my fortune."
Cornelius no doubt had learnt his Hebrew by the help of it, and was
already deep in studies which a few years afterwards brought the monks
of Cologne into array against Reuchlin himself, their

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

hostility somewhat embittered by an inkling of the Latin comedy that was
not to be quite suppressed. Cornelius, however, was the first to feel
the power of such enemies. By the Epistolæ Obscurorum Virorum the monks
were destined to come off much worsted from their battle against
Reuchlin and the scholars who defended his fair name. Of their fortune
in the battle fought against Cornelius Agrippa it is one part of this
history to tell.

Reuchlin wrote at a later period (1517) a book upon the cabalistic art.
If it is written God created heaven and earth, he interpreted that to
mean spirit and matter, the spirit consisting of the angels and
ministers by whom the ways of man are influenced. Magic, he said, dealt
with evil spirits, but the true Cabala only with the good. He believed
in astrology; and so, indeed, did Luther and Melancthon; Giovanni Pico
di Mirandola at Florence, while adopting the Cabala, was very singular
in his hostility to a belief in influences of the stars. His own faith
in cabalism Reuchlin enforced thus: God, out of love to his people, has
revealed the hidden mysteries to some of them, and these could find in
the dead letters the living spirit. For Scripture consists of single
letters, visible signs, which stand in a certain connection with the
angels, as celestial and spiritual emanations from God. By the
pronunciation of the one, the others also are affected; but with a true
Cabalist, who penetrates the whole connection of the earthly with the
heavenly, these signs, rightly placed in connection with each other, are
a way of putting him into immediate union with the spirits, who through
that are bound to satisfy his wishes.

In his book called Capnio, or the Mirific Word, expounded at Dole by
Cornelius Agrippa, Reuchlin placed the Christian system in the center of
old heathen philosophies, considering many of the doctrines of
Pythagoras and Plato as having been taken

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

from, not introduced into, the wisdom of the Cabalists. The argument is
stated in the form of dialogue, which is immediately preceded by a
summary of its intention that may very well suffice here for a summary
of its contents: "Receive, then, in this book the argument on the
Mirific Word of three philosophers, whom I have feigned to be holding
such dispute among themselves as the controversies proper to their sects
would occasion, as to the best elucidation of the hidden properties of
sacred names. Out of which, great as they are in number and importance,
occasion will at last be the more easily afforded for selecting one name
that is above all names supremely mirific and beatific. And this you may
know the whole matter in brief. Sidonius, at first ascribed to the
school of Epicurus, but found afterwards, *nullius jurare in verba
magistri*, an unfettered philosopher, travels about to satisfy his
thirst for knowledge, and after many experiences enters Suabia, where he
meets in the town of Pfortzheim" (Reuchlin's birthplace) "two
philosophers—Baruch, a Jew, and Capnio" (Reuchlin himself), "a
Christian, with whom he disserts upon many systems, and presently upon
the knowledge itself of divine and human things, upon opinion, faith,
miracles, the powers of words and figures, secret operations, and the
mysteries of seals. In this way question arises concerning the sacred
names and consecrated characters of all nations which have anything
excellent in their philosophy, or not unworthy in their ceremonies; an
enumeration of symbols is made by each speaker zealously on behalf of
the rites cherished in his sect, until at last Capnio, in the third
book, collects out of all that is holy one name, Jehosua, in which is
gathered up the virtue and power of all sacred things, and which is
eternally, supremely blessed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Agrippa Expounds Reuchlin](pnm89)
