<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi02)  [Next](pi04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# PALE INK

### CHAPTER I

### Geographical Myths

THIS IS A very ancient story, and yet a new one. It is the story of two
Chinese expeditions to America—one in the fifth century A.D., and the
other in the twenty-third century B.C. Both have been taken from Chinese
records. One has been doubted—the other has never been examined.

The fifth century story, which will be treated first, is that of Hwui
Shan, Buddhist priest, who told the Court of China of going to a far
country, to the east, called "Fu-sang." The second story, the "Classic
of Mountains and Seas," is the record of a series of journeys, compiled
by the great Yu, at the request of the Emperor Shun, supposedly in 2250
B.C., describing mountains and rivers across the "Great Eastern Sea."

Fu-sang, this alleged-to-be "geographical myth of Mexico-figment of
[Buddhist](errata.htm#1.md) imagination," is, today, assumed to be nothing
more than legendary fantasy. The dramatic record, from the Chinese
Classics, was microscopically examined from 1761 to 1885, by more than
fifty top-flight European scholars. Paper after paper was written but
when the fan-fare had died down, nothing was conclusively proved or
disproved—since nothing was actually known of pre-historic Mexico or
United States. The controversy over Fu-sang eventually died a natural
death for lack of knowledge.

Work, the process of digging down deep into the earth to see what went
on before, had not started. No one knew just what was there—and, even
yet, the surface is barely scratched.

Within the past ten or fifteen years, archeologists have uncovered
amazing pre-historic sites that would have been inconceivable to the
scores of French and German scientists who

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

examined the [Buddhist](errata.htm#2.md) monk's story. Recent finds in
Arizona and New Mexico confirm some of the most minute details contained
within Hwui Shan's gripping account of Fu-sang. Had this present-day
knowledge been available to those European scholars, history, within the
past century, would have recorded the facts in a far different manner
from the way in which they are recorded.

Fu-sang is no geographical myth. It is real. In the fifth century, it
was a vital, strategic spot—Hwui Shan's visit there changed the entire
course of its history. He it was who was instrumental in creating in it
a magnificently brilliant civilization—the like of which the world has
never seen.

The second of our stories, which chronologically belongs first,
suffering from want of examination, has been infrequently read, even in
China, and has never been fully translated into English. Presumably
compiled by Yu, who later became Emperor, the books comprising the Shan
Hai King, the "Classic of Mountains and Seas," contain accounts of
journeys that cover the earth. It is my belief that the Shan Hai King
will be found to be the most astounding geographical document that has
ever been written.

It has long been known that Asiatics came across Bering Strait to
America at a very remote time—no one knows how early—100,000 years,
500,000 years, or perhaps earlier. Land masses in that area are
relatively close and at no time is it necessary to be without sight of
land from either the Asiatic or Alaskan coast. Then, too, we know that
climatic conditions have changed many times in the polar regions—a
million years ago, redwood trees and ferns grew on the Aleutians; they
formed a continuous band from the Asiatic shore down to southern
California. Other similar climatic changes in those ice-locked areas
have taken place within the known age of man. Journeys, that now seem to
us incredible, apparently were frequently undertaken.

No longer ago than sixty years, it was the general belief that the
Indian on the American continent, although recognized as being of
Mongolian origin, came sometime after the Christian

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

era. Forty years ago, the date was moved back a thousand years and it
was assumed that 3,000 years would be the limit of time accorded the
"red man." Twenty-five years ago, with the finding of the "Folsom Man,"
the date was shoved to 10,000 B.C.—the "Sandia Man" came to light and
the date was revised to 20,000 B.C. Now, with recent discoveries in
southern California, it is believed to go back to 100,000 B.C., with
400,000 B.C. as a possibility. Tremendous strides have been made with
these discoveries. Things that fifty years ago were inconceivable, are
now accepted.

Mongolian characteristics among the Mexican Indians had been recognized
even as far back as the Conquest. The Spaniards, time after time,
likened the Indian people to the Chinese. As more knowledge became
available, one similarity after another was noted. The Indian of North
America also bore marks of similarity to the Chinese, but they were of a
different type from those of the Indians farther to the south.

About thirty years ago, the Mexican Government took an interest and it,
together with several North American private institutions, set to work
to find out some of the answers. Archeologists began the work of
shovelling out trenches and soon were able to identify which piece of
pottery came from which level, and thus built up a time sequence.
Gradually, a mosaic was pieced together and relative periods of time
fell into place.

Tremendous spurts of activity in the arts and sciences are known to have
taken place shortly after the beginning of the Christian era in southern
Mexico, Yucatan and Guatemala. Such things as the corbelled roof
suddenly appeared in north-western Yucatan, in 475 A.D., with no
apparent explanation and with no gradual process of evolution leading up
to it. It arrived full blown. The calendar came onto the scene at
approximately the same time. Great cities, such as Chichen Itza and
Uxmal, rose in spectacular glory.

Speculation started buzzing around among archeologists to find the
cause. Some impact from an outside source must have exerted a terrific
influence. Material that was unearthed showed

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

evidence of great and sudden change—a religious motif not noticeable
earlier, cropped up. Artifacts that were unearthed bore an uncanny
resemblance to Buddhist Java, Cambodia and China. Buddhists, who were
known to have wandered over the face of the earth spreading their
doctrine, were charged with having found their way over here sometime
around 500 A.D., during a time of great upsurge of Buddhist missionary
activity.

Then other material was found that preceded the time of Buddha. One
thing after another turned up. The Tuxtla Statuette, a jade figurine,
tentatively dated as of 162 A.D., was discovered; the El Baul monument
supposedly executed in 29 A.D., and the monument from Tres Zapotes, in
southern Vera Cruz, presumably carved in 21 B.C., were next uncovered.
The earliest fixed date is that of the Leyden jade piece, dated as
having been carved in 320 A.D. An early spurt appeared to have taken
place somewhere about the second [millennium](errata.htm#3.md) B.C.—pottery
had developed to a finished state and corn was cultivated by that date.
Buddhist Chinese could not then be alleged to have contributed to the
teaching of pottery or the cultivation of corn, since they both arose
here before the Buddha was born.

Did the Indians from Mexico to Peru develop all of their arts and crafts
independently? Were there two separate periods of external influence?
Were Chinese the emigrants in both instances? Did these wanderers come
for a time and then stop? After a thousand years or more did they come
back? At the early date did they bring any Egyptians along? If any of
them were here did they leave anything behind? Archeologists started
looking for Chinese "bones." None are known to have been found. Since
none have been found and positively identified, there appeared to be
nothing that would prove that they were here.

It would be a relatively simple matter if the Chinese Buddhists had been
as thoughtful as "Kilroy" and had taken time out to have carved their
names in Chinese characters on solid rock, together with a date. If
Chinese were here before the Buddhists, they likewise might have been
more considerate. If they came over at periodic intervals starting about
400,000 B.C. and for

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

some reason terminated their visits along about 500 A.D., why did they
not leave some note of it? If they did, perhaps we have not yet
recognized it. Were there many persons that came across—or just a
handful? Were they on round trip expeditions or did they come as
permanent settlers? How far down did they travel or settle? Was there
trade back and forth once the contact had been established? Did one
"borrow" from the other back and forth? If the Chinese taught the
Indians, did the Indians likewise teach the Chinese?

Both the history of China as well as that of Japan, relate stories
concerning boatloads of thousands of young people sailing out across the
eastern sea to find a fabled land—never to return. Great ships sailed
across the Indian Ocean, carrying as many as 200 persons, together with
their horses—but they all returned. Whether the boatloads of young
people were shipwrecked or went down in mid-ocean was never known.
Whether they may have been carried along with the Kamchatka Current and
deposited on another shore was never presumed nor suspected. Chinese
records reveal that a boatload sailed about 219 B.C. and the Japanese
date was three hundred years later. They were all looking for "The
Promised Land."

Two hundred years ago, de Guignes, a Frenchman, thought that he had
found the answers to these questions in the Chinese Classics. His
discovery connected the Chinese Buddhists of 500 A.D. with the fabled
land of Fu-sang—which de Guignes believed was Mexico. After a lapse of
seventy years, another scholar came to the conclusion that de Guignes
was wrong. For the past 120 years, the second man's opinion has been
accepted. Whether or not either one or the other was correct or in
error, it still does not explain the early period, 1500 years before the
advent of Buddha in 500 B.C.

Since the Classics of 500 A.D. were disproved in 1831, insofar as they
were identified with Mexico, why should one go back to the Classics
again for any earlier record of contact between Mexico and China? The
search may be presumed to be fruitless before it is started.
Nevertheless, it is now being undertaken.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

The account which de Guignes examined, that of Hwui Shan, the Buddhist
priest, will be re-examined first. The second portion will deal with the
record of Yu, which is called in Chinese, Shan Hai King, and, in
English, the Classic of Mountains and Seas. Presumably this recording
was begun during the reign of the Emperor Shun, 2250 B.C., and completed
after Yu succeeded to the throne, about 2205 B.C. Both the dates and the
geographical substance of the record have been completely discounted by
scholars, here and abroad, who consider the entire account as pure
travesty—a descriptive collection of non-existing mountain ranges
peopled with leprechauns and fire-spewing dragons.

If the fabled country across the "Great Eastern Sea," of which Yu has
left descriptive notes, were [non-existent](errata.htm#4.md), why did so
many poets tingle with excitement when they wrote of the spectacular
beauty of the "Great Luminous Canyon"? Why did so many poets write "I
saw the place where the sun was born?" Why did others feel that they had
been cheated because they had been born too late and were unable to
travel to the place where the sun was born? One poet of the T’ang
dynasty (618 A.D.) regretted that Confucius had travelled extensively to
the west but had failed to go east to the place of the sun. The
inspiring sight of the "Great Luminous Canyon" thrilled those poetic
souls—it could not fail to do so.

For centuries Chinese scholars had studied this Book of Mountains and
Seas—this record of Yu. It was one of the required books that all
students had to read and on which they were examined during the time of
the great examinations of China.

About the third century B.C., doubts as to the veracity of Yu's account
crept in. Scholars looked for his mountain ranges in every conceivable
corner of China and failed to find them. Since they failed to find them
in China, it was concluded that Yu's mountains did not exist; that the
record was good literature—it was never intended to be factual. That
opinion has been held for the past 2,000 years.

Originally the Book of Mountains and Seas comprised 32

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

books—18 have come down to us. No complete English translation is known
to exist. On reading the precious few that were found in translation. I
was impressed by their sincerity. It was perfectly obvious that whoever
set down the data had been somewhere. The record was an eye-witness
account—it was no collection of mythical nor imaginary
[labyrinthine](errata.htm#5.md) wanderings.

The fragmentary portion, available in translation, was titled "Across
the Great Eastern Sea." Chinese scholars had made exhaustive searches in
China but failed to locate Yu's mountain ranges. Looking in China would
prove pointless—the caption specifically stated otherwise. No one, it
seemed, had looked "across the Great Eastern Sea."

If the book were to be examined, directions of the author would have to
be scrupulously followed. Discounting the other fellow's directions and
mileage, on the presumption that he must be wrong, one never gets to the
place where he was directed. That was what happened to the German
scientist who examined Hwui Shan's account in the 1830's. In this
instance, when we are told to go east—we go east; when directions
specify 266 miles, then we shall go 266 miles. We shall follow every
instruction laid down in the Classics, insofar as we have it.

Traditions, oftentimes, are forgotten. In the case of Yu's journeymen,
great numbers of persons were sent out across the seas who, on their
return, doubtless related stories of their adventures to their children
and grandchildren. But time, along with war, [upheaval](errata.htm#6.md)
and pestilence over extended periods, has a habit of erasing details
from men's minds. If we rely solely on tradition, which, while it
maintains the germ, frequently is distorted, we would have an incomplete
picture. Tradition in this case was long since forgotten—but the record
of Yu remained intact, indelibly written down so that man would not
forget.

 

"Pale ink," said Confucius, "is better than the most retentive memory."
And so it was with the record of Yu.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Fu-sang](pi04.md)

</div>
