<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi03)  [Next](pi05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAPTER II

### Fu-sang

YU'S DOCUMENT will be put aside for the moment in order to explore the
highly controversial fifth century story of Fu-sang, an account
contained within the Chinese Classics.

The much-sought-after answer to the riddle as to whether or not Asiatics
were here in America at an early time has intrigued thousands of
persons. There could not be one who has read stories written by the
Spanish Conquistadores or even those concerning the problematical Mu,
Atlantis or Lemuria, who has not been disturbed by scores of conflicting
emotions. Fu-sang has added to them.

The beginning of the controversy, with reference to the Chinese account
of Fu-sang, started in 1761, following the discovery by de Guignes, an
eminent French sinologist, that the country of Fu-sang, as noted in the
Chinese Classics, was Mexico. From this discovery, there arose a most
bitter controversy. Like many controversies, it turned on questions of
personalities rather than on facts.

De Guignes was a scholar. He devoted much of his life to a study of the
early Chinese, particularly to that which concerned navigation. During
his course of study of the Classics, he came across a story, retold by
Ma Twan-lin, in his "Antiquarian Researches" published in 1321, of a
[Buddhist](errata.htm#7) priest, Hwui Shan by name, who, in the fifth
century, reported having been to a far country to the east of China.
After translating the account, de Guignes believed that he recognized
the country described by Hwui Shan to be that of Mexico. He made known
the result of his research in a very learned paper entitled
"Investigation of the Navigation of the Chinese to the Coast of America,
and as to some Tribes situated at the Eastern Extremity of Asia,"
published in Paris in 1761. The paper created a terrific shock. It came
at a time when the contributions of the French Academy of Sciences were
at their apex—Maupertuis and La Condamine had shortly before returned
from their respective expeditions in measuring the arc, one in the polar
regions and the other at the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

equator. The Academy was engulfed in broiling discussions concerning the
origin of man, his migrations, his early culture; the shape of the
earth; ethereal waves; and involved matters of linguistics. It was only
natural that, at a time like that, de Guignes’ paper should have aroused
tremendous interest.

The thesis that de Guignes propounded was conceded, for 70 years, to be
correct by all those who had considered it. However, in 1831, the famous
Prussian sinologist, Klaproth, refuted the de Guignes theory and put
forth one of his own. Klaproth, who had derived much of his knowledge
from de Guignes, jumped squarely on the learned treatise and ripped it
apart from stem to stern. He criticized de Guignes—he criticized the
Chinese. He went so far in his analysis as to conclude that the Chinese
themselves did not know east from south. Then, after concluding that, he
decided that the Chinese could not count—they would not know how far
they had travelled. He ruthlessly tore down both de Guignes’ theory and
the account of Hwui Shan. He gave no constructive explanation for this
portion of the Classics, but defiantly stood his ground relying on his
preeminent place among sinologists to uphold him. And it did.

A storm broke loose and a minor Franco-Prussian war of words raged
around Fu-sang for the next 50 years. For the most part, the thinking
world of that day opposed Klaproth, although, peculiarly enough, he is
followed today with no opposition. Klaproth based his major hypothesis
on the fact that, in the Classics, both a "grape" or "grapevine" and a
"horse" were supposed to have been found in this strange country. These
two items, together with his assertion of the erroneous sense of
direction on the part of the Chinese, and their inability to tabulate
mileage, formed the basis for his dissent. In Klaproth's own words, he
stated: "The circumstance that vines are found in the country of Fu-sang
is sufficient to prove that it could not be any part of America." For
some unknown reason, Klaproth, the scientist, made a bold and positive
statement that the vine did not exist in America before the coming of
Columbus, ignoring a fact, well known to him, that the early Norsemen
called

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

this country "Vinland" because of the abundance here of wild grapes.

The Marquis D’Hervey remarked: "If such reasoning had been published by
an Orientalist of less reputation than Klaproth, it would be almost
superfluous to expose it."

One of the very illuminating comments came from Dr. A. Godron, President
of the Academy of Sciences of Nancy, which in part stated:

"As to the point raised by M. Klaproth, that the Chinese did not possess
means of measuring the distances of their journeys accurately and of
determining their direction, it may be observed that we possess a
document which disproves this assertion, and which is the more curious
from the fact that it came from Klaproth himself. It proves that the
Chinese, even in the times of remote antiquity, were no novices in the
art of measuring distances and fixing their directions. . . . Klaproth
states that the accounts of these (early) journeys are worthy of the
more confidence from the fact that the compass had long been employed by
the Chinese. He adds that the Chinese historian,
[Sse-ma-tsein](errata.htm#8), gives an account of the Emperor
Tz’-ing-wang, 1100 years before the Christian era, as presenting five
magnetic compasses to the Ambassadors of Tong-king in order that they
would be able to retrace their steps home. Klaproth further says 'In the
third century of our era, the Chinese ships were steered upon the Indian
Ocean according to the indications of a magnetic needle. In order to
avoid friction, and to give freer movement to the needle, it has been
supposed that they allowed it to float upon water. That was the aquatic
compass of the Chinese'."

Godron further went on to say: "We, therefore, see that Klaproth was
perfectly well informed upon the subject, and may well feel surprised at
his remarks in regard to the voyages to Fu-sang. If the scientific
honesty of a scholar of his rank were not sheltered from all criticism,
it might readily be believed that he was forced to mislead the Chinese
navigators in order to prevent their arrival in America, and to compel
them to land in Japan."

This critical analysis of Klaproth's integrity runs all through

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

scholarly comments. Yet, in spite of them, the weight of Klaproth's name
has been such that the world has chosen to disregard his recorded
contradictory statements, taking the path of least resistance in finding
it easier to go along and uphold him than to independently re-examine
the facts and then decide right from wrong. Klaproth's other works on
the Chinese have been magnificently done. His dissent in this matter
appears to have been written with an [understandably](errata.htm#9)
sarcastic pen and, to anyone reading it today and knowing nothing of the
surrounding circumstances, it so speaks.

In the days of de Guignes, Alaska was an unknown entity—the northwestern
coastal area of the American continent, as far south as California, was
hazy. Maps of that day, even those by the famous German cartographers,
the Lotter family, left everything north of San Francisco a blank.
Knowledge of the Russian expeditions from Siberia to Alaska was not
available. In the years intervening between de Guignes and Klaproth,
more knowledge concerning this area was published and made available.
Maps by John Cary of London, in 1811, show Alaska and the coastal
regions north of San Francisco, including the Aleutians, with a
surprising degree of accuracy. In other words, Klaproth and those that
followed him, had knowledge of this vital area that de Guignes did not
possess.

The story that de Guignes discovered in the Chinese Classics is found in
Kuen 327, and is given here, in full, in translation. Some six or eight
excellent English translations are in existence, each of which vary
slightly according to the translator. The variations are of minor
consequence—some, in giving a free translation, leave out a phrase by
giving the broad general meaning of a sentence while others give a
literal word for word translation—some quibble about the tense of a
verb. Essentially, the published translations are alike. While I myself
do not read Chinese, this portion of the original Chinese Classics was
read to me in translation while I followed the earlier translations that
were before me. Therefore, the translation that is given here, which
under no circumstances can be assumed to be beyond the pale of
criticism, is the result of two independent

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

checks on my own part plus the six earlier translations that were before
me. In the light of that, the translation, based on Ma Twan-lin's
revision, follows:

 

Fu-sang. In the year 499, a Buddhist priest named Hwui Shan, came to
China and told about a country called Fu-sang. Fu-sang is 20,000 Chinese
miles to the east of the Great Han country. It is also situated east of
the Middle Kingdom (China). They have a great number of Fu-sang trees
and from them the country takes its name. The leaves of this tree are
the color of the oak. In its early stages the leaves look like bamboo
shoots. It has an edible fruit which is pear-shaped and reddish in
color. The bark of the tree can be made into cloth and from this the
people make clothing. In building their houses they make planks such as
are used in the construction of adobe houses. Their cities have no
walls. They have a written language and make paper from the bark of the
Fu-sang tree. They do not fight as they have no weapons in that country.
In this country they have prisons, a southern one and a northern one.
For lighter offenses, the culprit is sent to the southern prison but for
more serious crimes, he is placed in the northern prison. If the
criminal is pardoned, he is transferred to the southern prison but
failing to obtain a pardon, he remains in the northern prison. Those men
or women confined in the northern prison can marry and have children.
However, their sons are made slaves at the age of eight years and their
daughters at the age of nine years. The criminal's body is not allowed
to be brought out of prison at the time of his death. If a nobleman has
committed a crime, the people hold a great assembly placing the offender
in the center of a pit or excavation, while they sit around him, eating
and drinking, and then take leave of him as of a dying man. He is then
surrounded with ashes. If the offense is of a lesser nature, or is the
first offense, only the man himself is punished. If the crime is
greater, or has been repeated, then his children and grandchildren are
additionally punished. If it is a third offense, or one of great
seriousness, punishment will extend to his seventh generation. The title
of the King of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

this country is the Chief of the Multitudes. The noblemen of first rank
are called Tui-lu and of the second rank, Little Tui-lu. Those of the
third rank are called Nah-tu-sha. When the King of the country leaves
his home, he is both preceded and followed by drums and horns. He
changes the color of his clothes according to the years changes. The
first and second years are blue (green); the third and fourth years are
red; the fifth and sixth, yellow; the seventh and eighth, white, and the
ninth and tenth, black. They have cattle with long horns. These long
horns are used as receptacles to put things in and some horns are as
large as ten ordinary ones. They have horse carts and deer carts. The
people of the country raise deer as is done in China. From milk they
make koumiss. They have the red pears which are kept unspoiled
throughout the year. They also have the grape, or grapevine. The ground
of the country is destitute of iron but it has copper. Gold and silver
are not valued. Their markets are not taxed and they have no fixed
prices. When a man plans to marry, he first builds a small house near,
or in front of, that of the young lady he hopes to marry. He sprinkles
and sweeps the ground in front of her house both morning and evening
throughout the year. If the girl is not pleased with him, she soon sends
him away but, if there is a mutual attraction, then their marriage takes
place. The marriage ceremonies, in general, are the same as those of
China. If a father, mother, brother, wife or son dies, the remaining
members of the family mourn seven days, not eating; for grandparents,
they mourn five days without eating; for an elder or younger brother, a
father's elder or younger brother, or his sister or for an elder or
younger sister, they mourn three days without eating. An image of the
departed spirit is set up and they reverently honor it by offering it
libations both morning and evening. The people do not wear mourning
garments or mourning badges. During the first three years after his
accession to the throne, the King does not occupy himself with matters
of State. Formerly this country had no knowledge of the Buddhist
religion but, during the Sung Dynasty, in the second year of the period
called the "Great Brightness" (458 A.D.) five priests,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

or Pi-k’iu, from the country of Ki-pin (Kabul) journeyed to that country
taking with them their Buddhist religious books and images and taught
the people their Buddhist doctrine and to forsake their rude customs and
thus reformed them.

Immediately following this story of Fu-sang in the Classics, is the even
more controversial account of the "Kingdom of Women." This is the story
that has been presumed to be so utterly absurd and false that it has
brought discredit to all that Hwui Shan wrote. Being either unable to
explain it or to ignore it, those who have studied the matter have let
the entire problem of Fu-sang rest, since they were neither able to
explain nor ignore the "Kingdom of Women." Many have stated that they
were "embarrassed" by it. All of the studies concerning the "Kingdom of
Women" appear to have been made in the 19th century—no recent one has
been found.

As the story of Fu-sang is closely interwoven with that of the "Kingdom
of Women," these two stories will be considered as a unit for the sake
of brevity in discussing them. The translation therefore of that section
of the Classics is as follows:

 

Kingdom of Women. Hwui Shan says that the Kingdom of Women is about a
thousand LI (approx. 350 miles) east of Fu-sang. The appearance of the
people is neat and clean and their color is white. Their bodies have
hair and the hair of their heads is long, reaching to the ground. At the
second or third month they enter the water, and become pregnant. Six or
seven months after they bear their young. The female chests are
destitute of breasts. At the nape of their neck there is hair and milk
is in the hair at the back of the neck and the infant is fed by that
milk. Within 100 days, the infant can walk and in three or four years is
adult. It is true. On seeing a human being, the women are afraid and
hide. They have a great deal of respect for their husbands. The people
eat a salt plant the leaves of which resemble a certain Chinese herb and
they have a pleasant pungent odor. In the year 507 A.D., some men from
Tsin-ngan, while crossing the sea, were blown by strong winds to an
un-known

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

coast. On going ashore, they found a people there whose language they
could not understand. The women were like those of China but the men had
human bodies with dog's heads and they made sounds like the barking of a
dog. The people eat a small kind of bean or kernel. They wear clothing
made of cloth. They beat down the earth and make adobe for the walls of
their houses, the shape of which is circular and the doors, or
entrances, resemble burrows.

 

These, then, are the stories in the Classics on which de Guignes based
his conclusions that "Fu-sang" was Mexico, the account that precipitated
the argument.

It was particularly the story of the "Kingdom of Women" that caused the
"embarrassment"; the story that could not be explained; the story that
brought discredit to Hwui Shan's account of "Fu-sang"; the story that
was instrumental in the burial of both accounts; and the belief today
that the Classics contain a geographical myth, the product of
[Buddhist](errata.htm#10) imagination.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Chinese Whimsy?](pi05)

</div>
