<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi09)  [Next](pi11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### The Buddhists

Hwui SHAN identified himself as a mendicant Buddhist priest, who went to
a far country to preach and spread his religious doctrine. He stated
that five Buddhist priests, from Kabul, went out to this same country in
458 A.D., and took along with them their Buddhist books and images. Hwui
Shan did not state whether he was one of the five or not. All we know is
that five, or six, Buddhist priests spread their gospel somewhere.

Since these bhikshu were dedicated to missionary work, it would be
reasonable to expect to find evidence of Buddhism in places where they
are alleged to have spread it. If they spread it in Fu-sang, and Fu-sang
were Mexico, we should find some tangible proof of it there. Do we find
any? What must we look for? Before we start looking, we should know
something about Buddha.

Gautama, the Buddha, the Wise One, founder of the Buddhist faith, was
born in Nepal about 560 B.C., the son of Suddhodana, Prince of the Saka
Clan. His mother, Maya, was said to have conceived him after a dream.
Among Buddhists, he is called "Saka-muni," the holy man of the Sakas,
rather than Buddha, as we know him.

When he was 29 years old, he left home and began a life of
contemplation. He spent his first two weeks in meditation under the
Bo-tree, a tree now sacred to the Buddhist. The third week of meditation
was spent under a Muchalinda tree and it was during this period of time
that Muchalinda, the Serpent-King, was said to have come forth and
spread his hood as a canopy over the Buddha to protect him from the heat
of the sun. The serpent thus became sacred. During his last week of
contemplation, two merchants who were passing by, saw him and offered
him a bowl of rice and milk, which he accepted. The bowl, in turn,
became a sacred symbol.

A short period of doubt followed his first season of meditation, during
the course of which Brahma is supposed to have appeared to him, telling
him that he was destined to high office

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and that he should go out and preach. He hesitated, and Brahma is said
to have told him that others could not obtain salvation if he did not go
out—so Gautama agreed. He called five of his friends together and
preached to them. They accepted the faith, were ordained, and thus
formed the nucleus of the Buddhist order.

These five followers, in turn, were sent out to preach, with
instructions to wander over the face of the earth and preach the
doctrine, teaching men to order their lives with self-restraint,
simplicity, and chastity. The Saka-muni himself spent 45 years traveling
from place to place, preaching. Each of his followers was told to do
likewise and, in due course, the number of converts multiplied and
spread over a vast territory.

When the Buddha died, he passed through four "trances," and his death,
like his birth, was accompanied by miraculous signs from heaven. On the
seventh day after his death, his body was carried to a shrine east of
the city and placed on a great funeral pyre of sweet-scented wood. The
pyre is said to have ignited spontaneously and, after performing its
work, just as miraculously extinguished itself.

Symbols sacred to the Saka-muni are: first, the Sun; second, the Tree;
and third, the Serpent, who gave him protection from the heat of the sun
during his time of contemplation. Buddhist doctrine teaches a life after
death; that the earth will be destroyed five times, four of which have
already taken place, the last time being by flood; retirement into
[monasteries](errata.htm#23.md) and nunneries for a life of prayer; a
personal life marked by the doing of good deeds; and a missionary
program to spread the faith.

If we look to Mexico for Buddhist traces, we should necessarily confine
ourselves to something that would appropriately fit into the religious
form, both in character of the people, their belief, their symbolism,
their religious rites, their language, or in details of everyday life.
Since, as Hwui Shan stated, the priests taught the people their
religion—and the people learned.

The Sun, the Tree and the Serpent, being the three most sacred symbols
of the Buddhist, would spear-head the list of items to look for in
Mexico. Are they there? They are. All three

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

suddenly appear in the south of Mexico, in the late fifth century, in
sculptured objects. Not one at a time, nor faltering attempts striving
to achieve one form or the other, but all three in full bloom. Stone
carvings at Palenque are the best examples of early intertwined trees.
The Sun symbol, like the serpent, forms the basis of practically all
decorative art, stylized or natural, from one end of Mexico to the
other. No one knows why. Squier recognized the similarity back in 1851,
in his book "Symbolism of the Serpent," and devoted an extensive amount
of space to comparisons of the Mexican with the Buddhist.

Comparative photographs of Buddhist art and Mexican art are shown in the
Selected Papers of the XXIX International Congress of Americanists
published by the University of Chicago Press, 1951, and in American
Antiquity, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, Part 2, January, 1953. The same thing was
done by Gustav d’Eichthal in his comparison of the Buddhist and Mexican
in 1865.

In religious belief, both the Buddhist Saka-muni and the Azteca
Huitzilopochtli, were miraculously conceived. Both religious orders
maintained [monasteries](errata.htm#24.md) and nunneries as sanctuaries for
retirement to a life of meditation; both had idols that they worshipped
placed in niches in the walls of their sacred buildings; both had
stories of the destruction of the world by flood. Sixteenth century
Spanish accounts record these matters on behalf of the Mexican.

The Buddha's contemplation of death and the symbolic use of the skull,
in art forms, is well recognized in Tibet, Java, or Angkor—and
duplicated a dozen times over in the collection of the Museo Nacional.
in Mexico City.

Carved statuary of the sixth century was brought to this country for
exhibition purposes, by the Japanese government, and was shown in the
National Gallery, in Washington, 1953, adjoining the permanent
collection of Mexican jade. The heads and head-dresses of three of the
Japanese Buddhist gods, on display, were so identical with the early
jade pieces from Mexico, glass-cased not 20 feet away, that if the jade
were placed

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

in the Japanese collection, based on art form, one would not be
distinguishable from the other in type or age.

Sculptured doorways, at Angkor, having a serpent's head as a decorative
motif, with opened mouth used as the door entrance, is duplicated in the
Temple at Chichen. The lion throne, from Buddhist Java, is identical to
one found in Yucatan—examples are inexhaustible.

In a paper published in American Antiquity, January, 1953, Gordon Ekholm
of the American Museum of Natural History, pointed out the close
similarity of the lotus motif used in Buddhist and Mayan carvings—the
Mayan date he placed as being about the beginning of the Christian era
from 100 A.D. to 600 A.D. He states: "Perhaps among the most significant
parallels between Hindu-Buddhist and late Classic and post-Classic Maya
art are those we can classify under the heading of lotus panels. . ..
For the Maya we will refer to carvings [occurring](errata.htm#25.md) at
Chichen Itza and Palenque. The lotus motifs at these two sites are
remarkably similar although the more elaborate and more Asiatic-like
panels are at Chichen. For Asia I refer to the tradition of the use of
the lotus in design which appears first in Bharhut but has its earliest
full [occurrence](errata.htm#26.md) at Sanci and Amaravati in the second
century A.D., but continued in use for many centuries in India and was
carried to Cambodia, Indonesia and China or wherever Hindu-Buddhist
influence was important."

The article pointed out five specific details of which only two will be
listed here:

"1. A principle feature of the lotus panels in Buddhist art is that the
rhizome of the lotus plant forms a sinuous pattern along the length of
the design area, curving back and forth across the width of the panel
and leaving spaces which are filled with leaves, buds and flowers. The
same pattern is followed in the lower temple reliefs at Chichen Itza.
The undulating path of the rhizome of the plant is not a natural feature
of either the Asiatic lotus or the American water-lily."

"3. Fish are seen eating lotus flowers at the ends of one of the Chichen
panels. The placement of the fish is identical to

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

that of the makaras or fish-like monsters in the lotus panels at
Amaravati."

The rhizome is described as the root-like stalk of the lotus plant
growing under water from which the leaves grow. It is never visible but
is deeply buried in the mud.

Highly symbolical and stylized art forms do not arise in two unrelated
places, separated by thousands of miles, without some pretty solid
reason behind it.

Designs used by the Huichol Indian of the west coast of Mexico, shown
and described by Karl Lumholtz, adopting the Sun motif, are stylized
duplicates of sun-forms found in Buddhist temples in Cambodia and
Angkor. Huichol is one of the very ancient cultures and one which
resisted Spanish infiltration longest. If their early culture felt the
impact of Buddhist teaching, then we could expect to find something
there in as unadulterated a form as anywhere else.

Karl Lumholtz, the ethnologist, studied the Huichol Indian in 1901, and
it is from him that we learn much of what we know. He found that the
Mexicans called the people "Huicholes" which they said was a corruption
of the tribal name VIRA-RIKA, or VISA-LIKA. According to the Indians,
their name meant "Prophets" or "Healers." They were known among their
neighboring tribes as religious healers. In their ceremonials, they used
a bowl, which on one face had a disc of the setting sun, called
Sakai-Moka—on the reverse side was a large land serpent called
Hulia-Kami. Huichol tradition referred to a deluge. Some Huicholes bore
such strong resemblance to the Chinese that the Mexicans called them
"Chinos." In religious ceremonies, they used a wicker chair that was a
counterpart of the round cane chair made by the Chinese.

Is it not interesting to note that Lumholtz found the bowl in
association with the sun-disc—and called Sakai-Moka? The Holy man, the
Saka-muni, was himself associated with the sun. And, on the reverse side
a serpent called Hulia-Kami—a symbol of Quetzalcoatl—with a name not too
far removed phonetically from Hwui Shan.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Lumholtz found that the Huicholes bore such marked resemblance to the
Chinese that they were called "Chinos." These people are religious
healers and minister to their neighbors, the Coras. They live near the
"smoking mountain to the south"—the Volcan de Colima. The religious
nature of the Huichol, and their attendant religious ceremonies, have
strong Buddhist characteristics. They, too, go out and "minister" to
their neighbors. The Huichol make extensive use of the cane, or walking
stick, normally having a carved serpent as its head—a typical article of
personal effects of the mendicant Buddhist—a cane was his one
possession.

The dance of the "Chinelos," the "foreigners," the "Chinese," a dance
originating in the area around the State of Sinaloa, fascinates hundreds
of American tourists that attend the annual summer dance fiestas. The
history of the dance was lost in antiquity before the time of the
Conquest. The "little, old, bearded white men" have danced their way
around Mexico, with their canes, for more than a thousand years—a
tradition that perpetuates itself. Dr. Redfield writes that: "The word
'Chinelos' is probably from 'Chino,' meaning 'Chinese' or 'foreign.'
When used in speaking Nahuatl, it is Mexicanized as 'Zinelohque.' The
'Huehuenches' is also used, 'the old ones' (said with respect). It is
said by some in Tepoztlan that the Chinelos represent the Pharisees who
denied Christ'."

The origin of the dance in Sinaloa, its great antiquity, and the Nahuatl
name "Zinelohque," all strangely point to a definite Chinese influence.

Brief mention was made of the stories of the "flood" told by the Indians
to the Conquistadores. These stories, together with the religious
beliefs held by the Indians, could only be inventions of the Devil, so
reasoned the Spaniards. Could these things have originated with the
peregrinating Buddhist priests?

According to the Bhagavat Purana, one of the most sacred books of the
Buddhist, four ages, or cataclysms, are spoken of which, at different
periods of time, destroyed man—earthquake, hurricane, fire and flood.
The last destruction of man was by flood and the fifth cycle, in which
we are now living, will be

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the last. The story of the four destructions and the last by flood, runs
through all Buddhist theology and writings—the Matsya Purana, the Agni
Purana, the Mahabharata and the very early, probably pre-Buddhist,
Satapatha Brahmana.

Of the Mexican stories, perhaps the best to illustrate the point is the
famous "Codex Vaticanus," in the Vatican Library, which consists of four
symbolic pictures representing the four ages of man that had been
destroyed. These symbolic pictures were found at the time of the
Conquest and, at that time, were said to be ancient. Interpreted by a
Dominican monk, at Cholula, they pictured the first age as one of giants
who were destroyed by famine; the second age was destroyed by fire; the
third was an age of monkeys destroyed by hurricane; and the fourth ended
in deluge. The document explained that at the time of the great
inundation, all mankind was changed to fish, with the exception of one
man and his wife, who saved themselves by building a boat made from a
cypress tree.

The legend of the Azteca was similar. According to their ancient
tradition, men had lived and been destroyed four times. The last time
all mankind was lost by drowning and were all changed into fish. In a
single day, all was destroyed and even the mountains sank into the
water. The water was calm for fifty-two years and, at the end of that
time, a man and his wife emerged and hollowed out a cypress tree,
entered it, closed the door, and when they opened it again, they saw
fish swimming around. They took the fish inside with them and some they
cooked for food while the remainder of the fish were turned into many
other kinds of animals.

These stories may be considered crude and perhaps primitive—they were.
Spaniards took them down from all sections of Mexico back in the
sixteenth century. They were powerless to explain them—other than as an
invention of the Devil himself. Considering the legends and recordings
telling of the destruction of man on four occasions, the last by flood,
in the Bhagavat Purana, and the Mexican counterpart in the Vatican
Library, it must be apparent that either one was derived from the other
or they both were derived from a common source.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

When we started out, we wanted to find art forms, symbolism and
religious doctrine, that might be compared to, or derived from, the
Buddhist, in Mexico—something that would date from the late fifth
century. That which has been set down here is a relatively small sample.
It is regretted that illustrations, either photographic or line drawing,
are being omitted—the picture would demonstrate the point instantly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. A Matter of Words](pi11.md)

</div>
