<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi13)  [Next](pi15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### CHAPTER XII

### The Shan Hai King

GEOGRAPHERS and historians alike acknowledge the Shan Hai King to be the
world's oldest geography. Although frequently referred to, it is an
"unknown." No English translation has been made of the whole of
it—portions exist in French or German—and Chinese themselves rarely read
it. The book, it appears, has been considered to be so full of whimsy
and fantasy that a translation has never been attempted since the waste
of time would have been thought stupid. Yet, it is referred to, with
dignity, as our oldest known record of man's knowledge of the universe
on which he lives. We do not know, today, what portion of the earth's
surface it covers; we do not know if it refers solely to China or to
other places as well.

The Chinese say that the record was compiled by the great Yu, at the
time when he was minister under the Emperor Shun—prior to the time when
he himself was Emperor. However, the compilation may have been completed
after he took the throne. A noted British sinologist has assigned an
approximate date of the 10th or 11th centuries B.C. to the Shan Hai
King, stating however, that while its antiquity was certain, the date
was disputable. The majority of French sinologists agree with the
Chinese.

As stated earlier, there were originally 32 books, and, of the 32 only
18 remain. There is no way of knowing whether the total number of books
formed a sequence or in what manner one book followed another or even if
the 18 books themselves follow in any sequence. Each book is a separate
entity but no book has a beginning or an ending. Whether the existing
books deal with one country or 18 countries, is not known.

In 213 B.C., all books in China were ordered burned. The first Emperor
of the Ts‘in dynasty decided to abolish all knowledge of the past and
blot out history. His Premier, Le Sze, advised that the best way to
accomplish that end was to burn all books—and therefore, the edict went
out. The books were burned.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

In the fifth century A.D., records and documents concerning China's
past, became so voluminous that it was both impossible to study them or
to store them. Another edict was issued to condense all books.
Everything available was re-read. Volumes were deleted. The remainder
was compressed into a few scanty pages—the original volumes were
destroyed. Again, in the thirteenth century, all records and documents,
once more, were ordered condensed—the fifth century original
condensations were scrapped. Of the ancient Book of Mountains and Seas,
there exist today only those fragments that survived the burning of 213
B.C. and the two condensations. That which remains to work with is, at
the very outset, extremely meagre.

The material itself is complicated by the fact that there is no
beginning or ending to any book—each record as we now have it, starts on
a mountain peak, wanders from peak to peak, covering 2,000 miles, and
winds up on another peak—with no possible way of determining where, on
the face of the globe, that first peak may have been located.

Each of the 18 books vary in content—some are a few paragraphs long,
others are pages. Many are minutely detailed, neatly setting down exact
mileage from point to point; the remainder, apparently having been
written by more poetic souls, disregard mileage and grow lyrical over
the beauties of nature. They are all eye-witness accounts—each person
was somewhere. Their records are simple, straightforward and forthright.
This is no collection of mythical or imaginary
[labyrinthine](errata.htm#37) wanderings.

About the third century B.C., the Chinese themselves started looking in
China to see whether or not they could identify some of the mountains
described in the book—and they could not. Scholars looked all over China
for some clue, and finding none, gave up. Doubt arose as to the veracity
of the ancients. One after another, early writers decided that the
accounts in the Book of Mountains and Seas were whimsies and
extravagancies—not to be believed, but, nevertheless, good literature.
By the eighth century A.D., everyone was convinced that, like Aesop's
Fables, they were excellent reading—but myths. And so they

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

have come down to us labeled "fairy tales."

If one should read even a few sentences from those "tales," it would be
obvious that those who wrote them were sincere. Inconsistencies
certainly crept in during the condensations—but the mile by mile record
is no ephemeral dream, no elusive little visionary beam that someone was
following. Hard, cold, facts—"travel south 100 miles over shifting sand
and you will come to Bald Mountain where there is a large river flowing
eastward"—nothing whimsical about it.

A most exhaustive study of historical backgrounds of the Shan Hai King
was made by M. Bazin, the French authority, in 1839. His study showed
that while there were originally 32 books, the condensation that took
place in the fifth century A.D., eliminated all but 18. In this he
departs from Chinese sources, where it has been stated that the books
were lost during the burnings in 213 B.C. James Legge, who made
extensive translations of the Classics, said that among the great
scholars was one Fuh-sang who, when the order went out to burn all
books, hid his copies in the wall of his house. His house later burned
and many of the tablets were destroyed. In 178 B.C., when Fuh-sang was
90 years old, the Emperor commissioned him to re-write from memory what
he could of the old texts. Much of what we now have came down to us in
that manner.

The descriptive material contained in this oldest geography, told of
mountain ranges in the north, south, east and west and those beyond the
seas; of the regions beyond the seas to the north, south, east and west.
The author believed that there were five major mountain ranges on the
face of the globe and that on those mountain ranges all rivers of the
earth had their sources. It also told of living things that peopled
those areas and, in addition, some of those supposedly living things
that were later interpreted to be of the spirit world—as was the unicorn
and the archer that shot nine of the ten suns.

The shifting from a belief that the ancient writing was an actual
recording to one that clothed it in mythology, came between 300-100 B.C.
A later writer, commenting on the matter, said that the last 13 chapters
of the Shan Hai King contained

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

a description of foreign countries—and by "foreign countries" was meant
those countries inhabited by spirits. The spirits that governed the
earth in the days when the great Yu, as minister of the Emperor Shun,
drained off the waters left from the deluge, he said, differed from
those spirits which lived in later reigns. The spirits of the sun, moon
and planets referred to in the History of the Gods, were not even
mentioned in the Shan Hai King, and its authors have turned earth
spirits into monsters and [weird](errata.htm#38) mis-shapen animals and,
because of it, the account was a malicious parody.

Comments, throughout the ages, by the most learned of scholars, have
reached the same conclusion. Sse-ma Chien, the greatest of all Chinese
historians, declined to comment. He merely stated that the Book of
Mountains was attributed to the great Yu but that such extraordinary
things were contained in it, that he dared not speak of them. Confucius,
in his Analects, said: "Straight was the course of the Annalist Yu, aye,
straight as an arrow flies." He mentioned the Shan Hai King in his
Kia-yu (Familiar Discourses) and Tseu-hia, a disciple of Confucius, said
that during the reign of the Shang dynasty (1765-1123 B.C.) mention was
made of the Book of Mountains.

Chao-shi, considered in importance second only to Sse-ma Chien, living
at the time of the Han dynasty (206 B.C.-221 A.D.), felt that the book
was of doubtful merit and said that Yu, after consulting the spirits of
the mountains and lakes, wrote down all the details about these
"foreign" places.

In the third century of the Christian era, Tso-sse, one of the
outstanding historical poets, mentioned the Shan Hai King in one of his
verses on the Five Capitols. The preface to the Fabulous Encyclopedia
(265-420 A.D.) contained a statement that two of the most ancient books
then existing were the Herbal of Chi-nong and the Shan Hai King, which
several writers have attributed to the great Yu. A more modern writer
felt that all the operations of heaven and earth were mysterious and
incomprehensible, and withdrew themselves from the investigations of
men—that was why the Shan Hai King was a book that could not be
comprehended.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

M. Bazin, after digesting some hundreds of comments during his years of
research in digging out information concerning the Shan Hai King,
himself came to the conclusion that since scholars had failed to find
any of the descriptive material in China and, since many of the animals
peopling the work were obviously whimsical, that the work was of little
or no practical value.

He ended his conclusion with the statement that the book contained over
30,000 characters in the text and over 20,000 in the commentaries, which
was a great number for a book containing such extravagancies and which
did not merit deep study in a country like China, where the amount of
geographical knowledge was far from despicable. He found the work
unworthy of serious study. And that, today, is still the unqualified
opinion.

The story of Prince I, the archer who killed nine of the ten suns,
lyricized by poets for two thousand years, is considered the prize of
imaginative fantasies. The archer, according to the Shan Hai King and
the poets, travelled east until he reached the place where the sun was
born. There he found ten suns. He shot down nine of them with his bow
and those nine lie asleep in the "Great Luminous Canyon." Story after
story recount tales of the archer, some elaborated upon, others
unadulterated. Dr. Creel mentioned it in connection with the Shang
bronzes. The archer is put down as a credit to poetic
imagination—nothing more.

On reading the translation of that portion that I had of the Shan Hai
King, it was clear that this was an authentic travel account—not whimsy.
There were ten-tailed foxes and eight-headed serpents, it is true, but
rarely does one find old manuscripts that fail to include some oddment,
some Poseidon, Ra, banshee or werewolf. Sir Walter Raleigh's
Iwaipanomas, the headless warriors of the upper Orinoco, are good
examples—and they were believed. The Shan Hai King made sense. It was a
simple and sincere statement of a place visited and a distance measured
by a man who had been there—short notes jotted down in a little bamboo
note-book.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Two of the descriptive accounts began their recordings on an unknown
mountain top, travelled 2,000 miles from north to south, finding a peak
every one hundred miles, and wound up on another peak—but, in those
2,000 miles, that person definitely was somewhere, and he alone knew
where. The statements were concise, without embellishment of any kind.
If the books were whimsy, the language would have been flowery. That
which was written, insofar as I could determine, was as far from being
flowery as clipped speech could make it. It rang true.

If the accounts were true, someplace on the face of the earth those
places must exist. China itself had been thoroughly gone over and
eliminated. Fragmentary though the records were, the places that they
described would have to be found. Since the portion that I had in
translation was captioned "The Classic of the Eastern Mountains" in a
section identified as "Overseas," that [seemed](errata.htm#39) the
logical place to look first. Directions would have to be followed and,
after that, it would be a process of elimination.

The four maps on the following pages, together with the translation as I
found it, will show more clearly than any words of mine exactly where
the Chinese were. It is hoped that they will speak eloquently for
themselves. In the concluding translation, which gave no mileage and so
will have no map, will be found the place where, I believe, the archer
legend originated. There would hardly be two spots on earth that could
so aptly fit that description. That each thrilled person who saw that
"Great Luminous Canyon" where the nine suns lie buried, fulfilled his
lifetime hope and ambition, can well be understood.

This chapter could not be ended without one concluding priceless gem
concerning comment on the Shan Hai King. It came from a book published
in China at the beginning of the Christian era:

"Heaven and earth are great; what do they not contain? The Shan Hai King
is full of doubtful statements, but who can affirm that the assertions
which seem doubtful to us are absolutely false?"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Across the Sea](pi15)

</div>
