<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi15)  [Next](pi17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

### The Great American Desert

The Ninth Book and the Fourteenth Book of the Classic of Mountains and
Seas, the two additional books found in translation, bear the
sub-titles—"In Regard to the Regions Beyond the Sea, from its Southeast
Corner to its Northeast Corner" and "The Classic of the Great Eastern
Waste."

These two books do not follow the pattern set down in Book Four. In
neither of these two has mileage been given. In Book Nine, thirteen
notes have been given and in Book Fourteen, nineteen isolated
descriptions—each one of which appears to have been recorded by a
different person. All but the last item relate to the "Great Eastern
Waste" and have been lumped together in one book, probably to keep the
scattered notes of like areas in a separate book for ready reference. In
the original Chinese, none of the paragraphs in any of the books are
numbered—numbers were placed there by the translator, about 1880, as a
matter of convenience. In one early edition, I found that two of the
paragraphs had been transposed—whether this is the correct one or the
other is correct, I do not know.

The Ninth Book and the Fourteenth Book are being considered together
since, from the translation, it will be seen that they relate to
territory surrounding the Grand Canyon. Notes will not be made after
each paragraph, as was done in the preceding chapter, but comment on
both books will follow the second translation.

#### THE CLASSIC OF MOUNTAINS AND SEAS

##### *Ninth Book*

###### THE CLASSIC OF THE REGIONS BEYOND THE EASTERN SEA. IN REGARD TO THE REGIONS BEYOND THE SEA, FROM ITS SOUTHEAST CORNER TO ITS NORTHEAST CORNER.

1\. The CHA Hill. \[Pronounced CHA or perhaps FAH.\] It is said that
this country produces I gems, green horses, SHI-JUH,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

common willows, delicious cherries, sweet flowers, and excellent fruits.
It is in the Eastern Sea between two mountains. Upon the hill there are
lofty trees. One authority says that its name is CHA-KIU, and one says
that the Country of a Hundred Fruits lies east of YAO'S burial-place.

2\. The Great Men's Country is north of this. Because the men are great
they sit and seize passing boats. One authority says that this country
is north of CHA-KIU.

3\. SHE-PI'S Body is north of this. \[This is the name of a god.\] He
has a wild animal's body and a man's face. He has large ears, and for
ear-ornaments, has two green serpents \[i.e., he has ear-ornaments like
serpents strung in his ears.\] One authority says that KAN-YU'S Body
lies north of the Great Men's Country.

4\. The Country of Refined Gentlemen lies north of this. They have
clothing, caps, sashes and swords. They eat wild beasts, and have two
great tigers, one on each side. They are very gentle, and do not
quarrel. They have fragrant plants. \[Perhaps "clay" should be read
instead of "fragrant plants."\] They have a flowering-plant which
produces blossoms in the morning which die in the evening. One authority
says that it is north of KAN-YU'S Body.

5\. HUNG-HUNG lies north of this. They all have two heads. \[The name is
pronounced the same as that of the character HUNG, which means the
rainbow.\] One authority says that it is north of the Country of the
Refined Gentlemen.

6\. The god of the Valley of the Manifestation of the Dawn (CHAO-YANG)
is called TIEN-WU. He is the god of the water. He dwells north of
HUNG-HUNG, between two bodies of water. When he appears as a wild animal
he has eight heads with human faces, eight legs, and eight tails, and is
all green and yellow. \[The "Classic of the Great Eastern Waste" says he
has ten tails.\]

7\. The Green Hills Country is situated north of this. \[The people eat
all kinds of grain, and have silken clothing.\] Here there are foxes
with four legs and eight tails. One authority says that it is situated
north of the "Manifestation of the Dawn."

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[KIH-KIUN'S
"Bamboo Book" says that P’OH-SHU-TSZ’ went on a military expedition in
the eastern sea for fully three years, and found a fox with nine tails,
which, perhaps, was a species of the fox above described.\]

8\. The sovereign ordered SHU-HAI to walk from the farthest limit of the
East to the farthest limit of the West, five hundred thousand and ten
times ten thousand paces \[SHU-HAI was a dauntless traveler\] and nine
thousand eight hundred paces. SHU-HAI grasped an abacus in his right
hand and with his left hand he pointed to the north of the Beautiful
Green Hills. One [authority](errata.htm#47.md) says that it was the emperor
YU who commanded SHU-HAI; one says that the distance was five hundred
thousand, ten times ten thousand, nine thousand and eight hundred paces.
\[The poem TS’ANG-SHAN-WU says that heaven and earth, from east to west,
are three hundred and thirty three thousand LI, and from south to north,
two hundred and one thousand five hundred LI. To inspect heaven and
earth, go one hundred and fifty thousand LI.\]

9\. The Black-Teeth Country lies north of this. \[The "History of the
Eastern Barbarians" says that forty LI and east of Japan there is a
country called the Naked People's Country, and that southeast of this
lies the Black Teeth Country. A ship can reach it by sailing for one
year. The "Account of Strange Things" says that the Western Butchers dye
their teeth and are like these people.\] The people are black, and eat
rice. They also eat serpents, some red and some green. \[One authority
mentions only the green serpents.\] It is very great. One authority says
that it is north of (the country of) SHU-HAI, and has people with black
hands who eat rice, and who use serpents, one serpent being red. Below
it is the Warm Springs (T’ANG) Ravine. \[In the ravine there is hot
water.\] Above Warm Springs Ravine is FU-SANG \[i.e., the FU-SANG tree,
or the useful mulberry-tree.\] The place where the ten suns bathe lies
north of the Black-Teeth (Country). In the water there is a large tree
having nine suns in its lower branches and one sun in its upper
branches. \[CHWANG-CHEU says that formerly these ten suns rose all
together, and the grass and trees were burned and

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

withered. HWAI-NAN-TZ’ says that (the emperor) YAO then commanded (the
prince) I to shoot nine of the ten suns, and the bird in the suns, until
dead. The "Dissipation of Sorrows" says in reference to it that I
brought the sun-bird to an end, and that it dropped some of its
feathers, and that I took them home and kept them. The CHING-MU Classic
says that formerly this I shot skillfully, and brought these ten suns to
an end. KIH-KIUN'S "Bamboo Book" says that when YIN-KIAH ascended to the
throne and dwelt at SI-HO there were strange prodigies. Ten suns rose
and shone together. This is a wonder of nature, but there is proof of
it. Tradition says that there were ten suns in the sky, the number of
suns being ten. This account says that nine of the suns dwell in the
lower branches and one sun in the upper branches. The "Classic of the
Great Waste" says that when one sun sets, another sun rises and lights
heaven and earth, and, although there are ten suns, they rise
alternately, and so revolve and shine; but at the time referred to they
all rose together, and so heaven sent down supernatural calamities.
Therefore I, having asked for YAO'S instructions, and thoroughly
understanding his heart's desire, looked up to heaven, and pulled the
bowstring, and nine suns retired and concealed themselves. . .. If we
examine into this in a common-sense way we find that it is not
reasonable, but if we investigate the principles of destiny we find that
nothing is impossible. You, who stand by and see ought to try and
comprehend this mystery. Those things which relate to the mysterious and
obscure are hard to understand, but nevertheless they go on their course
without obstruction.\] YU-SHI'S Concubine dwells north of this. \[YU-SHI
is the same as P’ING-I, the God of Rain.\] He, as a man, is black, and
in each of his hands he holds a serpent. In his left ear there is a
green serpent, and in his right ear a red serpent. One authority says
that he dwells north of (the country of) the Ten Suns, that as a man he
has a black body and a human face, and that each (hand) holds a
tortoise.

10\. The Black-Hip Country lies north of this. \[So called because the
people are all black below the waist.\] These people

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

make clothing from water animals or fish—\[i.e., they make clothing from
the skins of fish—or water animals.\] They eat gulls. \[Gulls are water
birds. Their name is pronounced YIU.\] They use two birds, carrying them
in their arms. One authority says that this lies north of YU-SHI'S
Concubine.

11\. The Hairy People's Country lies north of this, and has people upon
whose bodies hair grows. \[At the present time, by leaving the region of
the LIN Sea, and going two thousand LI to the southeast, the place of
residence of the hairy people is found upon the Great LOH Island.\] Upon
this island there are people with short, small faces, and with their
bodies entirely covered with hair, like a hog or a moose. They live in
caves, and have no clothing or garments. \[In the reign of the TS’IN
dynasty in the fourth year of the period distinguished by the
[appellation](errata.htm#48.md) YUNG-KAI (or "Perpetual Excellence"—i.e.,
in the year 310 A.D.) an officer named TAI, having charge of the salt at
WU-KIEN, found upon the sea-shore a boat containing men and women, four
people in all. These all looked alike and spoke a language which was not
intelligible. They were sent to the prime-minister's palace, but before
they had reached it they all died on the way, except only one. The ruler
gave him a wife, who bore children to him. Going to and coming from the
market and wells, he advanced slowly in acquiring the language. His
native place was the Hairy People's Country. The "Classic of the Great
Waste" says that the Hairy Tribe eat a species of millet for food.\] One
authority says that this country is north of the Black-Hip Country.

12\. The Distressed (LAO) People's Country lies north of this. It has
people who are black \[and who for food eat the fruits of trees and
plants; they have a bird with two heads.\] Perhaps the name should be
read "the KIAO People," instead of the Distressed (or LAO) People. One
authority says that it lies north of the Hairy People, and has people
having their faces, eyes, hands, and feet entirely black.

13\. The K’EU-WANG of the Eastern Regions has a bird's body, a human
face, and he rides upon two dragons. \[He is the God of Wood, and has a
square face, and wears plain apparel.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> MOH-TSZ’ says that
formerly, in the TS’IN dynasty, MUH-KUNG was of illustrious virtue. The
Supreme Ruler caused K’EU-WANG to lengthen his life by nineteen years.\]

 

#### THE CLASSIC OF MOUNTAINS AND SEAS

##### *Fourteenth Book*

###### THE CLASSIC OF THE GREAT EASTERN WASTE

1\. The Great Canyon beyond the Eastern Sea \[the poem called
TS’ANG-SHAN-WU says that in the east there is a stream flowing in a
bottomless ravine. It is supposed to be this canyon. The "Dissipation of
Sorrows" calls it KIANG-SHAN'S Great Canyon\] is SHAO-HAO'S Country.
\[The emperor SHAO-HAO, of the "Golden Heaven" family, gave it this
designation.\] SHAO-HAO'S Descendant, the emperor CHWEN-SUH \[of whom no
further description is given\], left there his lute and lyre. \[It says
that his lute and lyre are in this canyon.\] It has a beautiful
mountain, from which there flows a delightful spring, producing a
charming gulf. \[The water accumulates and so forms a gulf.\]

2\. In the southeastern corner of the Great Eastern Waste there is a
mountain called the PI-MU-TI Hill.

3\. In the Great Waste beyond the Eastern Sea there is a mountain which
by hyperbole is called "the Place where the Sun and Moon Rise." It has
rolling valleys and mountains. This is the Great Men's Country. \[In the
reign of the TS’IN dynasty, in the second year of the period
distinguished by the designation YUNG-KIA "Perpetual Excellence," (i.e.,
in 308 A.D.), there were ducks collected in NGAO-PO, twenty LI south of
the district of SHI-NGAN. A man by the name of CHEU-FU-CHANG picked up a
wooden arrow with an iron point, which was six feet and a half long.
Reckoning from the length of the arrow, the shooter must have been a rod
and five or six feet tall. The Coreans say that formerly some people
from the kingdom of Japan, who encountered bad weather upon a voyage,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

were blown across the "Great Sea," and beyond it they discovered a
country where the people were all a rod tall and moreover, in their form
and appearance, they looked like Mongols. They were tall savages of a
foreign tribe. The arrow came from this country. The WAI-CHWEN says that
the shortest of the Scorched Pigmy People were only three feet high, and
the tallest of these did not exceed ten rods. In HO-TU'S "Album of Gems"
it is said that ninety thousand LI north of the KWUN-LUN (Range of
Mountains) the LUNG-POH Country is found, where the people are thirty
rods tall, and live for eighteen thousand years, but then they die. East
of the KWUN-LUN (Mountains) TA-TSIN is found. The people are ten rods
tall, and all wear plain garments. Ten times ten thousand LI to the east
the country of the T’IAO People is found. They are thirty rods and five
feet tall. East of this, ten times ten thousand LI, is the central TSIN
Country, whose people are one rod tall. The KUH-LIANG History says that
the body of a tall savage, measured crosswise, covered nine Chinese
acres. When riding, his head and shoulders reached above the crossbar of
the chariot. This man must therefore have been several rods tall. In the
time of the TS’IN dynasty a giant was seen in LIN-T’AO who was five rods
tall, and his foot-prints were six feet long. If the above accounts can
be considered to be true, then there is no limit to the
[height](errata.htm#49.md) of these tall men.\] It has the Great Men's
Market, which is called the "Great Men's Mansion." \[This is a mountain
which is so named because of its resemblance to a large mansion. The
Great Men collect near it at market-times, and hold a market upon and
about it.\] It has a great man crouching upon both of its sides.
\[Perhaps the character translated "crouching" formerly meant "sitting
erect." CHWANG-TSZ’ says that he sat in HWUI-K’IAL.\] It has a country
of "Little People" who are called the TSING People. \[The poem called
TS’ANG-SHAN-WU says that the farthest region to the northeast is
inhabited by people who are only nine inches tall.\] Its god has a human
face and a wild beast's body, and he is called LI-LING'S Body.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

4\. There is also a mountain named KUEH, from which the Aspen River
flows.

5\. There is also a Country of Plants, where millet is used for food.
\[It says that millet grows in this country. The name of the country is
pronounced WEI.\] They employ (or have) four (species of) birds (i.e.,
they have numerous varieties of birds); also tigers, panthers, brown
bears and grizzly bears.

6\. In the Great Waste there is a mountain called HOH-HU. It is the
place where the sun and moon rise. It has CHUNG-YUNG'S Country. TI-TSUN
(or the emperor TSUN) begat CHUNG-YUNG. The people of CHUNG-YUNG eat
wild beasts and the fruits of trees. \[In this country there are red
trees with dark wood, which have delicious flowers and fruit. See
LU-SHI'S edition of the work of Confucius called "Spring and Autumn."\]
They use four birds (i.e., they have numerous species of birds), and
also panthers, tigers, brown bears and grizzly bears.

7\. There is also the Mountain of the Eastern Pass, and here is the
"Country of Refined Gentlemen." These, people have clothing, caps,
sashes and swords. \[They have tigers and panthers, which are gentle and
give way.\] Here is the Country of Presiding Spirits. TI-TSUN begat
YEN-LUNG who begat the Presiding Spirits. The Presiding Spirits have
off-spring, but the pure-minded male has no wife, and the pure-minded
female has no husband. \[It says that these people are pure in their
thoughts, and are not affected by passion, and do not mate, but that
they conceive children with all purity, like white doves looking
steadfastly into each other's eyes, each being affected by the purity of
the other.\] They eat millet and wild beasts, and have numerous
varieties of birds. Here is TA-O Mountain (or the Mountain of the Great
Ridge).

8\. In the Great Waste there is a mountain named MING-SING (or the
Bright Star). It is the place where the sun and moon rise.

9\. There is also the White People's Country. TI-TSUN begat TI-HUNG, who
begat the White People. The White People have no surnames. They eat
millet, and have numerous varieties of birds, as well as tigers,
panthers, brown bears and grizzly

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

bears. \[And they have teams of yellow wild beasts, which they drive,
using them in order to reach a great age.\]

10\. There is also the Green Hills Country. Here there are foxes with
nine tails. \[When they are very little disturbed they come out (of
their holes), and this is considered a very good omen.\] It has the
JEU-PUH (or Courteous Vassal) Country. They live in a country of
luxuriant land. \[It is as luxuriant as if irrigated. The name is
pronounced YING.\] It has the country of Black Teeth. \[Their teeth are
like lacquer.\] TI-SUN begat the Black Teeth. \[As the teachings and
examples of the sage do not reach all regions, therefore in after ages
his descendants differ in their pursuits and outward appearance. Every
one says that those who are now living are his descendants; but they
surely can not be posterity which he himself begat.\] The KIANG tribe
eat millet for food, and have numerous varieties of birds. Here is also
the HIA-CHEU (Summer Island) Country. Here is also the KAI-YU Country.
It has a god with eight heads with human faces, a tiger's body, and ten
tails. He is called T’IEN-WU. \[He is the God of the Water.\]

11\. In the Great Waste there is a mountain called KUH-LING-YU-T’IEN. It
is at the farthest limit of the east with LI and MEU. \[These are the
names of three mountains.\] At the place where the sun and moon rise
\[there is a god\] called CHEH-TAN. In the Eastern Region he is called
CHEH. The "coming wind" is called CHAN. \[It is not fully described
where the Place of the Coming Wind is situated.\] He dwells at the
farthest limit of the east, and produces the eight winds. \[It says that
this man is able to regulate the proper times for the winds to come
forth and return.\]

I2. In an island of the Eastern Sea there is a god with a human face and
a bird's body, having two yellow serpents for ear-ornaments. \[These
serpents are passed through his ears.\] He treads upon two yellow
serpents, and is called Yu-KWOH. HWANG-TI begat YU-KWOH, and YU-KWOH
begat YU-KING. \[YU-KING is the same as YU-KIANG.\] YU-KING dwells in
the North Sea, and Yu-KWOH dwells in the Eastern Sea. They are sea-gods.
\[They are each called the god of that particular sea over

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

which they rule. One original authority reads HAO instead of KWOH.\]

13\. There is also the CHAO-YAO (Quaking) Mountain, where the YUNG
(Melting) River flows. Here there is a country called the Black-Hip
Country. \[From the hips down they are black like lacquer.\] They have
millet for food, and have numerous varieties of birds. Here is also the
country of the KW’UN (Needy) People, whose surname is KEU, who eat
birds. Some say that King HAI held a bird in his two hands, and, when he
had eaten its head, King HAI sent it to YIU-I, HO-POH, and PUH-NIU
\[HO-PO and PUH-NIU are both names and surnames—see KIH-KIUN'S "Bamboo
Book."\] YIU-I slew King HAI, and captured PUH-NIU. \[The "Bamboo Book"
says that HAI, the son of the emperor YIN, went as a visitor to the
house of YIU-I, and committed adultery there. Therefore YIU-I'S
sovereign, MIN-CH’AN, slew him, and thus made an example of him.
Therefore the emperor YIN-KIEH-CHING borrowed troops of HO-POH, with
which to punish YIU-I, overthrow his country, and slay his sovereign
MIN-CH’AN.\] Ho pitied YIU-I, and allowed him to leave the country
secretly, and go to a region of wild beasts; and because he ate the wild
beasts, he was called a YAO man. \[YIU-I was originally a friend of
HO-POH, and a good scholar; but because KIEH-CHING, who was then the
emperor of the YING Country, had a good and rightful reason for
borrowing troops to punish crime, HO-POH could not do otherwise than
help to overthrow his country. It was because he pitied YIU-I that he
allowed him to leave the country secretly. After he had left he became a
YAO man.\] The sovereign SHUN begat HI, and HI begat the YAO (Quaking)
People. In the sea there are two people. \[These are the people to whom
YIU-I went.\] They are [called](errata.htm#50.md) NU-CHEU. \[They are the
same as NU-CHEU'S Body. There is no certainty as to the time when, or
the kind of being into which, she (NU-CHEU'S Body) may be metamorphosed;
for at one time she walks on water, and at another she vanishes into
earth. There is no place she could not reach if she desired to reach it.
We hear also that the ways of the class

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

of FAN-LIS are similar to those of NU-CHEU'S Body.\] NU-CHEU has great
crabs. The breadth is ten LI.

14\. In the Great Waste there is a mountain called YEH-YAO-KIUN-TI. Upon
it is the FU-tree, having a trunk of three hundred LI. Its leaves are
like mustard. \[It resembles a pillar rising to a great height, and its
leaves are like mustard greens.\] It has a valley called the Warm
Springs Valley. Above the Warm Springs Valley is the FU-tree \[i.e.,
FU-SANG lies above\]. When one sun sets another sun rises. \[It says
that they alternate with each other.\] They all contain a bird. \[In
them there is a two-footed bird.\] Here there is a god with a human
face, dog's ears, and a wild beast's body. For ear-ornaments he has two
green serpents. He is called SHE-PI'S Body. They have birds variegated
with all colors. TI-TSUN condescended to be their friend. Ti descended
two high terraces (for worship) which were ruled by the variegated
birds. \[It says that below the mountain were SHUN'S two high terraces
for worship, and that the variegated birds ruled over them.\]

15\. And in the Great Waste there is a mountain called I-T’IEN-SU-MAN.
It is the place where the sun and moon were born, and here is the HUEN
(a pipe, a musical instrument) People's Country. Here is also the K’I
(Dark Gray) Mountain, the YAO (Quaking) Mountain, the TSANG Mountain,
the MAN-HU (or Household) Mountain, the SHING (Fertile) Mountain, and
the TAI Mountain. Here there are variegated birds.

16\. In the Eastern Waste there is a mountain called HOH-MING-TSUN-TSIH.
This is the place where the sun and moon rise. There is also the
KIH-YUNG Country, northeast beyond the sea. They had three blue (or
green) horses, and three horses that were black with white spots, sweet
flowers, YUEN-YI, I gems, three green (or blue) horses, and three black
horses with white spots like eyes on their flesh, sweet flowers,
delicious cherries, and numerous varieties of grain in this place. \[It
says that these are produced spontaneously.\]

17\. There is also the country of NU-HWO-YUEH-MU, having a man called
YUEN. In the northern regions they say that YUEN,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

who brings them the wind, is called YEN. \[It says that he has these two
names.\] He dwelt at the extreme eastern corner, for the sun and moon
dwelt there. They did not have a uniform time for rising and setting,
and he controlled them as to whether the time should be short or long.
\[It says that YUEN had the management of the observations of the rising
and setting of the sun and moon. He did not let them run out of order,
and he knew the length of the days.\]

18\. In the northeast corner of the Great Waste there is a mountain
called HIUNG-LI-TI Hill. The YING Dragon dwells at its extreme southern
limit. \[The YING Dragon is a dragon having wings.\] He killed CH’I-YIU,
together with KW’A-FU \[The Ying Dragon therefore dwells below the
earth.\] Formerly, when below, he was the occasion of dry weather \[then
it did not rain above\], but when the YING Dragon made his appearance
there was a very great rain. \[The dragon that is in heaven now was
produced by the vapor ascending from the YING Dragon. This is the work
of the mysterious and obscure, and man is not capable of accomplishing
it.\]

19\. In the Eastern Sea is the Mountain (or Island) of the Flowing
Stream, seven thousand LI distant in the sea. Upon this there are wild
beasts which look like cattle, with green (blue or hoary) bodies, but
they have no horns, and only one foot. When they come out of or go into
the water, then there is wind and rain. They are bright like the sun and
the moon, and their voice is like thunder. They are called KW-EI. The
Yellow Emperor obtained them and made drums of their skins, beating them
with drum-sticks made from the bones of wild beasts. \[The Thunderbeast
is the God of Thunder. He has a man's face and a dragon's body. He drums
his abdomen, beating it with drum-sticks.\] The sound might be heard for
five hundred LI, terrifying all beneath heaven.

Note: Comments within the square brackets form a part of the document as
it stands today. Some of them were placed there by a noted scholar about
368 B.C., while others were put in as late as the thirteenth century.
The early Chinese who studied the record

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

were trying to understand and apply the information to China—most of it
has aided considerably in interpreting difficult passages.

 

Nature's most magnificent display of her handiwork—the Great Luminous
Canyon with the little stream flowing in a bottomless
ravine—outspectacles every other natural extravaganza on this earth with
its brilliant yellows, vibrant oranges, deep subtle reds and in its
shadows pale lavenders toning into rich, velvet blues—like a glorious
sunrise or sunset. Nothing but the sun itself could have imparted such
rich color—and nowhere else does it exist. To an ancient Chinese,
traveling east, this great fissure must be the place where the sun was
born.

Hundreds of Chinese apparently saw the Canyon—it was a "must" on their
travel-adventure schedule. "I saw the place where the sun was
born"—Chinese poetry and literature fairly bulges with cantos of glowing
reminiscence. They called it the "Great Canyon," 4000 years ago; we call
it the "Grand Canyon," today. No one could stand on the rim of the
canyon and be unmoved by it. The Indians could not; the Chinese could
not; and we can not.

To one familiar with the area around the Grand Canyon and due south of
it, many small touches in the Chinese description will be noticeable.
Pipe-organ cactus will be recognized in the HUEN People's Country,
number 15, in the fourteenth Book, as well as the YAO Mountain—called,
in English, "quaking" mountain. "Quaking" is one of those odd words that
have a habit of sticking. Forests of Aspen trees have for years been
referred to as "quaking." In two recent travel accounts, the Aspen
forests on the north rim of the Canyon have been referred to as "quaking
Aspen"—right on this very spot where the Chinese nickname the mountain
on the rim as "Quaking Mountain."

And then the Sahuaro—erroneously called the "FU-tree"—which was said to
resemble a tall pillar rising to great height, the color of mustard. The
most perfect gem of all—"they all contain a bird"—describes the Sahuaro,
in five words, better than

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

any book. What highly imaginative comment could be more significant?
Does any other tree in the whole world "contain a bird?" The Sahuaro has
small holes drilled in the side, and anyone who has watched the birds
dart in and out, hitting the bull's eye each time, will appreciate this
Chinese description. Holes are originally made in the Sahuaro by
woodpeckers and, when they leave, elf owls take over. It is an
experience to watch that is never forgotten.

The "warm springs" that were noted, are probably Castle Hot Springs,
just north of Phoenix. And in this area, the FU-tree grew. This
identification again ties the Shan Hai King closely to the area
described in Hwui Shan's story—the territory is within 100 miles.

The "archer story" in the Ninth Book, locates, without a shadow of a
doubt, the place where the Chinese legend originated. It is my belief
that some day it will be found that the story of the archer came from
one of the Indian tribes and was told to the Chinese. They took it home
as a legend of the Canyon—the Indian legend of how the Canyon was
formed—a legend like that of the origin of the Snake Clan—a legend like
that of Ha-ak. Indian lore is rich in legendary material. In this
instance, we have the Indian trying to explain to himself how the Canyon
came about and why it was so rich in the colors of the sun. It sounded
plausible to the poetic soul of the Chinese and they "borrowed" it and
took it home. The legend, in China, has never been understood—it has
just been there always as a part of their folklore with no known
beginning. This, it is submitted, is its foundation—here at our Grand
Canyon.

The concluding paragraph appears to have been put into the "Classic of
the Great Eastern Waste" for the want of a better place to put it. It is
out of order—but it contains information found in no other place. It
furnishes the necessary clue as to how the Chinese came over. Some of
them, at least, came by ship following the course of the warm Kamchatka
Current which is identified as the "Flowing Stream." Sailing by way of
the Aleutians, and seven thousand LI, or 2300 miles, distant, they found
"wild beasts" that looked like cattle, with no horns,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

that go in and out of the water, have a man's face, a dragon's body and
beat their abdomen. In the Aleutians, and specifically on the Island of
Amchitka, 2300 miles from the tip of Korea from where the Chinese
probably sailed, is a large colony of sea otter that are a perfect match
for the Chinese description. At a short distance, sea otter, with their
round white faces and dark brown bodies, do look like they had human
faces. When the otter eats, it lies on its back in the water, and uses
its chest and abdomen as a table. Its food consists of hard-shelled
mollusks which are broken by hammering on a rock which had been brought
from the bottom of the depths for the purpose. "The rock rests on the
otter's chest and the mollusk is held in both forepaws and brought down
against the rock. The ability to balance food on the abdomen, even in
rough weather is remarkable." So says the Chicago Natural History
Bulletin.

This is a portion of the record, compiled by the great Yu for the
Emperor Shun, which told about the mountains and the seas of the
world—man's oldest known geography. The Ninth and Fourteenth Books took
us to the Grand Canyon and southern Arizona; the four sections of the
Fourth Book took us from the Sweetwater River in Wyoming down the crest
of the Rockies to the Rio Grande in Texas; from Manitoba, again down the
Continental Divide 2200 miles due south to Mazatlan; from Mt.
Fairweather in Alaska by sea to Santa Barbara, with a view of Mt. Shasta
and Klamath Falls; and from Mt. Rainier to Paradise Valley in the Santa
Rosa range in northern Nevada. The mapped record speaks for itself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Conclusion](pi17.md)

</div>
