<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi16)  [Next](pi18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### CHAPTER XV

### Conclusion

These two written records, that of Hwui Shan, fifth century Buddhist
priest, and that of Yu, Minister of Public Works under Shun, both
carefully safeguarded for centuries by the Chinese, have now been
examined in the one case and re-examined in the other. Artifacts and
other relevant material with which we compared these ancient writings,
for the most part, has been of recent date—some of it authenticated by
the carbon-14 process.

The earliest of the two records survived the burning of books, in 213
B.C., two condensations and many editings; the fifth century account
went through at least one condensation and various editings Both records
are fragmentary. No two translations from Chinese into English agree in
phraseology—and some editions of the early record do not agree with each
other. History of both documents has been fraught with doubt and
dissention. Errors of various kinds, in my writing, are bound to be
present—they could not help but be.

When the story of Fu-sang was so ably discussed in the early nineteenth
century, the great expanse of territory comprising southwestern 'United
States, was completely unknown—the pony express covered the ground west
of Kansas City; the [Louisiana](errata.htm#51) Purchase took place forty
years after de Guignes’ first identification of Fu-sang; New Mexico,
Arizona and California were then a part of Mexico; and ’49ers travelled
the long route around the Horn to California. It is not surprising,
therefore, that after Klaproth's dissent, more [positive](errata.htm#52)
proof from our southwest was not produced—we had none.

Even now, we are only in our infancy. The Mississippi basin, the highway
over which the shell necklace worn by the "Minnesota Girl" of 15,000
B.C., passed, has not yet been scratched. One of the books of the Shan
Hai King, by title, appears to use the Mississippi Valley and the Great
Lakes basin as its locale. There are many things that remain in our vast
country of which we know little or nothing—and of which the Chinese
apparently

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

knew a great deal. The story of Fu-sang and the reports within the Shan
Hai King have told us about a few.

Many of the details given in Books Nine and Fourteen, have been passed
over here without mention—but it is hoped that they will prove helpful
to scholars in clarifying knowledge of our own pre-history of this
fantastic area.

It is my belief, that from these ancient Chinese documents, we have the
answers to problems that have perplexed us for years and for which we
have had no solution. These two records have taught us:

That Fu-sang was no "geographical myth, figment of Buddhist
imagination"—that the plant "Fu-sang" was "corn," and the country
"Fu-sang" was Mexico;

That the legendary "bearded white man" was more than legend, he was
real—and it was he who was indirectly responsible for the Conquest of
Mexico a thousand years after he had died;

That the source of the "Flood" stories and the Biblical legends told to
the Conquistadores by the Indians, came from Buddhist teaching;

That the source of the Zapoteca, Maya and Azteca calendar was Asiatic;

That the source of early Mexican writing was Chinese;

That the source of the high cultures in both Peru and Mexico of the
fourth and fifth centuries—as well as the "mongolian spot" and the
epicanthic eye-fold, can be attributed to Chinese explorers;

That the basis for the story of Naymlap, in the Province of Lambayeque,
Peru, is true and derives from these same sources;

That the source of knowledge of weaving, ceramics, feather-work and
metallurgy, together with an understanding of astronomy and mathematics
came with the Buddhist priest;

That the root of the earliest Mexican religious philosophy, the dual
principle, stems from the Chinese Yin and Yang, the positive and
negative theory, and came with the earliest Chinese explorers, more than
4,000 years ago;

That the Folsom Point and cochineal constituted a "reverse borrowing" by
the Chinese from the American continent;

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

That the magnetic personality who dominated the scene and furnished the
incentive as well as the motive power that stimulated this aboriginal
people into rising to such unprecedented heights, the like of which has
rarely been duplicated, was Hwui Shan, fifth century Buddhist priest.

And, from the Asiatic side, it is my belief:

That the "great luminous canyon" of Chinese literature actually was the
Grand Canyon of the Colorado, in Arizona;

That the Chinese "archer" legend originated in our Grand Canyon;

That the descriptions given here from the Shan Hai King, fit actual
geographical locations in the United States, Canada and Mexico and can
be identified and mapped;

That the Chinese were in America in a period at least as early as 2200
B.C., and came periodically up to a date as late as 500 A.D., preceding
[Leif](errata.htm#53) Ericson by more than 3,000 years;

That the two stones inscribed with undecipherable hieroglyphics, one in
Alberta and one in North Dakota, if studied, may be found to be actual
inscriptions, in archaic Chinese, put there by the ancient Chinese sent
out by Yu;

That the Chinese "Classic of Mountains and Seas," which for the past
2,000 years has been accepted by the Chinese only as myth, is no myth
but is actually true;

That these two documents, faithfully preserved within the archives of
China, furnish sufficient written proof, that up to now has been
lacking, of Chinese exploration in America, at a date as early as 2200
B.C.

That the remaining untranslated books of the Shan Hai King contain
identifiable geographic locations on the face of the earth, outside of
China.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Author Biography](pi18)

</div>
