<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Author Biography

### (from [back of dust jacket](pi00.htm#img_bjacket).md)

HENRIETTE MERTZ, the author of PALE INK, was born in Chicago, studied
law at John Marshall Law School, there received the degrees of Bachelor
of Law and Master of Patent Law. In 1948, she was awarded an Honorary
Doctor of Laws by Western College, Oxford, Ohio, in recognition of her
work in International Law.

For twenty years, Miss Mertz has specialized in the field of
International Patent Law, during the course of which she has had
occasion to travel extensively in Europe and Latin America. On three
occasions, she was a representative of the American Bar Association at
Inter-American Bar Association Conferences. She has made fourteen trips
to the interior of Mexico or South America and, in 1940, made an
exploratory expedition to the headwaters of the Amazon River. Crossing
the Cordillera of the high Andes five days on foot, coming down the
eastern slope on balsa raft, she travelled the entire length of the
Amazon to its mouth by dugout canoe and river boat. During World War II,
Miss Mertz was commissioned a Lieutenant in the United States Naval
Reserve, where she served on active duty as Special Assistant to the
Advisor on Patent Matters for the Office of Scientific Research and
Development. She is a member of the Society of Woman Geographers and is
currently serving on its National Executive Board. She was one of the
founders and on the original Board of Directors of the Mexican Chamber
of Commerce of Illinois.

The writing of "Pale Ink" was undertaken because of her intense interest
and affection for the Indian people, many of whom are close friends, and
in wanting to help them solve some of the mysteries surrounding their
early culture.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

PALE INK

An important study of two ancient Chinese documents

relating to America . . . with maps

Price

4.50

Henriette Mertz

Box 207, Old Post Office Sta.

Chicago 90, Illinois

 

 

 
