[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl05)  [Next](wsl07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.--The Brotherhood of Hope.

In the spirit world there are many strange places, many wondrous sights,
and many organizations for helping repentant souls, but I have never
seen anything more strange in its way than this Home of Help, conducted
by the Brotherhood of Hope, to which I was now conducted. In the then
feeble condition of all my spiritual faculties I was not able to see
what the place was like. I was almost like one who is deaf, dumb and
blind. When I was with others I could scarcely see or hear them, or make
them hear me, and although I could see a little, it was more as though I
was in a perfectly dark room with only one small feeble glimmer of light
to show me where I went. On the earth plane I had not felt this so much,
for though all was darkness I could both see and hear enough to be
conscious of those near me. It was in ascending even to the little
distance at which this place was above the earth that I felt the absence
of all but the most material developments of my spirit.

That time of darkness was so awful to me that even now I scarce like to
recall it, I had so loved the sunshine and the light. I came from a land
where all is sunshine and brightness, where the colors are so rich, the
sky so clear, the flowers and the scenery so beautiful, and I so loved
light and warmth and melody; and here as elsewhere since my death I had
found only darkness and coldness and gloom; an apalling, enshrouding
gloom, that wrapped me round like a mantle of night from which I could
in no way free myself; and this awful gloom crushed my spirit as nothing
else could have done. I had been proud and haughty on earth. I came of a
race that knew not what it was to bow before anyone. In my veins ran the
blood of its haughty nobles. Through my mother I was allied to the great
ones of earth whose ambitions had moved kingdoms to their will; and now
the lowest, humblest, poorest beggar of my native streets was greater,
happier than I, for he at least had the sunshine and the free air, and I
was as the lowest, most degraded prisoner in the dungeon cell.

Had it not been for my one star of hope, my angel of light, and the
hopes she had given me through her love, I must have sunk into the
apathy of despair. But when I thought of her waiting, as she had vowed
she would do all her life for me, when I recalled her sweet and tender
smile and the loving words she had spoken to me, my heart and my courage
revived again, and I strove to endure, to be patient, to be strong. And
I had need of all to help me, for from now began a period of suffering
and conflict I shall in vain seek to make anyone fully realize.

This place where I was now I could barely see in all its details. It was
like a huge prison--dim and misty in its outlines. Later on I saw it was
a great building of dark grey stone (as solid to my eyes as earthly
stone) with many long passages, some long large halls or rooms, but
mostly composed of innumerable little cells with scarcely any light and
only the barest of furniture. Each spirit had only what he had earned by
his earthly life, and some had nothing but the little couch whereon they
lay and suffered. For all suffered there. It was the House of Sorrow,
yet it was also a House of Hope, for all there were striving upwards to
the light, and for each had begun the time of hope. Each had his foot
planted upon the lowest rung of the ladder of hope by which he should in
time mount even to heaven itself.

In my own little cell there was but my bed, a table and a chair--nothing
more. I spent my time in resting or meditating in my cell, and going
with those who, like myself, soon grew strong enough to hear the
lectures which were delivered to us in the great hall. Very impressive
those lectures were; told in the form of a story, but always so as to
bring home to the mind of each of us those things wherein we had done
wrong. Great pains were taken to make us understand, from the point of
view of an impartial spectator, the full consequences to ourselves and
others of each of our actions, and where we had for our own selfish
gratifications wronged or dragged down another soul. So many things
which we had done because all men did them, or because we thought that
we as men had a right to do them, were now shown to us from the other
side of the picture, from those who had in a measure been our victims,
or where we personally were not directly responsible for their fall, the
victims of a social system invented and upheld to gratify us and our
selfish passions. I cannot more fully describe these lectures, but those
amongst you who know what are the corruptions of the great cities of
earth will easily supply for yourselves the subjects. From such
lectures, such pictures of ourselves as we were, stripped of all the
social disguises of earth life, we could but return in shame and sorrow
of heart to our cells to reflect over our past and to strive to atone
for it in our future.

And in this there was great help given to us, for with the error and its
consequences we were always shown the way to correct and overcome the
evil desire in ourselves, and how we might atone for our own sins by
timely efforts to save another from the evil into which we had fallen,
all these lessons being intended to fit us for the next stage of our
progression, in which we would be sent back to earth to help, unseen and
unknown, mortals who were struggling with earth's temptations.

When we were not attending the lectures we were free to go where we
might wish; that is, such of us as were strong enough to move about
freely. Some who had left dear friends on earth would go to visit them,
that, unseen themselves, they might yet see those they loved. We were
always warned, however, not to linger in the temptations of the earth
plane, since many of us would find it difficult to resist them.

Those who were strongest amongst us and who possessed the needful
qualities and the desire to use them, were employed in magnetising those
who were weakest, and who, by reason of the excessive dissipations of
their earthly lives, were in such terrible condition of exhaustion and
suffering that the only thing which could be done with them was to allow
them to lie helpless in their cells while others gave them a little
relief by magnetising them; and here I must describe to you a very
wonderful system of healing those poor spirits which was practiced in
this House of Hope. Some advanced spirits, whose natural desires and
tastes made them doctors and healers, with the help of other spirits of
different degrees of advancement under them, would attend upon these
poorest and most suffering ones--where indeed all were sufferers--and by
means of magnetism and the use of others' powers which they could
control, they would put these poor spirits into temporary forgetfulness
of their pain; and though they awoke again to a renewal of their
sufferings, yet in these intervals their spirits gained strength and
insensibly grew more able to endure, till at last their sufferings were
mitigated with time and the growing development of the spirit body, and
they in turn would, when fit to do so, be employed to magnetise others
who were still suffering.

It is impossible for me to give you a very clear picture of this place
and those in it, for although the resemblance to an earthly hospital was
very great, there were many little points in which it resembled nothing
which you have yet on earth, though as knowledge on earth advances the
resemblance will become closer. All was so dark in this place, because
the unfortunate spirits who dwelt there had none of the brightness of
happy spirits to give into the atmosphere, and it is the state of the
spirit itself in the spiritual world that makes the lightness or
darkness of its surroundings. The sense of darkness was also due to the
almost total blindness of these poor spirits, whose spiritual senses
never having been developed on earth made them alike insensible to all
around them, just as those born on earth in a state of blindness,
deafness and dumbness would be unconscious of the things which were
apparent to those fully endowed with senses. In visiting the atmosphere
of the earthly plane, which was a degree more suited to their state of
development, these poor spirits would still be in darkness, though it
would not be so complete, and they would possess the power of seeing
those beings like themselves with whom they could come into direct
contact, and also such mortals as were in a sufficiently low spiritual
degree of development. The higher and more spiritualized mortals, and
still more the disembodied spirits in advance of them would be only very
dimly discernible, or even totally invisible.

The "working" Brothers of Hope, as they were called, were each provided
with a tiny little light like a star, whose rays illuminated the
darkness of the cells they visited and carried the light of hope
wherever the brothers went. I myself at first was so great a sufferer
that I used simply to lie in my cell in a state of almost apathetic
misery, watching for this spark to come glimmering down the long
corridor to my door, and wondering how long it would be in earth time
ere it would come again. But it was not long that I lay thus utterly
prostrate. Unlike many of the poor spirits who had added a love of drink
to their other vices, my mind was too clear and my desire to improve too
strong to leave me long inactive, and as soon as I found myself able to
move again I petitioned to be allowed to do something, however humble,
which might be of use. I was therefore, as being myself possessed of
strong magnetic powers, set to help an unfortunate young man who was
utterly unable to move, and who used to lie moaning and sighing all the
time. Poor fellow, he was only thirty years old when he left the earth
body, but in his short life he had contrived to plunge into such
dissipations that he had prematurely killed himself, and was now
suffering such agonies from the reaction upon the spirit of those powers
he had abused, that it was often more than I could bear to witness them.
My task was to make soothing passes over him, by which means he would
obtain a little relief, till at stated times a more advanced spirit than
myself would come and put him into a state of unconsciousness. And all
this time I was myself suffering keenly both in mind and in my spirit
body, for in the lower spheres the spirit is conscious of bodily
sufferings. As it grows more advanced the suffering becomes more purely
mental--the less material envelope of the higher spirits making them at
last insensible to anything like material pain.

As my strength grew so did my desires revive and cause me so much
torment that I was often tempted to do what many poor spirits did--go
back to earth in search of the means to satisfy them through the
material bodies of those yet on earth. My bodily sufferings grew very
great, for the strength I had been so proud of and had used to so bad a
purpose made me suffer more than one who had been weak. As the muscles
of an athlete who has used them to excess begin after a time to contract
and cause him excruciating pain, so those powers and that strength which
I had abused in my earthly life now began, through its inevitable
reaction on my spirit body, to cause me the most intense suffering. And
then as I grew stronger and stronger and able to enjoy what had seemed
enjoyment in my earth life, the desire for those pleasures grew and grew
till I could scarce refrain from returning to the earth plane there to
enjoy, through the organism of those yet in the flesh, whose sordid
lives and low desires placed them on a level with the spirits of the
earth plane, those pleasures of the senses which had still so great a
temptation for us. Many and many of those who were in the House of Hope
with me would yield to the temptation and go back for a time to haunt
the earth, whence they would return after a longer or shorter period,
exhausted and degraded even below their former state. All were free to
go or to stay as they desired. All could return when they wished, for
the doors of Hope's castle were never shut upon anyone, however
unthankful or unworthy they might be, and I have often wondered at the
infinite patience and tenderness which were ever shown for our
weaknesses and our sins. It was indeed only possible to pity these poor
unfortunates, who had made such utter slaves of themselves to their base
desires that they could not resist them and were drawn back time after
time till at last, satiated and exhausted, they could move no more and
were like the unfortunate young man whom I tended.

For myself, I might also have yielded to the temptation had it not been
for the thoughts of my pure love, and the hopes she had given me, the
purer desires she had inspired, and I at least could not condemn these
poor erring souls who had no such blessings granted them. I went to
earth very often, but it was to where my beloved one dwelt, and her love
drew me ever to her side, away from all temptations, into the pure
atmosphere of her home, and though I could never approach near enough to
touch her, by reason of this icy invisible wall which I have described,
I used to stand outside of it, looking at her as she sat and worked or
read or slept. When I was there she would always be in a dim way
conscious of my presence, and would whisper my name or turn to where I
was with one of her sad sweet smiles that I would carry away the
recollection of and comfort myself with in my lonely hours. She looked
so sad, so very sad, my poor love, and so pale and delicate, it made my
heart ache even while it comforted me to see her. I could tell that in
spite of all her efforts to be brave and patient, and to hope, the
strain was almost too great for her, and each day she grew more delicate
looking. She had many other things to try her at this time; there were
family troubles and the doubts and fears suggested by the strangeness of
her intercourse with the world of spirits. At times she would wonder if
it were not all a wild delusion, a dream from which she would awake to
find there was after all no communication between the dead and the
living, no means by which she could reach me again, and then a dull
despair would seize upon her and upon me also as I stood beside her and
read her feeling, helpless and powerless to make her realize my actual
presence beside her, and I would pray to be allowed in some way to make
her know that I was there.

One night when I had watched her sink into sleep after a weary time of
weeping, I, who could have wept, too, in my grief for us both, was
suddenly touched upon the shoulder, and looking up beheld her guardian
spirit who had first helped me speak with her. He asked me if I would be
very quiet and self-restrained if he allowed me to kiss her as she
slept, and I, wild with this new joy, most eagerly promised. Taking my
hand in his we passed together through the transparent icy wall that was
to me so impervious. Bending over her the guide made some strange
motions with his hand, and then taking one of my hands in his for a few
moments he bade me touch her very gently. She was lying quietly asleep,
with the tears still on her eyelashes and her sweet lips slightly parted
as though she was speaking in her dreams. One hand rested against her
cheek and I took it in mine, so gently, so tenderly--not to awaken her.
Her hand closed half consciously upon mine and a look of such joy came
into her face that I feared she would awake. But no! The bright spirit
smiled at us both and said, "Kiss her now." And I--ah! I stooped over
her and touched her at last and gave her the first kiss I had ever
given. I kissed her not once but half a dozen times, so passionately
that she awoke and the bright spirit drew me away in haste. She looked
round and asked softly: "Do I dream, or was that indeed my beloved one?"
I answered, "Yes," and she seemed to hear, for she smiled so sweet a
smile--ah! so sweet! and again and again she repeated my name softly to
herself.

Not for long after that would they allow me to touch her again, but I
was often near, and the joy of that one meeting dwelt in our hearts for
many an hour. I could see how real had been my kiss to her, and for me
it was as an anchor of hope encouraging me to believe that in time I
should indeed be able to make her feel my touch and hold communication
with her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.--Spirits of the Earth Plane](wsl07)
