[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl18)  [Next](wsl20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVII.--The Astral Plane and Its Inhabitants--Spooks, Elves, Vampires, etc.

I can hardly give you a better idea of the course of our journey than by
asking you to imagine a vast spiral or corkscrew winding upwards and
downwards in circling rings. A tiny speck no bigger than a pin's head in
the middle of a large cart-wheel might represent the earth in the centre
of these circling rings, an equal number of which are above and below
the earth, all winding in a connected series from the lowest to the
highest around this speck, and the head of the spiral pointing towards
our central sun--this being regarded as the highest point of the most
advanced sphere.

This will give you a faint idea of the earth and its attendant spirit
spheres, and help you to understand how in our journey we passed from
the second into the lowest sphere, and in doing so passed through the
earth plane. As we entered it I perceived many spirits of mortals
hurrying to and fro just as I had been wont to see them, but now for the
first time I also saw that mingling with them were many floating
spectral shapes similar to those wraiths I had seen haunting the spirit
in the icy cage in the Frozen Land. These wraiths seemed to be floating
to and fro like driftweed upon a seashore, borne here and there by the
different astral currents which revolve and circle round the earth.

Some were very distinct and life-like till a closer inspection revealed
to me that the light of intelligence was wanting in their eyes and
expressions, and there was a helpless collapsed look about them like wax
dolls from which the stuffing has run out. For the life of me I can
think of nothing that will so well express their appearance.

In my former wanderings through the earth plane I had not been conscious
of any of these beings, and on asking Hassein the reason of this he
answered: "First, because you were so much absorbed in your work, and
secondly, your powers of sight were not sufficiently developed. Now
look," he added, pointing to a strange little group of beings like elves
which were approaching us hand in hand, gamboling like children. "Look
at those; they are the mental and bodily emanations cast off from the
minds and bodies of children which consolidate into these queer,
harmless little elementals when brought into contact with any of the
great life currents that circle around the earth, and which bear upon
their waves the living emanations cast off from men, women and children.
These curious little beings have no real separate intelligent life such
as a soul would give, and they are so evanescent and ethereal that they
take their shapes and change them, as you will observe, like the clouds
on a summer sky. See how they are all dissolving and forming again
afresh."

As I looked I saw the whole little cloud of figures shift into a new
form of grotesque likeness, and whereas they had looked like tiny
fairies in caps and gowns made from flowers, they now took wings,
becoming like a species of half butterflies, half imps, with human
bodies, animal's heads, and butterflies' wings. Then as a fresh strong
wave of magnetism swept over them, lo! they were all broken up and
carried away to form fresh groups elsewhere with other particles.

I was so astonished at this, the real living appearance and the unreal
disappearance, that I suppose Hassein read my puzzled state of mind, for
he said, "What you have now beheld is only an ethereal form of elemental
life, which is not material enough for a long continued existence on the
earth plane, and is like the foam of the sea thrown up by the wave
motions of pure earthly lives and thoughts. See now how much stronger on
the astral plan can be the consistency of that which is not pure."

I beheld approaching us a great mass of aerial forms, dark, misshapen,
human, yet inhuman, in appearance. "These," said he, "are the beings
which haunt the delirium of the drunkard, which gather round him, drawn
by his corrupted magnetism and unable to be repelled by one who has lost
the will-force needful to protect him from such creatures which cling
like barnacles to him, and like leeches suck his animal vitality with a
strange ghoulish intelligence akin to that of some noisome plant which
has fastened itself upon a tree. For such a one as the unfortunate
drunkard the best help which can be given is by obtaining some one upon
the earth side of life who possesses a strong will and mesmeric powers,
and let him place the drunkard under the protection of his will and the
strong influence of his magnetism, till the last of these phantoms drops
off from inability to hold on longer under the stream of healthy
magnetism poured upon them and the unlucky man upon whom they have
fastened. The healthy magnetism acts like a poison upon these creatures,
and kills them so that they drop off, and their bodies, unable to hold
together, decay into immaterial dust. Should these beings, however, not
encounter such a strong dose of healthy magnetism they will go on for
years floating about and drawing away the animal vitality of one human
being after another, till at last they become endowed with a certain
amount of independent animal life of their own. At this stage they can
be used by higher, more intelligent beings to carry out such work as
their peculiar organizations fit them for, and it is these soulless
creatures, though created and earth-nourished, whom a certain class of
practitioners of the so-called black magic made use of in some of their
experiments, as well as for carrying out their evil designs against any
one who had offended them. But like deadly weeds at the bottom of a dark
pool, these astrals draw down and destroy in their soulless clutches
those who venture to meddle with them unprotected by the higher powers."

"And now tell me, friend Hassein," said I, "if these astrals, when they
fasten upon a drunkard, can or do influence him to drink more, as is the
case when the earth-bound spirit of a departed drunkard controls one
still in the flesh."

"No! These beings do not derive any pleasure from the drink a man
swallows, except in so far as by corrupting his magnetism it makes him
such that they can more readily feed upon him. It is his animal or
earthly life-force they desire. It means existence for them and is much
the same as water to a plant, and beyond the fact that by draining the
victim of his vitality they cause a sense of exhaustion which makes him
fly to stimulants for relief, they do not affect the question of his
continuing to drink. They are mere parasites, and possess no
intelligence of their own except of so rudimentary a character that we
can scarcely give it that name.

"To originate a thought or to impress your thoughts upon another
requires the possession of an intelligent soul germ or spark of the
divine essence, and once this has been given the being becomes possessed
of an independent individuality it can never again lose. It may cast off
envelope after envelope, or it may sink into grosser and still grosser
forms of matter, but once endowed with soul-life it can never cease to
exist, and in existing must retain the individuality of its nature and
the responsibility of its actions. This is alike true of the human soul
and the intelligent soul-principle as manifested in the animals or lower
types of soul existence. Whenever you see the power to reason and to act
upon such reasoning manifested either in man, the highest type, or in
animals, the lower type, you may know that a soul exists, and it is only
a question of degree of purity of soul essence. We see in man and in the
brute creation alike a power of reasoning intelligence differing only in
degree, and from this fact the school of thought to which I belong draws
the inference that both alike have a conscious individual immortality,
differing, however, in the type and degree of soul essence, animals as
well as men having an immortal future for development before them. What
are the limits of the action of this law we cannot pretend to say, but
we draw our conclusions from the existence in the spirit world of
animals as well as men who have alike lived on earth, and both of whom
are found in a more advanced state of development than they were in
their earth existences.

"It is impossible for the soulless parasite to influence the mind of any
mortal; and it is therefore undoubtedly the souls which have been
incarnated in earthly bodies and have so indulged their lower passions
in that state that they are not able to free themselves from the fetters
of their astral envelopes, that haunt the earth and incite those yet in
the flesh to indulgence in drink and similar vices. They, as you know,
can control man in many ways, either partially or completely, and the
most common way is for the spirit to partly envelop the man he controls
with his spirit body until a link has been formed between them, somewhat
after the nature of that uniting some twin children who possess distinct
bodies, but are so joined to each other and interblended that all which
one feels is felt by the other. In this fashion what is swallowed by the
mortal is enjoyed by the spirit who controls the unfortunate man, and
who urges him to drink as much as possible, and when he can no longer do
so the spirit will then try to free himself and go elsewhere in search
of some other weak-willed man or woman of depraved tastes. Not always,
however, can either the spirit or the mortal free themselves from the
strange link woven between them by the indulgence of their joint
desires. After a long-continued connection of this sort it becomes very
difficult for them to separate, and the spirit and the man may go on for
years sick of each other yet unable to break the tie without help from
the higher powers, who are always ready to assist those who call upon
their aid. Should a spirit continue to control men for the purpose of
self-gratification as I have described, he sinks lower and lower, and
drags his victims down with him into the depths of hell itself, from
which they will both have a bitter and weary task to climb when at last
the desire for better things shall awaken. To a soul alone belongs the
power to think and to will, and those other soulless creatures but obey
the laws of attraction and repulsion, which are felt likewise by all the
material atoms of which the universe is composed, and even when these
astral parasites have, by long feeding upon the vital force of men or
women, attained to a certain amount of independent life, they have no
intelligence to direct their own or others' movements; they float about
like fever germs generated in a foul atmosphere, attracted to one person
more readily than to another, and like such germs may be said to possess
a very low form of life.

"Another class of elemental astrals are those of the earth, air, fire,
and water, whose bodies are formed from the material life germs in each
element. Some are in appearance like the gnomes and elves who are said
to inhabit mines and mountain caverns which have never been exposed to
the light of day. Such, too, are the fairies whom men have seen in
lonely and secluded places amongst primitive races of men. Such, with
the variations caused by the different natures of the elements from
which they are formed, are the water sprites and the mermaids of ancient
fable, and the spirits of the fire and the spirits of the air.

"All these beings possess life, but as yet no souls, for their lives are
drawn from and sustained by the lives of earthly men and women, and they
are but reflections of the men amongst whom they dwell. Some of these
beings are of a very low order of life, almost like the higher orders of
plants, except that they possess an independent power of motion. Others
are very lively and full of grotesque unmeaning tricks, with the power
of very rapid flight from place to place. Some are perfectly harmless,
while others again are more malignant in their instincts as the human
beings from whom their life is drawn are of a more savage race. These
curious earth elementals cannot exist long amongst nations where the
more intellectual stage of development has been reached, because then
the life germs thrown off by man contain too little of the lower or
animal life to sustain them, and they die and their bodies decay into
the atmosphere. Thus as nations advance and grow more spiritual, these
lower forms of life die out from the astral plane of that earth's
sphere, and succeeding generations begin at first to doubt and then to
deny that they ever had an existence. Only amongst those ancient
religions of the East who have kept still unbroken the threads of
record, are there to be found accounts of these intermediate dependent
races of beings and the causes of their existence.

"These soulless elementals of earth, air, fire and water, are a class
distinct from those others which I have drawn you as emanating from the
debased intelligence of man's mind and the evil actions of his body.
Behold now, oh! man of a Western nation, the knowledge which your
philosophers and learned men have shut out and locked away as being
harmful fables, till man, shut into the narrow bounds of what he can
with his physical senses alone see, hear, and feel, has begun to doubt
if he has any soul at all; any higher, purer, nobler self than is
sustained by the sordid life of earth. See now the multitudinous beings
that surround man on every side, and ask yourself if it would not be
well that he should have the knowledge which could help to keep him safe
from the many pitfalls over which he walks in blind ignorance and
unconsciousness of his danger. In the primitive ages of the earth man
was content to look like a child for help and succor to his Heavenly
Father, and God sent his angels and ministering spirits to protect his
earthly children. In these latter ages man, like a full-grown
troublesome youth, seeks in his self-conceit no higher help than his
own, and rushes into danger with his eyes bandaged by his pride and
ignorance. He scoffs at those things which he is too limited in his
powers to understand, and turns aside from those who would instruct him.
Because he cannot see his soul, cannot weigh it and analyze it, he says,
forsooth, that man has no soul and had better enjoy this earthly life as
one who shall some day die and turn to dust again, consciousness,
individuality, all forever blotted out.

"Or, again, in abject fear of the unknown fate before him, man takes
refuge in the vague superstitions, the shadowy creeds of those who
profess to act as guides upon the pathway to the Unknown Land, with
little more certain knowledge than man has himself.

"Thus, then, it is in pity to his wandering, struggling children that
God has in these later days opened once more--and wider than ever
before--the doors of communion between the two worlds. He is sending out
again messengers to warn man, ambassadors, to tell him of the better
way, the truer path to the happiness of a higher life, and to show him
that knowledge and that power which shall yet be of right his
inheritance. As the prophets of old spake, so speak these messengers
now, and if they speak with clearer voice, with less veiled metaphor, it
is because man is no longer in his infancy and needs now that he should
be shown the reason and the science upon which his beliefs and hopes
must be founded.

"Listen, then, unto this voice that calls, oh! ye toilers of the earth!"
cried Hassein, turning and stretching out his hands towards a small dark
ball that seemed to float far away on the horizon of our sight--a small
dark globe that we knew to be the sorrowful planet called Earth. "Listen
to the voices that call to you and turn not a deaf ear, and realize ere
it be too late that God is not a God of the dead but of the living, for
all things are alive for evermore. Life is everywhere and in everything;
even the dull earth and the hard rocks are composed of living germs,
each living according to its own degree. The very air we breathe and the
boundless ether of universal space are full of life, and there is not
one thought we think but lives for good or ill, not one act whose image
shall not live to torture or to solace the soul in the days of its
release from its incarnation in an earthly form. Life is in all things,
and God is the central Life of All."

Hassein paused, then in a calmer voice he said to me: "Look yonder! What
would you say those things were?"

He pointed to what seemed to me at first a mass of spirit forms which
came sweeping towards us as though blown by a strong wind. As they came
near I saw they were evidently soulless astral envelopes, but unlike
those floating wraiths I had seen haunting the man in the icy cage,
these were solid, and to my spiritual sight life-like and full of animal
vigor; yet they were like automatons and did not seem to possess any
intelligence. They were drifting and bobbing about like buoys at sea to
which boats are anchored. As they drifted close to us my friend put
forth his will-force and captured one, which then remained floating in
mid air.

"Now look," said he, "you will observe this is somewhat like a great
living doll. It is the result of countless little living germs which man
is continually throwing off from his earthly body, emanations solely of
his animal or lower life, material enough when brought into contact with
the magnetic forces of the astral plane, to form into these imitations
of earthly men and women, and immaterial enough to be invisible to man's
purely material sight, although a very small degree of clairvoyant power
would enable him to see them. A stronger and higher degree of
clairvoyant power would enable him to see, as you do, that this is not a
true spirit envelope, since the soul principle is wanting; and a yet
higher degree of clairvoyant power would show that a soul has never been
in this form, and that it has never had a conscious existence as a
soul's astral envelope.

"Amongst ordinary clairvoyants the subject of astral spirits is not
studied sufficiently to develop these degrees of soul-sight, therefore
few clairvoyants in your earthly country could tell you whether this was
a true soul-enveloping astral form or one from which the soul had
departed, or yet again one in which the soul had never been present at
all. Presently I shall show you an experiment with this astral form, but
first observe that being such as it is, it is fresh and full of the
animal life of the earth plane, and has not the collapsed appearance of
those you saw before, which had once contained a soul and which were
there in a state of rapid decay yet. And mark this carefully: this fresh
looking astral will decay far faster than the others, for it has none of
the higher principle of life clinging to it, which, in the case of an
astral that has once contained a soul, often remains for a long time
animating and keeping it from perfect decay. Astral forms must draw
their life from a higher source (from soul germs in fact), or they soon
cease to exist and crumble away."

"But," I asked, "how do they assume the shapes of men and women?"

"By the action of the spiritualized magnetic currents which flow through
all the ether space continually, as the currents flow in the ocean.
These magnetic life currents are of a more etherealized degree than
those known to scientific mortals, being in fact their spiritual
counterpart, and as such they act upon these cloud masses of human atoms
in the same way that electricity acts upon the freezing moisture upon a
window pane, forming them into the semblance of men and women as the
electricity forms the freezing moisture into a likeness of trees,
plants, etc.

"It is an acknowledged fact that electricity is an active agent in the
formation of the shapes of leaves and trees, etc., in vegetable life,
but few know that this refined form of magnetism has a similar share in
the formation of human forms and animal life. I say animal life as
applied to those types which are lower than man."

"Are there, then, also the astral forms of animals?"

"Certainly, and very queer, grotesque combinations some of them are. I
cannot show them to you now, because your powers of sight are not yet
fully developed, and also because we are traveling too rapidly to enable
me to develop them for you, but some day I shall show you these, as well
as many other curious things relating to the astral plane. I may tell
you that atoms may be classed under different heads, and that each class
will have a special attraction for others of its own kind; thus
vegetable atoms will be attracted together to form astral trees and
plants, while animal atoms will form into the semblance of beasts,
birds, etc., and human atoms into men and women's forms. In some cases,
where the human beings from whom the atoms come are very low in the
scale of humanity and nearly akin to animals, their atoms will blend
with those of the lower forms of life and create grotesque horrible
creatures which resemble at once animals and men, and having been seen
by clairvoyants in a semi-trance condition are described as nightmare
visions. In the earth spheres an immense amount of these living atoms
are thrown off continually from man's lower or animal life, and these
sustain and renew the astral forms, but were we to transport one of
these shells to a planet whose spheres had been spiritualized beyond the
stage of material life, or in other words freed from all these lower
germs, the astrals could not exist, they would become like a noxious
vapor and be blown away. These astrals being, as I have said, created
from the cloud masses of human atoms, and never having been the envelope
of any soul, are very little more permanent in their nature than the
frost flowers on a window pane, unless the power of some higher
intelligence acts upon them to intensify their vitality and prolong
their existence. They are, as you will see, expressionless and like wax
dolls in appearance, and readily lend themselves to receive any
individuality stamped upon them, hence their use in ancient times by
magicians and others. Astral atoms, whether of trees, plants, animals,
or human beings, must not be confounded with the true spirit or
soul-clothing atoms which constitute the real spirit world and its
inhabitants. Astrals of every kind are the intermediate degree of
materiality between the gross matter of earth and the more etherealized
matter of the spirit world, and we talk of a soul clothed in its astral
envelope to express that earth-bound condition in which it is too
refined or immaterial for earth existence, and too grossly clad to
ascend into the spirit world of the higher spheres, or to descend to
those of the lower."

"Then you mean that a spirit even in the lowest sphere is more
spiritualized as regards its body than an earth-bound spirit?"

"Certainly I do. The astral plane extends like a belt around each planet
and is, as I said, formed of the matter which is too fine for
reabsorption by the planet, and too coarse to escape from the attraction
of the planet's mass and pass into the spheres of the spirit world to
form either matter in the course of disintegration or change from one
form to another, and it is only the vitalizing power of such soul
magnetism as it retains which enables it to cling together in any shape
at all.

"In the case of human astral forms which have possessed individualized
life as a soul's envelope, the astral atoms have absorbed a greater or
less degree of the soul's magnetism, or true life essence, according as
the earthly existence of the soul has been good or evil, elevated or
degraded, and this soul magnetism animates it for a longer or shorter
period, and forms a link between it and the soul which has animated it.
In the case of a soul whose desires are all for higher things, the link
is soon severed and the astral envelope soon decays, while with a soul
of evil desires the tie may last for centuries and chain the soul to
earth, making it in fact earth-bound. In some cases the astral of a soul
of very evil life will have absorbed the lower or higher spheres. Astral
matter is practically so much of the soul's vitality that after the soul
itself has sunk into the lowest sphere of all, the empty shell will
still float about the earth like a fading image of its departed owner.
Such are sometimes seen by clairvoyants hanging about the places where
they once lived, and are truly 'spooks.' They have no intelligence of
their own, since the soul has fled, and they can neither influence
mediums nor move tables, nor do any other thing except as mechanical
agents of some higher intelligence, whether that intelligence be good or
evil.

"The astral before us now has no soul magnetism in it; it never
possessed any, therefore it will soon decay and its atoms be absorbed by
others. But see to what use it can be turned when acted upon by my will
power and animated for the time being by my individuality."

I looked as he spoke and saw the astral doll become suddenly animated
and intelligent, and then glide to one of the Brotherhood whom Hassein
had selected and touch him upon the shoulder, seeming to say, "Friend,
Hassein Bey salutes you." Then bowing to the amused and wondering
brother, it glided back to us as though Hassein had held it by a string
like a performing monkey.

"Now you see," he said, "how if I chose I might use this astral as a
messenger to execute some work I wished done at a distance from myself,
and you will understand one of the means made use of by the old
magicians to carry out some work at a great distance from themselves and
without their appearing to take any share in it. These astrals, however,
are only capable of being made use of upon the astral plane. They could
not move any material object, although they would be visible to material
sight at the will of the mortal using them. There are other astrals more
material in substance who could be used to penetrate into the earth
itself and to bring forth its hidden treasures, the precious metals and
the gems deeply buried from the eyes of men. It would not, however, be
lawful or right for me to explain to you the power by which this could
be done, and those magicians who have discovered and made use of such
powers have sooner or later fallen victims to those powers they could
summon to their aid but rarely continue to control."

"Then were this astral to become animated by an evil intelligence it
would be an actual danger to man?" I said.

"Yes, without doubt it might; and you will also observe that although I
should not care to descend to clothe myself in this astral form, yet a
spirit more ignorant than myself could easily do so in order to make
himself felt and seen upon the earth in a more palpable form than
possible to any spirit who has left the earth plane; but in doing so he
would run a danger of creating a link between himself and the astral
envelope not easily broken, and which might thus tie him to the astral
plane for a considerable time. You will, therefore, see how the idea has
arisen that men on earth, in seeking to see their departed friends, draw
the spirits back into earthly conditions and do them harm. Many an
ignorant spirit who is good and pure himself, has committed the mistake
of reclothing himself in one of these fresh astral shells when he would
have turned away from those which he knew to have been left by another
spirit, and has found to his cost that he has thereby made of himself a
prisoner upon the earth plane, till a higher intelligence comes to his
aid and releases him.

"In a like manner spirits of a low type can clothe themselves in these
empty astral garments, but in their case the very grossness of the
spirit (or soul) prevents them from retaining possession long, the dense
magnetism of the low spirit's own body acting as a strong noxious vapor
or gas would do upon a covering made, say, of a spider's web of fine
gossamer, and rending it into a thousand pieces. To a spirit above the
astral plane an astral envelope appears almost as solid as iron, but to
one below it these fragile shells are like a cloud or vapor. The lower
the soul the stronger is its envelope and the more firmly does it hold
the soul, limiting its powers and preventing it from rising into a more
advanced sphere."

"You mean, then, that spirits sometimes use these astral shells as they
do earthly mediums, and either control them independently or actually
enter into the form?"

"Yes, certainly. A spirit above the earth plane, anxious to show himself
to a clairvoyant of the lowest or first degree of power, will sometimes
enter one of these shells which he at once stamps with his identity, and
in that way the clairvoyant will truly see and describe him. The danger
lies in the fact that when the good spirit of limited knowledge seeks to
leave again the astral shell, he finds he cannot do so; he has animated
it and its strong life holds him prisoner, and it is often difficult to
release him. In similar manner the too complete, too long continued
control of an earthly medium by a spirit, has been found to create a
link between them which becomes at last a chain. To a spirit of the
lowest spheres an astral envelope is but a convenient, all too
evanescent cloak with which to hide his own degraded spirit body, and
thus impose upon clairvoyants unable to see the vile spirit underneath;
but to a good and pure spirit the astral envelope is as a suit of iron
capable of imprisoning him."

"Then in the case of what are called personations by one spirit of
another at seances upon earth, are these astrals made use of?"

"Very often they are, where the mischief-making spirit is of too low a
type himself to come into direct contact with the medium. You must know
by this time how wonderfully the thoughts of mortal men and women are
mirrored upon the atmosphere of the astral plane, and as pictures they
can be read and answered by spirits possessing the knowledge of how to
read them. All spirits have not the power, just as all men and women on
earth are not able to read a newspaper or a letter. It requires
intellect and education with us as with those on earth. The spirits,
then, of which men should most beware are not so much the poor ignorant
half developed spirits of the earth plane and lower spheres, whose
degraded lives have made them what they are and who are often glad of a
helping hand to raise them, but it is of the intellectually evil, those
who have great powers alike of mind and body and who have only used them
for wrong purposes. These are the real dangers to guard against, and it
is only by the increase of knowledge amongst the mediums incarnated in
the earthly body that it will be successfully done, for then mortals and
spirit workers will labor in unison, and mutually protect the spiritual
movement from fraud and from the mistakes of the well meaning but
half-ignorant spirits and mortals who are doing good work in directing
the attention of mankind to the matter, but who often do harm both to
themselves and others. They are like ignorant chemists and liable to
bring destruction and harm upon others as well as on themselves in their
experiments in search of knowledge."

"You do not think, then, that the purity of their motives will suffice
to protect them?"

"Would purity of motive save a child from being burnt if it thrust its
hands into a blazing furnace? No! then the only way is to keep the child
as far from the fire as possible. This good and wise spirit guardians do
in a great measure, but if the children are continually hovering near
the danger, and try at all sorts of odd times and fashions to get just
another peep at the dangerous thing, it is impossible but that some of
them will get scorched."

"Then you would not advise the indiscriminate cultivation of mediumistic
powers by all mortals?"

"Certainly not. I would have all men use the powers of those who have
been carefully developed under wise guardians, and I would have all
assisted to cultivate them who are truly anxious to develop their powers
as a means of doing good to others. But when you consider how manifold
and how selfish may be the motives of those mediumistically endowed, you
will see how exceedingly difficult it would be to protect them. Perhaps
my ideas are colored by the circumstances of race and my earthly
education, but I confess I should wish to limit the practice of
mediumship to those who have proved their readiness to give up more
material advantages for its sake. I would, in fact, rather see them set
apart as a body who have no share in the ambitions of mankind. But
enough of our discussion. I am now about to let this astral shell go and
draw your attention to another type of the same class."

As he spoke he made a swift upward motion with his hands over it and
uttered some words in an unknown language, whereupon the astral--which
had hitherto floated on beside us--stopped and seemed to waver about for
a few seconds until an advancing current of magnetism caught it, and it
was swept away from us like a piece of driftwood upon the waves. As I
turned from watching it I saw a small cluster of dark, weird, horrible
looking forms approaching us. These were astral shells which had never
known soul life, but, unlike the pleasant waxy looking astral from which
we had just parted, these were in all respects repulsive.

"These," said Hassein, "are the emanations thrown off by men and women
of a low intellectual type and evil, sensual lives. They are from the
slums of the earth life--not alone the social slums, but also from a
higher grade of society where there are moral slums quite as degraded.
Such beings as these, when animated by an evil intelligence can be used
for the very worst purposes. Being so very material, they can even be
used to affect material matter upon earth, and have been so used in the
practice of what is known as Black Magic and witchcraft, and they are
also (but very rarely) used by higher intelligences to effect physical
phenomena at seances. Where wise and good intelligences control them no
harm will be done, but under the direction of the evil or ignorant they
become a danger beyond my power fully to express. To these astrals, and
to those of a similar class in which the soul germ yet lingers as in a
prison, are due those rough and dangerous manifestations sometimes seen
in spirit circles (seances), where men of bad lives, and others too
ignorant to protect themselves, are assembled from motives of curiosity
or mere amusement."

"And amongst what class of spirits do you place those ghouls and
vampires so firmly believed in, in many parts of the world?"

"Vampire spirits are those who have themselves known earth life, but
have so misused it that their souls are still imprisoned in the astral
envelope. Their object in sucking away the animal life principle of men
and women is in order to retain thereby their hold upon the life of the
earth plane, and so save themselves from sinking to far lower spheres.
They are anxious to cling to their astral envelope and to prolong its
life, just as men of very evil lives upon earth cling to the life of the
earthly body because they fear that when they are separated from it they
will sink into some unknown depths of darkness and horror. The constant
renewal of the animal and astral life often enables these vampire
spirits to hang about the earth for centuries."

"Is it possible for a vampire spirit to possess itself of a sufficient
amount of materiality to appear in mortal form and mingle with men as
described in many of the tales told of such creatures?"

"If you mean to ask if the vampire can make to itself a material body, I
say no, but it can and does sometimes take complete possession of one
belonging to a mortal, just as other spirits do, and can cause its
acquired body to act in accordance with its will. Thus it is quite
possible for a vampire spirit clothed in the mortal body of another to
so change its expression as to make it bear some resemblance to the
vampire's own former earthly appearance, and through the power obtained
by the possession of a material body he (or she, for the vampires are of
both sexes) might really lead the curious double life ascribed to them
in those weird tales current and believed in in many countries. By far
the larger number of vampire spirits, however, are not in possession of
an earthly body, and they hover about the earth in their own astral
envelope, sucking away the earthly life of mediumistic persons whose
peculiar organization makes them liable to become the prey of such
influences, while they are themselves quite ignorant that such beings as
these astrals exist. The poor mortals suffer from a constant sense of
exhaustion and languor without suspecting to what it is to be
attributed."

"But cannot spirit guardians protect mortals from these beings?"

"Not always. In a great measure they do protect them, but only as one
may protect a person from infectious fevers, by showing them the danger
and warning them to avoid spots where, owing to the associations with
their earthly lives, the vampire spirits are specially attracted. This
the guardian spirit does by instilling into the mind of the mortal an
instinctive dread of the places where crimes have been committed, or
persons of evil lives have lived. But since man is and must be in all
respects a free agent, it is not possible to do more. He cannot be
directed in all things like a puppet, and must in a great measure gather
his own experience for himself, however bitter may prove its fruits.
Knowledge, guidance and help will always be given, but only in such a
manner as will not interfere with man's free will, and only such
knowledge as he himself desires; nothing will ever be forced upon him by
the spirit world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.--The Approach to Hell](wsl20)
