[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl15)  [Next](wsl17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV.--A Father's Love.

After this there came for me a time of happiness, a season of rest and
refreshment upon which I shall not dwell; its memories are all too
sacred to me, for those days were spent near to her I loved, and I had
the happiness of knowing that she was conscious of much, though not all,
I said to her, and I spent so much of my time on earth that I had none
to explore the wonders of that Land of Dawn of which I had become an
inhabitant.

And now a fresh surprise awaited me. In all my wanderings since my death
I had never once seen any of my relatives nor the friends who had passed
before me into the spirit land. But one day when I came as usual to see
my beloved, I found her full of some mysterious message she had
received, and which she was to give me herself. After a little she told
me that it was from a spirit who had come to visit her, and who said he
was my father and that he wished her to give his message to me. I was so
overcome when she said this that I could scarcely speak--scarcely ask
what his message was. I had so loved my father upon earth, for my mother
had died when I was so young that she was but a faint tender memory to
me. But my father! he had been everything to me. He had had such pride
and joy in all my successes, such hopes for my future; and, then, when I
had made shipwreck of my life, I knew that I had broken his heart. He
did not long survive the crushing of all his hopes, and since his death
I had only thought of him with pain and shame of heart. And now when I
heard that from beyond the gates of Death he had come to my beloved and
spoken to her of me, I feared lest his words might be but a lament over
his buried hopes, his degraded son, and I cried out that I could not
dare to meet him, yet I longed to hear what he had said, and to know if
there was in it a word of forgiveness for me, his son, who had so deeply
sinned.

How shall I tell what his words had been? How say what I felt to hear
them? They fell upon my heart as dew upon a thirsty land, those words of
his, and are far, far too precious to be given to the world, but surely
the father in the parable must have welcomed back his prodigal son in
some such words as these! Ah! how I cried out to my beloved when I heard
those words, and how I longed to see that father again and be taken once
more to his heart as when I was a boy! And as I turned away I beheld his
spirit standing by us, just as I had seen him last in life, only with a
glory of the spirit world upon him such as no mortal eyes have ever
seen. My father--so long parted from me, and to meet again thus! We had
no words to greet each other with but "My father" and "My son," but we
clasped each other to the heart in a joy that required no words.

When our feelings had calmed down again we began to speak of many
things, and not least of her whose love had led me so far upon my upward
path, and then I learned that this beloved father had helped, watched
over, and protected us both; that he had followed me during all my
wanderings both on earth and in the spirit land, and had protected and
comforted me in my struggles. Unseen himself he had yet been near, and
unceasing in his efforts and his love. All this time when I had so
shrunk from the thought of meeting him he had been there, only waiting
an opportunity to make himself known, and he had come at last through
her who had so much of my love, in order that he might thereby link us
all three more closely together in the joy of this reunion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.--A New Expedition Proposed](wsl17)
