[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl13)  [Next](wsl15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII.--My Second Death.

The meetings for materialization were held once a fortnight, and from
the number of them I judged that about three months had passed, when I
was told by Ahrinziman to prepare myself for a great change which was
about to take place in myself and my surroundings, and which would mean
my passing into a higher sphere. I have heard the spheres divided
differently by different spirit teachers, and it is not very important
that they should be all divided by the same standard, since these
divisions are very similar to mapping out a country where the boundaries
melt so imperceptibly into one another that it is not very essential to
have the limits defined with perfect exactitude, since the changes in
the countries and the people will of themselves mark their different
states as you progress on your journey. Thus, then, some will tell you
there are seven spheres and that the seventh means the heaven spoken of
in the Bible; others say there are twelve spheres; others again extend
the number. Each sphere is, however, divided into circles, usually
twelve to a sphere, though here again some spirits will reckon them
differently, just as your standards of measurement on earth differ in
different countries, yet the thing they measure remains the same. For
myself, I have been used to count that there are seven spheres above the
earth and seven below it--using the terms above and below as signifying
the nearness to, or distance from, the great central sun of our solar
system, the nearest point of attraction towards that sun being
considered to be our highest point of attainment (while in the limits of
the earth spheres), and the farthest away being regarded as our lowest
or most degraded sphere. Each sphere, then, being subdivided into twelve
circles, which are blended so closely into each other that you appear to
pass almost insensibly from one to the other. I had hitherto been in
what is called the earth plane, which like a great broad belt circles
around the earth and permeates its atmosphere. This earth plane may be
said to comprehend within its bounds the first of the seven spheres
above and the first of those below the earth, and is used commonly in
describing the habitations of those spirits who are said to be
earth-bound in a greater or less degree because they are not able to
sink below the earth attractions nor to free themselves from its
influences.

I was now told that I had so far freed myself from the earth's
attractions and overcome my desires for earthly things, that I was able
to pass into the second sphere. The passing from the body of a lower
sphere into that of a higher one is often, though not invariably,
accomplished during a deep sleep which closely resembles the death-sleep
of the spirit in leaving the earthly body. As a spirit grows more
elevated, more etherealized, this change is accompanied by a greater
degree of consciousness, till at last the passing from one high sphere
to another is simply like changing one garb for another a little finer,
discarding one spiritual envelope for a more ethereal one. Thus the soul
passes onward, growing less and less earthly (or material) in its
envelopment, till it passes beyond the limits of our earth spheres into
those of the solar systems.

It happened, then, that upon my return from one of my visits to the
earth, I felt overpowered by a strange unusual sense of drowsiness,
which was more like paralysis of the brain than sleep.

I retired to my little room in the Twilight Land, and throwing myself
upon my couch, sank at once into a profound dreamless slumber like unto
the unconscious sleep of death.

In this state of unconsciousness I lay for about two weeks of earthly
time, and during it my soul passed from the disfigured astral body and
came forth like a newborn child, clothed in a brighter, purer spiritual
envelope, which my efforts at overcoming the evil in myself had created
for it. Only I was not born as an infant but as a full grown man, even
as my experience and knowledge had been those of a mature spirit. There
are some mortals whose knowledge of life is so limited, whose minds have
been so little cultivated, and whose natures are so simple and
childlike, that they are born into the spirit world as mere children,
however many years of earth life they may have known, but it was not so
with me, and in assuming my new condition I also possessed the
development in age which my earth life had given me.

In a state of perfect unconsciousness my newborn soul was borne by the
attendant spirit friends into the second sphere, where I lay sleeping my
dreamless sleep till the time came for my awakening.

The discarded astral envelope I had left was by the power of attendant
spirits dissolved into the elements of the earth plane, even as my
earthly body left at my first death would decay into the earthly
material from which it had been taken,--dust returning unto dust again,
while the immortal soul passed on to a higher state.

Thus did I pass through my second death and awake to the resurrection of
my higher self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.--Welcome in the Land of Dawn--My New Home
There.](wsl15.md)
