[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl23)  [Next](wsl25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXII.--Amusements in a Great City of Hell--Words of Caution.

I had proceeded but a short distance when I saw Faithful Friend sitting
by the wayside, evidently waiting for me. I was truly glad to see him
again and to have further guidance from him. We greeted one another with
much cordiality. He was now, he said, appointed to accompany me during a
part of my present journey, and he told me of many strange circumstances
which had befallen him and which I am sure would prove very interesting,
but as they do not properly belong to my own Wanderings I will not give
any account of them here.

Faithful Friend took me to a tall tower, from the top of which we could
see all over the city we were about to visit--this view of it beforehand
being, he said, likely to prove both useful and interesting to me. We
were, as I have said, surrounded always by this dark midnight sky and
heavy smoky atmosphere somewhat like a black fog yet different and not
quite so dense, since it was possible to see through it. Here and there
this darkness was lighted up in some places by the strange
phosphorescent light I have described, and elsewhere by the lurid flames
kindled from the fierce passions of the spiritual inhabitants.

When we had climbed to the top of the tall tower, which appeared to be
built of black rocks, we saw lying below us a wide stretch of dark
country. Heavy night clouds hung upon the horizon, and near to us lay
the great city, a strange mixture of magnificence and ruin, such as
characterized all the cities I saw in this dark land. A treeless
blackened waste surrounded it and great masses of dark blood-tinged
vapor hung brooding over this great city of sorrow and crime. Mighty
castles, lofty palaces, handsome buildings, all stamped with ruin and
decay--all bleared and blotched with the stains of the sinful lives
lived within them. Crumbling into decay, yet held together by the
magnetism of their spiritual inhabitants--buildings that would last
while the links woven by their spiritual occupants' earthly lives held
them in this place, and would crumble into the dust of decay whenever
the soul's repentance should sever those links and suffer it to wander
free; crumble into decay, however, only to be reconstructed by another
sinful soul in the shape into which his earthly life of pleasure should
form it. Here there was a palace--there beside it a hovel. Even as the
lives and ambitions of the indwelling spirits had been interwoven and
blended on earth, so were their dwellings constructed here side by side.

Have you ever thought, ye who dwell yet on earth, how the associates of
your earthly lives may become those of your spiritual? How the ties of
magnetism which are formed on earth may link your spirits and your fates
together in the spirit land so that you can only with great difficulty
and much suffering sever them? Thus I saw in these buildings before me
the proud patrician's palace, built of his ambitions and disfigured by
his crimes, joined to the humble abodes of his slaves and his parasites
and panderers of earth which had been as surely formed by their desires
and disfigured by their crimes, and between which and his palace there
were the same links of spiritual magnetism as between himself and those
who had been the sharers and instruments of his evil ambitions. He was
no more able to free himself from them and their importunities than they
were able to free themselves from his tyranny, till a higher and purer
desire should awaken in the souls of one set or the other of them and
thus raise them above their present level. So it was that they still
repeated over again their lives of earth in hideous mockery of the past,
impelled thereto by that past itself, their memories presenting to them
over and over again as in a moving panorama their past acts and the
actors, so that by no plunge into wild excess in that dark land could
they escape the grinding of memory's millstones, till at length the last
lust of sin and wickedness should be ground out of their souls.

Over this great spiritual city of past earth lives hung, as I have said,
patches of light of a dim misty appearance like faintly luminous smoke,
steel grey in color. This, I was told, was the light thrown off from the
powerful intellects of the inhabitants whose souls were degraded but not
undeveloped, and whose intellects were of a high order but devoted to
base things, so that the true soul light was wanting and this strange
reflection of its intellectual powers alone remained. In other parts of
the city the atmosphere itself seemed on fire. Flames hung in the air
and flickered from place to place, like ghostly fires whose fuel has
turned to ashes ere the flames have burned out, and as the floating
phantom flames were swept to and fro by the currents of the air I saw
groups of dark spirits passing up and down the streets heedless, or
perhaps unconscious, of these spectral flames that were thrown into the
atmosphere by themselves, and were created by their own fierce passions
which hung around them as spiritual flames.

As I looked and gazed upon this strange city of dead and ruined souls, a
strange wave of feeling swept over me, for in its crumbling walls, its
disused buildings, I could trace a resemblance to the one city on earth
with which I was most familiar and which was dear to my heart since I
had been one of her sons, and I called aloud to my companion to ask what
this meant--what was this vision I beheld before me. Was it the past or
the future or the present of my beloved city?

He answered, "It is all three. There before you now are the buildings
and the spirits of its past--such, that is, as have been evil--and there
among them are buildings half finished, which those who are dwelling
there now are forming for themselves; and as these dwellings of the past
are, so shall these half finished buildings be in the days to come when
each who builds now shall have completed his or her lifework of sin and
oppression. Behold and look upon it well, and then go back to earth a
messenger of warning to sound in the ears of your countrymen the doom
that awaits so many. If thy voice shall echo in even one heart and
arrest the building of but one of these unfinished houses, you shall
have done well and your visit here would be worth all that it may cost
you. Yet that is not the only reason for your coming. For you and me,
oh! my friend, there is work even in this city; there are souls whom we
can save from their darkened lives, who will go back to earth and with
trumpet tongues proclaim in the ears of men the horrors of the
retribution they have known, and from which they would save others.

"Bethink you how many ages have passed since the world was young and how
much improvement there has been in the lives and thoughts of the men who
dwell upon it, and shall we not suppose that even ordinary reason might
admit it must naturally be due to the influence of those who have
returned to earth to warn others from the precipice over which
themselves had fallen in all the pride and glory and lust of sin. Is it
not a far nobler ideal to place before men--the idea that God sends
these his children (sinful and disobedient once if you will, but
repentant now), back to earth as ministering spirits to war and help and
strengthen others who struggle yet in the unregenerated sinfulness of
their lower natures rather than believe that he would doom any to the
hopeless, helpless misery of eternal punishment? You and I have both
been sinners--beyond pardon, some of the good of earth might have
said--yet we have found mercy in our God even after the eleventh hour,
and shall not even these also know hope? If they have sunk lower than
we, shall we therefore in our little minds set limits to the heights to
which they may yet climb? No! perish the thought that such horrors as we
have looked upon in these Hells could be eternal. God is good and his
mercy is beyond any man's power to limit."

We descended now from the tower and entered the city. In one of the
large squares--with whose earthly counterpart I was very familiar--we
found quite a large crowd of dark spirits assembled, listening to some
sort of proclamation. Evidently it was one which excited their derision
and anger for there were yells, and hoots, and cries resounding on all
sides, and as I drew yet more near I perceived it was one which had been
read recently in the earthly counterpart, and had for its object the
further liberation and advancement of the people--an object which, down
here in this stronghold of oppression and tyranny, only provoked a
desire for its suppression and these dark beings around me were vowing
themselves to thwart the good purpose as far as lay in their power. The
more men were oppressed and the more that they quarreled and fought
against the oppression with violence, the stronger were these beings
here below to interfere in their affairs and to stir up strife and
fightings among them. The more men became free and enlightened and
improved, the less chance was there that these dark spirits would be
drawn to earth by the kindling of kindred passions there and thus be
enabled to mingle with and control men for their own evil purposes.
These dark beings delight in war, misery and bloodshed, and are ever
eager to return to earth to kindle men's fierce cruel passions afresh.
In times of great national oppression and revolt when the heated
passions of men are inflamed to fever heat, these dwellers of the depths
are drawn up to earth's surface by the force of kindred desires, and
excite and urge on revolutions, which, begun at first from motives that
are high and pure and noble, will under the stress of passion and the
instigation of these dark beings from the lower sphere become at last
mere excuses for wild butcheries and excesses of every kind. By these
very excesses a reaction is created, and these dark demons and those
whom they control are in their turn swept away by the higher powers,
leaving a wide track of ruin and suffering to mark where they have been.
Thus in these lowest Hells a rich harvest is reaped of unhappy souls who
have been drawn along with the evil spirits that tempted them.

As I stood watching the crowd, Faithful Friend drew my attention to a
group of spirits who were pointing over at us and evidently mediated
addressing us.

"I shall go," said he, "for a few moments and leave you to speak with
them alone. It will be better to do so, for they may recognize me as
having been here before, and I would wish you to see them by yourself. I
shall not, however, be far away, and will meet you again later when I
see that I can help you by doing so. At this moment something tells me
to leave you for a little."

As he spoke he moved away, and the dark spirits drew near to me with
every gesture of friendliness. I thought it as well to respond with
politeness, though in my heart I felt the most violent repugnance to
their company, they were so repulsive looking, so horrible in their
wicked, leering ugliness.

One touched me on the shoulder, and as I turned to him with a dim sense
of having seen him before, he laughed--a wild horrid laugh--and cried
out: "I hail thee, friend--who I see dost not so well remember me as I
do thee, though it was upon the earth plane we met before. I, as well as
others, then sought hard to be of service to thee, only thou wouldst
have none of our help, and played us, methinks, but a scurvy trick
instead. None the less for this, we, who are as lambs, didst thou but
know us, have forgiven thee."

Another also drew near, leering in my face with a smile perfectly
diabolical, and said: "So ho! You are here after all, friend, in this
nice land with us. Then surely you must have done something to merit the
distinction? Say whom you have killed or caused to be killed, for none
are here who cannot claim at least one slain by them, while many of us
can boast of a procession as long as the ghosts that appeared to
Macbeth, and others again--our most distinguished citizens--count their
slain by hundreds. Did you kill that one after all?--ha! ha! ha!" and he
broke into such a wild horrible peal of laughter that I turned to fly
from them--for like a flash had come across my mind the memory of that
time when I, too, could have been almost a murderer, and I recognized in
these horrible beings those who had surrounded me and counseled me how
to fulfill my desire--how to wreak my vengeance even though no earthly
form was still mine. I recoiled from them but they had no thought to let
me go. I was here--drawn down, as they hoped, at last--and they sought
to keep me with them that I might afford them some sport and they might
avenge themselves upon me for their former defeat.

I read in their minds this thought, though outwardly they were crowding
around me with every protestation of hearty friendliness. For a moment I
was at a loss what to do. Then I resolved to go with them and see what
they intended, watching at the same time for the first opportunity to
free myself from them. I therefore suffered them to take me by an arm
each, and we proceeded towards a large house on one side of the square
which they said was theirs, and where they would have the pleasure of
introducing me to their friends. Faithful Friend passed close to us and
looking at me impressed the warning,

"Consent to go, but beware of entering into any of their enjoyments or
allowing your mind to be dragged down to the level of theirs."

We entered and passed up a wide staircase of greyish stone, which like
all things here bore the marks and stains of shame and crime. The broad
steps were broken and imperfect, with holes here and there large enough,
some of them, to let a man through into the black dungeon-like depths
beneath. As we passed up I felt one of them give me a sly push just as
we were stepping over one of these, and had I not been watching for some
such trick I might have been tripped up and pushed in. As it was I
simply drew aside and my too officious companion narrowly escaped
tumbling in himself, whereat the rest all laughed and he scowled
savagely at me. I recognized him just then as the one whose hand had
been shriveled in the silver ring of fire drawn around my darling on the
occasion when her love had drawn me to her and saved me from yielding to
these dark fiends. This spirit held his hand carefully hidden under his
black cloak, yet I could see through it, and I beheld the shriveled hand
and arm, and knew then that I might indeed beware of its owner.

At the top of the staircase we passed into a large magnificent room,
lighted up by a glare of fire and hung around with dark draperies which
were in perfect rags and tatters and all splashed with crimson stains of
wet blood, as though this had been the scene of not one but many,
murders. Around the rooms were placed ghostly phantoms of ancient
furniture--ragged, dirty, and defaced, yet retaining in them a semblance
to an earthly apartment of great pretensions to splendor. This room was
filled with the spirits of men and women. Such men! and alas! such
women! They had lost all that could ever have given them any claim to
the charms and privileges of their sex. They were worse to look upon
than the most degraded bedraggled specimens to be seen in any earthly
slum at night. Only in Hell could women sink to such an awful
degradation as these. The men were to the full as bad or even if
possible worse, and words utterly fail me to describe them, were it
indeed advisable to do so. They were eating, drinking, shouting,
dancing, playing cards and quarreling over them--in short, going on in
such a way as the worst and lowest scenes of earthly dissipation can but
faintly picture.

I could see a faint reflection of the earthly lives of each, and knew
that each and all of them, men and women alike, had been guilty, not
only of shameless lives, but also of murder from one motive or another.
On my left was one who had been a Duchess in the days of the sixteenth
century, and I beheld that in her history she had from jealousy and
cupidity poisoned no less than six persons. Beside her was a man who had
belonged to the same era, and had caused several persons obnoxious to
him to be assassinated by his bravoes, and had moreover slain another
with his own hand in a most treacherous manner during a quarrel.

Another woman had killed her illegitimate child because it stood between
her and wealth and position. She had not been many years in this place
and seemed more overcome by shame and remorse than any of the others, so
I resolved if possible to get near to and speak to her.

My entrance was greeted with great shouts of laughter and wild applause,
while half a dozen or so of eager hands took hold of me and dragged me
to the table, whereupon there were cries: "Let us drink to the damnation
of this our new Brother! Let us baptize him with a draught of this our
new Brother! Let us baptize him with a draught of this fine cooling
wine?" And before I well realized their intentions, they were all waving
their glasses aloft amidst yells and shouts and horrible laughter,
whilst one, seizing a full glass of the fiery liquid, tried to throw it
over me. I had just presence of mind enough to step lightly aside, so
that the liquor was nearly all spilt upon the floor and only a small
portion fell upon my robe which it scorched and burned like vitrol,
while the wine itself turned into a bluish flame--such as one sees with
lighted whiskey--and disappeared at last with an explosion as of
gunpowder. Then they put before me a tray full of dishes which at first
sight resembled earthly delicacies, but on closer inspection I saw they
were full of the most horrible corrupting and loathsome maggots. As I
turned away from them one hag of a woman (for she was much more old and
ugly and horrible to look upon than the most degraded specimen you can
imagine) whose bleared eyes and fiendish expression made me recoil from
her, seized me round the neck and tried, with many grimaces which she
intended for coquettish smiles (she had been, oh ye powers! a great
beauty on earth) to induce me to join her and her party in a little game
of cards. She said: "The stakes for which we would play consist of the
liberty of the loser. We have invented this pleasing mode of passing our
time here since it revives for us the divertissements of the past; and
because there is no money here which one can win, or use if you win,
seeing it all turns to dross in your hands, we have adopted this mode of
paying our debts, and we agree to be the slave of anyone who beats us at
our games of chance and skill till we can turn the tables on them by
ourselves winning and making them in turn our slaves. 'Tis a charming
arrangement, as you would find did you join our party for a little.
These others here," she added, with a strange mixture of insolent
arrogance and animosity in her tone--"these others here are but the
canaille, the scum of the place, and you do well to turn from them and
their amusements. But for me, I am a Royal Duchess, and these my friends
are all noble also--and we would adopt you, who are also, I perceive,
one of the elite, among ourselves."

With the air of a queen she signed me to be seated beside herself, and
had she been a few degrees less horrible I might have been tempted to do
so if only from my curiosity to see what their game would be like. But
disgust was too strong in me and I shook myself free of her as well as I
could, saying, which was true, that cards had never possessed any
attraction for me. I was bent on getting near the woman I wished to
speak to, and very soon an opening in the crowd allowed me to do so.

As soon as I got beside her I addressed her in a low voice and asked if
she was sorry for the murder of her child, and would she wish to leave
this place even though it would be a long and sad and suffering road
that would take her from it? How her face brightened as I spoke! How
eagerly she faltered out: "What do you mean?"

"Be assured," I said, "I mean well to you, and if you will watch and
follow me, I shall doubtless find some means for us both to leave this
dreadful place." She pressed my hand in assent, for she did not venture
to speak for the other spirits were again crowding around us in a way
that was rapidly growing more and more threatening, although the guise
of friendliness was still kept up.

The Duchess and her party had returned to their cards with a frightful
avidity; they were quarreling over them and accusing each other of
cheating, which I have no doubt was the case, and it seemed as though a
fight was about to begin in that corner of the room to vary the monotony
of their existence. I noticed also that the others were collecting in
groups round the doors so as to keep me from leaving in case I desired
to do so, and I saw my enemy with the withered hand whispering with some
others of very low degraded type, such as might have been slaves in
their past lives. Half a dozen men and women came up and urged me to
join in a dance they were indulging in, which was like some of those
abominations we read of in descriptions of the Witches' Sabbaths of the
old days of witchcraft, and which I shall certainly not attempt further
to describe. Can it be, I thought to myself as I looked at them, that
there was truth in these old tales after all? and can the explanation be
that these unfortunate beings, who were accused as witches, did really
allow themselves to be so dominated by evil spirits that their souls
were for a time drawn down to one of these spheres, and took part in
some of its frightful orgies? I know not, but there seems truly a
marvelous resemblance between these things I was now witnessing and what
was related by the so-called witches, most of them poor half-witted
mortals more to be pitied than condemned.

As these creatures, whose gestures it were an insult to call dancing,
approached, I saw they were trying to get behind us in a ring and
surround us, and some instinct seemed to tell me not to allow them. I
drew back close to the wall, holding the woman's hand in mine and
whispering to her not to leave go of me on any account. The whole crowd
of spirits were now gathering towards my end of the room, the dull
ferocity of their faces and wild savage glitter of their eyes in
terrible contrast to their affectation of light-hearted gaiety. Closer
and closer they gathered--a moving mass of evil personified.

For once their quarrels and jealousies merged in their common desire to
do me harm, to get me down and trample me and rend me to pieces. As the
muttering of a storm came here and there broken disjointed words of hate
and menace, while those dancing demons kept up their wild antics in
front of us. All at once a great cry--a yell--of fury broke from them.
"A spy! a traitor! An enemy has got amongst us! It is one of the
accursed brothers from above come here to spy upon us and carry away our
victims. Down upon him! Stamp upon him! Crush him to death! Tear him to
pieces! Hurl him into the vaults below! Away with him! Away! Away!"

Like as an avalanche sweeps down the mountain side they rushed upon
us--those raging fiends--and I for one thought we were done for and
could not but regret that I had been drawn into entering the place at
all. I thought I was lost, when lo! just as the nearest of them were
actually upon us the wall behind opened and Faithful Friend and another
spirit drew us through, the wall closing again so suddenly that the
yelling crowd scarce realized how we had disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.--The Palace of My Ancestors--False Brothers
Baffled](wsl25.md)
