[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIV.--Conclusion.

My task is done, my story told, and it but remains for me to say to all
who read it, that I trust they will believe it is as it professes to be,
the true narrative of a repentant soul who has passed from darkness into
light, and I would have them ask themselves if it might not be well to
profit by the experiences of others and to weigh well the evidence for
and against the possibility of the spirit's return. And you who would
think the gospel of mercy after death too easy a one, too lenient to the
sinners, do you know what it is to suffer all the pangs of an awakened
conscience? Have you seen that path of bitter tears, of weary effort,
which the soul must climb if it would return to God? Do you realize what
it means to undo, step by step, through years of darkness and suffering
and bitter anguish of soul, the sinful acts and words and thoughts of an
earthly lifetime?--for even to the uttermost farthing must the debt be
paid; each must drink to the last dregs the cup that he has filled. Can
you imagine what it is to hover around the earth in helpless, hopeless
impotence, beholding the bitter curse of your sins working their baneful
effects upon the descendants you have left, with the taint of your past
lurking in their blood and poisoning it? To know that each of these
tainted lives--all these beings cursed with evil propensities ere they
were born--have become a charge upon your conscience in so far as you
have contributed to make them what they are, clogs which will continue
to drag back your soul when it attempts to rise, until you shall have
made due atonement to them, and helped to raise them from that slough
into which your unbridled passions have contributed to sink them? Do you
understand now how and why there may be spirits working still about the
earth who died hundreds of years ago? Can you imagine how a spirit must
feel who seeks from the grave to call aloud to others, and especially to
those he has betrayed to their ruin as well as his own, and finds that
all ears are deaf to his words, all hearts are closed to his cries of
anguish and remorse? He cannot now undo one foolish or revengeful act.
He cannot avert one single consequence of suffering which he has brought
upon others or himself; an awful wall has risen, a great gulf opened
between him and the world of living men on earth, and unless some kind
hand will bridge it over for him and help him to return and speak with
those whom he has wronged, even the confession of his sorrow--even such
tardy reparation as he may still make is denied to him. And is there,
then, no need that those who have passed beyond the tomb should return
and warn their brethren, even as Dives sought to return and could not?
Are men on earth so good that they require no voice to echo to them from
beyond the gates of death a foreshadowing of the fate awaiting them? Far
easier were it for man to repent now while still on earth than to wait
till he goes to that land where he can deal with the things of earth no
more, save through the organisms of others.

I met a spirit once who in the reign of Queene Anne had defrauded
another of a property by means of forged title deeds, and who when I saw
him was still earth-bound to that house and land, utterly unable to
break his chains until the help was given him of a medium through whom
he confessed where he had hidden the true title deeds, and gave the
names of those to whom of right the property should belong. This poor
spirit was freed by his confession from his chain to that house, but not
from his imprisonment to the earth plane. He had to work there till his
efforts had raised up and helped onward those whom he had driven into
the ways of sin and death by his crime. Not till he has done so can this
spirit hope to leave the earth plane, and there he still works, striving
to undo the effects of his past sin. Will anyone say his punishment was
too light? Shall anyone judge his brother man and say at what point
God's mercy shall stop and that sinner be doomed eternally? Ah, no! Few
dare to face the true meaning of their creeds or to follow out even in
thought the bitter and awful consequences of a belief in eternal
punishment for any of the erring children of God.

I have in these pages sought to show what has been the true experience
of one whom the churches might deem a lost soul, since I died without a
belief in any church, any religion, and but a shadowy belief in a God.
My own conscience ever whispered to me that there must be a Supreme, a
Divine Being, but I stifled the thought and thrust it from me, cheating
myself into a sense of security and indifference akin to that of the
foolish ostrich which buries its head in the sand and fancies none can
see it; and in all my wanderings, although I have indeed learned that
there is a Divine Omnipotent Ruler of the Universe--its upholder and
sustainer--I have not learned that he can be reduced to a personality, a
definite shape in the likeness of man, a something whose attributes we
finite creatures can argue about and settle. Neither have I seen
anything which would incline me to believe in one form of religious
belief rather than in another. What I have learned is to free the mind,
if possible, from the boundaries of any and every creed.

The infancy of the race of planetary man, when his mental condition
resembles that of a child, may be called the Age of Faith. The Mother
Church supplies for him the comfort and hope of immortality and takes
from his mind the burden of thinking out for himself a theory of First
Cause, which will account to him for his own existence and that of his
surroundings. Faith steps in as a maternal satisfier of the longings of
his imperfectly developed soul and the man of a primitive race believes
without questioning why he does so. Among the early tribes of savages
the more spiritualized men become the mystery men, and then the priests,
and as age succeeds to age the idea of an established church is
formulated.

Next comes the Age of Reason, when the development of man's intellectual
faculties causes him to be no longer satisfied with blind faith in the
unknown, the mother's milk of the Churches no longer assuages his mental
hunger, he requires stronger food, and if it be withheld, he breaks away
from the fostering care of Mother Church which once sustained but which
now only cramps and cripples the growing and expanding soul. Man's
reason demands greater freedom and its due share of nourishment, and
must find it somewhere, and in the struggle between the rebellious
growing child and the Mother Church, who seeks to retain still the power
she wielded over the infant, the Faith that once sufficed as food comes
to be regarded as something nauseous and to be rejected at all cost,
hence the Age of Reason becomes a time of uprootal of all the cherished
beliefs of the past.

Then comes another stage, in which the child, now grown to be a youth
who has seen and tasted for himself the joys and sorrows, the penalties,
and pleasures and benefits of reason, and has thereby learned to put a
juster value on the powers and limitations of his own reasoning
faculties, looks back at the faith he once despised, and recognizes that
it also has its beauties and its value. He sees that though faith alone
cannot suffice for the nourishment of the soul beyond its infant stage,
yet reason alone, devoid of faith, is but a cold hard fare upon which to
sustain the soul now becoming conscious of the immeasurable and
boundless universe by which it is surrounded, and of the many mysteries
it contains--mysteries reason alone is not able to explain. Man turns
back to faith once more and seeks to unite it with reason, that
henceforth they may assist each other.

Now Faith and Reason are the central thought principles of two different
spheres of thought in the spirit world. Faith is the vitalizing
principle of religion or ecclesiasticism, as Reason is of philosophy.
These two schools of thought which appear at first sight opposed to each
other, are none the less capable of being blended in the mental
development of the same personality, the properly balanced mind being
that in which they are equally proportioned. Where one predominates over
the other to a great degree, the individual--be he mortal or disembodied
spirit--will be narrow-minded in one direction or the other and
incapable of taking a just view of any mental problem. His mind will
resemble a two wheeled gig which has a big and a little wheel attached
to the same axle, and in consequence neither wheel can make due
progress, the mental gig coming to a stop till the defect be remedied.

A man may be thoroughly conscientious in his desire for truth, but if
his intellectual as well as his moral faculties have not been equally
developed, his mind will be like a highway blocked by huge masses of
error, so that the ethereal rays from the star of truth cannot penetrate
it; they are broken and refracted by the obstructions, so that either
they do not reach the man's soul at all or they are such distorted
images of the truth that they are simply a source of prejudice and
error. The intellect may be called the eye of the soul, and if the sight
of that eye be imperfect the soul remains in mental darkness, however
earnest may be its desire for light. The mental sight must be developed
and used ere it can become clear and strong.

Blind ignorant faith is no safeguard against error. The history of
religious persecutions in all ages is surely proof of that. The great
minds of earth to whom great intellectual discoveries are due have been
those in which the moral and intellectual powers are equally balanced,
and the perfect man or angel will be the man in whom all the qualities
of the soul have been developed to their highest point.

Every attribute of the soul, mental and moral, has its corresponding ray
of color, and the blending of these forms the beautiful and varied tints
of the rainbow, and like it they melt into one another to form the
perfect whole.

In some souls the development of certain faculties will take place more
rapidly than that of others; in some certain seed germs of intellect and
morality will lie fallow and give no sign that they exist, but they are
none the less there, and either on earth or in the great Hereafter they
will begin to grow and to blossom into perfection.

Evil is caused by the lack of development of the moral attributes in
certain souls and the over development of other qualities. The souls
which are now inhabiting the lower spheres are simply passing through
the process of eduction needful to awaken into active life and growth
the dormant moral faculties, and terrible as are the evils and
sufferings wrought in the process they are yet necessary and beneficent
in their ultimate results.

In the sphere where I now dwell there is a magnificent and beautiful
palace belonging to the Brotherhood of Hope. This palace is the meeting
place for all members of our Brotherhood, and in it there is a fine hall
built of what is the spiritual counterpart of white marble. This hall is
called the "Hall of Lecture," and in it we assemble to listen to
discourses delivered to us by advanced spirits from the higher sphere.
At the upper end there is a magnificent picture called "The Perfect
Man." That is to say it represents a man, or rather angel, who is
relatively perfect. I say relatively perfect, because even the utmost
perfection which can be imagined or attained, can only be relative to
the still greater heights which must be eternally possible for the soul.
Unlike Alexander who mourned that he had left no more worlds to conquer,
the soul has no limits put to the possibilities of its intellectual and
moral conquests. The universe of mind is as boundless as that of matter,
and as eternal. Hence none can use the word perfect as implying a point
beyond which progress is impossible.

In the picture this relatively perfect angel is represented as standing
on the highest pinnacle of the celestial spheres. The earth and her
attendant spheres lie far below him. His gaze is turned with an
expression of wonder, delight, and awe to those far distant regions
which lie beyond the power of mortal mind to grasp, regions which lie
beyond our solar universe. They are become for the angel his new Land of
Promise.

On his head the angel wears a golden helmet, symbolizing spiritual
strength and conquest. On one arm he bears a silver shield typical of
the Protection of Faith. His garments are of dazzling white showing the
purity of his soul, and the wide outstretched wings symbolize the power
of intellect to soar into the highest thought-regions of the universe.
Behind the angel there is a white cloud spanned by a rainbow whose every
tint and shade blended into perfect harmony shows that the angel has
developed to the highest degree every intellectual and moral attribute
of his soul.

The rich coloring of this picture, the purity of its dazzling white, the
brilliancy of its glowing tints, no pen can describe, no earthly brush
could ever paint, and yet I am told it falls far short of the beauty of
the original picture, which is in the highest sphere of all, and which
represents a former grand master of our order who has passed on to
spheres beyond the limits of our solar system. Replicas of this picture
are to be seen in the highest circle of each earth sphere in the
buildings belonging to the Brotherhood of Hope, and they show the
connecting links between our Brotherhood and the celestial spheres of
the solar system, and also to what heights all may aspire in the ages of
eternity before us. Yes, each one of us, the most degraded brother who
labors in the lowest sphere of earth, and even the most degraded soul
that struggles there in darkness and sin unspeakable, is not shut out,
for all souls are equal before God and there is nothing which has been
attained by one that may not be attained by all if they but strive
earnestly for it.

Such, then, is the knowledge I have gained, such the beliefs I have
arrived at since I passed from earth life, but I cannot say I have seen
that any particular belief helps or retards the soul's progress, except
in so far as this, that some creeds have a tendency to cramp the mind
and obscure the clearness of its vision and distort its ideas of right
and wrong, thereby preventing those who hold those beliefs from
possessing the perfect freedom of thought and absence of prejudice which
can alone fit the soul to rise to the highest spheres.

I have written this story of my wanderings in the hope that amongst
those who read it may be found some who will think it worth while to
inquire whether, after all, it may not be, as it professes to be, a true
story. There may also be others who have lost those who were very dear
to them, but whose lives were not such as gave hope that they could be
numbered with those whom the churches call "The Blessed Dead who die in
the Lord"--dear friends who have not died in the paths of goodness and
truth--I would ask those mourners to take hope and to believe that their
beloved but erring friends may not be wholly lost--not utterly beyond
hope, yes, even though some may have perished by their own hands and
under circumstances which would seem to preclude all hope. I would ask
those on earth to think over all that I have said and to ask themselves
whether even yet their prayers and their sympathy may not be able to
help and comfort those who need all the help and comfort that can be
given to them.

From my home in the Bright Land--so like the land of my birth--I go
still to work upon the earth plane and among those who are unhappy. I
also help to carry forward the great work of spirit communion between
the living of earth and those whom they call dead.

I spend a portion of each day with my beloved, and I am able to help and
protect her in many ways. I am also cheered in my home in the spirit
land by the visits of many friends and companions of my wanderings, and
in that bright land surrounded by so many memorials of love and
friendship, I await with a grateful heart that happy time when my
beloved one's earthly pilgrimage shall be finished, when her lamp of
life shall have burned out and her star of earth has set, and she shall
come to join me in an even brighter home, where for us both shall shine
eternally the twin stars of Hope and Love.

(The End.)
