[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca12) 
[Next](lca14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

# ON JEALOUSY

A GREAT disturber of the celestial order of Love is jealousy-that brand
of physical passion which carried over into the emotional regions of the
mind will sometimes rage there like a burning fire. One may distinguish
two kinds of jealousy, a natural and an artificial. The first arises
perhaps from the real uniqueness of the relationship between two
persons--at any rate as it appears to one of them--and the endeavour to
stamp this uniqueness on the whole relationship, sexual and
moral-especially on the sexual relationship. This kind of jealousy seems
in a sense natural and normal, at any rate for a period; but when the
personal relation between the two parties has been fully and confessedly
established, and is no more endangered, the feeling does often I think
(equally naturally) die away; and may do so quite well without damaging
the intimacy and uniqueness of the alliance. This jealousy is felt with
terrible keenness and intensity by lovers before the consummation of
their passion, and perhaps for a year or two afterwards--though it may
be protracted rather indefinitely in the case

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

where the alliance, on one side at any rate, is not quite satisfactory.

The other kind of jealousy rests on the sense of property, and is the
kind that is often felt by the average husband and wife long after
honeymooning days--by the husband not because of his especial devotion
to his partner, but because he is furious at the idea of her disposing
as she likes with what he considers *his property*; and by the wife
because she is terrified at the thought that her matrimonial
clothes-peg, from which depend all her worldly prospects, may vanish
away or become the peg for another woman's clothes. This kind of
jealousy is more especially the product of immediate social conditions,
and is in that sense artificial. Though probably not quite so
heart-rending as the other, it is often passionate enough, and lasts on
indefinitely, like a chronic disease.

In early times, with the more communistic feeling of primitive
societies, and with customs (like group-marriage) which allowed some
latitude in sex-relation, jealousy though strong was not probably a very
great force. But with the growth of individualism in life and in love,
with the rise of the sense of property under civilisation and the
accentuation of every personal feeling in what may be called the
*cellular* state of society, the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

passion became one of fearful and convulsive power and fury; as is borne
witness to by numberless dramas and poems and romances of the historical
period. In the communism and humanism of the future, as the sense of
property declines, and as Love rises more and more out of mere blind
confusion with the sex-act, we may fairly hope that the artificial
jealousy will disappear altogether, and that the other form of the
passion will subside again into a comparatively reasonable human
emotion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Family](lca14)
