[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca11) 
[Next](lca13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

# NOTE

### ON THE PRIMITIVE GROUP-MARRIAGE

ONE of the early forms of union among human beings appears to have been
that of the *Group-marriage*, which was an alliance between a group of
men and a group of women. It had various forms, but rested in general on
the fact that the women in primitive societies did not, on marriage,
leave their parental habitation but remained there and were visited by
the men--by one man first, who would come with presents of game, etc.,
from the chase, and would afterwards bring his 'brothers' or friends.
Thus in general a group of 'brothers' would come into relation with a
group of 'sisters.' In such a state of society, however, it is obvious
that parentage would be very uncertain, and the terms brother and sister
would not always have the stricter meanings which we give them. Such a
group-marriage was the, 'Punalua' or 'friend' marriage of Morgan's North
American Indians; which is also supposed by Marx and Engels to have
prevailed at an early time throughout Polynesia. See Lewis Morgan's
*Ancient* 

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Society* and Friedrich Engels' *Ursprung der
Familie*. In later times the group-marriage became restricted in various
directions, according to the genius of various races--marriage of
cousins, for instance, being severely prohibited among some barbaric
tribes, while among others *all* relatives (in the maternal line) were
barred. Thus ultimately, in some quarters, sprang up a Pair-marriage;
which however was only loosely defined; which had much of the old
group-marriage lingering round it; and in which the children still
belonged to the woman, and descent was traced in the maternal line only.

Under these conditions of society the woman was comparatively well off.
Remaining as she did in her own *gens* or clan and among her own
relations, and the husband being as it were a visitor from the outside,
she was by no means subject to him; in fact, in order to gain access, he
had to make himself agreeable not only to her but to her own family! She
had the disposal of the, children; there was no danger of their being
sequestrated to her husband; and whatever little property she had she
could leave to them; to her was all the honor of ancestry, The husband
on the other hand, even if he knew which his own children were, could
see little of them, and could not leave his possessions to them without

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

alienating those possessions from his clan--which the clan-customs would
not permit. Thus in marriage he practically had to take the second
place.

With the growth however of property and the sense of property, there
came a time when the men could stand this state of affairs no longer,
and insisted, violently at first, in carrying off the women and locating
them in their own tents and among their own clans--a change rudely
recorded probably in legends like the Rape of the Sabines, and in all
the later customs of Marriage by Capture. And with this change marriage
took on new forms. Women became the property of their husbands; they
ceased to hold property of their own, in their children or in anything
else; and descent was traced through the males only. In the Patriarchal
system marriage was closely akin to slavery. Polygamy and Monogamy were
the two resulting institutions.

Polyandry may perhaps be looked upon as a survival of the group-marriage
in a special form adapted to warrior races; but--as Engels remarks--both
Polygamy and Polandry in any strict sense can only be regarded as
exceptional institutions, since if they were general in any one country,
that would imply a great preponderance of one sex over the other--unless
indeed the two institutions existed side by side in the same country,
which notoriously

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

never happens. As a matter of fact in oriental countries Polygamy is
confined to the rich, and is so to speak a luxury, within reach of the
few only.

Thus it would appear that from the first, in oriental countries, the
practices of polygamy and monogamy were intermixed. In Greece and Rome
polygamy ceased to be recognised as an institution; though concubinage
in one form or another remained. The Monogamic marriage became the legal
institution; and the woman was handed over to the man as his chattel;
was bought symbolically with his money, in the marriage ceremony; and
had at first no more rights of her own than a chattel. In the later
times, however, of the Roman Empire, with the institution of the dowry
and the power granted to women of holding property, together with the
great facilities of divorce allowed, the position of the Roman matron
became much improved. And in modern European countries the monogamic
institution seems to have passed or be passing through somewhat the same
stages as in ancient Greece or Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Jealousy](lca13)
