<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act012)  [Next](act014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

[Acts 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 13:1</span></span>

Prophets

See on [Luk 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#026).

Lucius of Cyrene

Attempts have been made to identify him with Luke the evangelist; but
the name Lucas is an abbreviation of Lucanus, and not of Lucius. It is
worth noting, however, that, according to Herodotus (iii., 131), the
physicians of Cyrene had the reputation of being the second best in
Greece, those of Crotona being the best; and that Galen the physician
says that Lucius was before him a distinguished physician in Tarsus of
Cilicia. From this it has been conjectured that Luke was born and
instructed in medicine in Cyrene, and left that place for Tarsus, where
he made Paul's acquaintance, and was, perhaps, converted by him (Dr.
Howard Crosby, "The New Testament, Old and New Version"). But, apart
from the form of the name (see above), the mention of the evangelist's
name here is not in accord with his usual practice, since he nowhere
mentions his own name, either in the Gospel or in the Acts; and if the
present passage were an exception, we should have expected to find his
name last in the list of the worthies of Antioch. Of the five here
named, four are known to be Jews; and therefore, probably, Lucius was
also a Jew from Cyrene, where Jews are known to have abounded. Luke the
evangelist, on the contrary, was a Gentile. Nothing certain can be
inferred from [Rom 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021), where Lucius
is enumerated by Paul among his kinsmen. If συγγενεῖς, kinsmen, means
here, as is claimed by some, countrymen, it would prove Lucius to be a
Jew; but the word is commonly used of relatives in the New Testament. In
[Rom 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003), Paul applies the term to his
fellow-countrymen, "my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who
are Israelites."

Which had been brought up with (σύντροφος)

Some render foster-brother, as Rev.; others, comrade. The word has both
meanings.

[Acts 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 13:2</span></span>

Ministered (λειτουργούντων)

See on the kindred noun ministration, [Luk
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#023). This noun has passed through the
following meanings: 1. A civil service, especially in the technical
language of Athenian law. 2. A function or office of any kind, as of the
bodily organs. 3. Sacerdotal ministration, both among the Jews and the
heathen (see [Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006); [Heb
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021)). 4. The eucharistic services. 5.
Set forms of divine worship (Lightfoot, "On Philippians," ii., 17).
Here, of the performance of Christian worship. Our word liturgy is
derived from it.

Separate

The Greek adds δή, now, which is not rendered by A. V. or Rev. It gives
precision and emphasis to the command, implying that it is for a special
purpose, and to be obeyed at the time. Compare [Luk
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#015); [Act
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036); [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020).

[Acts 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 13:4</span></span>

Sailed

On Luke's use of words for sailing, see Introduction.

[Acts 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 13:5</span></span>

Synagogues

The plural implies that the Jews were numerous in Salamis. Augustus,
according to Josephus, made Herod the Great a present of half the
revenue of the copper-mines of Cyprus, so that numerous Jewish families
would be settled in the island. In the reign of Trajan, upon the
breaking out of a Jewish insurrection, the whole island fell into the
hands of the Jews, and became a rallying-point for the revolt. It is
said that two hundred and forty thousand of the native population were
sacrificed to the fury of the insurgents. When the rebellion was
extinguished, the Jews were forbidden thenceforth, on pain of death, to
set foot on the island.

Minister (ὑπηρέτην)

Better, as Rev., attendant. See on [Mat
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025).

[Acts 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 13:6</span></span>

Sorcerer (μάγον)

That the man was an impostor is told us in the next word, but not in
this term. It is the word used of the wise men who came to the Saviour's
cradle. See [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001), [Mat
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007), [Mat
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016). Elymas was a magian; of what
kind is shown by false prophet. See on [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001).

Bar-Jesus

Son of Jesus or Joshua.

[Acts 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 13:7</span></span>

The deputy (ἀνθυπάτῳ)

Better, Rev., proconsul. See Introduction to Luke, on Luke's accuracy in
designating public officers.

Sergius Paulus

Di Cesnola relates the discovery at Soli, which, next to Salamis, was
the most important city in the island, of a slab with a Greek
inscription containing the name of Paulus, proconsul.

Prudent (συνετῷ)

Better, as Rev., a man of understanding. See on [Mat
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025).

[Acts 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 13:8</span></span>

Elymas

An Arabic word, meaning the wise, and equivalent to Magus. See on [Act
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006).

Withstood

"The position of soothsayer to a Roman proconsul, even though it could
only last a year, was too distinguished and too lucrative to abandon
without a struggle" (Farrar, "Life and Work of Paul").

[Acts 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 13:9</span></span>

Saul - Paul

The first occurrence of the name of Paul in the Acts. Hereafter he is
constantly so called, except when there is a reference to the earlier
period of his life. Various explanations are given of the change of
name. The most satisfactory seems to be that it was customary for
Hellenistic Jews to have two names, the one Hebrew and the other Greek
or Latin. Thus John was also called Marcus; Symeon, Niger; Barsabas,
Justus. As Paul now comes prominently forward as the apostle to the
Gentiles, Luke now retains his Gentile name, as he did his Jewish name
during his ministry among the Jews. The connection of the name Paul with
that of the deputy seems to me purely accidental. It was most unlike
Paul to assume the name of another man, converted by his
instrumentality, out of respect to him or as a memorial of his
conversion. Farrar justly observes that there would have been in this
"an element of vulgarity impossible to St. Paul."

Set his eyes on him

See on [Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020).

[Acts 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 13:10</span></span>

Mischief (ῥᾳδιουργίας)

Only here in New Testament. Originally, ease or facility in doing; hence
readiness in turning the hand to anything, bad or good; and so
recklessness, unscrupulousness, wickedness. A kindred word (ῥᾳδιούργημα,
lewdness, Rev., villany) occurs at [Act
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#014).

Right ways

Or straight, possibly with an allusion to Elymas' crooked ways.

[Acts 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 13:11</span></span>

Mist (ἀχλὺς)

Only here in New Testament. The word is used by medical writers as a
name for a disease of the eyes. The mention of the successive stages,
first dimness, then total darkness, are characteristic of the physician.
"The first miracle which Paul performed was the infliction of a
judgment; and that judgment the same which befell himself when arrested
on his way to Damascus" (Gloag).

[Acts 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 13:12</span></span>

Astonished (ἐκπλησσόμενος)

See on [Mat 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028).

[Acts 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 13:13</span></span>

Loosed (ἀναχθέντες)

See on [Luk 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#022).

Paul and his company (οἱ περὶ τὸν Παῦλον)

Lit., those aroused Paul. In later writers, used to denote the principal
person alone, as [Joh 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#019), came to
Mary and Martha; where the Greek literally reads, came to the women
around Mary and Martha. Paul, and not Barnabas, now appears as the
principal person.

[Acts 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 13:15</span></span>

Exhortation

See on [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031).

[Acts 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 13:16</span></span>

Beckoning

See on [Act 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017).

Men of Israel

See on [Act 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012).

[Acts 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 13:17</span></span>

People (λαοῦ)

Restricted in the Acts to the people of Israel.

[Acts 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 13:18</span></span>

Suffered he their manners (ἐτροποφόρησεν)

From τρόπος fashion or manner, and φορέω, to bear or suffer. The
preferable reading, however, is ἐτροφοφόρησεν; from τροφός, a nurse; and
the figure is explained by, and probably was drawn from, [Deu
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031). The American revisers properly
insist on the rendering, as a nursing-father bare he them.

[Acts 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 13:19</span></span>

Divided by lot (κατεκληρονόμησεν)

The A. V. gives the literal rendering. The Rev., gave them their land
for an inheritance, is correct, so far as the meaning, inheritance is
concerned (see on [Pe1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)), but does
not give the sense of distribution which is contained in the word.

[Acts 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 13:24</span></span>

Before his coming (πρὸ προσώπου τῆς εἰσόδου αὐτοῦ)

Lit., before the face of his entrance. A Hebrew form of expression.

[Acts 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 13:25</span></span>

Think ye (ὑπονοεῖτε)

Originally, to think secretly: hence to suspect, conjecture.

[Acts 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 13:26</span></span>

To you

The best texts read to us.

[Acts 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 13:33</span></span>

Hath fulfilled (ἐκπεπλήρωκε)

Completely fulfilled; force of ἐκ, out and out.

[Acts 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 13:34</span></span>

The sure mercies (τὰ ὅσια τὰ πιστά)

Lit., the holy things, the sure. Rev., the holy and sure blessings.

[Acts 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 13:35</span></span>

Suffer (δώσεις)

Lit., give.

[Acts 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 13:36</span></span>

Was laid unto (προσετέθη)

Lit., was added unto. Compare [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047); [Act
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#014).

[Acts 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 13:41</span></span>

Perish (ἀφανίσθητε)

Lit., vanish.

Declare (ἐκδιηγῆται)

Only here and [Act 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003). See on shew,
[Luk 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#039). The word is a very strong
expression for the fullest and clearest declaration: declare throughout.

[Acts 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 13:42</span></span>

Next (μεταξὺ)

The word commonly means intermediate, and hence is explained by some as
referring to the intermediate week. But the meaning is fixed by [Act
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044); and though the word does not
occur in the New Testament elsewhere in the sense of next, it has that
meaning sometimes in later Greek.

[Acts 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 13:43</span></span>

Religious (σεβομένων)

Lit., worshipping. Compare [Act 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)
and [Act 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014).

Proselytes (προσηλύτων)

Originally, one who arrives at a place; a stranger; thence of one who
comes over to another faith.

[Acts 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 13:45</span></span>

Envy (ζήλου)

Rev., jealousy. See on [Jam 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#014).

[Acts 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 13:46</span></span>

Put (ἀπωθεῖσθε)

Not strong enough. Better, as Rev., thrust, denoting violent rejection.

Lo (ἰδοὺ)

Marking a crisis.

[Acts 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">act 13:50</span></span>

Honorable (εὐσχήμονας)

See on [Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043). Women of rank, or,
as Rev., of honorable estate.

Coasts (ὁρίων)

Not a good rendering, because it implies merely a sea-coast; whereas the
word is a general one for boundaries.

[Acts 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 13:51</span></span>

Shook off

See on [Mat 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).

Dust

See on [Luk 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 14](act014)

</div>
