<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1012)  [Next](co1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 13:1</span></span>

Tongues

Mentioned first because of the exaggerated importance which the
Corinthians attached to this gift.

Angels

Referring to the ecstatic utterances of those who spoke with tongues.

Charity (ἀγάπην)

Rev., love. The word does not occur in the classics, though the kindred
verbs ἀγαπάω and ἀγαπάζω to love, are common. It first appears in the
Septuagint, where, however, in all but two of the passages, it refers to
the love of the sexes. Eleven of the passages are in Canticles. See,
also, [Sa2 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#015), Sept. The change in
the Rev. from charity to love, is a good and thoroughly defensible one.
Charity follows the caritas of the Vulgate, and is not used consistently
in the A.V. On the contrary, in the gospels, ἀγάπη is always rendered
love, and mostly elsewhere, except in this epistle, where the word
occurs but twice. Charity, in modern usage, has acquired the senses of
tolerance and beneficence, which express only single phases of love.
There is no more reason for saying "charity envieth not," than for
saying "God is charity;" "the charity of Christ constraineth us;" "the
charity of God is shed abroad in our hearts." The real objection to the
change on the part of unscholarly partisans of the A.V. is the breaking
of the familiar rhythm of the verses.

Sounding brass (χαλκὸς ἠχῶν)

The metal is not properly brass, the alloy of copper and zinc, but
copper, or bronze, the alloy of copper and tin, of which the Homeric
weapons were made. Being the metal in common use, it came to be employed
as a term for metal in general. Afterward it was distinguished; common
copper being called black or red copper, and the celebrated Corinthian
bronze being known as mixed copper. The word here does not mean a brazen
instrument, but a piece of unwrought metal, which emitted a sound on
being struck. In the streets of Seville one may see pedlers striking,
together two pieces of brass instead of blowing a horn or ringing a
bell.

Tinkling cymbal (κύμβαλον ἀλαλάζον)

The verb rendered tinkling, alalazo, originally meant to repeat the cry
alala, as in battle. It is used by Mark ([Mar
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#038)) of the wailings of hired
mourners. Hence, generally, to ring or clang. Rev., clanging. Κύμβαλον
cymbal, is derived from κύμβος a hollow or a cup. The cymbal consisted
of two half-globes of metal, which were struck together. In middle-age
Latin, cymbalum was the term for a church or convent-bell. Ducange
defines: "a bell by which the monks are called to meals, and which is
hung in the cloister." The comparison is between the unmeaning clash of
metal, and music; between ecstatic utterances which are jargon, and
utterances inspired by love, which, though unintelligible to the
hearers, may carry a meaning to the speaker himself and to God, [Co1
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004), [Co1
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007).

[1 Corinthians 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 13:2</span></span>

All mysteries (τὰ μυστήρια πάντα)

The mysteries, all of them. See on [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025). The article indicates the
well-known spiritual problems which exercise men's minds.

All faith (πᾶσαν τὴν πίστιν)

All the special faith which works miracles.

[1 Corinthians 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 13:3</span></span>

Bestow (ψωμίσω)

Only here and [Rom 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020). See on sop,
[Joh 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026). The verb means to feed out
in morsels, dole out.

To be burned (ἵνα καυθήσωμαι)

The latest critical text reads καυχήσωμαι in order that I may glory,
after the three oldest MSS. The change to burned might have been
suggested by the copyist's familiarity with christian martyrdoms, or by
the story of the three Hebrews. Bishop Lightfoot finds a possible
reference to the case of an Indian fanatic who, in the time of Augustus,
burned himself alive at Athens. His tomb there was visible in Paul's
time, and may have been seen by him. It bore the inscription:
"Zarmochegas the Indian from Bargosa, according to the ancient customs
of India, made himself immortal and lies here." Calanus, an Indian
gymnosophist who followed Alexander, in order to get rid of his
sufferings, burned himself before the Macedonian army (see Plutarch,
"Alexander"). Martyrdom for the sake of ambition was a fact of early
occurrence in the Church, if not in Paul's day. Farrar says of his age,
"both at this time and in the persecution of Diocletian, there were
Christians who, oppressed by debt, by misery, and sometimes even by a
sense of guilt, thrust themselves into the glory and imagined
redemptiveness of the baptism of blood.... The extravagant estimate
formed of the merits of all who were confessors, became, almost
immediately, the cause of grave scandals. We are horified to read in
Cyprian's letter that even in prison, even when death was imminent,
there were some of the confessors who were puffed up with vanity and
pride, and seemed to think that the blood of martyrdom would avail them
to wash away the stains of flagrant and even recent immoralities"
("Lives of the Fathers," ch. vi., sec. 2).

[1 Corinthians 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 13:4</span></span>

Suffereth long (μακροθυμεῖ)

See on [Jam 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007).

Is kind (χρηστεύεται)

Only here in the New Testament. See on χρηστὸς, A.V., easy, [Mat
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030), and see on χρηστότης good, [Rom
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012).

"The high charity which makes us servants

Prompt to the counsel which controls the world."

Dante, "Paradiso," xxi., 70, 71.

Vaunteth (περπερεύεται)

From πέρπερος a braggart. Used of one who sounds his own praises. Cicero
introduces a compound of the word in one of his letters to Atticus,
describing his speech in the presence of Pompey, who had just addressed
the senate on his return from the Mithridatic war. He says: "Heavens!
How I showed off (ἐνεπερπερευσάμην) before my new auditor Pompey," and
describes the various rhetorical tricks which he employed.

Puffed up (φυσιοῦται)

See on [Co1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006), and compare [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001). Of inward disposition, as the
previous word denotes outward display. The opposite is put by Dante:

"That swells with love the spirit well-disposed."

"Paradiso," x., 144.

[1 Corinthians 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 13:5</span></span>

Easily provoked (παροξύνεται)

Easily is superfluous, and gives a wrong coloring to the statement,
which is absolute: is not provoked or exasperated. The verb occurs only
here and [Act 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016). The kindred noun
παροξυσμός, in [Act 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039), describes
the irritation which arose between Paul and Barnabas. In [Heb
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#024), stimulating to good works. It
is used of provoking God, [Deu 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#008);
[Psa 105:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#029); [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003).

Thinketh no evil (οὐ λογίζεται τὸ κακόν)

Lit., reckoneth not the evil. Rev., taketh not account of. The evil;
namely, that which is done to love. "Love, instead of entering evil as a
debt in its account-book, voluntarily passes the sponge over what it
endures" (Godet).

[1 Corinthians 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 13:6</span></span>

Rejoiceth in the truth (συγχαίρει τῇ ἁληθείᾳ)

Rev., correctly, rejoiceth with. Truth is personified as love is.
Compare [Psa 85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010).

[1 Corinthians 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 13:7</span></span>

Beareth (στέγει)

See on suffer, [Co1 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012). It keeps out
resentment as the ship keeps out the water, or the roof the rain.

Endureth (ὑπομένει)

An advance on beareth: patient acquiescence, holding its ground when it
can no longer believe nor hope.

"All my days are spent and gone;

And ye no more shall lead your wretched life,

Caring for me. hard was it, that I know,

My children! Yet one word is strong to loose,

Although alone, the burden of these toils,

For love in larger store ye could not have

From any than from him who standeth here."

Sophocles, "Oedipus at Colonus," 613-618.

[1 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 13:8</span></span>

Faileth (ἐκπίπει)

Falls off (ἐκ) like a leaf or flower, as [Jam
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011); [Pe1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024). In classical Greek it was used
of an actor who was hissed off the stage. But the correct reading is
πίπτει falls, in a little more general sense, as [Luk
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#017). Love holds its place.

[1 Corinthians 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 13:11</span></span>

A child

See on [Co1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001), and see on [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006).

I understood (ἐφρόνουν)

See on [Rom 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005). The kindred noun
φρένες occurs only once in the New Testament, [Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020), where also it is associated
with children in the sense of reflection or discrimination. Rev. renders
felt; but the verb, as Edwards correctly remarks, is not the generic
term for emotion, though it may be used for what includes emotion. The
reference here is to the earlier undeveloped exercise of the childish
mind; a thinking which is not yet connected reasoning. This last is
expressed by ελογίζομην I thought or reasoned. There seems to be a
covert reference to the successive stages of development; mere idle
prating; thought, in the sense of crude, general notions; consecutive
reasoning.

When I became (ὄτε γέγονα)

Rev., better, giving the force of the perfect tense, now that I am
become. Hence I have put away for I put away. Lit., have brought them to
nought.

[1 Corinthians 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 13:12</span></span>

Through a glass (δἰ ἐσόπτρου)

Rev., in a mirror. Through (διά) is by means of. Others, however,
explain it as referring to the illusion by which the mirrored image
appears to be on the other side of the surface: others, again, think
that the reference is to a window made of horn or other translucent
material. This is quite untenable. Ἔσοπτρον mirror occurs only here and
[Jam 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023). The synonymous word
κάτοπτρον does not appear in the New Testament, but its kindred verb
κατοπτρίζομαι to look at one's self in a mirror, is found, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018). The thought of imperfect seeing
is emphasized by the character of the ancient mirror, which was of
polished metal, and required constant polishing, so that a sponge with
pounded pumice-stone was generally attached to it. Corinth was famous
for the manufacture of these. Pliny mentions stone mirrors of agate, and
Nero is said to have used an emerald. The mirrors were usually so small
as to be carried in the hand, though there are allusions to larger ones
which reflected the entire person. The figure of the mirror,
illustrating the partial vision of divine things, is frequent in the
rabbinical writings, applied, for instance, to Moses and the prophets.
Plato says: "There is no light in the earthly copies of justice or
temperance or any of the higher qualities which are precious to souls:
they are seen through a glass, dimly" ("Phaedrus," 250). Compare
"Republic," vii., 516.

Darkly (ἐν αἰνίγματι)

Lit., in a riddle or enigma, the word expressing the obscure form in
which the revelation appears. Compare δἰ αἰνιγμάτων in dark speeches,
[Num 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008).

Face to face

Compare mouth to mouth, [Num 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008).

Shall I know (ἐπιγνώσομαι)

American Rev., rightly, "I shall fully know." See on knowledge, [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020). The A.V. has brought this out in
[Co2 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#009), well known.

I am known (ἐπεγνώσθην)

The tense is the aorist, "was known," in my imperfect condition. Paul
places himself at the future stand-point, when the perfect has come. The
compound verb is the same as the preceding. Hence American Rev., "I was
fully known."

[1 Corinthians 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 13:13</span></span>

And now (νυνὶ δὲ)

Rev., but; better than and, bringing out the contrast with the transient
gifts. Now is logical and not temporal. Thus, as it is.

Abideth

Not merely in this life. The essential permanence of the three graces is
asserted. In their nature they are eternal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14](co1014)

</div>
