<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

[Matthew 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 5:1</span></span>

A mountain (τὸ ὄρος)

The Rev. recognizes the force of the definite article, and renders "the
mountain," that particular mountain in the place where Jesus saw the
multitudes. The mountain itself cannot be identified. Delitzsch calls
the Mount of Beatitudes "The Sinai of the New Testament."

When he was set (καθίσαντος), following Tyndale

Rev., more literally, when he had sat down (compare Wyc., when he had
sete). After the manner of the rabbis, he seated himself ere he began to
teach.

[Matthew 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 5:2</span></span>

Taught (ἐδίδασκεν)

The imperfect signifies began to teach.

[Matthew 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 5:3</span></span>

Blessed (μακάριοι)

As this word and its cognates occur at least fifty-five times in the New
Testament, it is important to understand its history, which is
interesting because it is one of those numerous words which exhibit the
influence of Christian association and usage in enlarging and dignifying
their meaning. It is commonly rendered blessed, both in the A. V. and
Rev., and that rendering might properly be given it in every instance.

Its root is supposed to be a word meaning great, and its earlier meaning
appears to be limited to outward prosperity; so that it is used at times
as synonymous with rich. It scarcely varies from this meaning in its
frequent applications to the Grecian gods, since the popular Greek ideal
of divine blessedness was not essentially moral. The gods were blessed
because of their power and dignity, not because of their holiness. "In
general," says Mr. Gladstone ("Homer and the Homeric Age") "the chief
note of deity with Homer is emancipation from the restraints of moral
law. Though the Homeric gods have not yet ceased to be the vindicators
of morality upon earth, they have personally ceased to observe its
rules, either for or among themselves. As compared with men, in conduct
they are generally characterized by superior force and intellect, but by
inferior morality."

In its peculiar application to the dead, there is indicated the despair
of earthly happiness underlying the thought of even the cheerful and
mercurial Greek. Hence the word was used as synonymous with dead. Only
the dead could be called truly blessed. Thus Sophocles ("Oedipus
Tyrannus"):

"From hence the lesson learn ye

To reckon no man happy till ye witness

The closing day; until he pass the border

Which severs life from death, unscathed by sorrow."

And again ("Oedipus at Colonus"):

"Happiest beyond compare,

Never to taste of life:

Happiest in order next,

Being born, with quickest speed

Thither again to turn

From whence we came."

Nevertheless, even in its pagan use, the word was not altogether without
a moral background. The Greeks recognized a prosperity which waited on
the observance of the laws of natural morality, and an avenging Fate
which pursued and punished their violation. This conception appears
often in the works of the tragedians; for instance, in the "Oedipus
Tyrannus" of Sophocles, where the main motive is the judgment which
waits upon even unwitting violations of natural ties. Still, this
prosperity is external, consisting either in wealth, or power, or
exemption from calamity.

With the philosophers a moral element comes definitely into the word.
The conception rises from outward propriety to inward correctness as the
essence of happiness. But in all of them, from Socrates onward, virtue
depends primarily upon knowledge; so that to be happy is, first of ail,
to know. It is thus apparent that the Greek philosophy had no conception
of sin in the Bible sense. As virtue depended on knowledge, sin was the
outcome of ignorance, and virtue and its consequent happiness were
therefore the prerogative of the few and the learned.

The biblical use of the word lifted it into the region of the spiritual,
as distinguished from the merely intellectual, and besides, intrusted to
it alone the task of representing this higher conception. The pagan word
for happiness (εὐδαιμονία, under the protection of a good genius or
daemon) nowhere occurs in the New Testament nor in the Scriptures,
having fallen into disrepute because the word daemon, which originally
meant a deity, good or evil, had acquired among the Jews the bad sense
which we attach to demon. Happiness, or better, blessedness, was
therefore represented both in the Old and in the New Testament by this
word μακάριος. In the Old Testament the idea involves more of outward
prosperity than in the New Testament, yet it almost universally occurs
in connections which emphasize, as its principal element, a sense of
God's approval founded in righteousness which rests ultimately on love
to God.

Thus the word passed up into the higher region of Christian thought, and
was stamped with the gospel signet, and laden with all the rich
significance of gospel blessedness. It now takes on a group of ideas
strange to the best pagan morality, and contradictory of its fundamental
positions. Shaking itself loose from all thoughts of outward good, it
becomes the express symbol of a happiness identified with pure
character. Behind it lies the clear cognition of sin as the
fountain-head of all misery, and of holiness as the final and effectual
cure for every woe. For knowledge as the basis of virtue, and therefore
of happiness, it substitutes faith and love. For the aristocracy of the
learned virtuous, it introduces the truth of the Fatherhood of God and
the corollary of the family of believers. While the pagan word carries
the isolation of the virtuous and the contraction of human sympathy, the
Gospel pushes these out with an ideal of a world-wide sympathy and of a
happiness realized in ministry. The vague outlines of an abstract good
vanish from it, and give place to the pure heart's vision of God, and
its personal communion with the Father in heaven. Where it told of the
Stoic's self-sufficiency, it now tells of the Christian's poverty of
spirit and meekness. Where it hinted at the Stoic's self-repression and
strangling of emotion, it now throbs with a holy sensitiveness, and with
a monition to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with them that
weep. From the pagan word the flavor of immortality is absent. No vision
of abiding rest imparts patience and courage amid the bitterness and
struggle of life; no menace of the destiny of evil imposes a check on
human lusts. The Christian word blessed is full of the light of heaven.
It sternly throws away from itself every hint of the Stoic's asserted
right of suicide as a refuge from human ills, and emphasizes something
which thrives on trial and persecution, which glories in tribulation,
which not only endures but conquers the world, and expects its crown in
heaven.

The poor (οἱ πρωχιὸ)

Three words expressing poverty are found in the New Testament. Two of
them, πὲνης and πενιχρός, are kindred terms, the latter being merely a
poetic form of the other, and neither of these occurs more than once
([Luk 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#002); [Co2
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009)). The word used in this verse is
therefore the current word for poor, occurring thirty-four times, and
covering every gradation of want; so that it is evident that the New
Testament writers did not recognize any nice distinctions of meaning
which called for the use of other terms. Luke, for instance ([Luk
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#002), [Luk
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#003)), calls the widow who bestowed
her two mites both πενιχρὰν and πρωχὴ. Nevertheless, there is a
distinction, recognized by both classical and ecclesiastical writers.
While ὁ πένης is of narrow means, one who "earns a scanty pittance,"
πρωχός is allied to the verb πτώσσειν, to crouch or cringe, and
therefore conveys the idea of utter destitution, which abjectly solicits
and lives by alms. Hence it is applied to Lazarus ([Luk
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020), [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)), and rendered beggar. Thus
distinguished, it is very graphic and appropriate here, as denoting the
utter spiritual destitution, the consciousness of which precedes the
entrance into the kingdom of God, and which cannot be relieved by one's
own efforts, but only by the free mercy of God. (See on [Co2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010); and see [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009).)

[Matthew 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 5:4</span></span>

They that mourn (πενθοῦντες)

Signifying grief manifested; too deep for concealment. Hence it is often
joined with κλαίειν, to weep audibly ([Mar
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#010); [Jam
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009)).

Shall be comforted

See on [Joh 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016).

[Matthew 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 5:5</span></span>

The meek (οἱ πραεῖς)

Another word which, though never used in a bad sense, Christianity has
lifted to a higher plane, and made the symbol of a higher good. Its
primary meaning is mild, gentle. It was applied to inanimate things, as
light, wind, sound, sickness. It was used of a horse; gentle.

As a human attribute, Aristotle defines it as the mean between stubborn
anger and that negativeness of character which is inescapable of even
righteous indignation: according to which it is tantamount to
equanimity. Plato opposes it to fierceness or cruelty, and uses it of
humanity to the condemned; but also of the conciliatory demeanor of a
demagogue seeking popularity and power. Pindar applies it to a king,
mild or kind to the citizens, and Herodotus uses it as opposed to anger.

These pre-Christian meanings of the word exhibit two general
characteristics. 1. They express outward conduct merely. 2. They
contemplate relations to men only. The Christian word, on the contrary,
describes an inward quality, and that as related primarily to God. The
equanimity, mildness, kindness, represented by the classical word, are
founded in self-control or in natural disposition. The Christian
meekness is based on humility, which is not a natural quality but an
outgrowth of a renewed nature. To the pagan the word often implied
condescension, to the Christian it implies submission. The Christian
quality, in its manifestation, reveals all that was best in the heathen
virtue - mildness, gentleness, equanimity - but these manifestations
toward men are emphasized as outgrowths of a spiritual relation to God.
The mildness or kindness of Plato or Pindar imply no sense of
inferiority in those who exhibit them; sometimes the contrary. Plato's
demagogue is kindly from self-interest and as a means to tyranny.
Pindar's king is condescendingly kind. The meekness of the Christian
springs from a sense of the inferiority of the creature to the Creator,
and especially of the sinful creature to the holy God. While, therefore,
the pagan quality is redolent of self-assertion, the Christian quality
carries the flavor of self-abasement. As toward God, therefore, meekness
accepts his dealings without murmur or resistance as absolutely good and
wise. As toward man, it accepts opposition, insult, and provocation, as
God's permitted ministers of a chastening demanded by the infirmity and
corruption of sin; while, under this sense of his own sinfulness, the
meek bears patiently "the contradiction of sinners against himself,"
forgiving and restoring the erring in a spirit of meekness, considering
himself, lest he also be tempted (see [Gal
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)). The ideas of forgiveness and
restoration nowhere attach to the classical word. They belong
exclusively to Christian meekness, which thus shows itself allied to
love. As ascribed by our Lord to himself, see [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029). Wyc. renders "Blessed be mild
men."

[Matthew 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 5:6</span></span>

Shall be filled (χορτασθήσονται)

A very strong and graphic word, originally applied to the feeding and
fattening of animals in a stall. In [Rev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021), it is used of the filling of
the birds with the flesh of God's enemies. Also of the multitudes fed
with the loaves and fishes ([Mat
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020); [Mar
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#008); [Luk
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#017)). It is manifestly appropriate
here as expressing the complete satisfaction of spiritual hunger and
thirst. Hence Wycliffe's rendering, fulfilled, is strictly true to the
original.

[Matthew 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 5:7</span></span>

The merciful

See on [Luk 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#050).

[Matthew 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 5:9</span></span>

The peacemakers (οἱ εἰρηνοποιοί)

Should be held to its literal meaning, peace-makers; not as Wyc.,
peaceable men. The founders and promoters of peace are meant; who not
only keep the peace, but seek to bring men into harmony with each other.
Tynd. renders, the maintainers of peace.

[Matthew 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 5:13</span></span>

Have lost his savour (μωρανθῇ)

The kindred noun (μωρός) means dull, sluggish; applied to the mind,
stupid or silly; applied to the taste, insipid, flat. The verb here used
of salt, to become insipid, also means to play the fool. Our Lord refers
here to the familiar fact of salt losing its pungency and becoming
useless. Dr. Thompson ("The Land and the Book") cites the following
case: "A merchant of Sidon, having farmed of the government the revenue
from the importation of salt, brought over a great quantity from the
marshes of Cyprus - enough, in fact, to supply the whole province for
many years. This he had transferred to the mountains, to cheat the
government out of some small percentage of duty. Sixty-five houses were
rented and filled with salt. Such houses have merely earthen floors, and
the salt next the ground was in a few years entirely spoiled. I saw
large quantities of it literally thrown into the road to be trodden
under foot of men and beasts. It was 'good for nothing.'"

[Matthew 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 5:15</span></span>

A bushel (τὸν μόδιον)

Rev., rightly, "the bushel;" since the definite article is designed to
indicate a familiar object - the grain-measure which is found in every
house.

A candlestick (τὴν λυχνίαν)

Rev., the stand. Also a part of the furniture of every house, and
commonly but one in the house: hence the article. The word, which occurs
four times in the Gospels and eight times elsewhere, means, in every
ease, not a candlestick, but a lamp-stand. In [Heb
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002), the golden "candlestick" of the
tabernacle is called λυχνία; but in the description of this article
([Exo 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031), [Exo
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039)), we read, "Thou shalt make the
seven lamps thereof;" and in [Zac 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002),
where the imagery is drawn from the sanctuary, we have a "candlestick"
with a bowl on the top of it, "and his seven lamps thereon, and seven
pipes (for the oil) to the lamps which are upon the top thereof."

[Matthew 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 5:16</span></span>

So shine (οὕτως)

Often misconceived, as if the meaning were, "Let your light shine in
such a way that men may see," etc. Standing at the beginning of the
sentence, it points back to the illustration just used. "So," even as
that lamp just mentioned, let your light shine. Wycliffe has apparently
caught this correct sense: So shine your light before men.

[Matthew 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 5:17</span></span>

To destroy (καταλῦσαι)

Lit., to loosen down, dissolve; Wyc., undo.

[Matthew 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 5:18</span></span>

Jot, tittle (ἰῶτα κεραία)

Jot is for jod, the smallest letter in the Hebrew alphabet. Tittle is
the little bend or point which serves to distinguish certain Hebrew
letters of similar appearance. Jewish tradition mentions the letter jod
as being irremovable; adding that, if all men in the world were gathered
to abolish the least letter in the law, they would not succeed. The
guilt of changing those little hooks which distinguish between certain
Hebrew letters is declared to be so great that, if such a thing were
done, the world would be destroyed.

[Matthew 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 5:22</span></span>

Hell-fire (τήν γέενναν τοῦ πυρός)

Rev., more accurately, the hell of fire. The word Gehenna, rendered
hell, occurs outside of the Gospels only at [Jam
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006). It is the Greek representative of
the Hebrew Ge-Hinnom, or Valley of Hinnom, a deep, narrow glen to the
south of Jerusalem, where, after the introduction of the worship of the
fire-gods by Ahaz, the idolatrous Jews sacrificed their children to
Molech. Josiah formally desecrated it, "that no man might make his son
or his daughter pass through the fire to Molech" ([Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)). After this it became the
common refuse-place of the city, into which the bodies of criminals,
carcasses of animals, and all sorts of filth were cast. From its depth
and narrowness, and its fire and ascending smoke, it became the symbol
of the place of the future punishment of the wicked. So Milton:

"The pleasant valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence

And black Gehenna called, the type of hell."

As fire was the characteristic of the place, it was called the Gehenna
of fire. It should be carefully distinguished from Hades (ᾅδης), which
is never used for the place of punishment, but for the place of departed
spirits, without reference to their moral condition. This distinction,
ignored by the A. V., is made in the Rev.

[Matthew 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 5:25</span></span>

Agree with (ἴσθι εὐνοῶν)

Lit., be well-minded toward; inclined to satisfy by paying or
compromising. Wyc., Be thou consenting to.

Officer (ὑπηρέτῃ)

Denoting a subordinate official, as a herald or an orderly, and in this
sense applied to Mark as the "minister" or attendant of Paul and
Barnabas ([Act 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)). It furnishes an
interesting instance of the expansion of a word from a limited and
special meaning into a more general one; and also of the influence of
the Gospel in lifting words into higher and purer associations. Formed
with the verb ἐρέσσω, to row, it originally signified a rower, as
distinguished from a soldier, in a war-galley. This word for a
galley-slave comes at last, in the hands of Luke and Paul, to stand for
the noblest of all offices, that of a minister of the Lord Jesus ([Luk
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002); [Act
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016); [Co1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)).

[Matthew 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 5:29</span></span>

Offend (σκανδαλίξει)

The word offend carries to the English reader the sense of giving
offence, provoking. Hence the Rev., by restoring the picture in the
word, restores its true meaning, causeth to stumble. The kindred noun is
σκάνδαλον, a later form of σκανδάληθρον, the stick in a trap on which
the bait is placed, and which springs up and shuts the trap at the touch
of an animal. Hence, generally, a snare, a stumbling-block. Christ's
meaning here is: "If your eye or your hand serve as an obstacle or trap
to ensnare or make you fall in your moral walk." How the eye might do
this may be seen in the previous verse. Bengel observes: "He who, when
his eye proves a stumbling-block, takes care not to see, does in reality
blind himself." The words scandal and slander are both derived from
σκάνδαλον; and Wyc. renders, "If thy right eye slander thee." Compare
Aeschylus, "Choephori," 301,372.

[Matthew 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 5:40</span></span>

Coat, cloke (χιτῶνα, ἱμάτιον)

The former, the shirt-like under-garment or tunic; the latter, the
mantle, or ampler over-garment, which served as a covering for the
night, and therefore was forbidden by the Levitical law to be retained
in pledge overnight ([Exo 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026), [Exo
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027)). To yield up this without
resistance therefore implies a higher degree of concession.

[Matthew 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 5:41</span></span>

Shall compel thee to go (ἀγγαρεύσει)

This word throws the whole injunction into a picture which is entirely
lost to the English reader. A man is travelling, and about to pass a
post-station, where horses and messengers are kept in order to forward
royal missives as quickly as possible. An official rushes out, seizes
him, and forces him to go back and carry a letter to the next station,
perhaps to the great detriment of his business. The word is of Persian
origin, and denotes the impressment into service, which officials were
empowered to make of any available persons or beasts on the great lines
of road where the royal mails were carried by relays of riders.

[Matthew 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 5:42</span></span>

Borrow (δανίσασθαι)

Properly, to borrow at interest.

[Matthew 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 5:43</span></span>

Neighbor (τὸν πλησίον)

Another word to which the Gospel has imparted a broader and deeper
sense. Literally it means the one near (so the Eng., neighbor =
nigh-bor), indicating a mere outward nearness, proximity. Thus a
neighbor might be an enemy. Socrates (Plato, "Republic," ii., 373) shows
how two adjoining states might come to want each a piece of its
neighbor's (τῶν πλησίον) land, so that there would arise war between
them; and again (Plato, "Theaetetus," 174) he says that a philosopher is
wholly unacquainted with his next-door neighbor, and does not know
whether he is a man or an animal. The Old Testament expands the meaning
to cover national or tribal fellowship, and that is the sense in our
Lord's quotation here. The Christian sense is expounded by Jesus in the
parable of the Good Samaritan ([Luk
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#029) sqq.), as including the whole
brotherhood of man, and as founded in love for man, as man, everywhere.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006)

</div>
