<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 0:0</span></span>

The Revelation

This document has given rise to voluminous controversy as to its author,
its origin, its purpose, and its interpretation. It has been held to be
a forgery in the name of John; to have been composed by another writer
in the apostle's name, not in order to deceive, but in order to record
an oral revelation of John; or to have been the work of another John.
Some who deny that John wrote the Gospel, have attributed Revelation to
him, and the authenticity of the latter is maintained by some prominent
rationalistic critics.

The Apostle John was banished to the Island of Patmos, probably by the
Emperor Domitian, a.d. 95 or 96, and the book, composed either during
his exile, or, as is more likely, after his return to Ephesus, contains
the revelation given him there in a series of visions. It is directly
addressed to the Seven Churches of Proconsular Asia; the number seven
being representative, and not including all the Asiatic Churches. Its
design was to encourage the Church during that trying period, predicted
by Jesus himself, between the close of direct revelation and the second
coming of the Lord. This encouragement centers in the return of Jesus to
give His people eternal life and to trample down His foes. As related to
the progress of doctrine in the New Testament, it represents the final
consummation in the redeemed Church, the heavenly Jerusalem, which is
foreshadowed in the rise and growth of the Apostolic Church.

The style is figurative and symbolical. It deals with principles rather
than with particular events. To the neglect of this characteristic, and
the corresponding attempt to link the symbols and prophecies with
specific historical incidents or personages, are due most of the
extravagances of interpretation. No satisfactory argument against its
authenticity can be drawn from its contents as related to the other
writings of John. It proclaims the same eternal truths which are
asserted and vindicated in the Gospel and in the Epistles - the
sovereignty of God, the conflict of sin with righteousness, the
temporary triumph of evil, and the final, decisive victory of holiness.
As in the other writings, Christ is the central figure, the conqueror of
sin and death, the crowning joy of the redeemed, and the object of their
adoration. It emphasizes the divine hatred of sin and the certainty of
the divine judgment of the wicked and of the future bliss of believers
in Jesus. The main idea of the Gospel and of Revelation is the same -
that of a decisive conflict between the powers of good and evil.

The symbolism of Revelation is Jewish, and not Greek or Roman. It is
pervaded with the style and imagery of the Old Testament, and is molded
by its historical and prophetical books. "The book," says Professor
Milligan, "is absolutely steeped in the memories, the incidents, the
thoughts, and the language of the Church's past. To such an extent is
this the case that it may be doubted whether it contains a single figure
not drawn from the Old Testament, or a single complete sentence not more
or less built up of materials brought from the same source.... It is a
perfect mosaic of passages from the Old Testament, at one time quoted
verbally, at another referred to by distinct allusion; now taken from
one scene in Jewish history, and now again from two or three together."
Thus the heresy of the Nicolaitanes is the heresy of Balaam ([Rev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)): the evil in the Church of
Thyatira is personified in Jezebel ([Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)): the angelic captain in the war
against the dragon is the Michael of Daniel ([Rev
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#007)): Jerusalem, Mount Zion, Babylon,
the Euphrates, Sodom, and Egypt are symbols of the holy bliss of the
saints, of the transgressors against God, and of the judgment of the
wicked ([Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002); [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019); [Rev
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#014); [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)). The battle of Har-Magedon
carries us back to the great slaughters in the plain of Megiddo ([Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019); [Psa
83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009); [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029)). The promises to the churches
are given under the figure of the tree of life, the hidden manna, the
white stone, the iron scepter, the pillar in the temple of God ([Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007), [Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017), [Rev
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027), [Rev
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028); [Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005), [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012), [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)). Heaven is described under the
image of the tabernacle in the wilderness ([Rev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001), [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019); [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009); [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003); [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006)). The plagues of [Rev
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001) are the plagues of Egypt: the
crossing of the Red Sea and the destruction of Korah are blended in the
representation of the deliverance of God's people ([Rev
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015), [Rev
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#016)). Of the Prophets, Haggai
contributes the earthquake of chapter 6, and Joel the sun changed into
the blackness of sackcloth and the moon into blood: Isaiah the falling
stars, the fig tree casting her untimely fruit, and the heavens
departing as a scroll: Ezekiel the scorpions of chapter 9, the
description of the New Jerusalem in chapter 21, the roll in [Rev
5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001), and the little book in [Rev
10:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001) : Zechariah the opening of the
seals in chapter 6 and the olive trees in chapter 11. The vision of the
glorified Redeemer ([Rev 1:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012)) is
combined from Exodus, Zechariah Daniel, Ezekiel, Isaiah, and the Psalms.

Along with these coincidences there are certain contrasts, notably as
respects the doctrine of Christ's coming, which, in the Gospel and
Epistles lies in the background, while it is the main theme of
Revelation. Revelation treats the impending judgment as external, the
Gospel as spiritual. Revelation describes the triumph of Christianity
under the imagery of Judaism; the consummation being an ideal Jerusalem
and an ideal worship; while in the Gospel, Judaism appears in opposition
to Christ, "standing without, isolated and petrified, and not taken up
with it, quickened and glorified."

The symbols of the book are drawn from objects familiar to the writer -
the locusts, the eagles, the millstone, the olive and palm and vine.

The principal objection urged against the common authorship of the
Gospel and Revelation, is the difference in language and style. This
difference must be frankly admitted. "The language," says Dr. Davidson,
"departs materially from the usual Greek of the New Testament,
presenting anomalies, incorrectnesses, peculiar constructions, and
awkward dispositions of words, which have no parallel.... The language
is so thoroughly Hebraistic as to neglect the usual rules of Greek." By
many eminent critics these differences are regarded as irreconcilable on
the assumption of a common authorship.

On the other hand, it may be urged that these differences are largely
intentional; that the author departs from common usage under the
peculiar demands of his subject, arising from the conditions under which
he writes, and his intent to conform to the Old Testament style of
address; and further, that his familiarity with correct usage is shown
by other passages in the same book. Revelation, moreover, contains many
of the words which are peculiar to the Gospel and Epistles, such as to
witness, to tabernacle, to keep, to overcome, to name as the expression
of character, true (ἀληθινός) in the sense of real; and the figures of
hungering and thirsting, the manna, the living water, the shepherd and
the sheep. It is, indeed, answered that, where the same words occur,
they are used in a different sense; but many of these alleged
differences disappear upon closer examination. The Hebrew character is
only superficially different from that of the Gospel, which is Hebrew in
spirit, though the Greek is much purer, and "the absence of solecisms
arises from the avoidance of idiomatic expressions."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001)

</div>
