<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

[Romans 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 12:1</span></span>

I beseech (παρακαλῶ)

See on consolation, [Luk 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024).

By the mercies (διὰ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν)

By, not as an adjuration, but as presenting the motive for obedience. I
use the compassion of God to move you to present, etc.

Present

See on [Rom 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013). It is the technical
term for presenting the Levitical victims and offerings. See [Luk
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022). In the Levitical sacrifices the
offerer placed his offering so as to face the Most Holy Place, thus
bringing it before the Lord.

Bodies

Literally, but regarded as the outward organ of the will. So, expressly,
[Rom 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013), [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019); [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010). Compare [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023). Hence the exhortation to glorify
God in the body ([Co1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020); compare
[Phi 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020); [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)). So the body is called the body
of sin ([Rom 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006); compare [Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)). In later Greek usage slaves
were called σώματα bodies. See [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013).

A living sacrifice (θυσίαν ζῶσαν)

Living, in contrast with the slain Levitical offerings. Compare [Rom
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008), [Rom
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011). "How can the body become a
sacrifice? Let the eye look on no evil, and it is a sacrifice. Let the
tongue utter nothing base, and it is an offering. Let the hand work no
sin, and it is a holocaust. But more, this suffices not, but besides we
must actively exert ourselves for good; the hand giving alms, the mouth
blessing them that curse us, the ear ever at leisure for listening to
God" (Chrysostom).

Acceptable (εὐάρεστον)

Lit., well-pleasing.

Which is your reasonable service (τὴν λογικὴν λατρείαν)

Explaining the whole previous clause. Service, see on [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004). The special word for the service
rendered by the Israelites as the peculiar people of God is very
significant here. Reasonable, not in the popular sense of the term, as a
thing befitting or proper, but rational, as distinguished from merely
external or material. Hence nearly equivalent to spiritual. So Rev., in
margin. It is in harmony with the highest reason.

[Romans 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 12:2</span></span>

Conformed - transformed (συσχηματίζεσθε - μεταμορφοῦσθε).

See on was transfigured, [Mat 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002).
For conformed to, Rev., correctly, fashioned according to.

Mind (νοός)

See on [Rom 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023). Agreeing with
reasonable service.

That good and acceptable and perfect will

Better to render the three adjectives as appositional. "May prove what
is the will of God, what is good," etc. The other rendering compels us
to take well-pleasing in the sense of agreeable to men.

[Romans 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 12:3</span></span>

Not to think, etc.

The play upon φρονεῖν to think and its compounds is very noticeable.
"Not to be high-minded (hyperphronein) above what he ought to be minded
(phronein), but to be minded (phronein) unto the being sober-minded
(sophronein). See on [Pe1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007).

The measure of faith (μέτρον πίστεως)

An expression which it is not easy to define accurately. It is to be
noted: 1. That the point of the passage is a warning against an undue
self-estimate, and a corresponding exhortation to estimate one's self
with discrimination and sober judgment. 2. That Paul has a standard by
which self-estimate is to be regulated. This is expressed by ὡς as,
according as. 3. That this scale or measure is different in different
persons, so that the line between conceit and sober thinking is not the
same for all. This is expressed by ἐμέρισεν hath imparted, distributed,
and ἑκάστῳ to each one. 4. The character of this measure or standard is
determined by faith. It must be observed that the general exhortation to
a proper self-estimate is shaped by, and foreshadows, the subsequent
words respecting differences of gifts. It was at this point that the
tendency to self-conceit and spiritual arrogance would develop itself.
Hence the precise definition of faith here will be affected by its
relation to the differing gifts in [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). Its meaning, therefore, must not
be strictly limited to the conception of justifying faith in Christ,
though that conception includes and is really the basis of every wider
conception. It is faith as the condition of the powers and offices of
believers, faith regarded as spiritual insight, which, according to its
degree, qualifies a man to be a prophet, a teacher, a minister, etc.;
faith in its relation to character, as the only principle which develops
a man's true character, and which, therefore, is the determining
principle of the renewed man's tendencies, whether they lead him to
meditation and research, or to practical activity. As faith is the
sphere and subjective condition of the powers and functions of
believers, so it furnishes a test or regulative standard of their
respective endowments and functions. Thus the measure applied is
distinctively a measure of faith. With faith the believer receives a
power of discernment as to the actual limitations of his gifts. Faith,
in introducing him into God's kingdom, introduces him to new standards
of measurement, according to which he accurately determines the nature
and extent of his powers, and so does not think of himself too highly.
This measure is different in different individuals, but in every case
faith is the determining element of the measure. Paul, then, does not
mean precisely to say that a man is to think more or less soberly of
himself according to the quantity of faith which he has, though that is
true as a fact; but that sound and correct views as to the character and
extent of spiritual gifts and functions are fixed by a measure, the
determining element of which, in each particular case, is faith.

[Romans 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 12:4</span></span>

Office (πρᾶξιν)

Lit., mode of acting.

[Romans 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 12:5</span></span>

Being many (οἱ πολλοὶ)

Lit., the many. Rev., better, who are many.

Every one (τὸ δὲ καθ' εἶς)

The literal phrase can only be rendered awkwardly: and as to what is
true according to one; i.e., individually, severally. Compare, for a
similar phrase, [Mar 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#019); [Joh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009).

[Romans 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 12:6</span></span>

Prophecy

See on prophet, [Luk 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#026). In the New
Testament, as in the Old, the prominent idea is not prediction, but the
inspired delivery of warning, exhortation, instruction, judging, and
making manifest the secrets of the heart. See [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003), [Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024), [Co1
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025). The New-Testament prophets are
distinguished from teachers, by speaking under direct divine
inspiration.

Let us prophesy

Not in the Greek.

According to the proportion of faith (κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τῆς πίστεως)

Ἁναλογία proportion, occurs only here in the New Testament. In classical
Greek it is used as a mathematical term. Thus Plato: "The fairest bond
is that which most completely fuses and is fused into the things which
are bound; and proportion (ἀναλογία) is best adapted to effect such a
fusion" ("Timaeus," 31). "Out of such elements, which are in number
four, the body of the world was created in harmony and proportion"
("Timaeus," 32). Compare "Politicus," 257. The phrase here is related to
the measure of faith ([Rom 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)). It
signifies, according to the proportion defined by faith. The meaning is
not the technical meaning expressed by the theological phrase analogy of
faith, sometimes called analogy of scripture, i.e., the correspondence
of the several parts of divine revelation in one consistent whole. This
would require ἡ πίστις the faith, to be taken as the objective rule of
faith, or system of doctrine (see on [Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)), and is not in harmony with [Rom
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003), nor with according to the grace
given. Those who prophesy are to interpret the divine revelation
"according to the strength, clearness, fervor, and other qualities of
the faith bestowed upon them; so that the character and mode of their
speaking is conformed to the rules and limits which are implied in the
proportion of their individual degree of faith" (Meyer).

[Romans 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 12:7</span></span>

Ministering (διακονίᾳ)

Let us wait on is supplied. Lit., or ministry in our ministry. The word
appears in the New Testament always in connection with the service of
the Christian Church, except [Luk
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040), of Martha's serving; [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014), of the ministry of angels, and
[Co2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007), of the ministry of Moses.
Within this limit it is used, 1. Of service in general, including all
forms of christian ministration tending to the good of the christian
body ([Co1 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005); [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013); [Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)). Hence, 2. Of the apostolic
office and its administration; (a) generally ([Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024); [Co2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001); [Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)); or (b) defined as a ministry of
reconciliation, of the word, of the Spirit, of righteousness ([Co2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018); [Act
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004); [Co2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008), [Co2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)). It is not used of the specific
office of a deacon; but the kindred word διάκονος occurs in that sense
([Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008), [Ti1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)). As the word is employed in
connection with both the higher and lower ministrations in the Church
(see [Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001), [Act
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)), it is difficult to fix its
precise meaning here; yet as it is distinguished here from prophecy,
exhortation, and teaching, it may refer to some more practical, and,
possibly, minor form of ministry. Moule says: "Almost any work other
than that of inspired utterance or miracle-working may be included in it
here." So Godet: "An activity of a practical nature exerted in action,
not in word." Some limit it to the office of deacon.

Teaching

Aimed at the understanding.

[Romans 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 12:8</span></span>

Exhortation

Aimed at the heart and will. See on consolation, [Luk
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024). Compare [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003); [Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036), where Rev. gives son of
exhortation.

He that giveth (ὁ μεταδιδοὺς)

Earthly possessions. The preposition μετά indicates sharing with. He
that imparteth. Compare [Eph 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028);
[Luk 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#011).

Simplicity (ἁπλότητι)

See on single, [Mat 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022), and compare
[Jam 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005), where it is said that God
gives ἁπλῶς simply. See note there. In [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002); [Co2
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011), [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013), the A.V. gives liberality; and
in [Jam 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005), liberally. Rev. accepts
this in the last-named passage, but gives singleness in margin. In all
the others liberality is, at best, very doubtful. The sense is unusual,
and the rendering simplicity or singleness is defensible in all the
passages.

He that ruleth (ὁ προΐ́στάμενος)

Lit., he that is placed in front. The reference is to any position
involving superintendence. No special ecclesiastical office is meant.
Compare [Tit 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008), to maintain good
works; the idea of presiding over running into that of carrying on or
practicing. See note there. Compare also προστάτις succorer, [Rom
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002), and see note.

With diligence (ἐν σπουδῇ)

See on [Jde 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003). In [Mar
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025); [Luk
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039), it is rendered haste. In [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011), carefulness (Rev., earnest
care). In [Co2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012), care (Rev.,
earnest care). In [Co2 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008),
forwardness (Rev., earnestness). In [Co2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016), earnest care.

With cheerfulness (ἐν ἱλαρότητι)

Only here in the New Testament. It reappears in the Latin hilaritas;
English, hilarity, exhilarate. "The joyful eagerness, the amiable grace,
the affability going the length of gayety, which make the visitor a
sunbeam penetrating into the sick-chamber, and to the heart of the
afflicted."

[Romans 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 12:9</span></span>

Love (ἡ ἀγάπη)

The article has the force of your. See on loveth, [Joh
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020).

Without dissimulation (ἀνυπόκριτος)

Rev., without hypocrisy. See on hypocrites, [Mat
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013).

Abhor (ἀποστυγοῦντες)

Lit., abhorring. The only simple verb for hate in the New Testament is
μισέω. Στυγέω, quite frequent in the classics, does not occur except in
this compound, which is found only here. The kindred adjective στυγητός
hateful, is found [Ti1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003). The
original distinction between μισέω and στυγέω is that the former denotes
concealed and cherished hatred, and the latter hatred expressed. The
preposition ἀπό away from, may either denote separation or be merely
intensive. An intense sentiment is meant: loathing.

Cleave (κολλώμενοι)

See on joined himself, [Luk 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#015).
Compare [Act 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034); [Co1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016).

[Romans 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 12:10</span></span>

Be kindly affectioned (φιλόστοργοι)

Only here in the New Testament. From στέργω to love, which denotes
peculiarly a natural affection, a sentiment innate and peculiar to men
as men, as distinguished from the love of desire, called out by
circumstance. Hence of the natural love of kindred, of people and king
(the relation being regarded as founded in nature), of a tutelary God
for a people. The word here represents Christians as bound by a family
tie. It is intended to define more specifically the character of
φιλαδελφία brotherly love, which follows, so that the exhortation is
"love the brethren in the faith as though they were brethren in blood"
(Farrar). Rev., be tenderly affectioned; but the A.V., in the word
kindly gives the real sense, since kind is originally kinned; and kindly
affectioned is having the affection of kindred.

In honor preferring one another (τῇ τιμῇ ἀλλήλους προηγούμενοι).

The verb occurs only here. It means to go before as a guide. Honor is
the honor due from each to all. Compare [Phi
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003); [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017); [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005). Hence, leading the way in showing
the honor that is due. Others render antcipating and excelling.

[Romans 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 12:11</span></span>

Slothful (ὀκνηροί)

From ὀκνέω to delay.

In business (τῇ σπουδῇ)

Wrong. Render, as Rev., in diligence; see on [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008). Luther, "in regard to zeal be
not lazy."

Fervent (ζέοντες)

See on [Act 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025).

The Lord (τῷ Κυρίῳ)

Some texts read καιρῷ the time or opportunity, but the best authorities
give Lord.

[Romans 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 12:12</span></span>

Continuing instant (προσκαρτεροῦντες)

Compare [Act 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004); [Act
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004). Rev., steadfastly for instant,
which has lost its original sense of urgent (Latin, instare to press
upon). Thus Latimer: "I preached at the instant request of a curate."
Compare A.V., [Luk 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#004); [Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007).

[Romans 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 12:13</span></span>

Distributing (κοινωνοῦντες)

Rev., communicating to. The meaning is sharing in the necessities;
taking part in them as one's own. So [Rom
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027); [Ti1
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022); [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011); [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014); [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013). See on partners, [Luk
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010); see on fellowship, [Act
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042); see on [Jo1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003); see on [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011).

Given to hospitality (φιλοξενίαν διώκοντες)

Lit., pursuing hospitality. For a similar use of the verb compare [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001); [Th1
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015); [Heb
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014); [Pe1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#011). A necessary injunction when so
many Christians were banished and persecuted. The verb indicates not
only that hospitality is to be furnished when sought, but that
Christians are to seek opportunities of exercising it.

[Romans 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 12:14</span></span>

Bless (εὐλογεῖτε)

See on blessed, [Pe1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003).

Them that persecute (τοὺς διώκοντας)

See on [Joh 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016). It has been
suggested that the verb pursuing in [Rom
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013) may have suggested the
persecutors here. Pursue hospitality toward the brethren as the wicked
pursue them.

Curse not

Plutarch relates that when a decree was issued that Alcibiades should be
solemnly cursed by all the priests and priestesses, one of the latter
declared that her holy office obliged her to make prayers, but not
execrations ("Alcibiades").

[Romans 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 12:16</span></span>

Condescend to men of low estate (τοῖς ταπεινοῖς συναπαγόμενοι)

Rev., to things that are lowly. Τοῖς ταπεινοῖς to the lowly may mean
either lowly men or lowly things. The verb literally means being carried
off along with; hence yielding or submitting to, and so condescending.
Compare [Gal 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013), and see on [Pe2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017), in which passages it has a bad
sense from the context. According to the original sense, the meaning
will be, being led away with lowly things or people; i.e. being drawn
into sympathy with them. Farrar suggests letting the lowly lead you by
the hand. Meyer, who maintains the neuter, explains: "The lowly things
ought to have for the Christian a force of attraction, in virtue of
which he yields himself to fellowship with them, and allows himself to
be guided by them in the determination of his conduct. Thus Paul felt
himself compelled to enter into humble situations." On the other hand,
Godet, maintaining the masculine, says: "The reference is to the most
indigent and ignorant and least influential in the Church. It is to them
the believer ought to feel most drawn. The antipathy felt by the apostle
to every sort of spiritual aristocracy, to every caste-distinction
within the Church, breaks out again in the last word." Condescend is a
feeble and inferential rendering, open to construction in a patronizing
sense; yet it is not easy to furnish a better in a single word. The
idea, then, fully expressed is, "set not your mind on lofty things, but
be borne away (ἀπό) from these by the current of your Christian sympathy
along with (σύν) things which are humble."

In your own conceits (παῤ ἑαυτοῖς)

Lit., with yourselves; in your own opinion. See [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025), and compare [Act
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008), "incredible with you," i.e., in
your judgment.

[Romans 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 12:17</span></span>

Provide (προνοούμενοι)

The A.V. uses provide in its earlier and more literal meaning of taking
thought in advance. This has been mostly merged in the later meaning of
furnish, so that the translation conveys the sense of providing honestly
for ourselves and our families. Better, as Rev., take thought for. The
citation is from [Pro 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#004), and varies
from both Hebrew and Septuagint. Hebrew: And thou shalt find favor and
good understanding in the eyes of God and man. Septuagint: And thou
shalt find favor and devise excellent things in the sight of the Lord
and of men. Compare [Co2 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021).
Construe in the sight of all men with the verb, not with honorable.
Men's estimate of what is honorable is not the standard.

[Romans 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 12:18</span></span>

If it be possible

Not if you can, but if others will allow. The phrase is explained by as
much as lieth in you (τὸ ἐξ ὑμῶν), lit., as to that which proceeds from
you, or depends on you. "All your part is to be peace" (Alford).

[Romans 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 12:19</span></span>

Give place unto wrath (δότε τόπον τῇ ὀργῇ)

Wrath has the article: the wrath, referring to the divine wrath. Give
place is give room for it to work. Do not get in its way, as you will do
by taking vengeance into your own hands. Hence as Rev., in margin, and
American Rev., in text, give place unto the wrath of God.

Vengeance is mine (ἐμοὶ ἐκδίκησις)

Lit., unto Me is vengeance. The Rev. brings out better the force of the
original: Vengeance belongeth unto Me. The quotation is from [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035). Hebrew, To me belongs vengeance
and requital. Septuagint, In the day of vengeance I will requite. The
antithesis between vengeance by God and by men is not found in
Deuteronomy. Compare [Heb 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030).
Dante, listening to Peter Damiano, who describes the abuses of the
Church, hears a great cry. Beatrice says:

"The cry has startled thee so much,

In which, if thou hadst understood its prayers,

Already would be known to thee the vengeance

Which thou shalt look upon before thou diest.

The sword above here smiteth not in haste,

Nor tardily, howe'er it seem to him

Who, fearing or desiring, waits for it."

"Paradiso," xxii, 12-18.

Compare Plato: Socrates, "And what of doing evil in return for evil,
which is the morality of the many - is that just or not? Crito, Not
just. Socrates, For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?
Crito, Very true. Socrates, Then we ought not to retaliate or render
evil for evil to any one, whatever evil we may have suffered from
him.... This opinion has never been held, and never will be held by any
considerable number of persons" ("Crito," 49). Epictetus, being asked
how a man could injure his enemy, replied, "By living the best life
himself." The idea of personal vindictiveness must be eliminated from
the word here. It is rather full meting out of justice to all parties.

[Romans 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 12:20</span></span>

Feed (ψώμιζε)

See on sop, [Joh 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026). The citation
from [Pro 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021), [Pro
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022), closely follows both Hebrew and
Septuagint.

Shalt heap (σωρεύσεις)

Only here and [Ti2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006).

Coals of fire

Many explain: The memory of the wrong awakened in your enemy by your
kindness, shall sting him with penitence. This, however, might be open
to the objection that the enemy's pain might gratify the instinct of
revenge. Perhaps it is better to take it, that kindness is as effectual
as coals of fire. Among the Arabs and Hebrews the figure of "coals of
fire" is common as a symbol of divine punishment ([Psa
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013)). "The Arabians call things
which cause very acute mental pain, burning coals of the heart and fire
in the liver" (Thayer, "Lexicon"). Thomas De Quincey, referring to an
author who calls this "a fiendish idea," says: "I acknowledge that to
myself, in one part of my boyhood, it did seem a refinement of malice.
My subtilizing habits, however, even in those days, soon suggested to me
that this aggravation of guilt in the object of our forgiveness was not
held out as the motive to the forgiveness, but as the result of it;
secondly, that perhaps no aggravation of his guilt was the point
contemplated, but the salutary stinging into life of his remorse
hitherto sleeping" ("Essays on the Poets").

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
