<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](th2003)  [Next](ti1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 0:0</span></span>

The Pastoral Epistles

Introduction

The two Epistles to Timothy and the Epistle to Titus are called the
Pastoral Epistles because they consist chiefly of instructions and
admonitions to pastors. Their authenticity is disputed. The current of
modern criticism is against their Pauline authorship, but it is
supported by high authorities.

I. The three letters are closely allied, and stand or fall together.
While each has its peculiarities, they contain considerable common
matter; and their general situation and aim are substantially the same.
They oppose heresies, seek to establish a definite church polity, and
urge adherence to traditional doctrine. Their style is similar. Certain
expressions which occur nowhere else in the N.T. are found in all three.
Whole sentences are in almost verbal agreement.

II\. They exhibit certain resemblances to the Pauline Epistles, notably
to Romans. If the writer is not Paul, he is manifestly familiar with
Paul's teachings.

III\. As to the external evidence for these letters, there seems good
reason to believe in the existence, at an early date, either of the
letters in their present form, or of documents on which the letters were
constructed later. Not much reliance can be placed on the traces which
occur in Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians: perhaps a little more on
those in the Ignatian Epistles, although many of these are merely
analogies of expression which may have been accidental, or echoes of
current religious phraseology. An unmistakable reminiscence appears in
Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians (Philip. iv.; [Ti1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007), [Ti1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)). There are no echoes in Hermas
or in the Didache, and none of importance in Barnabas. Justin Martyr has
a few characteristic expressions of the Pastorals, which may be only
accidental coincidences. The Muratorian Canon enrolls the three as
canonical, and expressly justifies their reception because, being
private letters, their canonicity might be called in question. They are
found in the Peshitto and Old Latin Versions, and are accepted and cited
as Pauline by Clement of Alexandria, Irenaeus, and Tertullian. At the
end of the second century they have a recognized place among the Pauline
Epistles. It is, however, significant, that they were excluded from
Marcion's Canon. It cannot be positively affirmed that Marcion knew
them, although his acquaintance with them would seem to be implied by
Tertullian (Adv. Marc. v., 21), who says that it was strange how Marcion
could have accepted a letter written to one man (Philemon), and have
rejected the two to Timothy and the one to Titus.

On the assumption that they were known to Marcion, it is said that he
cut and carved the New Testament Scriptures to suit his own views, and
that there was therefore nothing strange in his rejecting the Pastorals.
But besides rejecting the whole of the New Testament with the exception
of ten Epistles of Paul and the Gospel of Luke which he mutilated,
Marcion applied the knife to the Pauline Epistles. In view of his
reverence for Paul as the only true apostle and representative of Jesus
Christ, and for Paul's Epistles as containing the only true gospel, - it
is strange that, knowing the Pastorals as Pauline, he should have
rejected them en masse, instead of merely altering or abridging them to
suit himself. Tatian also rejected the two letters to Timothy, but
accepted Titus, because it contained nothing adverse to ascetic
practices.

IV\. Chronological Considerations. - Was Paul released from his first
imprisonment and imprisoned a second time? Can a place be found for the
three letters in his recorded history?

It is claimed that Paul was released from prison after his first
confinement at Rome (Acts 28:16-31) and that he then continued his
missionary labors in Ephesus, Epirus, Macedonia, and Crete: that he was
again arrested and imprisoned, and that the second imprisonment was
terminated by his execution.

Of this there is no sound historical evidence whatever. The narrative of
Acts leaves him in his first confinement. The ordinary course of
argument forms a circle. The hypothesis of a second imprisonment can be
sustained only by the Pastoral Epistles if they are authentic. Their
authenticity can be shown only on that hypothesis. The only evidence
adduced for the second imprisonment outside of these letters is, 1. A
passage in Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians (v.), as follows: (Paul)
"having preached the gospel both in the East; and in the West, received
the glorious renown due to his faith, having taught righteousness to the
whole world, and having come to the boundary of the West, and having
born his testimony before the rulers. Thus he departed out of the
world." The main point is having come to the boundary of the West (ἐπὶ
τὸ τέρμα τῆς δύσεως ἐλθών). It is claimed that this expression refers to
Spain, and that Clement thus records the fulfillment of the apostle's
intention stated in [Rom 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024), [Rom
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028). Others, however, hold that it
refers to Rome. Apart from this difference, which it is impossible to
settle, the whole statement is general, vague, and rhetorical, and has
no historical value.

2\. The Muratorian Canon (about 170 a.d.) contains a passage apparently
to the effect that Luke relates to Theophilus the things which fell
under his own notice, and evidently declares as apart from his purpose
the martyrdom of Peter; but the departure of Paul setting out from the
city to Spain - here the text is mutilated. How the writer intended to
complete it can only be guessed. The passage is worthless as evidence.
3. After these two we have nothing until the fourth century, when
Eusebius says that there was a tradition that the apostle again set
forth to the ministry of his preaching, and having a second time entered
the same city of Rome, was perfected by his martyrdom before Nero. That
in this imprisonment he wrote the second Epistle to Timothy (H. E. ii.
22, 25). This is all. Jerome merely echoes Eusebius. Eusebius does not
mention Spain. History does not show any apostolic foundation in Spain.
Neither Irenaeus, Caius, Tertullian, nor Origen allude to such a
mission; and although Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Origen mention the death
of Paul at Rome, they say nothing of any journeys subsequent to his
first arrival there. Dr. McGiffert remarks (note on Euseb. ii. 22, 2):
"The strongest argument against the visit to Spain is the absence of any
trace of it in Spain itself. If any church there could have claimed the
great apostle to the Gentiles as its founder, it seems that it must have
asserted its claim, and the tradition have been preserved at least in
that church."

It is also said that [Ti2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016), [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017) implies that Paul had had a
hearing and been discharged and permitted to preach. The assumption is
entirely gratuitous. The words may have referred to a hearing during his
first captivity, when he was delivered from imminent danger, but not set
at liberty.

In short, historical evidence for a release from the first Roman
imprisonment, a subsequent missionary activity, and a second
imprisonment, is utterly wanting. It seems hardly conceivable that no
traces of a renewed ministry should be left in history except these
instructions to friends and pupils. If Paul was liberated from his first
imprisonment, it is singular that Luke should not have recorded the fact
as a triumph of the gospel.

Such being the case, it remains only to find a place for these letters
in the recorded ministry of Paul. This cannot be done. There is no
period of that ministry, from Damascus to Rome, into which they will
fit.

V. Style and Diction. - The most formidable objection to the Pauline
authorship of these Epistles is furnished by their style and diction,
which present a marked contrast with those of the Pauline letters. That
the three Pastorals contain 148 words which appear nowhere else in the
N.T., and 304 which are not found in Paul's writings, are facts which,
by themselves, must not be allowed too much weight. Hapaxlegomena are
numerous in the several Pauline Epistles. Second Corinthians has about
90: Romans and 1st Corinthians each over a hundred: Ephesians about 40.
That words like πολυτελής and οἰκουργός appear in the Pastorals and not
in Paul, counts for no more than that ὁλοτελής occurs only in 1st
Thessalonians, and ἀβαρής only in 2nd Corinthians.

But we are not dealing with individual letters, but with a group of
letters, nearly, if not absolutely, contemporaneous. It is a striking
fact that this entire group, closely allied in all its three parts in
vocabulary and style, presents, as a whole, such marked variations in
these particulars from the accepted Pauline letters. In their lexical
peculiarities the Pastorals form a class by themselves.

One who is thoroughly steeped in Paul's style and diction, and who reads
these letters out of hand, is at once impressed with the difference from
Paul. He feels that he is in a strange rhetorical atmosphere. The
sentences have not the familiar ring. The thought does not move with the
accustomed rush. The verve of Corinthians and Galatians, the dialectic
vigor of Romans, the majesty of Ephesians, are alike wanting. The
association of ideas is loose, the construction is not compact, the
movement is slow and clumsy. We miss the heavily freighted utterance of
Paul. The thought is scanty in proportion to the volume of words; as
Holtzmann says: "We miss those characteristic dam-breakings which the
construction suffers from the swelling fullness of thought." We miss the
frequent anacolutha, the unclosed parentheses, the sudden digressions,
the obscurities arising from the headlong impetus of thought and
feeling. The construction of sentences is simple, the thoughts are
expressed without adornment, everything is according to rule and easy,
but without momentum or color. Strange compounds, great, swelling words,
start up in our path: a Pauline thought appears in a strange dress: the
voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.

Some of these unusual compounds, for which the writer has a great
liking, occur neither in the N.T. nor in profane Greek, High-sounding
words are chosen where simpler terms would have suited the thought
better. It seems, occasionally, as if the diction were being employed to
pad the meagerness of the thought. A class of words which occur
principally in the Pauline letters is wanting, as ἄδικος, ἀκαθαρσία,
ἀκροβυστία, γνωρίζειν, διαθήκη, περιπατεῖν, χρηστός and σῶμα which, in
the four principal Epistles alone, Paul uses 71 times. We miss entire
families of Pauline words, as ἐλεύθερος, φρονεῖν, πράσσειν, τέλειος,
ἐνεργεῖν, περισσός, and the numerous derivatives and compounds growing
out of these.

Again, we look in vain for certain expressions most characteristic of
the Pauline vocabulary, as ὑπακούειν, ἀποκαλύπτειν, καυχᾶσθαι, and their
kindred words. Still more significant is the fact that the article,
which is freely used by Paul before entire sentences, adverbs,
interjections, numerals, and especially before the infinitive, is never
so employed in the Pastorals. Τοῦ with the infinitive disappears. The
prepositions, the conjunctions, and especially the particles are quite
differently handled. The lively γὰρ appears oftener in the Epistle to
the Galatians than in all the three Pastorals. The movement of the
Pauline thought indicated by ἄρα and ἄρα οὖν is lacking. Ἁντὶ, ἄχρι,
διὸ, διότι, ἔμπροσθεν, ἕνεκεν, ἔπειτα, ἔτι, ἴδε, ἰδού, μήπως, ὅπως,
οὐκέτι, οὔπω, οὔτε, πάλιν, παρὰ with the accusative, ἐν παντί, πότε,
ποῦ, σύν, ὥσπερ - none of these appear. There is no trace of Paul's
habit of applying different prepositions to the same object in one
sentence, for the purpose of sharper definition. See [Gal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001); [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).

Similar ideas are differently expressed by Paul and in the Pastorals.
Comp. [Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003) and [Co2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#004); [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006) : [Ti1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009) and [Gal
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#018), [Gal
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023); [Rom
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014) : [Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012) and [Co1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028). For Paul's ἐπιθυμεῖν or
ἐπιποθεῖν the Pastorals give ὀρέγεσθαι. For Paul's ἄμωμος, ἄμεμπτος,
ἀνέγκλητος, the Pastorals give ἀνεπίλημπτος (not elsewhere in N.T.). For
ἐπιπλήσσω (not elsewhere in N.T.) Paul has ἐλέγχω though ἐλέγχω occurs
several times in the Pastorals. For ἀμοιβή (not elsewhere in N.T.) Paul
has ἀντιμισθία or ἀνταπόδοσις. Paul uses ὄντως only adverbially (see
[Co1 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025); [Gal
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021)): in the Pastorals it is prefixed
to a substantive, and converted into an adjective by means of an
article, and is used only in this way, a construction unknown to Paul
(see [Ti1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003), [Ti1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005),[Ti1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016); [Ti1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)).

To these should be added expressions in all the three Epistles which
indicate a peculiar mode of thought and of literary expression on the
part of the writer. Such are εὐσεβῶς to live godly; διώκειν δικαιοσύνην
to pursue righteousness; φυλάσσειν τὴν παραθήκην to guard the deposit;
παρακολουθεῖν to follow the teaching; τὸν καλὸν ἀγῶνα ἀγωνίζεσθαι to
fight the good fight. Also designations like ἄνθρωποι κατεφθαρμένοι
corrupt men; ἄνθρωπος θεοῦ man of God; constructions like διαβεβαιοῦσθαι
περὶ τινος to affirm concerning something; and the introduction of
examples by ὧν ἐστίν of whom are.

Many more might be added to these, but these are amply sufficient to
show the wide gulf which separates the vocabulary and style of these
letters from those of Paul.

By way of explaining away these facts we are reminded that these are
private letters; but even in his private letters a man does not so
entirely abjure his literary peculiarities, and the letter to Philemon
exhibits no lack of distinctive Pauline characteristics. It is further
urged that Paul's style had developed, and that, in his advanced age, he
had lost the vivacity once peculiar to him. One is tempted to smile at
the suggestion of a development of style in the easy commonplaces of
these Epistles over the nervous vigor of Romans, the racy incisiveness
of Galatians and 2nd Corinthians, and the majestic richness of
Ephesians. As to a decline on account of age, Paul, on this showing,
must have aged very rapidly. He styles himself "the aged" in [Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009). Colossians was written at the
same time with Philemon, and Philippians and Ephesians shortly before or
after. The Pastorals (assuming Paul's authorship) cannot have been
written more than three or four years later than these; but the Epistles
of the Captivity certainly betray no lack of vigor, and exhibit no signs
of senility; and the differences between these and the Pastorals are far
greater than between the former and Paul's earliest letters, written ten
years before. The production of an old man may indeed exhibit a lack of
energy or a carelessness of style, but an old writer does not abandon
his favorite words or his characteristic turns of expression. After
following Paul for a dozen years through ten Epistles, all marked by the
essential features of his style, one finds it hard to believe that he
should suddenly become a writer of an entirely different type, ignoring
his own characteristic and favorite modes of expression. Surely the
themes treated in the Pastorals would have furnished abundant occasion
for υἱὸς, θεοῦ, ἀπολύτρωσις, υἱοθεσία, δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ, and δικαιόω,
which occurs only twice, and in one of these instances is applied to
Christ.

VI\. As to the character of the teaching, it is possible that the
divergence of the teaching and of the Christian ideal of the Pastorals
from those of the Pauline Epistles may have been somewhat exaggerated.
On a fair construction, the Pastorals may be said to contain the
essentials of the Pauline teaching, expressed or implied. More
exaggerated, however, is the claim of Godet and Findlay, that the
Pastorals represent an advanced and rounded expression of Pauline
teaching, "bringing the doctrines of grace to a rounded fullness and
chastened ripeness of expression that warrants us in seeing in them the
authentic conclusion of the Pauline gospel of salvation in the mind
which first conceived it" (Findlay).

No special pleading can get round the clear difference between the types
of Christianity and of Christian teaching as set forth in the Pastorals
and in the Pauline Epistles; between the modes of presenting the
doctrine of salvation and the relative emphasis on its great factors.

The death and resurrection of Christ are matters of allusion rather than
central truths. As regards resurrection, the Pastorals resemble the
Epistle to the Hebrews. The vital union of the believer with Christ,
which is the essence of Paul's Christian ideal, may possibly be implied,
but is not emphasized, and certainly does not underlie the Pastoral
teaching. The conception of Justification is not sharply defined.
Δικαιοῦν occurs but twice, and in one of the cases is predicated of
Christ ([Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)). The teaching is
predominantly ethical. Its two key-notes are practical piety and sound
doctrine. Ἑυσέβεια piety or godliness plays the part which is born by
πίστις faith in the Paulines. Πίστις does not occupy the commanding and
central position which it does in Paul's teaching. Only in [Ti1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016); [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015), does faith clearly appear as the
means of the subjective appropriation of salvation. In [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005), just where we should expect it,
we do not find faith set sharply over against righteousness by works.
Faith is emphasized as confiding acknowledgment of the truth, and
sometimes as the virtue of fidelity. See [Ti1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012); [Tit
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010). It appears either as one of the
cardinal virtues following in the train of εὐσέβεια, or as the
acknowledgment of the teaching in which εὐσέβεια finds expression.

These Epistles deal much with the character and attributes of God, and
exhibit them in terms which are mostly foreign to Paul, such as God our
Savior. This, however, may have been partly due to the false
representations of contemporary heresies. I cannot but feel that there
is too much truth in the remark of Schenkel, that "the image of Christ
presented in the Pastorals is indeed composed of Pauline formulas, but
is lacking in the Pauline spirit and feeling, in the mystic inwardness,
the religious depth and moral force, that live in the Christ of Paul."
Still, the Pauline conception appears in the emphasis upon the manhood
of Christ ([Ti1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005); [Ti2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)), and the clear implication of his
preexistence ([Ti1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015); [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016); [Ti2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)). In [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) the representation is nearer to
that of John.

VII\. The Writer's Allusions to Himself and His Companions. - Grave
suspicions as to the Pauline authorship are awakened by the writer's
mode of speaking of himself, and to intimate and trusted companions and
disciples like Timothy and Titus. We know how near these two were to
him, and how he confided in them (see [Phi
2:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)). It is strange that in
writing to them he should find it necessary to announce himself formally
as an apostle of Jesus Christ (Comp. Philemon, δέσμιος prisoner), just
as to the Galatians, who had impugned his apostolic authority, or to the
Romans, to whom he was personally a stranger. Such an announcement is
singularly out of place in a private letter, even though official.
Equally strange is his assuring such friends that he is appointed of God
to be a herald of the gospel; that he speaks the truth and does not lie;
that he has served God from his fathers with a pure conscience. One
might doubt his entire confidence in these trusted ministerial helpers
and personal friends, when he feels it incumbent upon him to commend to
them the most elementary and self-evident duties, as abstinence from
youthful lusts. It is singular that he should exhort Timothy to let no
man despise his youth, when Timothy had attended him for at least
thirteen years, and must have been a mature man. And if Paul, before
writing 1st Timothy and Titus, had recently been with them both ([Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003); [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)), and had given them their
commissions by word of mouth, why does he do the same thing so soon
after, especially when he is looking forward to a speedy reunion ([Ti1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014); [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012))? Why does he picture the Cretans
in such detail to Titus, who was in the midst of them, and who must have
known their characteristics quite as well as himself?

VIII\. The Heresies. - Before it can be decisively asserted that the
heresies treated in these Epistles are later than Paul's time, it must
be settled what these heresies were, and this, with our present
knowledge, is impossible. There are almost as many different views as
there are critics. In the Epistles themselves the statements regarding
heresies are general and sweeping, and, taken together, do not point to
any particular system. It would seem that the writer was assailing, not
a particular form of heresy, but a tendency, of which he does not
discuss the details. Indeed, the allusions to heresies appear intended
principally to point the exhortations to hold fast sound teaching and
the instructions concerning church polity, as safeguards against false
teaching and immoral practice. The moral developments of the heresies,
rather than their doctrinal errors, are treated. Their representatives
are wicked men and impostors: they are deceiving and deceived: they are
of corrupt mind, destitute of truth, with their consciences seared: they
lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away by divers lusts:
they are greedy of gain. At the root of the moral errors there seem to
be indicated Gnostic tendencies and Jewish corruptions, and traits akin
to those which appear in the Colossian heresy. All of the writer's
theology is anti-Gnostic. Individual features of Gnosticism can be
recognized, but a consistent reference throughout to Gnosticism cannot
be shown. In any case, it is noticeable how the treatment of heresies
and false teachers differs from that of Paul. The treatment in the
Pastorals is general, sweeping, vague, and mainly denunciatory. No vital
differences between the forms of error and between their teachers are
defined, but all are indiscriminately denounced as concerned with
foolish and ignorant questioning, disputes about words, strifes about
the law, fables, endless genealogies, and profane babblings. This is
quite unlike the controversial method of Paul, who defines what he
assails, demonstrates its unsoundness, and shows the bearing of the
gospel upon it.

IX\. Church Polity. - The church polity of the Pastorals is of a later
date than Paul. Within the circle of the Pauline Epistles there is no
trace of formally constituted church officers. The greeting to Bishops
and Deacons in Philippians is unique, but it does not imply a polity
differing substantially from that exhibited in 1st Corinthians and 1st
Thessalonians. The greeting is to the church first, and the special
mention of Bishops and Deacons by way of appendage is explained by the
fact that the letter was cancel out by the pecuniary contribution of the
Philippian church to Paul, of the collection and sending of which these
functionaries would naturally have charge. The names Bishop and Deacon
designate functions and not official titles. In the formal list, in [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011), of those whom God has set in the
church, neither Bishops, Elders, nor Deacons occur; and yet that Epistle
was written within a short time of the writing of the Philippian letter.
The offices in the Pauline church were charismatic. The warrant of
leadership was a divine, spiritual endowment. Paul recognizes certain
functions as of divine institution; and those functions are assumed in
virtue of a special, divine gift in prophecy, speaking with tongues,
teaching, healing, or helping, as the case may be (see 1 Corinthians
12). There is no recognition of official distinctions, or of formal
appointment to definite offices, in the Pauline Epistles. Apostles,
prophets, teachers, powers, helps, healings, kinds of tongues, do not
represent offices resting on the appointment of the church. The
Pastorals recognize Bishops, Deacons, and Presbyters. The recognition of
three distinct orders is not as sharp and clear as in the Ignatian
Epistles (100-118 a.d.), but the polity is in advance of that of the
Pauline churches as set forth in the Epistles of Paul. The Pastorals
seem to mark a transition point between the earlier republican
simplicity and the later monarchical tendency. If these letters are the
work of Paul before his first imprisonment, their notes of church polity
do not consist with those of his other letters written during that
period. If they were composed by Paul a few years after his first
imprisonment, the period is too early for the change in polity which
they indicate.

In view of all these facts, it seems unlikely that these Epistles are
the work of Paul. The writer was probably a Pauline Christian in the
early part of the second century, who, in view of the doctrinal errors
and moral looseness of his age, desired to emphasize the orthodox
doctrine of the church, to advocate a definite ecclesiastical polity as
a permanent safeguard against error, and to enforce practical rules of
conduct. These counsels and warnings he issued in the name of Paul,
whose letters he evidently knew, whose character he revered, and whose
language he tried to imitate. To this he was, perhaps, moved by the fact
that contemporary heretics, in some cases, laid claim to the authority
of Paul, and in other cases openly repudiated it. It is probable that he
based these letters upon genuine Pauline material - despatches, or
fragments of letters to Timothy and Titus, which had fallen into his
hands. It may be conceded that the letters have a Pauline nucleus. The
writer probably assumed that the addresses of his letters to Timothy and
Titus would attract attention and carry weight, since these teachers
were representatives of churches.

To stigmatize such a proceeding as forgery is to treat the conditions of
that early time from the point of view of our own age. No literary fraud
was contemplated by the writer or ascribed to him. The practice of
issuing a work in the name of some distinguished person was common, and
was recognized as legitimate. A whole class of writings, chiefly
apocalyptical and known as pseudepigraphic or pseudonymous, appeared in
the times immediately preceding and succeeding the beginning of the
Christian era. Such were the Book of Enoch, the Sibylline Oracles, and
the Psalter of Solomon. Precedent was furnished by the Old Testament
writings. The Psalmists adopted the names of David, Asaph, and the Sons
of Korah. Neither Samuel nor Ruth nor Esther were supposed to be the
authors of the books which bore their names. Koheleth, in the Book of
Ecclesiastes, impersonates Solomon, and the Proverbs and the Canticles
both bear his name.

The church of the second century thankfully accepted these three
Epistles, and, inferior though they were in spiritual power and richness
of idea to the genuine Pauline letters or the Epistle to the Hebrews,
incorporated them with these among the New Testament writings. They are
valuable in exhibiting to us certain features of post-Pauline
Christianity. They testify to the energy and purity of the church's
moral impulses as nourished by the religious principles of Christendom.
They show us the causes out of which grew the increased emphasis upon
authority and external regimen. By their strong attestation of the value
of the inheritance from the apostolic age, by their high ethical
character, based on religion and exhibiting the moral consequences of
the Christian faith, by their emphasis upon the practical rather than
the doctrinal edification of the church, upon the significance of the
church, and upon the representation of Christianity by Christian
personality - they justify their canonization.

Lists of Words Found Only in the Pastoral Epistles, and in the Pastoral
Epistles and Not in Paul's Writings.

Pastorals Only

ἀγαθοεργέω

ἀγνεία

ἀγωγή

ἀδηλότης

ἀθλέω

αἰδώς

αἱρετικός

αἰσχροκερδής

ἀκαίρως

ἀκατάγνωστος

ἀκρατής

ἄλλως

ἄμαχος

ἀμοιβή

ἀναζωπυρέω

ἀνάλυσις

ἀνανήφω

ἀναψύχω

ἀνδραποδιστής

ἀνδροφόνος

ἀνεξίκακος

ἀνεπαίσχυντος

ἀνεπίλημπτος

ἀνήμερος

ἀνόσιος

ἀντιδιατίθεμαι

ἀντίθεσις

ἀντίθεσις

ἀντίλυτρον

ἀπαίδευτος

ἀπέραντος

ἀπόβλητος

ἀπόδεκτος

ἀποδοχή

ἀποθησαυρίζω

ἀποτρέπομαι

ἀπρόσιτος

ἄρτιος

ἄσπονδος

ἀστοχέω

αὐθοντέω

αὐτοκατάκριτος

ἀφθορία

ἀφιλάγαθος

ἀψευδής

βαθμός

βδελυκτός

βέλτιον

βλαβερός

γάγγραινα

γενεαλογία

γόης

γραώδης

γυμνασία

γυναικάριον

δειλία

διαβεβαιόομαι

διάβολος, as adj.

διάγω

διαπαρατριβή

διατροφή

διδακτικός

δίλογος

διώκτης

ἐγκρατής

ἑδραίωμα

ἔκγονος

ἔκδηλος

ἐκζήτησις

ἐκστρέφομαι

ἔλαττον, as adv.

ἐλεγμός

ἐνδύνω

ἔντευξις

ἐντρέφομαι

ἐπαγγέλλομαι in sense of professing

ἐπανόρθωσις

ἐπαρκέω

ἐπιδιορθόω

ἐπίορκος

ἐπιπλήσσω

ἐπιστομίζω

ἐπισωρεύω

ἑτεροδιδασκαλέω

εὐμετάδοτος

εὐσεβῶς

ἤρεμος

θεόπνευστος

θεοσέβεια

ἱεροπρεπής

Ἱουδαΐκός

καλοδιδάσκαλος

καταλέγομαι

κατάστημα

καταστολή

καταστρηνιάω

καταφθείρω

καυστηριάζομαι

κενοφωνία

κνήθω

κοινωνικός

κόσμιος

κοσμίως (alt. for κοσμίῳ)

λογομαχέω

λογομαχία

μάμμη

ματαιολογία

μααταιολόγος

μεμβράνα

μετάλημψις

μηδέποτε

μητρολῴης

μονόομαι

νεόφυτος

νεωτερικός

νηφάλιος

νομίμως

νοσέω

ξενοδοχέω

οἰκοδεσποτέω

οἰκουργός

ὁμολογουμένως

ὀργίλος

ὀρθοτομέν

παραθήκη

πάροινος

πατρολῴης

περιούσιος (citn.)

περιπείρω

περιφρονέω

πιστόομαι

πλέγμα

πλήκτης

πορισμός

πραγματία

πραΰπαθία

πρεσβῦτις

πρόγονος

πρόκριμα

πρόσκλισις

ῥητῶς

σεμνότης

σκέπασμα

στόμαχος

στρατολογέω

στυγητός

συνκακοπαθέω

σωτήριος

σωφρονίζ

σωφρονισμός

σωφρόνως

σώφρων

τεκνογονέω

τεκνογονία

τεκνοτροφέω

τυφόομαι ὑγιαίνω, (metaphorical use of the participle as attributive)

ὑδροποτέω

ὐπερπλεονάζω

ὑπόνοια

ὑποτύπωσις

ὑψηλοφρονέω

φελόνης

φιλάγαθος

φίλανδρος

φιλαργυρία

φίλαυτος

φιλήδονος

φιλόθεος

φιλότεκνος

φλύαρος

φρεναπάτης

φροντίζω

χαλκεύς

χρήσιμος

ψευδολόγος

ψευδώνυμος

ὠφέλιμος

Pastorals and Not in Paul

αἰτία

ἀμελέω

ἀνατρέπω

ἄνοια

ἀντιλαμβάνομαι

ἀνυπότακτος

ἀνωφελής

ἀπόλαυσις

ἀποπλανάω

ἀργός

ἀργύρεος

ἀρνέομαι

ἄσπιλος

αὐθάδης

ἀφιλάργυρος

ἀχάριστος

βέβηλος

βίος

βλάσφημος

βραδύνω

βρέφος

βυθίζω

γεωργός

γυμνάζω

δεσπότης

διπλόος

δρόμος

δυνάστης

εἰσφέρω

ἐκτρέπομαι

ἐκφέρω

ἐμπίπτω

ἐμπλέκω

ἐξαρτίζω

ἑξήκοντα

ἐπακολουθέω

ἐπίθεσις

ἐπιλαμβάνομαι

ἐπιμελέομαι

ἐπισκοπή

ἐπίσταμαι

ἐπιτίθημι

ἐπιτιμάω

ἐπιφαίνω

εὐεργεσία

εὐκαίρως

εὐσέβεια

εὐσεβέω

ζήτησις

ζωγρέω

ζωογονέω

ἡδονή

ἡσύχιος

θηρίον

θνήσκω

ἱματισμος

κακοπαθέω

κακοῦργος

καταστροφή

κατηγορία

κῆρυξ

κοσμέω

κοσμικός

κριτής

κτιτής

κτίσμα

λαός (in Paul always in citn.)

λείπω

λέων

λίαν

λοιδορία

λυτρόομαι

μαργαρίτης

μαρτυρία

μάχομαι

μελετάω

μέντοι

μεταλαμβάνω

μήποτε

μιαίνω

μῦθος

νέστης

νίπτω

νομή

νομικός

νομοδιδάσκαλος

νοσφίζομαι

ξύλινος

ὀρέγομαι

ὅσιος

παλινγενεσία

παραδέχομαι

παραιτέομαι

παρακολουθέω

πειθαρχέω

περίεργος

περιέρχομαι

περιίστημι

περιποιέομαι

ποικίλος

πολυτελής

πρεσβυτέριον

πρεσβύτερος

προάγω

πρόδηλος

προδότης

προπετής

προσέρχομαι

προσέχω

προσμένω

πυκνός

σοφίζω

σπαταλάω

στερεός

στεφιανόω

στρατιώτης

σωματικός

σωφροσύνη

τάχειον

ὑβρίζω

ὑγιαίνω

ὐγιής

ὑπομιμνήσκω

ὑπόμνησις

ὕστερος

φιλανθρωπία

φιλάργυρος

φιλόξενος

χαλεπός

χειμών

χείρων

χρυσός

A List of Phrases Which Occur Only in the Pastoral Epistles

Χριστὸς Ιησοῦς ἡ ἐλπὶς ἡμῶν, [Ti1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

πέκνον ἐν πίστει, [Ti1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002)

νόμος κεῖται, [Ti1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)

ἡ ὐγιαίνουσα διδασκαλία, [Ti1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)

τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τῆς δόξης τοῦ μακαρίου θεοῦ [Ti1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#011)

ὁ μακάριος θεὸς [Ti1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#011)

πιστὸς ὁ λόγος, [Ti1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)

πάσης ἀποδοχῆς ἄξιος, [Ti1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)

πίστις καὶ ἀγαθή συνείδησις, [Ti1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)

πρῶτον πάντων [Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

οἱ ἐν ὑπεροχῇ, [Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν ἀληθείας ἐλθεῖν, [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)

καιροῖς ἰδίοις, [Ti1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)

διδάσκαλος ἐθνῶν (of Paul), [Ti1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)

ἐν πίστει καὶ ἀληθείᾳ [Ti1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)

ἐπαίροντες ὁσίους χεῖρας, [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)

χωρὶς ὀργῆς καὶ διαλογισμῶν, [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)

ἔχων ἐν ὑποταγῇ, [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004)

ἐμπιπτεῖν εἰς κρίμα, [Ti1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)

τὸ μυστήριον τῆς πίστεως, [Ti1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009)

οἶκος θεοῦ (of the church), [Ti1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)

στύλος καὶ ἐδραίωμα τῆς ἀληθείας, [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)

ἐδικαιώθη ἐν πνεύματι (of Christ), [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)

ἐν ὑοτέροις καιροῖς, [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)

ἀφίστασθαι τῆς πίστεως, [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)

ἐπαγγελίαν ἔχειν, [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)

νῦν (with an article and adjectively, as ὁ νῦν αἰών; ζωῆς τῆς νῦν), [Ti1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)

ὄντως (with an article and adjectively, as τὰς ὄντως χήρας), [Ti1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)

ἀμοιβὰς ἀποδιδόναι, [Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)

ἔχειν κρίμα, [Ti1 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)

ἐκλεκτοὶ ἄγγελοι, [Ti1 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)

χωρὶς προκρίματος, [Ti1 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)

προέρχεσθαι ὑγιαίνουσι λόγοις, [Ti1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003)

ἡ κατ' εὐσέβειαν διδασκαλία, [Ti1 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003)

ἄνθρωπος θεοῦ, [Ti1 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011)

ἀγωνίζεσθαι τὸν καλὸν ἀγῶνα, [Ti1 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012)

ὁμολγεῖν τὴν καλὴν ὁμολογίαν, [Ti1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012)

μαρτυρεῖν τὴν καλὴν ὁμολογίαν, [Ti1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)

δυνάστης (of God), [Ti1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)

οἱ κυριεύοντες for κύριοι, [Ti1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)

ἔχειν ἀθανασίαν, [Ti1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)

ἀποστόλος κατὰ - , [Ti1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001); [Ti2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001); [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

ἐπαγγελία ζωῆς, [Ti2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

ἀπὸ προγόνων, [Ti2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)

ἐν καθαρᾷ συνειδήσει, [Ti1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009); [Ti2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)

πίστις ἐνῴκησεν, [Ti2 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)

κλῆσις ἁγία, [Ti2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)

πρὸ χρόνων αἰωνίων, [Ti2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009); [Tit
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)

σωτηρία ἡ ἐν Χριστῷ Ἱησοῦ, [Ti2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010)

νομὴν ἔχειν, [Ti2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)

θεμέλιος τοῦ θεοῦ, [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)

ἡ τοῦ διαβόλου παγίς, [Ti2 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026)

τοῦτο γίνωσκε, [Ti2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

διώκειν (in sense of persecute), [Ti2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)

ἱερὰ γράμματα, [Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)

ἑααυτοῖς ἐπισωρεύειν διδασκάλους, [Ti2
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)

κνηθόμενοι τὴν ἀκοήν, [Ti2 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)

ὁ τῆς δικαιοσυ.νης στέφανος, [Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)

τοῖς ἠγαπηκόσι τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν αὐτοῦ, [Ti2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)

παραγίνομαι (in the sense of standing by as a friend), [Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)

κατὰ κοινὴνπίστιν, [Tit 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004)

σεαυτὸν παρέχεσθαι, [Tit 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007)

ὁ ἐξ ἐναντίας, [Tit 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#008)

πᾶσαν πίστιν ἐνδείκνυσθαι ἀγαθήν, [Tit
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010)

τὴν διδασκαλίαν κοσμεῖν, [Tit 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010)

ἡ χάρις τοῦ θεοῦ σωτήριος, [Tit 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011)

κοσμικαὶ ἐπιθυμίαι, [Tit 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012)

ἡ μακαρία ἐλπίς, [Tit 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)

ὁ μέγας θεὸς, [Tit 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)

μάχαι νομικαί, [Tit 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009)

οἱ φιλοῦντες ἡμᾶς ἐνπίστει, [Tit 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#015)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 1](ti1001)

</div>
