[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhl14)  [Next](hhl16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

# XI

# CAPTAIN COOK

IN response to an appeal from the British Admiralty, Captain Cook left
England to enter upon his third voyage in July, 1776, with the purpose
of restoring some natives of the Society Islands to their home;
examining islands of the Pacific for good harbours for future English
use; and then to pass along the northwest coast of America to find, if
possible, a sea passage from the Pacific Ocean to Hudson's or Baffin's
Bay. During the year 1777 he felt his way from island group to island
group. He recognised the close relationship in language and features,
between inhabitants of many of these island worlds.

On January 18, 1778, he discovered Oahu and later Kauai, of the Hawaiian
Islands. He named the group "The Sandwich Islands," in honour of Lord
Sandwich, the patron of the expedition.

This name has never been accepted among the Hawaiians. The home name,
the name used for centuries, could not be supplanted by an English
discoverer. The Hawaiians have always called themselves "Ka poe
Hawaii"--"the Hawaiian people."

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

There are four different sources of information concerning the coming to
and death of Captain Cook in the Hawaiian Islands. Captain King wrote
the account given in "Cook's Voyages."

Ledyard, an American petty officer on one of Captain Cook's ships, wrote
a story published in America.

The surgeon on Captain Cook's boat kept a diary which has recently been
published.

The historian must remember that there were thousands of native
eye-witnesses whose records cannot be overlooked in securing a true
history. The following account is almost entirely from the Hawaiians
only:

Captain Cook came to Waimea, Kauai. He was called by the Hawaiians "*O
Lono*," because they thought he was the god Lono, one of the chief gods
of the ancient Hawaiians.

The ship was seen coming up from the west and going north. Kauai lay
spread out in beauty before Lono, and the first anchor was dropped in
the bay of Waimea, in the month of January, 1778. It was night when the
ship anchored.

A man by the name of Mapua, and others, were out fishing, with their
boats anchored. They saw a great thing coming up, rising high above the
surf, fire burning on top of it. They thought it was something evil and
hurried to the shore, trembling and frightened by this wonderful
apparition. They had fled, leaving all they had used

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

while fishing. When they went up from the beach they told the high chief
Kaeo and the other chiefs about this strange sight.

In the morning they saw the ship standing outside Waimea. When they saw
this marvellous monster, great wonder came to the people, and they were
astonished and afraid. Soon a crowd of people came together, shouting
with fear and con-fused thought until the harbour resounded with noise.
Each one shouted as he saw the ship with masts and the many things, such
as ropes and sails, on them. One said to another, "What is this thing
which has branches?" Another said, "It is a forest of trees." A certain
priest, who was also a chief, said, "This is not an ordinary thing; it
is a *heiau* \[temple\] of the god Lono, having steps going up into the
clear sky, to the altars on the outside" (*i.e.*, to the yards of the
upper masts).

The chiefs sent some men to go out in canoes and see this wonderful
thing. They went close to the ship and saw iron on the outside of the
ship. They were very glad when they saw the amount of iron. They had
known iron before because of iron in sticks washed up on the land. Then
there was little, but at this time they saw very much. They rejoiced and
said, "There are many pieces of *pahoa*" (meaning iron). They called all
iron *pahoa*--a tool for cutting, because there was once a sword among
the old people of the Islands.

They went up on the ship and saw "a number

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of men with white foreheads, shining eyes, skin wrinkled,
square-cornered heads, indistinct words, and fire in their mouths."

A chief and a priest tied the ends of their long malo-like sashes and
held them up in their left hands. "They went before *Kapena Kuke*
(Captain Cook), bent over, squatted down, and offered prayers, repeating
words over and over; then took the hand of Kapena Kuke and knelt down;
then rose up free from any tabu."

Captain Cook gave the priest a knife. For this reason he named his
daughter *Kua-pahoa*, after this knife. This was the first present of
Captain Cook to a Hawaiian.

When they saw the burning of tobacco in the mouth of a man they thought
he belonged to the volcano family. When they saw peculiar and large
"cocoanuts" (probably melons) lying on the deck, they said, "This is the
fruit of a sorceress, or mischief-maker of the ocean, who has been
killed." They saw the skin of a bullock hanging in the front part of the
ship and said, "Another mischief-making sorceress has been killed.
Perhaps these gods have come that all the evil *kupuas* \[monsters\]
might be destroyed."

These messengers returned and told the king and chiefs about the kind of
men they had seen, what they were doing, their manner of speech, and the
death of some of the monsters of the ocean. "We saw the fruit and the
skin hanging on the altar.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There is plenty of iron on that temple and a
large amount is lying on the deck."

When the chiefs heard this report they said, "Truly this is the god
*Lono* with his temple."

The people thought that by the prayer of the priest all troubles of tabu
had been lifted, so they asked the priest if there would be any trouble
if they went on this place of the god. The priest assured them that his
prayer had been without fault and there would be no death in all that
belonged to the gods. There was no interruption of any kind during the
prayer.

Hao was another name for "iron" and also hao meant "theft."

A certain war-chief said, "I will go and *hao* that *hao* treasure, for
my profession is to *hao*" (steal). The chiefs assented. Then he paddled
out to the ship and went on board and took iron and went down. Some one
shot him and killed him. His name was Kapu-puu (The Tabu Hill), The
canoes returned and reported that the chief had been killed by a
*wai-ki* (a rush of smoke like water in a blow-hole).

Some of the chiefs cried out, "Kill this people because they killed
Kapu-puu!" The priest heard the cry and replied, "That thought is not
right. They have not sinned. We have done wrong because we were greedy
after the iron and let Kapu-puu go to steal. I forbade you at first, and
established my law that if any one should steal, he shall

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

suffer the loss of his bones. It is only right that we should be
pleasant to them. Where are you, O Chiefs and People! This is my word to
you!"

That night guns were fired and sky-rockets sent up into the sky, for the
sailors were glad to have found such a fine country. The natives called
the flash from the guns "*Ka huila*" (lightning) and "*Kane-hikili*"
(thunder of the god *Kane*). The natives thought this was war.

Then a high chiefess, Ka-maka-helei, the mother of Kaumu-alii, the last
king of Kauai, said: "Not for war is our god, but we will seek the
pleasure of the god." So she gave her own daughter as a wife for
Lono--Captain Cook. After this there was promiscuous living among the
men of the ship and the people of the land, with the result that the
vile diseases of the white people were quickly scattered over all the
islands.

A boat came to Oahu from Kauai with a chief. The Oahu people asked him,
"What kind of a thing was the ship?" The chief said "it was like a
*heiau* (temple) with steps going up to the altars, masts standing with
branches spread out each side, and a long stick in front like the sharp
nose of a swordfish, openings (portholes) in the side and openings
behind. The men had white heads with corners, clothes like wrinkled
skin, holes in the sides (pockets), sharp-pointed things on their feet,
fire in their mouths, and smoke with the fire like a volcano coming from
their mouths."

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

Kalaniopuu, king of Hawaii, was at Koolau, Maui, fighting with the
people of Kahekili, king of Maui. Moho, a messenger, told Kalaniopuu and
the chiefs the news about this strange ship. They said, "This is Lono
from Kahiki."

They asked about the language. Moho, putting his hand in his malo, drew
out a piece of a broken calabash and held it, out like the foreigners,
saying: "A hikapalale, hikapalale, hioluio, oalaki, walawalaki, waiki,
poha, aloha kahiki, aloha haehae, aloha ka wahine, aloha ke keiki, aloha
ka hale." Of course, this was a jumbled mass of words or sounds with but
very little meaning.

The natives relate how, with veneration, they received the white man.
They robed Captain Cook with red native cloth and rich feather cloaks.
They prostrated themselves before him. They placed him in the most
sacred places in their temples. When he despoiled a temple of its
woodwork and carried off idols for firewood to use upon his ships, the
natives made no protest. They supposed that Lono had a right to his own.
But afterward, when death proved that Captain Cook was "a man and no
god," the feeling of resentment was exceedingly deep and bitter. This
was the standpoint from which the Hawaiians welcomed their discoverers.

On the other hand, when Captain Cook saw the islands in 1778, he was
impressed with the friendly spirit of the people, and with their hearty
willingness

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to give aid in any direction. There was also an appearance of manliness
and dignity about the high chiefs. There was such respect and ready
service on the part of the people--there were such prostrations before
the kings of the various islands that Captain Cook accepted the
"worship" offered him as the proper respect due to the representative of
Great Britain. He was glad to receive a welcome that freed him from much
anxiety. He was thankful that the chiefs accepted his superiority. He
could easily procure the supplies needed for his ships. He could
prosecute his investigations concerning harbours and resources without
danger to himself or to his men.

After securing such supplies as he needed, in February, 1778, he sailed
for North America. Here he spent the summer and fall, exploring the
coast from San Francisco to Alaska. He consulted the Russians who were
fur-hunting in this region. He became satisfied that there was no
northwest channel across North America, to either Hudson's or Baffin's
Bay. He made a chart of the coast. The winter came on suddenly and
severely. He fled to the "Sandwich Islands," and in November, 1778,
sighted the island of Maui, or, as Captain Cook phonetically spelled it,
"Mowee." Soon he discovered the large island Hawaii, or "Owhyhee." He
was surprised to see the summits of the mountains covered with snow. As
he drew near the channel between Maui and Hawaii, Ka-meha-meha

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

with several of his friends went on board one of the ships and passed
the night. He was at that time forty-three years of age.

Then for eleven days Captain Cook sailed in the channel between Maui and
Hawaii. On the second day of December he anchored near Kohala, the
northern point of the island Hawaii.

Captain Cook purchased pigs for a piece of iron or barrel hoop, to make
axes or knives or fish-hooks. A pig one fathom long would get a piece of
iron. A longer pig would get a knife for a chief. If a common man
received anything, the chief would take it. If it was concealed and
discovered the man was killed.

They brought offerings--pigs, taro, sweet potatoes, bananas, chickens,
and all such things as pleased Captain Cook.

Lono went to the western bay Ke-ala-ke-kua and the priest took him into
the temple, thinking he was their god. There they gave him a place upon
the platform with the images of the gods--the place where sacrifices
were laid. The priest stepped back after putting on Captain Cook the
*oloa* (the small white tapa thrown over the god while prayer was being
recited) and the red cloak *laaena*, as was the custom with the gods.
Then he offered prayer thus:

"O Lono! your different bodies in the heavens, long cloud, short cloud,
bending cloud, spread-out cloud in the sky, from Uliuli, from Melemele,
from

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kahiki, from Ulunui, from Haehae, from
Anaokuululu, from Hakalanai, from the land opened up by Lono in the
lower sky, in the upper sky, in the shaking bottom of the ocean, the
lower land, the land without hills.

"O Ku! O Lono! O Kane! O Kanaloa! the gods from above and from beneath,
gods from most distant places! Here are the sacrifices, the offerings,
the living things from the chief, from the family, hanging on the
shining cloud and the floating land! *Arama* (amen); *ma noa*" (the tabu
is lifted).

Several weeks passed by. Trivial troubles arose. The natives learned to
steal some things from the supposed "heavenly" visitors. The harmony
between the sailors and the Hawaiians was disturbed.

In February, 1779, Lono went on his ship and sailed as far as Kawaihae.
He saw that one of his masts was rotten, so he went back to make
repairs, and anchored again at Ke-ala-ke-kua. When the natives saw the
ships returning they went out again, but not as before. They had changed
their view, saying: "These are not gods; they are only men." Some,
however, persisted in believing that these were gods. Some of the men
said, "They cry out if they are hurt, like any man." Some of them
thought they would test Lono, so went up on the ship and took iron. The
sailors saw them and shot at them. Then the natives began to fight. The
sailors grabbed the canoe of

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the chief Polea, an *aikane* (close friend) of the king.

He opposed their taking his boat and pushed them off. One of them ran up
with a club and struck Polea and knocked him down. The natives saw this
and leaped upon the sailors. Polea rose up and stopped the fighting.
Because he was afraid Lono would kill him he stopped the quarrel.

After this he no longer believed that Lono was a god. He was angry, and
thought he would secretly take one of the ship's boats, break it all to
pieces for the iron in it, and also because he wanted revenge for the
blow which knocked him down. This theft of a boat was the cause of the
quarrel with, and death of, Captain Cook.

Captain Cook and his people woke up in the morning and saw that his boat
was gone. They were troubled, and Captain Cook went to ask the king
about the boat. The king said, "I do not know anything about it. Perhaps
some native has stolen it and taken it to some other place." Captain
Cook returned to the ship and consulted with his officers. They decided
they had better get the king, take him on the ship, and hold him until
the boat should be returned, and then set him free. Officers and men
took guns and swords and prepared to go ashore and capture the king.

Captain Cook tried to persuade the king to go to the ship with him. The
king was held back by

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

his chiefs. They were suspicious, but the king could not readily give up
his confidence.

Meanwhile, a chief living across the bay saw Captain Cook going ashore.
He and another chief launched a double canoe and sailed quickly across.

Sailors saw these men in red cloaks, fired upon them from the ships and
killed one of them. The other hurried his boatmen and escaped to the
king's house. Captain Cook had issued an order forbidding canoes to come
near the ships. When the chief saw the king by the side of Captain Cook
he cried out: "O Kalani! O the sea is not right--Kalimu has been killed!
Return to the house!" He told how the sailors had fired upon his friend
and himself.

Kalola, wife of Kalaniopuu, heard the death-word, and that the chief had
been killed by the gun of the foreigners, so she ran out of the woman's
house, put her hand on the king's shoulder and said, "O Kalani, let us
go back."

The king turned, thinking he would go back, but Captain Cook seized his
hands. A chief thrust his spear between them, and the king and some of
his chiefs went back to the house.

Then the battle commenced. When Lono (Captain Cook) saw the spear pushed
between the king and himself he caught his sword and struck that chief
on the head, but the sword slipped and cut the cheek. Then that chief
struck Lono with his spear and knocked him down on the lava beach.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Lono cried out because of the hurt. The chief thought, "This is a man,
and not a god, and there is no wrong." So he killed Lono (Captain Cook).
Four other foreigners also were killed. Many daggers and spears were
used in killing Captain Cook.

When the officers and men saw that Captain Cook and some others had been
killed, they ran down, got on the boat, fired guns and killed many of
the natives. Some natives skilled in the use of sling-stones threw
stones against the boat. When the sailors saw that Captain Cook was
dead, they fired guns from the ship. The natives held up mats as
shields, but found they were no protection against the bullets.

The king offered the body of Captain Cook as a sacrifice. This sacrifice
meant that the body was placed on an altar with prayers as a gift to the
gods because the chief and his kingdom had been saved by the gods. When
the ceremonies of the sacrifice were over, they cleaned off the flesh
from the bones of Lono and preserved them. A priest kindly returned a
part of the body to the foreigners to be taken on their ship. Some of
the bones were kept by the priests and worshipped.

Eight days after the death of Lono at Ka-awaloa the natives again met
those who remained on the ship.

Monday, February 23, 1779, the ship went to Kauai. On the 29th of that
month they secured water and purchased food. Because they wanted

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the yams of Niihau, they sailed over to that island and purchased yams,
sweet potatoes, and pigs, and on March 15th sailed out into the mist of
the ocean and were completely lost to sight.

This is the end of Captain Cook's voyage along the coasts of these
islands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Ivory of Oahu](hhl16)
