[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osgp05)  [Next](osgp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2WGY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid*, by C. Staniland
Wake, \[1882\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE RELIGIOUS THEORY.

THE Great Pyramid was intended to be something more than the tomb or
even a temple in honour of Cheops. The astronomical character of many of
the chief features of the structure confirms this view, and it is
supported by the arguments used by Mr. Proctor to establish its
connection with astrological observances. The pyramid had, indeed, a
religious character of its own, which probably supplied the primary
object of its erection. It is true that Mr. Proctor remarks that it is
not "easy to understand why any building at all, except an astronomical
observatory, should be placed so that its four faces front the four
cardinal points." He says, however, that "a temple devoted to
Sun-worship, and generally to the heavenly bodies, might be built in
that way. For it is to be noticed that the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

peculiar figure and position of the Pyramids would bring about the
following relations: when the sun rose and set south of the east and
west points, or (speaking generally) between the autumn and the spring
equinoxes, the rays of the rising and setting sun illuminated the
southern face of the pyramid; whereas, during the rest of the year, that
is, during the six months between the spring and autumn equinoxes, the
rays of the rising and setting sun illuminated the northern face. Again,
all the year round the sun's rays passed from the eastern to the western
face at solar noon. And, lastly, during seven months and a half of each
year, namely, for three months and three quarters before and after
Midsummer, the noon rays of the sun fell on all four faces of the
pyramid, or, according to a Peruvian expression (so Smyth avers) the sun
shone on the pyramid 'with all his rays.'" Such conditions as these
might have been regarded as very suitable for a temple devoted to
Sun-worship. And yet Mr. Proctor declares that the temple theory is as
untenable as the tomb theory, on the ground, first, that the pyramid
form is unsuited for all "the ordinary requirements of a temple of
worship," and, secondly, that it gives no explanation

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the fact that each king built a pyramid, and each king only
one. <span id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_47)

These objections would, however, present no difficulty if the temple
theory were restricted to the Great Pyramid, the other pyramids being
probably intended only for the tombs of their founders. That the
erection of the former had a distinctly religious purpose can hardly be
denied. What that purpose was may be gathered from the statements of
certain Arab writers. Thus Soyuti mentions from earlier writers that the
Sabæans made pilgrimages to the Pyramids and had opened one of them, and
that they sacrificed hens and black calves, and burnt incense. He says
also that Seth took possession of Egypt, and his son was Hermes, and
that he introduced Sabaism, which inculcated, among other things, a
pilgrimage to the Pyramids. He adds that, according to some accounts,
one pyramid is the tomb of Seth. <span id="fr_48"></span>[†](#fn_48) An
earlier writer, Eddin Ahmed Ben Yahya, does not refer to Seth, but he
says that each pyramid was consecrated to a star, and that the Sabæans
performed religious pilgrimages to the greatest

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

and also visited the others. He observes that every pyramid presents the
form of a lantern surrounded by equilateral sides, which indicates that
it was sacred to a star. <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49) Abd
Allatif, who wrote nearly 200 years earlier, also refers to the
pilgrimages made to the Pyramids, and he affirms that he had read in
ancient Sabæan books that one pyramid was the tomb of Agathodæmon, and
the other of Hermes. <span id="fr_50"></span>[†](#fn_50) Agathodæmon was
none other than Seth, and according to some writers Hermes was his
son. <span id="fr_51"></span>[‡](#fn_51)

A modern author, Mr. Palgrave, states that frequent enquiries were made
of him in Oman regarding the Egyptian Pyramids, a memory, he thinks,
derived from old Sabæan times. <span id="fr_52"></span>[§](#fn_52) This
traveller remarks elsewhere that the Arab writers give us the following
information as to the ancient Sabæans. "That they worshipped the seven
planets, and pre-eminently the sun; that they observed a fast of thirty
days, set apart in the early spring, before the vernal

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

equinox; that their chief annual feast coincided with the entrance of
the sun in the sign of Aries (a fact which supposes a solar, not lunar,
computation of the months); that they had a special veneration for the
two great pyramids of Egypt, believed by them to be the sepulchres of
Seth and Idrus (Enoch); that their stated prayers recurred seven times a
day . . . . and that during their devotions they turned their faces
towards the north; lastly, that they possessed a book, or code of laws,
ascribed to Seth himself (in what language, unhappily, it is not said),
and believed to contain the dogmas and institutions of that primeval
patriarch." Mr. Palgrave adds, that two points of great importance seem
to have distinguished the ancient form of Sabaism: one, the absence of
image-idols and idolatry; the other, the absence of any priestly
caste <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_53) These points are, indeed, of
great importance, and if it can be shown that the two great pyramids had
really anything to do with Sabaism, it is not surprising that their
founders were regarded with hatred by the Egyptian priests. The builder
of the Third Pyramid, Mycerinus, was not so regarded, however, and

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

perhaps, therefore, he may be referred to in the legend which spoke of
one of the pyramids of Ghizeh as the tomb of Hermes. This personage was
not only the son of Seth, but probably also the same as Thoth, the
Egyptian god of Wisdom; and to the reign of Mycerinus was assigned the
discovery of a mystical text, which formed the most profound passage in
the Book of the Dead. M. Lenormant states that numerous legends of the
discoveries of books of a supernatural and divine origin were current
among the Egyptians, who generally placed them under the earliest
dynasties. <span id="fr_54"></span>[\*](#fn_54)

We have already had occasion to notice that the city of Memphis, near
which the Pyramids were situated, was founded by Menes, who established
a political and military monarchy on the ruins of the priestly
authority. Prior to his reign, the priests had exercised supreme power,
the chief seat of which was in the middle part of Upper Egypt. 'In this
region, says Lenormant, was situate Abydos, the principal centre of the.
worship of Osiris, whose tomb was there shown, the only worship which
was common to all Egypt; Thebes, which boasted itself to have

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

been the birth-place of the same god; Tentyris, the favorite abode of
the goddess Hathor; Deb or Edfou, where Har-m-akhouti, with his son
Har-houd, are supposed to have assembled the army with which they
combatted Set or Typhon. <span id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55) Set or
Seth is thus brought into connection with the Egyptian mythology, and he
occupies a remarkable position in relation to it. "Seth was at one
time," says Bunsen, "a great god, universally adored throughout Egypt,
who conferred on the sovereigns of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
Dynasties the symbols of life and power. The most glorious monarch of
the latter dynasty Sethos, derives his name from this deity. But,
subsequently, in the course of the Twentieth Dynasty, he is suddenly
treated as an evil demon, inasmuch that his effigies and name are
obliterated on all the monuments and inscriptions that could be
reached." The hatred of the Osirian priests to the worship of Seth,
which this conduct betokens, cannot, however, have had a sudden rise. It
must have been merely the culmination of a feeling similar to that which
led to the detestation in which the memory of Cheops and Cephren was
held. It was, indeed, probably

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

connected with the hatred of the Pyramid builders, if we may judge from
the position occupied by the god Seth. According to Bunsen, this deity
was the primitive god of Northern Egypt and Palestine, and appears as
the background of religious consciousness among the Semites. Moreover,
his genealogy as "the Seth of Genesis, the father of Enoch (the man)
must be considered as originally running parallel with that derived from
the Elohim, Adam's father." <span id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_56) Seth,
therefore, is not only the primitive god of the Semites, but also their
semi-divine ancestor. We have here, probably, the explanation of a fact
mentioned by Herodotus, who, after speaking of the aversion of the
Egyptians for the memory of Cheops and Cephren, says, "they will not
even mention their names, and for this reason they call the Pyramids
after the Shepherd Philitis, who at the time of their erection used to
feed his flocks near the spot." The occupation of a keeper of sheep was
an abomination to the Egyptians, and if a shepherd prince dwelt near
Memphis there must have been some very powerful reason for his doing so.
That there was a religious reason we may infer from the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

stories related to Herodotus by the priests, who told him that the
temples were closed during the reigns of Cheops and Cephren. M.
Lenormant has, indeed, shown that this statement cannot have been
correct, as an inscription preserved in the Museum at Boulak enumerates
the temples built by Cheops, the pious foundations made by him, and his
splendid offerings to the gods, <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57)
thus confirming the opinion expressed by Dr. Ebers. Nevertheless, there
may have been some ground for the accusation of impiety made against
Cheops, and it was probably his recognition of the supremacy of a god
foreign to the strictly Egyptian Pantheon, which might be quite
consistent with his continuing to show respect for the native gods. Who
the strange deity was may probably be determined by the nationality of
Philitis, whose name is mentioned in connection with the Pyramids,
although they may have been erected long before his time; unless indeed
the name stands for a people and not merely an individual. M.
Büdenger <span id="fr_58"></span>[†](#fn_58) ingeniously identifies
Philitis with Salatis, the first Hyksos king, and Prof. Duncker states
that the name of the former

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

points to a Semitic tribe for the Hyksos, "and one immediately bordering
on Egypt on the Syrian coast—the Philistines (Pelischtim), from whom the
whole Syrian coast was called by the Greeks Palæstina." <span
id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59) The first Hyksos king fixed his residence
at Memphis in the neighbourhood of the great pyramids, which had perhaps
already become connected with the shepherd princes, and among a people
who were probably prepared to receive him as a friend rather than as an
enemy. M. Lenormant remarks that the Delta, and especially its eastern
part, "appeared to have been inhabited from the highest antiquity by a
population somewhat different from that of the rest of Egypt—of a more
Asiatic character, and probably mixed in a certain measure with Semitic
element." That region, before even the foundation of Memphis by Menes,
was for Egypt "the cradle of he worship of more important deities, who
took a leading place in the national Pantheon, but in their origin were
connected with the cycle of Euphratico-Syrian divinities." One of those
deities vas Hathor; the other was Set, "the special god of the northern
country—in opposition to Horus, the god of the southern

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

country—of whose name the Soutekh of the Shepherds and of the Kheta is
only an enlarged form; whom we find adored under the name of Schita in
several parts of Assyria; and whom it is perhaps necessary to compare
with the antediluvian patriarch Scheth (Seth) in the narrative of
Genesis." <span id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_60) We see thus that not only
was Set (Seth) by his name Soutekh the rational god of the Hyksos, but
he was also the chief deity of the semi-Semitic population of the
Memphitic region in which that shepherd race established itself. It is
not surprising, therefore, that the hatred of the native Egyptians for
the Hyksos was afterwards entertained in an intensified form towards the
god whom they adored, although previously, as the special deity of Lower
Egypt, he had been recognised as the Agathodæmon.

The Hyksos and their congeners of Northern Egypt, however, were probably
more closely connected with the ancient Cushite race, referred to by
Arab tradition as the people of Ad, than with the pure Semitic stock.
The Arabian branch of that race was thought to have become extinct
before the establishment of the later Arabs in the peninsula. Remnants
of it, however, are still

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

to be found in the territory between the Hedjaz and Yemen, and also in
the Hadramaut and Mahrah, between Yemen and Oman, where a large number
of independent tribes exist. <span id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_61) The
religion of these tribes was down to a comparatively recent period
star-worship, and their ancestors, the people of Ad, were adherents of
the Sabaism which was so widely spread in the ancient world. To this
cult the Hyksos belonged, as shown by the identification of their god
Soutekh with the Seth of the Sabæans. The race connection between the
population of Lower Egypt and the Hyksos, with the position occupied by
Seth as the national deity, agree with the fact of Sabaism being the
religion also of the northern Egyptians. Dr. Tiele, remarks that
"star-worship was not unknown to the Semites, but the highly-developed
astrology and magic which we find among the Babylonians and Assyrians
were derived from the Akkadians," to whom the early population of
Arabia, known as the people of Ad, were related. That early race,
moreover, furnished the Babylonians with the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

models on which their temples were built, "namely, in the form of
terraced pyramids, such as were erected also in Elam, and among the
oldest inhabitants of Media and India, to which class belonged the
famous Tower of Babel." <span id="fr_62"></span>[\*](#fn_62) The Great
Pyramid of Egypt may well, therefore, have been a monument of
star-worship, dedicated to the god Seth.

Nor is this conclusion, that the Great Pyramid was intimately associated
with the worship of Seth, inconsistent with the fact that it appears to
have been sometimes referred to by the Egyptians as the tomb of
Osiris. <span id="fr_63"></span>[†](#fn_63) This opinion is connected
with the myth of Osiris and Isis in its later form, which introduces
Seth (Typhon) as the great enemy of Osiris. According to Bunsen,
however, this form was not known earlier than the 13th or 14th century
B.C., so that the Great Pyramid would not be spoken of as the tomb of
Osiris before that date. It could not have been thus regarded
originally, as we know that neither Cheops nor Cephren received the name
of Osiris, an honour which was conferred by the Egyptian priests on the
later monarch, Mycerinus, owing

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

to his great benevolence and justice—or, shall we say, his orthodox
religious views. The learned Dupuis expresses the opinion that the
Agathodæmon, or Good Spirit, whom the Sabæans believed to repose under
the pyramid, was in reality Osiris, the benevolent god of Nature. The
Agathodæmon of the early Egyptians was, however Seth, the special deity
of Northern Egypt, and we shall not be wrong in supposing the Great
Pyramid to have been erected by the Sabæans in his honour.

In so doing, we explain perfectly the scientific features which have
been traced in the structure. The worshippers of the heavenly host
would, undoubtedly, in so grand a religious monument as the Great
Pyramid, embody all the astronomical knowledge they possessed, and this
must have been considerable. The Arabian historian, Abulfaraj, as quoted
by Dupuis, <span id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64) says that the religion
of the Chaldeans and of the Sabæans was the same, and that the former
were distinguished by their astronomical observations and studied the
nature of the stars and their secret influences. Nor was this true
merely of the later Chaldeans. Mr. Proctor remarks, that "no one

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

who considers the wonderful accuracy with which, nearly 2,000 years
before the Christian era, the Chaldeans had determined the famous cycle
of the Saros, can doubt that they must have observed the heavenly bodies
for several centuries before they could have achieved such a
success." <span id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65) As to the later
Chaldeans, the Jewish writer Philo observes that they make everything
depend on the movement of the stars, which they regard as the sovereign
arbiters of the order of the world. They limit their homage to the
visible, and do not form any idea of the invisible and intellectual
being; on the contrary, in observing the order of the world, they think
they see in it the divinity itself, which exercises its power by the
movements of the sun, the moon, the planets, and the fixed stars, by the
successive revolutions of the seasons, and by the combined action of the
heaven and the earth. <span id="fr_66"></span>[†](#fn_66)

A religion such as this could have no fitter monument than a vast
astronomical observatory, which the Great Pyramid probably was, until at
least it was completed on the death of its royal founder. The building
was a worthy

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

symbol of the remarkable system of religion which, according to ancient
writers, once pervaded nearly the whole world, and was said to have been
founded by Seth, the son of Adam. According to Philo, Abraham was
educated in its principles, which he held, until having opened his eyes,
he saw the light and recognised in the Universe a sovereign guide, whom
he had not before suspected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[56:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_47) "Myths and Marvels of
Astronomy," p. 89.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[56:†](osgp06.htm#fr_48) See Vyse, "Operations,"
etc., Vol. ii. p. 358.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[57:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_49) Vyse, "Operations,"
Vol. ii. p. 349. According to the Platonists, a pyramid is the *figure*
of fire.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[57:†](osgp06.htm#fr_50) Vyse, vol. ii., p. 342.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[57:‡](osgp06.htm#fr_51) See Appendix I. for
various ancient references to Seth and Hermes, as give by Dr. Sprenger.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[57:§](osgp06.htm#fr_52) Vol. ii. p. 264.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[58:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_53) Vyse, vol. ii. p. 258.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[59:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_54) "Histoire Ancienne de
l’Orient," 9th edition, Tom. ii. p. 74.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[60:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_55) Tom. ii. p. 55.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[61:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_56) God in History, Vol.
i., pp. 233-4.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[62:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_57) Tom. ii., p. 72.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[62:†](osgp06.htm#fr_58) Quoted in Duncker's
"History of Antiquity." Vol. i. p. 98 *n*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[63:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_59) Ducker, Vol. i. p.
127.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[64:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_60) Histoire Ancienne de
l’Orient, Tom. ii. p. 147.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[65:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_61) M. Vivien de
Saint-Martin, in his "Nouveau Dictionnaire de Geographie
Universelle,"—art. *Arabie*. And see the "Preliminary Discourse," in
Sale's "Koran," as to the tribe of Ad, and other early peoples of
Arabia.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[66:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_62) "Outlines of the
History of Religion" (Eng. Trans.), p. 75.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[66:†](osgp06.htm#fr_63) Dupuis, "L’Origine de
tous les Cultes," Tom. i. p. 424.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[67:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_64) Tom, i. p. 7.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[68:\*](osgp06.htm#fr_65) "Myths and Marvels of
Astronomy," p. 73.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[68:†](osgp06.htm#fr_66) Treatise on Abraham,
Sec. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Seth And Serpent Worship](osgp07)
