[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osgp02)  [Next](osgp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2WGY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid*, by C. Staniland
Wake, \[1882\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

##### THE

#### ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE

###### OF

# THE GREAT PYRAMID

### CHAPTER I

#### THE ASTRONOMICAL THEORY

THE GREEKS of the time of Alexander the Great were so impressed with the
magnitude or splendour of certain edifices, that they spoke of them as
the seven wonders of the world. Among these, the first place was given
to the Pyramids of Egypt, and pre-eminently to those of Ghizeh, which
are situate a few miles from Cairo, and in the neighbourhood of ancient
Memphis. The Pyramids of Ghizeh form a group of nine, consisting of
three large ones, known as the Pyramid of Cheops, or the Great Pyramid;
that of Cephren; and that of Mycerinus, which is inferior in size to
either of the others. The six other pyramids of the Ghizeh group are
much smaller,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

and arc supposed to be the tombs of female relatives of the kings who
constructed the larger ones. From the term "Great" applied to the
largest pyramid, it might be thought that it far exceeds in size any of
the others. As a fact, however, the Pyramid of Cephren is not very much
smaller than that of Cheops, which was about 756 feet square at the base
and 480 feet high, as against 707 feet 9 inches the extreme length of
the sides, and 454 the height, of the Second Pyramid. Moreover, the
construction of the two pyramids was, according to Col. Vyse, carried on
upon the same principles. This is true more especially of the general
design and external characters of the buildings, which in their internal
features, however, differ considerably. The position of the chambers,
and the inclination of the passages of the Great Pyramid are
exceptional, and, judging from these peculiarities and from certain
scientific facts supposed to be embodied in it, several modern writers
have affirmed that the design for the Great Pyramid must have been
derived from an inspired source. The originator of this theory was John
Taylor who in 1859, published a book on the subject <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

and as in recent years it has attracted considerable attention, chiefly
through its adoption by the author of "Life and Work at the Great
Pyramid," Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth, the Astronomer Royal of Scotland, and
as the scientific facts on which it is based are admittedly true, it is
necessary to consider the theory.

In the first place, the Great Pyramid is said to embody in its form and
proportions certain facts as to the size and shape of the earth. Thus,
John Taylor says that the builders of the Great Pyramid "imagined the
earth to be a sphere, and as they knew that the radius of a circle must
bear a certain proportion to its circumference, they built a four-sided
pyramid of such a height in proportion to its base that its
perpendicular would be the radius of a sphere equal to the perimeter of
the base." This shape is supposed to have reference to an important
astronomical fact, seeing that "the vertical height of the Great Pyramid
multiplied by 10 to the 9th power (10<sup>9</sup>) tells the mean
distance of the sun from the earth—that is, one thousand million times
the pyramid's height, or 91,840,000 miles." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1) Moreover,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the Great Pyramid is thought to supply a standard of linear measure,
based on the length of the polar axis of the earth. Assuming this length
to be 500,500,000 of our inches, the 500 millionth of that axis
(omitting fractions) will be one inch. Of these inches, 25 or 25.025 of
our inches would form a cubit or longer standard, the ten millionth part
of the semi-axis of the globe in length, which is the measure of the
sacred cubit of the ancient Hebrews. This cubit of 25 earth inches is
contained in each side of the Great Pyramid as many times as there are
days in the year, and the inch itself "is contained separately and
independently in the entire perimeter of the Great Pyramid's base just
one hundred times for each day of the year." The inch is also said to be
the "representative of a year in the reckoning of the passage floor
lines as charts of history, also in the diagonals of the pyramid's base
taken as a measure of the precessional cycle."

The Great Pyramid is found, moreover, to furnish an important weight and
capacity measure

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

having relation to the mean density or specific gravity of the earth.
These earth-measures are said to be reproduced in the Coffer preserved
in the large or so-called King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid, the
internal capacity of which vessel is just four times the measure of an
English *quarter* of wheat. The Great Pyramid was thus, according to the
holders of the inspiration theory, originally designed as a perfect and
complete metrological monument. This conclusion is thought to be
supported by the great astronomical knowledge possessed by the builders,
who were aware, not only of the shape and rotatory motion of the earth,
but also of its distance from the sun. They were able, further, to do
what was found so difficult up to a comparatively recent date—to fix
with precision the position of the four cardinal points, as is shewn by
the fact that the pyramid stands due North, South, East, and West.

The Great Pyramid is thus seen to be an important *astronomical*
monument, and it is no less remarkable in relation to certain
*chronological* facts. It is supposed to perpetuate the great cycle
founded on the precession of the equinoxes. This siderial year is equal
to 25,868

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of our years, and the two diagonals of the pyramid's base taken together
are said to measure just the same number of inches. It is thought,
moreover, that by means of this cycle the date of the erection of the
pyramid can be ascertained. Assuming that the long narrow downward
passage leading from the entrance was directed towards the pole star of
the pyramid builders, astronomers have shown that in the year 2,170 B.C.
the passage pointed to Alpha Draconis, the then pole star, at its lower
culmination, at the same time that the Pleiades, particularly Alcyone,
the centre of the group, were on the same meridian above. This relative
position of Alpha Draconis and Alcyone being an extraordinary one, as it
could not occur again for a whole siderial year, it is thought to mark
the date of the building of the Great Pyramid. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) It should be mentioned, however, that the
date named is not the only possible one. Mr. Richard A. Proctor the
astronomer, after stating that the Pole-star was in the required
position about 3,350 B.C., as well as in 2,170 B.C., says "either of

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

these would correspond with the position of the descending passage in
the Great Pyramid; but Egyptologists tell us there can absolutely be no
doubt that the later epoch is far too late." He adds: If then we regard
the slant passage as intended to bear on the Pole-star at its sub-polar
passage, we get the date of the pyramid assigned as about 3,350 years
B.C., with a probable limit of error of not more than 200 years either
way, and perhaps of only fifty years." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3)

The testimony of Mr. Proctor is important as he has recently performed
very valuable work in pointing out the true astronomical meaning of the
passages and galleries which distinguish the internal structure of the
Great Pyramid from that of other pyramids. We may now accept the view
that the former has been erected with an astronomical purpose, although
its measurements may not have all the significance sometimes assigned to
them.

Mr. Proctor, while admitting the existence of many of the curious
coincidences on which the theory of the inspired origin of the Great

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pyramid is based,
gives an entirely different explanation of them. He declares, indeed,
"that they are mere coincidences, and that they would still remain if
the pyramid had no existence." The fact that they exist, and are in
themselves so singular, shows simply how little value there is in the
argument from mere coincidence. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) In
support of this opinion, Mr. Proctor refers to "the
[multitude](errata.htm#0) of relations, independent of the pyramid,
which have turned up while Pyramidalists have been endeavouring to
connect the pyramid with the solar system." "These coincidences," he
says, "are altogether more curious than any coincidence between the
Pyramid and astronomical numbers: the former are as close and remarkable
as they are real; the latter, which are only imaginary, have only been
established by the process which schoolboys call 'fudging,' and now new
measures have left the work to be done all over again." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[†](#fn_5) The new measures here referred to show that
the base of the pyramid is

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

several feet shorter than had been supposed, and this will necessitate a
change in the pyramid inch and in the length of the cubit on which the
astronomical relations of the Great Pyramid were based.

Mr. Proctor's own explanation of the peculiar features which distinguish
the internal construction of the Great Pyramid from that of the other
pyramids is very ingenious, and probably conclusive: He says, we see "in
all the Egyptian pyramids the evidence of an astronomical plan; and in
the Great Pyramid we find evidence that such a plan was carried out with
great skill, and with an attention to points of detail which shows that,
for some reason or other, the edifice was required to be most carefully
built in a special astronomical position." Moreover, to obtain such
accuracy, it was made to serve, while being built, "the purpose of an
astronomical observatory." To this end, "the builders of the Great
Pyramid used the passages which they made within it to determine the
proper position of each part of it, up to the so-called King's Chamber,
at least, and probably higher." The slant descending passage was
directed to the position of the Pole-star when it was due north and at

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

its lowest, for the purpose of obtaining true orientation. As layer
after layer of the building was placed, this passage was carried towards
the north until it reached the northern face of the Pyramid. Here it was
compelled to terminate and another mode of observing the Pole-star had
to be used. This was effected by making a fresh passage "in such a
direction as to contain the rays from the Pole-star after reflection at
a. horizontal surface, such as that of still water." The reflecting
surface required was obtained by plugging the descending passage and
pouring in water so as to partially fill the angle thus formed, from
which the rays would be reflected up the ascending passage. Mr. Proctor
remarks that thus far the pyramid builders had "been working with
manifest reference to the meridional plane, just as an astronomer of our
own time would; and it looks very much, even from what we have already
seen, as though they had considered this plane for the same reason that
the modern astronomer considers it—viz., because this is the plane in
which all the heavenly bodies culminate, or attain the middle and
highest point of their passage from the eastern to the western horizon."
Mr. Proctor adds that at the point where the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Grand Gallery
commences all doubt ceases. "The astronomical nature of the builder's
purpose becomes here as clear and certain as already the astronomical
nature of their methods had been. For from here upwards the small
ascending passage is changed to one of great height, so as to command a
long vertical space of the heavens, precisely as a modern astronomer
sets his transit circle to sweep the vertical meridian." This Grand
Gallery shows that it was intended for astronomical observations by its
double character, Its walls, taken as wholes, are aslant, but every part
of the them is absolutely vertical, as would be required by an
astronomer if his observations were to be of value. To facilitate these
observations, long slant stone ramps or banks are placed at each side of
the gallery the whole of its length, with holes in them at equal
distances for the purpose of receiving movable seats. Regarded as a kind
of architectural transit instrument, the Great Gallery would, says Mr.
Proctor, "have to be carried to a certain height, and there open out on
the level to which the pyramid had then attained, the sides and top
being carried up until the southernmost end of the gallery was
completed." At that end commences the so-called

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Antechamber, and
the floor of this chamber and of the King's Chamber, then not walled in,
would serve to station a time indicator and the watchers "appointed to
mark the passage of time in some way, and to note also the instants when
the observer or observers in the Great Gallery signalled the beginning
or end of transit across the gallery's field of view." Mr. Proctor
concludes an interesting chapter on this subject by saying, "if a
telescopist of our time will try to plan out a method of determining the
declinations and right ascensions of stars (say for the purpose of
forming a trustworthy star chart or catalogue), without using a
telescope, by using such an observing place as the Great Gallery, he
will see how much might be done, so far as equatorial and zodiacal stars
were concerned; and they are altogether the most important, even now,
and were still more so in the days when the stars in their courses were
supposed to rule the fates of men and nations." In a further article,
Mr. Proctor gives a view of the Pyramid observatory, showing the object
end of the great observing tube. In that article he says, "the
astronomers who observed from the Great Pyramid doubtless made many more
observations off the meridian

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

than on it. . . . They no doubt often used astrolabes and similar
instruments to determine the position of stars, planets, comets, etc.,
when off the meridian, with reference to stars whose places were already
determined by the use of their great meridional instrument. But all
those observations were regulated by, and derived their value from, the
work done in the Great Ascending Gallery. The modern astronomer sees
that this was the only way in which exact observations of the heavenly
bodies all over the star-sphere could possibly have been made; and
seeing the extreme care, the most marvellous pains, which the
astronomers of the Great Pyramid took to secure good meridional work,
the astronomer recognizes in them fellow workers."

Mr. Proctor very properly assumes, however, that the builder of the
Great Pyramid had something more than a scientific purpose in its
erection, something beyond even its use as a tomb. That purpose is to be
gathered from the fact that "the astronomy of the time of Cheops was
essentially astrology, and astrology a most important part of religion."
The Great Pyramid was erected as a place from which the heavenly

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

bodies could be observed, and their movements were observed and studied
that Cheops might know what was to happen, and learn the times and
seasons which were likely to be fortunate or unfortunate for him or his
race. "As an astrological edifice," says Mr. Proctor, "a gigantic
horoscope for him and for him only, we can understand its purport, much
though we may marvel at the vast expenditure of care, labour, and
treasure at which it was erected. Granted full faith in astrology (and
we know there was such faith), it was worth while to build even such a
structure as the Great Pyramid; just as, granted the ideas of Egyptians
about burial, we can understand the erection of so mighty a mass, and
all save its special astronomical character. Of no other theory, I
venture to say, than that which combines these two strange but most
marked characteristics of the Egyptian mind, can this be said."

Mr. Proctor gives a figure, taken from Raphael's "Astrology,"
representing the ordinary horoscope and its relations to "a horizontal,
carefully-oriented square plane surface, such as the top of the pyramid
was, with just such direction lines as would naturally be used on such a
platform";

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and, apart from the reasons assigned by him for the differences in
size <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6) between the Pyramids of Cheops,
and those of Cephren, his brother, and Mycerinus and Asychis, his son
and grandson, Mr. Proctor has conclusively established the astrological
purpose of the Great Pyramid. Elsewhere, he says, "remembering the
mysterious influence which astrologers ascribed to special numbers,
figures, positions, and so forth, the care with which the Great Pyramid
was so proportioned as to indicate particular astronomical and
mathematical relations is at once explained. The four sides of the
square base were carefully placed with reference to the cardinal points,
precisely like the four sides of the ordinary square scheme of nativity.
The eastern side faced the Ascendant, the southern faced the Mid-heaven,
the western faced the Descendant, and the northern faced the Imum Cœli.
Again, we can understand that the architects would have made a circuit
of the base correspond in length with the number of days in the year—a
relation which, according to Prof. P. Smyth, is fulfilled in this
manner, that the four sides contain one hundred times as many

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

pyramid inches as there are days in the year. The pyramid inch again is
itself mystically connected with astronomical relations, for its length
is equal to the five hundred millionth part of the earth's diameter, to
a degree of exactness corresponding well with what we might expect
Chaldean astronomers to attain. . . . It is not \[indeed\] at all
certain that the sacred cubit bore any reference to the earth's
dimensions, but this seems tolerably well made out—that the sacred cubit
was about 25 inches in length, and that the circuit of the pyramid's
base contained a hundred inches for every day of the year. Relations
such as these are precisely what we might expect to find in buildings
having an astrological significance. Similarly, it would correspond well
with the mysticism of astrology that the pyramid should be so
proportioned as to make the height be the radius of a circle whose
circumference would equal the circuit of the pyramid's base. Again, that
long slant tunnel, leading downwards from the pyramid's northern face,
would at once find a meaning in this astrological theory. The slant
tunnel pointed to the pole-star of Cheops's time, when due north below
the true pole of the heavens. This circumstance

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

had no observational utility. It could afford no indication of time,
because a pole-star moves very slowly, and the pole-star of Cheops's day
must have been in view through that tunnel for more than an hour at a
time. But, apart from the mystical significance which an astrologer
would attribute to such a relation, it may be shown that this slant
tunnel is precisely what the astrologer would require in order to get
the horoscope correctly." <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) Mr. Proctor
supports his view as to the astrological object of the pyramid by
reference to the fact that in the account given by Ebn Abd Al Hôkm of
the contents of the Pyramids of Ghizeh, those assigned to the East or
Great Pyramid "relate entirely to astrology and associated
mysteries." <span id="fr_8"></span>[†](#fn_8) The Arab writer, or rather
the earlier historian, Masoudi, whose account he repeats, says, "in the
eastern pyramid were inscribed the heavenly spheres, and figures
representing the stars and planets in the forms in which they were
worshipped. The king also deposited the instruments and the thuribula
with which his forefathers had sacrificed to the stars,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

and their circles; together with the history and chronicles of time
past, of that which is to come, and of every future event which would
take place in Egypt." <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9)

The connection of astrology with the Great Pyramid is thus confirmed by
ancient testimony, but this does not support the notion that the chief
object of its erection was astrological. An early Arab writer, Jafer Ben
Mohammed Balkhi, who was himself an astrologer, says that the pyramids
were built for refuge against an approaching destruction of every
created being, by submersion or by fire, which was foreseen by wise men
previous to the flood. <span id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10) The founder
of the Great Pyramid had undoubtedly a more permanent object in its
erection than its use as a horoscope for the benefit of himself and his
family. Mr. Proctor speaks of the religious observances associated with
astrological observations. These, being made by priests, were religious
in character, and in all probability the priests who made them
"professed a religion differing little from pure Sabaism, or the worship

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

of the heavenly host," of which astrology vas the natural offspring.
Religion has here [a](errata.htm#1) secondary character, however, and it
is quite subsidiary to the astrological purpose with which the pyramid
is supposed to have been erected. The reverse of this would be nearer
the truth, and it will be hereafter shown that whatever may have been
its temporary purpose, its primary object was religious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_0) "The Great Pyramid: Why
was it built? and who built it?"

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_1) Mr. Proctor regards this
fact as a mere coincidence, although he deems it probable that the
smaller unit of measurement used <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> by the
Great Pyramid builders was intended to have a relation to the earth's
diameter, as stated in the text.—"Myths and Marvels of Astronomy" (Ed.
188o), pp. 66, 73.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[6:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_2) I have taken the opinions
of the Pyramidalists from the 9th edition of an ingenious work by Dr.
Seiss, of Philadelphia, entitled "A Miracle in Stone."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_3) *Knowledge* Vol. i. pp.
242-400 This agrees very well with one of the dates given by Diodorus,
but 2,170 B.C. is a preferable date on grounds which will be referred to
*infra*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[8:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_4) They must, however, have
been more than mere coincidences if the builders of the pyramid had the
astronomical knowledge displayed in its perfect orientation and in its
other admitted astronomical features. See *infra*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:†](osgp03.htm#fr_5) See Mr. Petrie's letter to
*The Academy*, Dec. 17, 1881. Mr. Proctor's views are taken from
*Knowledge*, Vol. i. unless otherwise stated.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[15:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_6) The size of each Pyramid
is usually supposed to denote the length of the reign of the Monarch by
whom it was constructed.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[17:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_7) "Myths and Marvels of
Astronomy" (Ed. 1880), p. 101.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[17:†](osgp03.htm#fr_8) Ditto, p. 103.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[18:\*](osgp03.htm#fr_9) See Appendix II.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[18:†](osgp03.htm#fr_10) Vyse, "Operations at
the Pyramids of Gizeh," Vol. p. 319.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Early Egyptian Civilization](osgp04)
