[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a016.md) 
[Next](m12a018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Discontent, heedless attachment to earthly goods,
the absence of tranquillity, might, folly, vanity, and
anxiety,--affected by these sins, O Bhima, thou covetest sovereignty.
Freed from desire, prevailing over joy and grief and attaining to
tranquillity, strive thou to be happy. That peerless monarch who will
govern this unbounded earth, will have but one stomach. Why dost thou
then applaud this course of life? One's desires, O bull of Bharata's
race, are incapable of being filled in a day, or in many months. Desire,
which is incapable of gratification, cannot, indeed, be fitted in course
of one's whole life. Fire, when fed with fuel, blazeth forth; when not
so fed, it is extinguished. Do thou, therefore, extinguish with little
food the fire in thy stomach when it appears. He that is bereft of
wisdom seeks much food for his stomach. Conquer thy stomach first. (Thou
shalt then be able to conquer the Earth). The earth being conquered,
that which is for thy permanent good will then be won by thee. Thou
applaudest desires and enjoyments and prosperity. They, however, that
have renounced all enjoyments and reduced their bodies by penances,
attain to regions of beatitude. The acquisition and preservation of
kingdom is attended with both righteousness and unrighteousness. The
desire for them exists in thee. Free thyself, however, from thy great
burthens, and adopt renunciation. The tiger, for filling one stomach of
his, slaughters many animals. Other animals destitute of strength and
moved by covetousness live upon the tiger's prey. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md) If kings, accepting earthly

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

possessions, practise renunciation, they can never have contentment.
Behold the loss of understanding that is noticeable in them. As a matter
of fact, however, they who subsist on leaves of trees, or use two stones
only or their teeth alone for husking their grain, or live upon water
only or air alone, succeed in conquering hell. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) That king who rules this wide unbounded
earth, and that person who regards gold and pebbles equally, amongst
these two, the latter is said to have attained the object of his life
and not the former. Depending, therefore, upon that which is the eternal
refuge of joy both here and hereafter, cease thou to act and hope with
respect to thy wishes and cease to bear attachment to them. They that
have given up desire and enjoyment have never to grieve. Thou, however,
grievest for enjoyments. <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48.md) Discarding
desire and enjoyment, thou mayst succeed in liberating thyself from
false speech. <span id="fr_49"></span>[3](#fn_49.md) There are two
well-known paths (for us), *viz*., the path of the *Pitris* and the path
of the gods. They that perform sacrifices go by the *Pitri*-path, while
they that are for salvation, go by the god-path. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[4](#fn_50.md) By penances, by *Brahmacharya*, by study
(of the *Vedas*), the great *Rishis*, casting off their bodies,
proceeded to regions that are above the power of Death. Worldly
enjoyments have been styled as bonds, They have also been called Action.
Liberated from those two sins (*viz*., bonds and action), one attains to
the highest end. Mention is made of a verse sung (of old) by Janaka who
was freed from the pairs of opposites, liberated from desire and
enjoyments, and observant of the religion of Moksha. That verse runs
thus: 'My treasures are immense, yet I have nothing! If again the whole
of Mithila were burnt and reduced to ashes, nothing of mine will be
burnt!' As a person on the hill-top looketh down upon men on the plain
below, so he that has got up on the top of the mansion of knowledge,
seeth people grieving for things that do not call for grief. He,
however, that is of foolish understanding, does not see this. He who,
casting his eyes on visible things, really seeth them, is said to have
eyes and understanding. The faculty called understanding is so called
because of the knowledge and comprehension it gives of unknown and
incomprehensible things. He who is acquainted with the words of persons
that are learned, that are of cleansed souls, and that have
[attained](errata.htm#8.md) to a state of Brahma, succeeds in obtaining
great honours. When one seeth creatures of infinite diversity to be all
one and the same and to be but diversified emanations from the same
essence, one is then said to have attained *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[5](#fn_51.md) Those who reach this high

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

state of culture attain to that supreme and blissful end, and not they
who are without knowledge, or they who are of little and narrow souls,
or they who are bereft of understanding, or they who are without
penances. Indeed, everything rests on the (cultivated) understanding!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[30:2](m12a017.htm#fr_46.md) The Bengal tiger acts
as a fisher to both animals and men. When the tiger goes on a fishing
expedition, what it usually does is to catch large fishes from shallow
streams and throw them landwards far from the water's edge. The poor
beast is very often followed, unperceived, by the smaller carnivorous
animals, and sometimes by bands of fishermen. I have seen large fishes
with the claw-marks of the tiger on them exposed for sale in a village
market.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[31:1](m12a017.htm#fr_47.md) The sense seems to be
that unless kings perform such penances they cannot escape hell. Such
penances, however, are impossible for them as long as they are in the
midst of luxuries. To accept wealth and not use it, therefore, is
impracticable.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[31:2](m12a017.htm#fr_48.md) *i.e.*, Thou art not
liberated from desire.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[31:3](m12a017.htm#fr_49.md) The false speech, in
this instance, consists in professing one's self to be really unattached
white enjoying wealth and power, *i.e.*, the hypocritical profession of
renunciation in the midst of luxuries. As already said by Yudhishthira,
such renunciation is impracticable.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[31:4](m12a017.htm#fr_50.md) The path of the
*Pitris* means the course of Vedic rites by which one attains to bliss
hereafter. The path of the gods means the abandonment of religious rites
for contemplation and pious conduct.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[31:5](m12a017.htm#fr_51.md) This truth has been
expressed in various forms of language in various passages of the
*Mahabharata*. The fact is, the unification of infinite variety and its
[identification](errata.htm#9.md) with the <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
Supreme Soul is attainment of Brahma. One, therefore, that has attained
to Brahma ceases to regard himself as separate from the rest of the
universe. Selfishness, the root of sin and injury, disappears from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XVIII](m12a018.md)
