[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a028.md) 
[Next](m12a030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXIX

Vaisampayana said, "The foremost of kings, *viz*., Yudhishthira the son

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

of Dharma, still remaining speechless, Pandu's son Arjuna addressed
Krishna and spoke as follows:

"Arjuna said, 'This scorcher of foes, *viz*., Dharma's son, is burning
with grief on account of his (slaughtered) kinsfolk. Comfort him, O
Madhava I Once more, O Janardana, all of us have fallen into great
danger. It behoveth thee! O mighty-armed one, to dispel his grief.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the high-souled Arjuna, the
lotus-eyed Govinda of unfading glory turned his face towards the king.
Kesava could not by any means be disregarded by Yudhishthira. From the
earliest years Govinda was dearer to Yudhishthira than Arjuna himself.
Taking up the king's hand adorned with sandal-paste and looking like a
column of marble, the mighty-armed Saurin began to speak, gladdening
(the hearts of all who listened to him). His face, adorned with teeth
and eyes that were very beautiful, shone brightly like a full-blown
lotus at sunrise.

"Vasudeva said, "Do not, O tiger among men, indulge in such grief that
emaciates thy body. They who have been slain in this battle will on no
account be got back. Those Kshatriyas, O king, that have fallen in this
great battle, are even, like objects that one acquires in one's dreams
and that vanish when one awakes. All of them were heroes and ornaments
of battle. They were vanquished while rushing with faces towards their
foes. No one amongst them was slain with wounds on the back or while
flying away. All of them, having contended with heroes in great battle
and having cast off their life-breaths then, have, sanctified by
weapons, proceeded to heaven. It behoveth thee not to grieve for them.
Devoted to the duties of Kshatriyas, possessed of courage, perfectly
conversant with the *Vedas* and their branches, all of them have
attained to that blissful end which is obtainable by heroes. It behoveth
thee not to grieve for them after hearing of those high-souled lords of
the earth, of ancient days, that departed from this world. In this
connection is cited the old discourse of Narada before Srinjaya when the
latter was deeply afflicted with grief on account of the death of his
son. (Narada said),--Subject to happiness and misery, myself, thyself
and all creatures, O Srinjaya, shall have to die. What cause then is
there for sorrow. Listen to me as I recite the great blessedness of
(some) ancient king. Hear me with concentrated attention. Thou shalt
then, O king, cast off thy grief. Listening to the story of those
high-souled lords of the earth, abate thy sorrow. O, hear me as I recite
their stories to thee in detail. By listening to the charming and
delightful history of those kings of ancient times, malignant stars may
be propitiated and the period of one's life be increased. We hear, O
Srinjaya, that there was a king of the name of Marutta who was the son
of Avikshit. Even he fell a prey to death. The gods with Indra and
Varuna and Vrihaspati at their head came to sacrifice, called Viswasrij,
performed by that high-souled monarch. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) Challenging Sakra, the chief of the gods,
that king vanquished him in battle. The learned Vrihaspati, from desire
of doing good unto Indra, had refused to officiate at Marutta's
sacrifice. Thereupon Samvarta, the younger brother

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

of Vrihaspati, acceded to the king's request. During the rule of that
king, O best of monarchs, the earth yielded crops without being tilled
and was adorned with diverse kinds of ornaments. In the sacrifice of
that king, the *Viswedevas* sat as courtiers, the *Maruts* acted as
distributors (of food and presents) and the high-souled *Sadhyas* were
also present. In that sacrifice of Marutta, the *Maruts* drank *Soma*.
The sacrificial presents the king made surpassed (in value) those ever
made by the gods, the *Gandharvas*, and men. When even that king, O
Srinjaya, who transcended thee in religious merit, knowledge,
renunciation, and affluence, and who was purer than thy son, felt a prey
to death, do not grieve for thy son. There was another king of the name
of Suhotra the son of Atithi. We hear, O Srinjaya, that even he fell a
prey to death. During his rule, Maghavat showered gold for one whole
year upon his kingdom. Obtaining that king for her lord, the earth
became in reality (and not in name only as before) *Vasumati*. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) The rivers, during the sway of that king,
bore golden tortoises, crabs, alligators, sharks, and porpoises, for the
adorable Indra, O king, had showered these upon them. Beholding those
golden fishes and sharks and tortoises in hundreds and thousands,
Atithi's son became filled with wonder. Collecting that vast wealth of
gold that covered the earth, Suhotra performed a sacrifice at
Kurujangala and gave it away unto the Brahmanas, When that king, O
Srinjaya, who transcended thee in the four attributes of religious
merit, knowledge, renunciation, and affluence, and who was purer than
thy son, felt a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son (that is dead).
Thy son never performed a sacrifice and never made gifts. Knowing this,
pacify thy mind and do not give away to grief. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87.md) We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Vrihadratha
the king of the Angas, fell a prey to death. He gave away I hundred
thousand steeds. A hundred thousand maidens also, adorned with golden
ornaments, he gave away as presents in a sacrifice he performed. A
hundred thousand elephants also of the best breed, he gave away as
presents in another sacrifice performed by him. A hundred millions also
of bulls, adorned with golden chains, with thousands of kine
accompanying them, he gave away as sacrificial presents. While the king
of Anga performed his sacrifice by the hill called Vishnupada, Indra
became intoxicated with the *Soma* he drank, and the Brahmanas with the
presents they received. In the sacrifices, O monarch, numbering by
hundreds, that this king performed of old, the presents he made far
surpassed those ever made by the gods, the *Gandharvas*, and men. No
other man was born, or will ever be born, that gave or will give away so
much wealth as was given away by the king of the Angas in the seven
sacrifices he performed, each of which was characterised by the
consecration of the *Soma*. <span id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88.md) When, O
Srinjaya, this Vrihadratha even, who was thy superior in the four
attributes and who was

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that
is dead. We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Sivi, the son of Usinara, fell a
prey to death. That king swayed the whole earth as one sways the
leathern shield in his hand. Riding on a single car that proved
victorious in every battle, king Sivi caused the whole earth to resound
with the rattle of his wheels and subjugated all monarchs. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) Usinara's son Sivi gave away, in a
sacrifice, all the kine and horses he had, both domestic and wild. The
Creator himself thought that no one amongst the kings of the past or the
future had or would have the ability to bear the burthen, O Srinjaya,
that Usinara's son Sivi, that foremost of kings, that hero who was
possessed of prowess equal to that of Indra himself, bore. Do not,
therefore, grieve or thy son who never performed any sacrifice nor made
any gift. Indeed, O Srinjaya, when Sivi, who was far superior to thee in
the four attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
the high-souled Bharata also, the son of Dushmanta and Sakuntala, who
had a vast and well-filled treasury, fell a prey to death. Devoting
three hundred horses unto the gods on the banks of the Yamuna, twenty on
the banks of the Saraswati, and fourteen on the banks of Ganga, that
king of great energy, in days of old, performed (in this order) a
thousand Horse-sacrifices and a hundred *Rajasuyas*. No one amongst the
kings of the earth can imitate the great deeds of Bharata, even as no
man can, by the might of his arms, soar into the welkin. Erecting
numerous sacrificial altars, he gave away innumerable horses and untold
wealth unto the sage Kanwa. <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md) When
even he, O Srinjaya, who was far superior to thee in the four attributes
and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for
thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that Rama also, the son of
*Dasaratha*, fell a prey to death. He always cherished his subjects as
if they were the sons of his own loins. In his dominions there were no
widows and none that was helpless. Indeed, Rama in governing his kingdom
always acted like his father Dasaratha. The clouds, yielding showers
season ably, caused the crops to grow abundantly. During the period of
his rule, food was always abundant in his kingdom. No death occurred by
drowning or by fire. As long as Rama governed it, there was no fear in
his kingdom of any disease. Every man lived for a thousand years, and
every man was blessed with a thousand children. During the period of
Rama's sway, all men were whole and all men attained the fruition of
their wishes. The very women did not quarrel with one another, what need
then be said of the men? During his rule his subjects were always
devoted to virtue. Contented, crowned with fruition in respect of all
the objects of their desire, fearless, free, and wedded to the vow of
truth, were all the people when Rama governed the kingdom. The trees
always bore flowers and fruit and were subject to no accidents. Every
cow yielded milk filling a *drona* to the brim. Having dwelt, in the
observance of severe penances,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

for four and ten years in the woods, Rama performed ten Horse-sacrifices
of great splendour <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md) and to them the
freest access was given to all. Possessed of youth, of a dark
complexion, with red eyes, he looked like the leader of an elephantine
herd. With aims stretching down to his knees and of handsome face, his
shoulders were like those of a lion and the might of his arms great.
Ascending upon the throne of Ayodhya, he ruled for ten thousand and ten
hundred years. When, he O Srinjaya, who transcended thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
king Bhagiratha also died. In one of the sacrifices of that king,
intoxicated with the *Soma* he had drunk, Indra, the adorable chastiser
of Paka and the chief of the gods, vanquished, by putting forth the
might of his arms, many thousands of *Asuras*. King Bhagiratha, in one
of the sacrifices he performed, gave away a million of maidens adorned
with ornaments of gold. Each of those maidens sat upon a car and unto
each car were attached four steeds. With each car were a hundred
elephants, all of the foremost breed and decked with chains of gold.
Behind each elephant were a thousand steeds, and behind each steed a
thousand kine, and behind each cow a thousand goats and sheep. (The
river-goddess) Ganga, named (from before) Bhagirathi, sat upon the lap
of this king dwelling near (her stream), and from this incident she came
to be called *Urvasi*. <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92.md) The
triple-coursed Ganga had agreed to be the daughter of Bhagiratha of
Ikshvaku's race, that monarch ever engaged in the performance of
sacrifices with presents in profusion unto the Brahmanas. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93.md) When he, O Srinjaya, who transcended thee
in respect of the four principal attributes and who was purer than thy
son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son. We hear, O
Srinjaya, that the high-souled Dilipa also fell a prey to death. The
Brahmanas love to recite his innumerable deeds. In one of his great
sacrifices that king, with heart fully assenting, gave away the entire
earth, abounding with wealth, unto the Brahmanas. In each sacrifice
performed by him, the chief priest received as sacrificial fee a
thousand elephants made of gold. In one of his sacrifices, the stake
(set up for slaughtering the victims) was made of gold and looked
exceedingly beautiful. Discharging the duties assigned to them, the gods
having Sakra for their chief, used to seek the protection of that king.
Upon that golden stake possessed of great effulgence and decked with a
ring, six thousand Gods and *Gandharvas* danced in joy, and Viswavasu
himself, in their midst played on his *Vina* the seven notes according
to the rules that regulate their combinations. Such was the character of
Viswavasu's music that every creature

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (whatever he might be) thought that the great
*Gandharva* was playing to him alone. No other monarch could imitate
this achievement of king Dilipa. The elephants of that king, intoxicated
and adorned with housings of gold, used to lie down on the roads. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md) Those men proceeded to heaven that
succeeded in obtaining a sight even of the high-souled king Dilipa who
was ever truthful in speech and whose bow could bear a hundred foes
equal in energy to a hundred Anantas. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md) These three sounds never ceased in
Dilipa's abode, *viz*., the voice of Vedic recitations, the twang of
bows, and cries of *Let it be given*. When he, O Srinjaya, who
transcended thee in the four principal attributes and who was purer than
thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead.
Yuvanaswa's son Mandhatri also, O Sanjaya, we have heard, fell a prey to
death. The deities named Maruts extracted that child from his sire's
stomach through one of its sides. Sprung from a quantity of clarified
butter that had been sanctified by *mantras* (and that had by mistake
been quaffed by his sire instead of his sire's spouse) Mandhatri was
born in the stomach of the high-souled Yuvanaswa. Possessed of great
prosperity, king Mandhatri conquered the three worlds. Beholding that
child of celestial beauty lying on the lap of his sire, the God asked
one another, 'From whom shall this child obtain suck?' Then Indra
approached him, saying, 'He shall obtain stick even from me!' From this
circumstance, the chief of the deities came to call the child by the
name of *Mandhatri*. <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96.md) From the
nourishment of that high-souled child of Yuvanaswa, the finger of Indra,
placed in his mouth, began to yield a jet of milk. Sucking Indra's
finger, he grew up into a stout youth in a hundred days, In twelve days
he looked like one of twelve years. The whole earth in one day came
under the sway of that high-souled and virtuous and brave king who
resembled Indra himself for prowess in battle. He vanquished king
Angada, Marutta, Asita, Gaya, and Vrihadratha the king of the
Angas. <span id="fr_97"></span>[4](#fn_97.md) When Yuvanaswa's son fought
in battle with Angada, the Gods thought that the firmament was breaking
with the twang of his how. The whole earth from where the Sun rises to
where he sets is said to be the field of Mandhatri. Having performed
Horse-sacrifices and a hundred *Rajasuyas*, he gave unto the Brahmanas
many *Rohita* fishes. Those fishes were each ten *Yojanas* in length and
one in breadth. Those that remained after gratifying the Brahmanas were
divided amongst themselves by the other classes. When he, O Srinjaya,
who transcended thee in respect of the four principal attributes and who
was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son
that is dead. We hear, O Sanjaya, that Yayati, the son of Nahusha, also
fell a prey to death. Having subjugated

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the whole world with its seas, he journeyed through it, decking it with
successive sacrificial altars the intervals between which were measured
by throws of a heavy piece of wood. Indeed, he reached the very shores
of the sea as he proceeded performing great sacrifices (on those altars
along his way). <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) Having performed a
thousand sacrifices and a hundred *Vajapeyas*, he gratified the foremost
of Brahmanas with three mountains of gold. Having slain many *Daityas*
and *Danavas* duly arrayed in battle, Nahusha's son, Yayati, divided the
whole earth (among his children). At last discarding his other sons
headed by Yadu and Drahyu, he installed (his youngest son) Puru on his
throne and then entered the woods accompanied by his wife, When he, O
Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and
who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy
son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that Amvarisha also, the son of
Nabhaga, fell a prey to death. That protector (of the world) and
foremost of kings was regarded by his subjects as the embodiment of
virtue. That monarch, in one of his sacrifices, assigned to the
Brahmanas, for waiting upon them, a million of kings who had themselves
performed thousands of sacrifices each. Men of piety praised Amvarisha,
the son of Nabhaga, saying that such feats had never been achieved
before nor would their like be achieved in the future. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99.md) Those hundreds upon hundreds and thousands
upon thousands of kings (that had at the command of Amvarisha waited at
his sacrifices upon the Brahmanas that came there) became (through
Amvarisha's merits) crowned with the fruits of the Horse-sacrifice, and
followed their lord by the Southern-path (to regions or brightness and
bliss). When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy child that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya,
that Sasavindu also, the son of Chitrasena, felt a prey to death. That
high-souled king had a hundred thousand wives, and million of sorts. All
of them used to wear golden armour and all of them were excellent
bowmen. Each of those princes married a hundred princesses, and each
princess brought a hundred elephants. With each of those elephants were
a hundred cars. With each car were a hundred steeds, all of good breed
and all decked with trappings of gold. With each steed were a hundred
kine, and with each cow were a hundred sheep and goats. This countless
wealth, O monarch, Sasavindu gave away, in a Horse-sacrifice, unto the
Brahmanas. When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy child that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya,
that Gaya also, the son of Amurtarayas, fell a prey to death. For a
hundred years, that king subsisted upon the remains of sacrificial food.
(Pleased with such devotion) Agni desired to give him boons. The boons
solicited by Gaya were, 'Let

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

my wealth be inexhaustible even if I give ceaselessly. Let my regard for
virtue exist for ever. Let my heart ever take pleasure in Truth, through
thy grace, O cater of sacrificial libations.' It hath been heard by us
that king Gaya obtained all those wishes from Agni. On days of the new
moon, on those of the full moon, and on every fourth month, for a
thousand years, Gaya repeatedly performed the Horse-sacrifice. Rising
(at the completion of every sacrifice) he gave away a hundred thousand
kine and hundreds of mules (unto the Brahmanas) during this period. That
bull among men gratified the gods with *Soma*, the Brahmanas with
wealth, the *Pitris* with *Swadha*, and the women with the
accomplishment of all their wishes. In his great Horse-sacrifice, king
Gaya caused a golden ground to be made, measuring a hundred cubits in
length and fifty in breadth, and gave it away as the sacrificial fee.
That foremost of men, *viz*., Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas, gave away as
many kine as there are sand grains, O king, in the river Ganga. When he,
O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and
who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy
son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that Sankriti's son Rantideva
also fell a prey to death. Having undergone the austerest of penances
and adored him with great reverence, he obtained these boons from Sakra,
having solicited them, saying 'Let us have abundant food and numerous
guests. Let not my faith sustain any diminution, and let us not have to
ask anything of any person.' The animals, both domestic and wild,
slaughtered in his sacrifice, used to come to him, *viz*., the
high-souled Rantideva of rigid vows and great fame, of their own accord.
The secretions that flowed from the skins of the animals (slaughtered in
his sacrifices), produced a mighty and celebrated river which to this
day is known by the name of *Charmanwati*. King Rantideva used to make
gifts unto the Brahmanas in an extensive enclosure. When the king said,
'Unto thee I give a hundred *nishkas*! Unto thee I give a hundred,' the
Brahmanas (without accepting what was offered) made a noise (expressive
of refusal). When, however, the king would say, 'I give a thousand
*nishkas*,' the gifts were all accepted. All the vessels and plates, in
Rantideva's palace, for holding food and other articles, all the jugs
and pots, the pans and plates and cups, were of gold. On those nights
during which the guests used to live in Rantideva's abode, twenty
thousand and one hundred kine had to be slaughtered. Yet even on such
occasions, the cooks, decked in ear-rings, used to proclaim (amongst
those that sat down to supper): 'There is abundant soup, take as much as
ye wish; but of flesh we have not as much today as on former occasions.'
When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four principal
attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not
grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that the
high-souled Sagara also fell a prey to death. He was of Ikshvaku's race,
a tiger among men, and of superhuman prowess. Sixty thousand sons used
to walk behind him, like myriads upon myriads of stars waiting upon the
Moon in the cloudless firmament of autumn. His sway extended over the
whole of this earth. <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) He gratified
the gods by performing

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

a thousand Horse-sacrifices. He gave away unto deserving Brahmanas
palatial mansions with columns of gold and (other parts) made entirely
of that precious metal, containing costly beds and bevies of beautiful
ladies with eyes resembling petals of the lotus, and diverse other kinds
of valuable objects. At his command, the Brahmanas divided those gifts
among themselves. Through anger that king caused the earth to be
excavated whereupon she came to have the ocean on her bosom, and for
this, the ocean has come to be called Sagara after his name. When he, O
Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and
who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy
son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that king Prithu also, the son of
Vena, fell a prey to death. The great *Rishis*, assembling together in
the great forest, installed him in the sovereignty of the earth. And
because it was thought that he would advance all mankind, he was, for
that reason, called *Prithu* (the advancer). And because also he
protected people from injuries (*Kshata*), he was, for that reason,
called a *Kshatriya* (protector from injuries). Beholding Prithu the son
of Vena, all the creatures of the earth exclaimed, 'We have been
lovingly attached to him.' From this circumstance of the loving
attachment (to him of all creatures), he came to be called a *Raja* (one
that can inspire attachment). The earth, during his sway, yielded crops
without being tilled, every leaf that the trees had bore honey; and
every cow yielded a jugful of milk. All men were hale and all their
wishes used to be crowned with fruition. They had no fear of any kind.
They used to live, as they pleased, in fields or in (sheltered) houses.
When Prithu desired to go over the sea, the waters became solidified.
The rivers also never swelled up when he had to cross them but remained
perfectly calm. The standard on his car moved freely everywhere (without
being obstructed by any impediment). King Prithu, in one of his grand
Horse-sacrifices, gave away unto the Brahman as one and twenty mountains
of gold, each measuring three *nalwas*. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed
thee in the four principal attributes and who was purer than thy son,
fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. Upon what,
O Srinjaya, dost thou reflect in silence? It seems, O king, that thou
hearest not these words of mine. If thou hast not heard them, then this
discourse of mine has been a fruitless rhapsody, like medicine or diet,
to a person on the point of death.'

"Srinjaya said, 'I am attending, O Narada, to this discourse of thine,
of excellent import and perfumed like a garland of flowers,--this
discourse upon the conduct of high-souled royal sages of meritorious
deeds and great fame, that can certainly dispel grief. Thy discourse, O
great sage, has not been a fruitless rhapsody. I have been freed from
grief at thy very sight. Like one never satiated with drinking nectar, I
am not satiated with thy words. O thou of true sight, if thou, O lord,
be inclined to show thy grace towards this person burning on account of
the death of his son, then that son, through that grace of thine, is
sure to be revived and to mingle once more with me (in this life).

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

"Narada said, 'I will give back to thee that son of thine, named
*Suvarnashthivin*, whom Parvata gave thee and who has been bereft of
life. Of the splendour of gold, that child shall have a thousand
years.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[54:1](m12a029.htm#fr_85.md) This sacrifice is one
in which the performer parts with all his wealth.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[55:1](m12a029.htm#fr_86.md) *Vasumati* means
possessed of wealth (from *Vasu* and the syllable *mat*).

<span id="fn_87"></span>[55:2](m12a029.htm#fr_87.md) The Bengal reading
*chainam* in the first line of 31 is better than the Bombay reading
*chetya*, which, Nilakantha explains, means *chetanavan bhava*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[55:3](m12a029.htm#fr_88.md) These seven sacrifices
were the *Agnishtoma*, the *Atyagnishtoma*, the *Ukthya*, the
*Shodashi*, the *Vajapeya*, the *Atiratra*, and the *Aptoryama*. Each of
these required the consecration of the *Soma*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[56:1](m12a029.htm#fr_89.md) The expression used is
"He caused one umbrella only to be set up." The custom is well-known
that none but kings could cause umbrellas to be held over their heads.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[56:2](m12a029.htm#fr_90.md) Kanwa had brought up
in his retreat Bharata's mother Sakuntala who had been deserted,
immediately after her birth, by her mother, Menaka, Bharata himself was
born in Kanwa's retreat.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[57:1](m12a029.htm#fr_91.md) *Jaruthyan* is
explained by Nilakantha as *Stutyan*. It may also mean
*Triguna-dakshinan*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[57:2](m12a029.htm#fr_92.md) The legend about the
bringing down of Ganga is very beautiful. Ganga is nothing else than the
melted form of Vishnu. For a time she dwelt in the pot (*Kamandalu*) of
Brahman. The ancestors of Bhagiratha having perished through Kapila's
curse, Bhagiratha resolved to rescue their spirits by calling down Ganga
from heaven and causing her sacred waters to roll over the spot where
their ashes lay. He succeeded in carrying out his resolution after
conquering many difficulties. *Urvasi* literally means one who sits on
the lap.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[57:3](m12a029.htm#fr_93.md) *Triple-coursed*,
because Ganga is supposed to have one stream in heaven, one on the
earth, and a third in the nether regions.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[58:1](m12a029.htm#fr_94.md) The sense, I think, is
that such was the profusion of Dilipa's wealth that no care was taken
for keeping gold-decked elephants within guarded enclosures.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[58:2](m12a029.htm#fr_95.md) *Satadhanwan* is
explained by Nilakantha as one whose bow is capable of bearing a hundred
Anantas.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[58:3](m12a029.htm#fr_96.md) Literally, "*Me he
shall suck*."

<span id="fn_97"></span>[58:4](m12a029.htm#fr_97.md) The Burdwan
translators take Asita and Gaya as one person called Asitangaya, and
K.P. Singha takes Anga and Vrihadratha to be two different persons. Of
course, both are wrong.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[59:1](m12a029.htm#fr_98.md) *Samyapat* is
explained as hurling a heavy piece of wood. What it meant here is that
Yayati, having erected an altar, took up and hurled a piece of wood
forward, and upon the place where it fell, erected another altar. In
this way he proceeded till he reached the very sea shore.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[59:2](m12a029.htm#fr_99.md) *Dakshinah* is
explained by [Nilakantha](errata.htm#12.md) as men possessed of *Dakshya*.
It may mean liberal-minded men.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[60:1](m12a029.htm#fr_100.md) Literally, 'there
was but one umbrella opened on the earth in his time.'

<span id="fn_101"></span>[61:1](m12a029.htm#fr_101.md) The word in the
original is *nala*. Nilakantha supposes that it has been so used for the
sake or rhythm, the correct form being *nalwa*, meaning a distance of
four hundred cubits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXX](m12a030.md)
