[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a170) 
[Next](m12a172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXXII

"Bhishma said, 'There, under that banian, for the protection of his
guest, the prince of birds had kindled and kept up a fire with high and
blazing flames. <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_495) On one side of the
fire, the bird slept trustfully. The ungrateful and wicked-souled wretch
prepared to slay his sleeping host. With the aid of that blazing fire he
killed the trustful bird, and having despatched him, became filled with
delight, never thinking there was sin in what he did. Peeling off the
feathers and the down, he roasted the flesh on that fire. Then taking it
up with the gold he had brought, the Brahmana Red quickly from that
spot. The next day, the *Rakshasa* king, Virupaksha, addressing his son,
said, 'Alas, O son, I do not behold Rajadharman, that best of birds,
today. Every morning he repairs to the regions of Brahman for adoring
the Grandsire. While returning, he never goes home without paying me a
visit. These two mornings and two nights have passed away without his
having come to my abode. My mind, therefore, is not in peace. Let my
friend be enquired after. Gautama, who came here, is without Vedic
studies and destitute of Brahmanic splendour. He has found his way to

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

the abode of my friend. I greatly fear, that worst of Brahmanas has
slain Rajadharman. Of evil practices and wicked understanding, I read
him through by the signs he showed. Without compassion, of cruel and
grim visage, and wicked, that vilest of men is like a robber. That
Gautama has gone to the abode of my friend. For this reason, my heart
has become extremely anxious. O son, proceeding hence with great speed
to the abode of Rajadharman, ascertain whether that pure-souled bird is
still alive. Do not tarry.' Thus addressed by his sire, the prince,
accompanied by other *Rakshasas*, proceeded with great speed. Arrived at
the foot of that banian, he saw the remains of Rajadharman. Weeping with
grief, the son of the intelligent king of the *Rakshasas*, ran with
great speed and to the utmost of his power, for seizing Gautama. The
*Rakshasas* had not to go far when they succeeded in catching the
Brahmana and discovering the body of Rajadharman destitute of wings,
bones, and feet. Taking the captive with them, the *Rakshasas* returned
with great speed to Meruvraja, and showed the king the mutilated body of
Rajadharman, and that ungrateful and singing wretch, *viz*., Gautama.
Beholding the remains of his friend the king, with his counsellors and
priest, began to weep aloud. Indeed, loud was the voice of lamentation
that was heard in his abode. The entire city of the *Rakshasa* king,
men, women, and children, became plunged in woe. The king then addressed
his son saying, 'Let this sinful wretch be slain. Let these *Rakshasas*
here feast merrily on his flesh. Of sinful deeds, of sinful habits, of
sinful soul, and inured to sin, this wretch, I think, should be slain by
you.' Thus addressed by the *Rakshasa* king, many *Rakshasas* of
terrible prowess expressed their unwillingness to eat the flesh of that
sinner. Indeed, those wanderers of the night, addressing their king,
said, 'Let this vilest of men be given away to the robbers.' Bending
their heads to their king, they told him so, adding, 'It behoveth thee
not to give us this sinful wretch for our food.' The king said unto
them, 'Let it be so! Let this ungrateful wight be given to the robbers
then without delay.' Thus addressed by him, the *Rakshasas* armed with
lances and battle-axes, hacked that vile wretch into pieces and gave
them away to the robbers. It so happened, however, that the very robbers
refused to eat the flesh of that vile man. Though cannibals, O monarch,
they would not eat an ungrateful person. For one that slays a Brahmana,
for one that drinks alcohol, for one that steals, for one that has
fallen away from a vow, there is expiation, O king. But there is no
expiation for an ungrateful person. That cruel and vile man who injures
a friend and becomes ungrateful, is not eaten by the very cannibals nor
by the worms that feed on carrion.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_495"></span>[377:1](m12a171.htm#fr_496) *Agni* or fire is a
deity that is said to have Vayu (the wind-god) for his charioteer. The
custom, to this day, with all travellers in India is to kindle a large
fire when they have to pass the night in woods and forests or
uninhabited places. Such fires always succeed in scaring off wild
beasts. In fact, even tigers, raging with hunger, do not approach the
place where a blazing fire is kept up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXIII](m12a172)
