[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a011) 
[Next](m12a013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XII

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Arjuna, O chastiser of foes,
Nakula of mighty arms and a broad chest, temperate in speech and
possessed of great wisdom, with face whose colour then resembled that of
copper, looked at the king, that foremost of all righteous persons, and
spoke these words, besieging his brother's heart (with reason).'

"Nakula said, 'The very gods had established their fires in the region
called *Visakha-yupa*. Know, therefore, O king, that the gods themselves
depend upon the fruits of action. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)
The *Pitris*, that support (by rain) the lives of even all disbelievers,
observing the ordinances (of the Creator as declared in the *Vedas*),
are, O king, engaged in action. <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20) Know
them for downright atheists that reject the declaration of the *Vedas*
(which inculcate action). The person that is learned in the *Vedas*, by
following their declarations in all his acts, attains, O Bharata, to the
highest region of heaven by the way of the deities. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

This (domestic mode of life again) has been said by all persons
acquainted with Vedic truths to be superior to all the (other) modes of
life. Knowing this, O king, that the person who in sacrifices gives away
his righteously acquired wealth unto those Brahmanas that are well
conversant with the *Vedas*, and restrains his soul, is, O monarch,
regarded as the true renouncer. He, however, who, disregarding (a life
of domesticity, that is) the source of much happiness, jumps to the next
mode of life,--that renouncer of his own self, <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) O monarch, is a renouncer labouring under
the quality of darkness. That man who is homeless, who roves over the
world (in his mendicant rounds), who has the foot of a tree for his
shelter, who observes the vow of taciturnity, never cooks for himself,
and seeks to restrain all the functions of his senses, is, O Partha, a
renouncer in the observance of the vow of mendicancy. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) That Brahmana who, disregarding wrath and
joy, and especially deceitfulness, always employs his time in the study
of the *Vedas*, is a renouncer in the observance of the vow of
mendicancy. <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) The four different modes
of life were at one time weighed in the balance. The wise have said, O
king, that when domesticity was placed on one scale, it required the
three others to be placed on the other for balancing it. Beholding the
result of this examination by scales, O Partha, and seeing further, O
Bharata, that domesticity alone contained both heaven and pleasure, that
became the way of the great *Rishis* and the refuge of all persons
conversant with the ways of the world. He, therefore, O bull of
Bharata's race, who betakes himself to this mode of life, thinking it to
be his duty and abandoning all desire for fruit, is a real renouncer,
and not that man of clouded understanding who goes to the woods,
abandoning home and its surroundings. A person, again, who under the
hypocritical garb of righteousness, fails to forget his desires (even
while living in the woods), is bound by the grim King of death with his
deadly fetters round the neck. Those acts that are done from vanity, are
said to be unproductive of fruit. Those acts, on the other hand, O
monarch I that are done from a spirit of renunciation, always bear
abundant fruits. <span id="fr_25"></span>[4](#fn_25) Tranquillity,
self-restraint, fortitude, truth, purity, simplicity, sacrifices,
perseverance, and righteousness,--these are always regarded as virtues
recommended by the *Rishis*. In domesticity, it is said, are acts
intended for *Pitris*, gods, guests. In this mode of life alone, O
monarch, are the threefold aims to be attained. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[5](#fn_26) The renouncer that rigidly adheres to this
mode of life, in which one is free to do all acts, has not to encounter
ruin either here or hereafter. The sinless Lord of all creatures, of
righteous soul, created creatures,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

with the intention that they would adore him by sacrifices with profuse
presents. Creepers and trees and deciduous herbs, and animals that are
clean, and clarified butter, were created as ingredients of sacrifice.
For one in the observance of domesticity the performance of sacrifice is
fraught with impediments. For this, that mode of life has been said to
be exceedingly difficult and unattainable. Those persons, therefore, in
the observance of the domestic mode of life, who, possessed of wealth
and corn and animals, do not perform sacrifices, earn, O monarch,
eternal sin. Amongst *Rishis*, there are some that regard the study of
the *Vedas* to be a sacrifice: and some that regard contemplation to be
a great sacrifice which they perform in their minds. The very gods, O
monarch, covet the companionship of a regenerate person like this, who
in consequence of his treading along such a way which consists in the
concentration of the mind, has become equal to *Brahma*. By refusing to
spend in sacrifice the diverse kinds of wealth that thou hast taken from
thy foes, thou art only displaying thy want of faith. I have never seen,
O monarch, a king in the observance of a life of domesticity renouncing
his wealth in any other way except in the *Rajasuya*, the *Astwamedha*,
and other kinds of sacrifice. Like Sakra, the chief of the celestial, O
sire, perform those other sacrifices that are praised by the Brahmanas.
That king, through whose heedlessness the subjects are plunged by
robbers, and who does not offer protection to those whom he is called
upon to govern, is said to be the very embodiment of Kati. If, without
giving away steeds, and kine, and female slaves, and elephants adorned
with trappings, and villages, and populous regions, and fields, and
houses, unto Brahmanas, we retire into the woods with hearts not
harbouring friendly feeling towards kinsmen, even we shall be, O
monarch, such Kalis of the kingly order. Those members of the kingly
order that do not practise charity and give protection (to others),
incur sin. Woe is their portion hereafter and not bliss. If, O lord,
without performing great sacrifices and the rites in honour of thy
deceased ancestors, and it, without bathing in sacred waters, thou
betakest thyself to a wandering life, thou shalt then meet with
destruction like a small cloud separated from a mass and dashed by the
winds. Thou shalt then fall off from both worlds and have to take thy
birth in the *Pisacha* order. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) A
person becomes a true renouncer by casting off every internal and
external attachment, and not simply by abandoning home for dwelling in
the woods. A Brahmana that lives in the observance of these ordinances
in which there are no impediments, does not fall off from this or the
other world. Observant of the duties of one's own order,--duties
respected by the ancients and practised by the best of men, who is
there, O Partha, that would grieve, O king, for having in a trice stain
in battle his foes that swelled with prosperity, like Sakra slaying the
forces of the *Daityas*? Having in the observance of Kshatriya duties
subjugated the world by the aid of thy prowess, and having made presents
unto persons conversant with the *Vedas*, thou canst, O monarch, go to
regions higher than heaven. It behoves thee not, O Partha, to indulge in
grief."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19:1](m12a012.htm#fr_19) The sense is that the
gods themselves have become so by action.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[19:2](m12a012.htm#fr_20) The first word is
compounded of *an* and *astika*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[19:3](m12a012.htm#fr_21) *Deva-yana* is the
*Yana* or way along which the deities have gone, the strict observance
of the Vedic rites.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[20:1](m12a012.htm#fr_22) *Renouncer of his own
self*, because he dries up his very body by denying himself food.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[20:2](m12a012.htm#fr_23) Such a person also is
not a true renouncer. For a Kshatriya, again, such a mode of life would
be sinful.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[20:3](m12a012.htm#fr_24) Nilakantha thinks that
the object of this verse is to show that even such a life properly
appertains to a *Brahmana* and not to a *Kshatriya*. Therefore, if
Yudhishthira would, without reigning, live quietly in the kingdom
governed by some brother of his, he would then be equally sinning.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[20:4](m12a012.htm#fr_25) *Acts done from
vanity*, *i.e.*, with the bragging consciousness of one being himself
the actor and the arranger of everything, *Acts done from a spirit of
renunciation*, *i.e.*, without hope of reaping their fruits.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[20:5](m12a012.htm#fr_26) *The threefold aims*,
*i.e.*, Religion, Pleasure and Profit.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[21:1](m12a012.htm#fr_27) *Antarala* is thus
explained by Nilakantha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XIII](m12a013)
