[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a027) 
[Next](m12a029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXVIII

Vaisampayana said, "Vyasa then dispelled the grief of the eldest son of
Pandu., who, burning with sorrow on account of the slaughter of his
kinsmen, had resolved to make an end of himself."

Vyasa said, 'In this connection is cited the old story, O tiger among
men, that is known by the name of Asma's discourse. Listen to it, O
Yudhishthira! Janaka the ruler of the Videhas, O king, filled with
sorrow and grief, questioned a wise Brahmana of the name of Asma for the
resolution of his doubts.'

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

"Janaka said, 'How should a man desirous of his own good behave upon
occasions of the accession and the destruction of both kinsmen and
wealth?'

"Asma said, 'Immediately after the formation of a man's body, joys and
griefs attach themselves to it. Although there is a possibility of
either of the two overtaking the person, yet whichever actually
overtakes him quickly robs him of his reason like the wind driving away
gathering clouds. (In times of prosperity) one thinks in this strain,
*viz*., '*I am of high birth! I can do whatever I like!--I am not an
ordinary man*!' His mind becomes soaked with such triple vanity.
Addicted to all earthly enjoyments, he begins to waste the wealth
hoarded by his ancestors. Impoverished in course of time, he regards the
appropriation of what belongs to others as even laudable. Like a hunter
piercing a deer with his shafts, the king then punishes that wicked
wight that robber of other people's possessions, that transgressor of
law and rule. Without attaining to a hundred years (the usual period of
human life), such men scarcely live beyond twenty or thirty years.
Carefully observing the behaviour of all creatures, a king should, by
the exercise of his intelligence, apply remedies for alleviating the
great sorrows of his subjects. The causes of all mental sorrow are two,
*viz*., delusion of the mind and the accession of distress. No third
cause exists. All these diverse kinds of woe as also those arising from
attachment to earthly enjoyments, that overtake man, are even
such. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) Decrepitude and Death, like a
pair of wolves, devour all creatures, strong or weak, short or tall. No
man can escape decrepitude and death, not even the subjugator of the
whole earth girt by the sea. Be it happiness or be it sorrow that comes
upon creatures., it should be enjoyed or borne without elation or
depression. There is no method of escape from them. The evils of life, O
king, overtake one in early or middle or old age. They can never he
avoided, while those (sources of bliss) that are coveted never
come. <span id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79) The absence, of what is
agreeable, the presence of what is disagreeable, good and evil, bliss
and woe, follow Destiny. Similarly, the birth of creatures and their
death, and the accessions of gain and loss, are all pre-ordained. Even
as scent, colour, taste, and touch spring naturally, happiness and
misery arise from what has been pre-ordained. Seats and beds and
vehicles, prosperity and drink and food, ever approach leaving creatures
according to Time's course. <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80)
Physicians even get ill. The strong become weak. They that are in the
enjoyment of prosperity lose all and become indigent. The course of Time
is very wonderful. High birth, health, beauty, prosperity, and objects
of enjoyment, are all won through Destiny. The indigent, although they
may not desire it, have many children. The affluent again are seen to be
childless. Wonderful is the course of Destiny. The evils caused by
disease, fire, water, weapons, hunger, poison, fever, and death, and
falls from high places, overtake a man according to the Destiny under
which he is born. It is seen in this world that somebody without
sinning, suffers diverse ills, while another, having

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

sinned, is not borne down by the weight of calamity. It is seen that
somebody in the enjoyment of wealth perishes in youth; while some one
that is poor drags on his existence, borne down by decrepitude, for a
hundred years. One borne in an ignoble race may have a very long life,
while one sprung from a noble line perishes soon like an insect. In this
world, it is very common that persons in affluent circumstances have no
appetite, while they that are indigent can digest chips of wood.
Impelled by destiny, whatever sins the man of wicked soul, discontented
with his condition, commits, saying, '*I am the doer*,' he regards to be
all for his good. Hunting, dice, women, wine, brawls, these are censured
by the wise. Many persons, however, possessed of even extensive
knowledge of the scriptures are seen to be addicted to them. Objects,
whether coveted or otherwise, come upon creatures in consequence of
Time's course. No other cause can be traced. Air, space, fire, moon,
sun, day, night, the luminous bodies (in the firmament), rivers, and
mountains,--who makes them and who supports them? Cold, and heat, and
rain, come one after another in consequence of Time's course. It is even
so, O bull among men, with the happiness and the misery of mankind.
Neither medicines, nor incantations, can rescue the man assailed by
decrepitude or overtaken by death. As two logs of wood floating on the
great ocean, come together and are again (when the time comes)
separated, even so creatures come together and are again (when the time
comes) separated. Time acts equally towards those men that (are in
affluent circumstances and that) enjoy the pleasures of song and dance
in the company of women and those helpless men that live upon the food
that others supply. In this world a thousand kinds of relationship are
contracted, such as mother and father and son and wife. In reality,
however, whose are they and whose are we? No one can become anyone's
own, nor can anyone become anybody else's own. Our union herewith wives
and kinsfolk and well-wishers is like that of travellers at a road-side
inn. *Where am I? Where shall go? Who am I? How come I here! What for
and whom I grieve*? Reflecting on these questions one obtains
tranquillity. Life and its environments are constantly revolving like a
wheel, and the companionship of those that are dear is transitory. The
union with brother, mother, father, and friend is like that of
travellers in an inn. Men of knowledge behold, as if with corporeal
eyes, the next world that is unseen. Without disregarding the
scriptures, one desirous of knowledge should have faith. One possessed
of knowledge should perform the rites laid down in respect of the
*Pitris* and the gods, practise all religious duties, perform
sacrifices, judiciously pursue virtue, profit, and pleasure. Alas, no
one understands that the world is sinking on the ocean of Time that is
so very deep and that is infested with those huge crocodiles called
decrepitude and death. Many physicians may be seen afflicted with all
the members of their families, although they have carefully studied the
science of Medicine. <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) Taking bitters
and diverse kinds of oily drugs, these succeed not in escaping death,
like ocean in transcending its continents. Men well-versed in chemistry,
notwithstanding chemical compounds applied

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

judiciously, are seen to be broken down by decrepitude like trees broken
down by elephants. Similarly, persons possessed of ascetic merit,
devoted to study of the Vedas, practising charity, and frequently
performing sacrifices, succeed not in escaping decrepitude and death. As
regards all creatures that have taken birth, neither years, nor months,
nor fortnights, nor days, nor nights, that have once passed, do ever
return. Man, whose existence is so transitory, is forced, in course of
Time, whether he will or not, to come upon this inevitable and broad
path that has to be trodden by every creature. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) Whether the body springs from the creature
or the creature springs from the body, one's union however, with wives
and other friends is like that of travellers in an inn. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83) one cannot obtain a lasting companionship
with anyone. One cannot obtain such companionship with one's own body.
How then it can be had with anyone else? Where, O king, is thy sire
today and where thy grandsire? Thou beholdst them not today and they do
not behold thee. O sinless one! No person can see either heaven or hell.
The scriptures, however, are the eyes of the virtuous. O king, frame thy
conduct according to the scriptures. What pure heart, one should
practise first the vow of *Brahmacharya* and then beget children and
then perform sacrifices, for paying off the debt one owes to the
*Pitris*, the gods, and men. Performing sacrifices and engaged in
[procreating](errata.htm#11) (children), after having first observed the
vow of *Brahmacharya*, one who bath wisdom for his eyes, casting off all
anxiety of heart, should pay court to heaven, this world, and his own
soul. <span id="fr_84"></span>[3](#fn_84) That king bent upon the
practice of virtue who strives judiciously for acquiring Heaven and
Earth and who takes of earthly goods just what is ordained (as the
king's share) in the scriptures, wins a reputation that spread over all
the worlds and among all creatures, mobile and immobile. The ruler of
the Videhas, of clear understanding, having heard these words full of
reason, become freed from grief, and taking Asma's leave proceeded
towards his abode, O thou of unfading glory, cast off thy grief and rise
up. Thou art equal to Sakra himself. Suffer thy soul to be gladdened.
The earth has been won by thee in the exercise of Kshatriya duties.
Enjoy her, O son of Kunti, and do not disregard my words.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[51:1](m12a028.htm#fr_78) *Even such* i.e.,
spring from such causes.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[51:2](m12a028.htm#fr_79) Man covets freedom
from decay and immortality, but instead of obtaining what he covets for,
decay and death become his portion on Earth.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[51:3](m12a028.htm#fr_80) *i.e.*, these appear
and disappear in the course of Time.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[52:1](m12a028.htm#fr_81) Literally, the science
of Life.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[53:1](m12a028.htm#fr_82) This inevitable and
broad path is the path of Life. What is said here is that every creature
is subject to birth.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[53:2](m12a028.htm#fr_83) The first line of this
verse refers to the disputed question of whether the body exists
independent of life, or the creature exists independent of the body.
This is much disputed by Hindu philosophers. The gross body may be
dissolved, but the *linga sarira* (composed of the subtlest elements)
exists as a cause for the unborn Soul. This is maintained by many.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[53:3](m12a028.htm#fr_84) *Param* here is
explained by Nilakantha as *Paramatma*. *Pay court* *i.e.*, seek to
obtain and enjoy them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXIX](m12a029)
