[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a121.md) 
[Next](m12a123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I wish, O sire, to hear the settled conclusions on
the subject of Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure. Depending upon which of
these does the course of life proceed? What are the respective roots of
Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure? What are again the results of those three?
They are sometimes see n to mingle with one another, and sometimes to
exist separately and independently of one another.'

"Bhishma said, 'When men in this world endeavour with good hearts to
achieve Wealth with the aid of Virtue, then those three, *viz*., Virtue,
Wealth, and Pleasure, may be seen to co-exist in a state of union in
respect of time, cause, and action. <span
id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_373.md) Wealth has its root in Virtue, and
Pleasure is said to be the fruit of Wealth. All the three again have
their root in Will. Will is concerned with objects. All objects, again,
in their entirety, exist for gratifying the desire of enjoyment. Upon
these then does the aggregate of three depend. Entire abstraction from
all objects is Emancipation. It is said that Virtue is sought for the
protection of the body, and Wealth is for the acquisition of Virtue.
Pleasure is only the gratification of the senses. All the three have,
therefore, the quality of Passion. <span id="fr_374"></span>[2](#fn_374.md)
Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure, when sought for the sake of heaven or such
other rewards, are said to be remote because the rewards themselves are
remote. When sought, however, for the sake of Knowledge of Self, they
are said to be proximate. One should seek them when they are of such a
character. <span id="fr_375"></span>[3](#fn_375.md) One should not cast
them off even mentally. If Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure are to be
abandoned, one should abandon them when one has freed one's self by
ascetic penances. <span id="fr_376"></span>[4](#fn_376.md) The aim of the
triple aggregate is towards emancipation.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Would that man could obtain it! One's acts,
undertaken and completed with eve tithe aid of intelligence may or may
not lead to the expected results. Virtue is not always the root of
Wealth, for other things [than](errata.htm#46.md) Virtue lead to Wealth
(such as service, agriculture, &c). There is again a contrary opinion
(for some say that Wealth is earned through chance or birth or like
causes). In some instances, Wealth acquired has been productive of evil.
Other things again that Wealth (such as fasts and vows) have led to the
acquisition of Virtue. As regards this topic, therefore, a dullard whose
understanding has been debased by ignorance, never succeeds in acquiring
the highest aim of Virtue and Wealth, *viz*., Emancipation. Virtue's
dross consists in the desire of reward; the dross of Wealth consists in
hoarding it; when purged of these impurities, they are productive of
great results. In this connection is cited the narrative of the
discourse that look place in days of old between Kamandaka and
Angaristha. One day, king Angaristha, having waited for the opportunity,
saluted the *Rishi* Kamandaka as he was seated at his ease and asked him
the following questions, 'If a king, forced by lust and folly, commits
sin for which he afterwards repents, by what acts, O *Rishi*, can those
sins be destroyed? If again a man impelled by ignorance, does what is
sinful in the belief that he is acting righteously, how shall the king
put a stop to that sin come into vogue among men?'

"Kamandaka said, 'That man who, abandoning Virtue and Wealth pursues
only Pleasure, reaps as the consequence of such conduct the destruction
of his intelligence. The destruction of intelligence is followed by
heedlessness that is at once destructive of both Virtue and Wealth. From
such heedlessness proceed dire atheism and systematic wickedness of
conduct. If the king does not restrain those wicked men of sinful
conduct, all good subjects then live in fear of him like the inmate of a
room within which a snake has concealed itself. The subjects do not
follow such a king. Brahmanas and all pious persons also act in the same
way. As a consequence the king incurs great danger, and ultimately the
risk of destruction itself. Overtaken by infamy and insult, he has to
drag on a miserable existence. A life of infamy, however, is equal to
death. Men learned in the scriptures have indicated the following means
for checking sin. The king should always devote himself to the study of
the three Vedas. He should respect the Brahmanas and do good offices
unto them. He should be devoted to righteousness. He should make
alliance (of marriage) with high families. He should wait upon
high-minded Brahmanas adorned with the virtue of forgiveness. He should
perform ablutions and recite sacred *mantras* and thus pass his time
happily. Banishing all wicked subjects from himself and his kingdom, he
should seek the companionship of virtuous men. He should gratify all
persons by speeches or good acts. He should say unto all--'*I am
yours*,'--proclaim the virtues of even his foes. By pursuing such
conduct he may soon cleanse himself of his sins and win the high regard
of all. Without doubt, by conduct such as this all his sins will be
destroyed. Thou shouldst accomplish all those high duties which thy
seniors and preceptors would indicate. Thou art sure to obtain great
blessing through the grace of thy seniors and preceptors.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[268:1](m12a122.htm#fr_373.md) The commentator
illustrates this by the action of a virtuous husband seeking congress
with his wedded wife in the proper season. There is religious merit in
the performance of the rites known by the name of *Garbhadhana*; there
is pleasure in the act itself; and lastly, wealth or profit in the form
of a son is also acquired.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[268:2](m12a122.htm#fr_374.md) There are three
qualities or attributes that characterise human acts, *viz*., Goodness,
Passion, and Darkness. *Vide* the latter sections of the *Bhagavadgita*.
Such Virtue and Wealth and Pleasure, therefore, are not very high
objects of pursuit. Things possessing the, attribute of Goodness only
are worthy of pursuit.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[268:3](m12a122.htm#fr_375.md) *i.e.*, one should
seek virtue for only compassing purity of soul; Wealth in order that one
may spend it in acts undertaken without desire of fruit; and Pleasure
for only supporting the body.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[268:4](m12a122.htm#fr_376.md)
*Dharmadinkamanaishthikan*, *i.e.*, having Dharma for the first and
Karna for the last, hence Virtue, Wealth and Pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXIV](m12a123.md)
