[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a018) 
[Next](m12a020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### SECTION XIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'I am conversant with both the *Vedas* and the
scriptures that lead to the attainment of *Brahma*. In the *Vedas* there
are precepts of both kinds, *viz*., those that inculcate action and
those that inculcate renouncement of action. The scriptures are
confounding and their conclusions are based upon reasons. The truth,
however, that is in the *Mantras*, is duly known to me. Thou art
conversant only with weapons and observant of the practices of heroes.
Thou art unable to understand truly the sense of the scriptures. If thou
wert really acquainted with duty, then thou couldst have understood that
words such as these ought not to have been addressed to me by even one
possessed of the clearest insight into the meaning of the scriptures and
acquainted with the truths of religion. That, however, which thou hast
said unto me, induced by fraternal affection, has been fit and proper, O
son of Kunti! I am, for that, pleased with thee, O Arjuna! There is no
one equal to thee in the three worlds in all duties connected with
battle and in skill in respect of diverse kinds of acts. Thou mayst,
therefore, speak of the subtleties connected with those
subjects,--subtleties, that is, that are impenetrable by others. It
behoveth thee not, however, O Dhananjaya, to doubt my intelligence. Thou
art conversant with the science of battle, but thou hast never waited
upon the aged. Thou knowest not the conclusions arrived at by those that
have studied the subject in brief and detail. Even this is the
conclusion of intelligent men whose understanding are bent on achieving
salvation, *viz*., that amongst ascetic penances, renunciation, and
knowledge of *Brahma*, the second is superior to the first, and the
third is superior to the second. This, however, that thou thinkest,
*viz*., that there is nothing superior to wealth, is an error. I will
convince thee of it, so that wealth may not again appear to thee in that
light. All men that are righteous are seen to be devoted to ascetic
penances and the study of the Vedas. The *Rishis* also, that have many
eternal regions for them, have the merit of penances. Others possessed
of tranquillity of soul, having no enemies, and dwelling in the woods,
have, through penances and study of the Vedas, proceeded to heaven.
Pious men, by restraining desire for worldly possessions, and casting
off that darkness which is born of folly, proceed northward (*i.e.*, by
luminous paths) to the regions reserved for practisers of renunciation.
The path that lies to the south and that leads to regions of light
(*i.e.*, lunar regions), are reserved for men devoted to action. These
are attained by persons subject to birth and death. That end, however,
which persons desirous of salvation have before their eyes, is
indescribable. *Yoga* is the best means for attaining to it. It is not
easy to explain it (to thee). Those that are learned live, reflecting on
the scriptures from desire of finding what is unreal. They are, however,
often led away to this and to that in the belief that the object of
their search exists in this and that. Having mastered, however, the
Vedas, the *Aranyakas*, and the other scriptures, they miss the real,
like men failing to find solid timber in an uprooted banana plant. Some
there are who., disbelieving in its unity, regard the Soul, that dwells
in

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

this physical frame consisting of the five elements, to be possessed of
the attributes of desire and aversion (and others). <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) Incapable of being seen by the eye,
exceedingly subtle, and inexpressible by words, it revolves in a round
(of re-births) among the creatures of the earth, keeping before it that
which is the root of action. <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62) Having
made the Soul advance towards itself which is the spring of every kind
of blessedness, having restrained all desires of the mind, and having
cast off all kinds of action, one may become perfectly independent and
happy. When there is such a path that is trod by the righteous and that
is attainable by Knowledge, why, O Arjuna, dost thou applaud wealth
which is full of every kind of calamity? Men of olden times that were
conversant with the scriptures, O Bharata,--men that were always engaged
in gifts and sacrifice and action, were of this opinion. O Bharata!
There are some fools who, accomplished in the science of argumentation,
deny the existence of the Soul, in consequence of the strength of their
convictions of a previous life. It is very difficult to make them accept
this truth about final emancipation. <span id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63)
Those wicked men, though possessed of great learning, travel all over
the earth, making speeches in assemblies, and deprecating the true
doctrine about emancipation. O Partha, who else will succeed in
understanding that which we do not understand?' Indeed, (as those men
cannot understand the true meaning of the scriptures), similarly they
cannot succeed in knowing those wise and pious persons that are truly
great and that have deep acquaintance with the scriptures. O son of
Kunti, men acquainted with truth obtain *Brahma* by asceticism and
intelligence, and great happiness by renunciation.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[36:1](m12a019.htm#fr_61) Refers to the
well-known definition of the soul or mind in the *Nyaya* philosophy,
which says that it is distinguished by the attributes of desire,
aversion, will, pleasure and pain, and the cognitive faculties.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[36:2](m12a019.htm#fr_62) The soul, though
really bereft of attributes, nevertheless revolves in a round among
creatures, *i.e.*, enters other bodies on the dissolution of those
previously occupied. The reason of this round or continual journey is
*Avidya* or illusion, *viz*., that absence of true knowledge in
consequence of which men engage themselves in action. When the soul is
freed from this *Avidya*, action ceases, and the soul becomes revealed
in its true nature, which consists in the absence of all attributes.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[36:3](m12a019.htm#fr_63) *Hetumantah Panditah*
means--learned in the science of reasoning; *Dridhapurve* is explained
by Nilakantha as persons endued with strong convictions of a past life:
*Suduravartah* means difficult of being made to understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XX](m12a020)
