[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a060) 
[Next](m12a062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### SECTION LXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell his those duties in respect of persons like
ourselves which are auspicious, productive of happiness in the future,
benevolent, approved by all, pleasant, and agreeable.'

"Bhishma said, 'The four modes of life, O puissant one, have been laid
down for the Brahmana. The other three orders do not adopt them, O best
of the Bharatas! Many acts, O king, leading to heaven and especially fit
for the kingly order, have already been declared. Those, however, cannot
be referred to in reply to thy present query, for all of them have been
duly laid down for such Kshatriyas as are not disinclined to
pitilessness. The Brahmana who is addicted to the practices of
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, incurs censure in this world as a
person of wicked soul and goes to hell in the next world. Those names
which are applied among men to slaves and dogs and wolves and (other)
beasts, are applied, O son of Pandu, to the Brahmana who is engaged in
pursuits that are improper for him. That Brahmana who, in all the four
modes of life. is duly engaged in the six-fold acts (of regulating the
breath, contemplation, etc.), who performs all his duties, who is not
restless, who has his passions under control, whose heart is pure and
who is ever engaged in penances, who has no desire of bettering his
prospects, and who is charitable, has inexhaustible regions of bliss in
the other world. Everyone derives his own nature from the nature of his
acts, in respect of their circumstances, place, and means and motives.
Thou shouldst, therefore, O king, regard the study of the Vedas, which
is fraught with such high merit, to be equal with the exertion of kingly
power, or the pursuits of agriculture, trade, and hunting. The world is
set agoing by Time. Its operations are settled by the course of Time.
Man does all his acts, good, bad, and indifferent, entirely influenced
by Time. <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194) Those amongst the good
acts of a man's past life that exert the greatest influence on the next,
are liable to be exhausted. Men, however, are always engaged in those
acts to which their propensities lead. Those propensities, again, lead a
living being to every direction.'" <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[135:1](m12a061.htm#fr_194) The sense seems to
be that influenced by past acts everyone acts in subsequent lives. If he
is a hunter in this life, it is because the influence of many cruel acts
of a past life pursues him even in this.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[135:2](m12a061.htm#fr_195) Men, therefore,
have not always balances of good acts to their credit. These are,
however, free agents; the new acts they do determine the character of
their next lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXIII](m12a062)
