[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a064) 
[Next](m12a066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast spoken to me about the four modes of
human life. I desire to know more of-them. Do thou discourse on them in
detail.'

"Bhishma said, 'O Yudhishthira of mighty arms, all the duties that are
practised in this world by the righteous are known to thee as they are
known to me. O foremost of virtuous persons, listen now to me about what
thou askest, *viz*. the merit (that a king acquires) in consequence of
the duties practised

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

by others leading other modes of life. <span
id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) All the merits, O son of Kunti, that
belong to persons practising the duties of the four modes of life,
attach, O foremost of men, to righteous kings. A king who is not
governed by lust and hate, who rules with the aid of the science of
chastisement, and who looks equally on all creatures, O Yudhishthira,
attains to the object of the *Bhaikshya* mode of life. <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206) That king who is possessed of knowledge,
who makes gifts to deserving persons on proper occasions, who knows how
to favour and punish, who conducts himself in all things according to
the injunctions of the scriptures, and who has tranquillity of soul,
attains to the object of the *Garhasthya* mode of life. That king who
always worships those that are deserving of worship by giving them their
due, completely attains, O son of Kunti, to the object of the Bhaikshya
mode of life. That king, O Yudhishthira, who rescues from distress, to
the best of his power, his kinsmen and relatives and friends, attains to
the object of the *Vanaprashtha* mode of life. That king who on every
occasion honours those that are foremost among men and those that are
foremost among *Yatis*, attains, O son of Kunti, to the object of the
*Vanaprashtha* mode of life. That king, O Partha, who daily makes
offerings unto the *Pitris* and large offerings unto all living
creatures including men, attains to the object of the same mode of life.
That king, O tiger among men, who grinds the kingdoms of others for
protecting the righteous, attains to the object of the same mode of
life. In consequence of the protection of all creatures as also of the
proper protection of his own kingdom, a king earns the merit of as many
sacrifices as the number of creatures protected, and accordingly attains
to the object of the Sannyasa mode of life. Study of the Vedas every
day, forgiveness, and worship of preceptors, and services rendered to
one's own teacher, lead to the attainment of the object of Brahmacharya.
That king who silently recites his *mantras* every day and who always
worships the gods according to the ordinance, attains, O tiger among
men, to the object of the *Garhasthya* mode of life. That king who
engages in battle with the resolve of protecting his kingdom or meeting
with death, attains to the object of the *Vanaprastha* mode of life.
That king who gives unto persons leading a *Vanaprastha* mode of life
and unto Brahmanas versed in the three Vedas attains to the object of
the *Vanaprastha* mode of life. That king who displays compassion
towards all creatures and abstains entirely from cruelty, attains to the
objects of all the modes of life. That king, O Yudhishthira, who shows
compassion to the young and the old, O son of Kunti, under every
circumstance, attains to the objects of every mode of life. That king, O
perpetuator of Kuru's race, who affords relief to all oppressed people
that seek his protection, attains to the object of the *Garhasthya* mode
of life. That king who protects all creatures mobile and immobile, and
honours them is they deserve, attains to the object of the *Garhasthya*
mode of life. Bestowing favours and inflicting

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

punishments upon the wives and brothers, elder and younger, and upon
their sons and grandsons, are the domestic duties of a king and these
constitute his best penances. By honouring those that are righteous and
deserving of worship and protecting those that have (by their penances)
acquired it knowledge of self, a king, O tiger among men, attains to the
object of the *Garhasthya* mode of life. Inviting to this home, O
Bharata, persons that have betaken themselves to that *Vanaprastha* and
other modes of life, and treating them with food, constitute the
domestic duties of a king. That king who duly adheres to the duties laid
down by the Creator, obtains the blessed merits of all the modes of
life. That king, O son of Kunti, in whom no virtue is wanting, that
foremost of men, O Yudhishthira, is said by the learned to be a person
in the observance of the *Vanaprastha* and all the other modes of life.
That king who duly honours the office or rank which deserves honour, the
race or family which deserves honour, and those old men that deserve
honour is said, O Yudhishthira, to live in all the modes of life. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207) A king, O son of Kunti, by observing the
duties of his country and those of his family, acquires, O tiger among
men, the merits of all the modes of life. That king who at proper
seasons bestows upon righteous persons affluence or gifts of value,
earns the merits, O king, of all the modes of life. That king, O son of
Kunti, who while overcome with danger and fear still keeps his eye on
the duties of all men, <span id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_208) earns the
merits of all the modes of life. The king obtains a share of the merits
earned under his protection by righteous people in his dominions. On the
other hand, if kings, O tiger among men, do not protect the righteous
people within their dominions, they then take the sins of the latter (of
omission and commission). Those men also, O Yudhishthira. who assist
kings (in protecting their subjects), become equally entitled, O sinless
one, to a share of the merits earned by others (in consequence of that
protection). The learned say that the Garhasthya, which we have adopted,
is superior to all the other modes of life. The conclusions in respect
of it are very clear. It is certainly sacred, O tiger among men. That
man who regards all creatures to be like his own self, who never does
any harm and has his wrath under control, obtains great happiness both
here and hereafter. <span id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_209) A king can
easily cross the ocean of the world, with kingly duties as his boat
passed of great speed, urged on by the breeze of gifts, having the
scriptures for its tackle and intelligence for the strength of its
helmsman, and kept afloat by the power of righteousness. When the
principle of desire in his heart is withdrawn from every earthly object,
he is then regarded as one resting on his understanding alone. In this
state he soon attains to *Brahma*. <span id="fr_210"></span>[4](#fn_210)
Becoming cheerful by meditation and by restraining desire and other
passions of the heart, O tiger among men, it

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

king, engaged in discharging the dully of protection, succeeds in
obtaining great merit. Do thou, therefore, O Yudhishthira, exert thyself
carefully in protecting Brahmanas of pious deeds and devoted to the
study of the Vedas, as also all other men. By exercising the duty of
protection only, O Bharata, the king earns merit that is a hundred times
greater than what is earned by recluses in their asylums within the
wood.'

"I have now described, O eldest son of Pandu, the diverse duties of men.
Do thou adhere to kingly duties that are eternal and that have been
practised by great men since days of old. If thou employest thyself with
concentrated attention to the duty of protecting (thy subjects), O tiger
among men, thou mayst then, O son of Pandu, obtain the merits of all the
four modes of life and of all the four orders of men!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_205"></span>[143:1](m12a065.htm#fr_205) Nilakantha thinks
that *Lingantargatam* means omniscient. He is for taking this verse to
mean--'Listen now to those duties about which thou askest my omniscient
self.' Bhishma having acquired omniscience through Krishna's boon,
refers to it here. The interpretation seems to be very far-fetched.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[143:2](m12a065.htm#fr_206) That object is
*Brahma*.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[144:1](m12a065.htm#fr_207) *i.e.*. such a man
acquires the merits of all the modes of life.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[144:2](m12a065.htm#fr_208) *Dasadharmagatam*
is explained by [Nilakantha](errata.htm#19) as 'overcome with fear,
etc." Keeps his eye on the duties of all men,' *i.e.*, protects all men
in the discharge of their duties.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[144:3](m12a065.htm#fr_209) If this verse has a
reference to kings, *nyastadandah* would mean one who punishes without
wrath.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[144:4](m12a065.htm#fr_210) In this and the
preceding verse, *Sattwa*, without being taken as used for intelligence,
may be taken to mean 'the quality of goodness' as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXVII](m12a066)
