[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a074) 
[Next](m12a076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, amongst Brahmanas some are engaged in
the duties proper to their order, while others are engaged in other
duties. Tell me the difference between these two classes!'

"Bhishma said, 'Those Brahmanas, O king, that are possessed of learning
and beneficent features, and that look upon all creatures with an equal
eye, are said to be equal to *Brahma*. They that are conversant with the
Riches, the [*Yajuses*](errata.htm#27) and the *Samans*, and who are
devoted to the practices of their order, are, O king, equal to the very
gods. Those, however, amongst them that are not well-born and not
devoted to the duties of their order, and are, besides wedded to evil
practices, are like Sudras. A virtuous king should realise tribute from
and impress without pay into the public service those Brahmanas that are
not possessed of Vedic lore and that have not their own fires to
worship. They that are employed in courts of justice for summoning
people, they that perform worship for others for a fee, they that
perform the sacrifices of Vaisyas and Sudras, they that officiate in
sacrifices on behalf of a whole village, and they that make voyages on
the ocean,--these five are regarded as *Chandalas* among
Brahmanas. <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231) They amongst them that
become *Ritwikas*, *Purohitas*, counsellors, envoys, and messengers,
become, O king, equal to Kshatriyas. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_232) They amongst them that ride horses or
elephants or cars or become foot-soldiers, become, O king, equal to
Vaisyas. If the king's treasury is not full, he may realise tribute from
these. In realising tribute, the king, however, should exclude those
Brahmanas that are (for their conduct) equal to the gods or *Brahma*.
The Vedas say that the king is the lord of the wealth belonging to all
the orders except Brahmanas. He can take the wealth of those Brahmanas
also that have fallen away from their legitimate duties. The king should
never be indifferent towards those Brahmanas that are not observant of
their duties. For the sake of making his people virtuous, he should
punish and separate them from their superiors. That king, O monarch, in
whose territories a Brahmana becomes a thief, is

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

regarded by the learned to be the author of that misdeed. Persons
conversant with the Vedas declare that if a Brahmana versed in the Vedas
and observant of vows becomes, through want of sustenance, a thief, it
is the duty of the king to provide for his support. If, after provision
has been made for his support, he does not abstain from theft he should
then, O scorcher of foes be banished from the kingdom with all his
kinsmen.'"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_231"></span>[166:1](m12a075.htm#fr_231) *Mahapathika* is
believed to mean a person making a voyage by the sea or the ocean, The
literal meaning seems to be 'a person making a long or distant voyage.'

<span id="fn_232"></span>[166:2](m12a075.htm#fr_232) A *Ritwij* is a
priest employed on a special occasion. A *Purohita* is one who always
acts as a priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXVII](m12a076)
