[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a119) 
[Next](m12a121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, thou hast now finished thy discourse
upon the duties of kings. From what thou hast said it seems that
Chastisement occupies a high position and is the lord of everything for
everything depends upon Chastisement. It seems, O puissant one, that
Chastisement, which is possessed of great energy and which is present
everywhere, is the foremost of all beings among either gods and *Rishis*
and high-souled *Pitris* and *Yakshas* and *Rakshasas* and *Pisachas*
and *Sadhyas*, or living beings in this world including beasts and
birds. Thou hast said that the entire universe, mobile and immobile,
including gods, *Asuras*, and men, may be seen to depend upon
Chastisement. I now desire, O bull of Bharata's race, to know truly who
Chastisement is. Of what kind is he? What is his form? What is his
disposition? Of what is he made? Whence is his origin? What are his
features? What is his splendour? How does he remain wakeful among living
creatures so heedfully? Who is he that remains eternally wakeful,
protecting this universe? Who is he that is known to be the foremost of
all things? Who, indeed, is that high personage called Chastisement?
What is that upon which Chastisement depends? And what is his course?'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O descendent of Kuru, who Chastisement is and
why he is called also *Vyavahara*! That upon whom all things depend is
called Chastisement. Chastisement is that by which righteousness is kept
up. He is sometimes called *Vyavahara*. In order that the righteousness
of a king that is heedfully awake may not suffer extinction
(Chastisement has come to be called by that name). It is for this reason
that the name *Vyavahara* becomes applicable to it. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[2](#fn_361) In olden days Manu, O king, declared
first of all this truth, *viz*.,--'He who protects all creatures, the
loved and the odious equally, by impartially wielding the lord of
Chastisement, is said to be the embodiment of righteousness.'--These
words that I have said were, O king first, uttered in days of old by
Manu. They represent the high words of Brahman. And because these words
were spoken first, therefore, they are known as the *first words*. And
since it is by Chastisement that the misappropriation of other people's
possessions is stopped, therefore Chastisement has come to be called by
the name of *Vyavahara*. The aggregate of three always rests on well
applied Chastisement. Chastisement is a great god. In form he looks

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

like a blazing fire. His complexion is dark like that of the petals of
the blue lotus. He is equipt with four teeth, has four arms and eight
legs and many eyes. His cars are pointed like shafts and his hair stands
upright. He has matted locks and two tongues. His face has the hue of
copper, and he is clad in a lion's skin. <span
id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_362) That irresistible deity assumes such a
fierce shape. Assuming again the form of the sword, the bow, the mace,
the dart, the trident, the mallet, the arrow, the thick and short club,
the battle-axe, the discus, the noose, the heavy bludgeon, the rapier,
the lance, and in fact of every kind of weapon that exists on earth.
Chastisement moves in the world. Indeed, Chastisement moves on earth,
piercing and cutting and afflicting and lopping off and dividing and
striking and slaying and rushing against its victims. These, O
Yudhishthira, are some of the names which Chastisement bears, *viz*.,
Sword, Sabre, Righteousness, Fury, the Irresistible, the Parent of
prosperity, Victory, Punisher, Checker, the Eternal, the Scriptures,
Brahmana, *Mantra*, Avenger, the Foremost of first Legislators, Judge,
the Undecaying, God, the individual whose course is irresistible, the
Ever-agoing, the First. born, the individual without affections, the
Soul of Rudra, the eldest Manu and the great Benefactor Chastisement is
the holy Vishnu. He is the puissant Narayana. And because he always
assumes a terrible form, therefore he is called *Mahapurusha*. His wife
Morality is also known by the names of Brahmana's Daughter, Lakshmi,
Vriti, Saraswati, and Mother of the universe. Chastisement thus has many
forms. Blessings and curse, pleasure and pain, righteousness and
unrighteousness, strength and weakness, fortune and misfortune, merit
and demerit, virtue and vice, desire and aversion, season and month,
night and day, and hour, heedfulness and heedlessness, joy and anger,
peace and self-restraint, destiny and exertion, salvation and
condemnation, fear and fearlessness, injury and abstention from injury,
penances and sacrifice and rigid abstinence, poison and healthy food,
the beginning, the middle, and the end, the result of all murderous
acts, insolence, insanity, arrogance, pride, patience, policy, impolicy,
powerlessness and power, respect, disrespect, decay and stability,
humility, charity, fitness of time and unfitness of time, falsehood,
wisdom, truth, belief, disbelief, impotence, trade, profit, loss,
success, defeat, fierceness, mildness, death, acquisition and
non-acquisition, agreement and disagreement, that which should be done
and that which should not be done, strength and weakness, malice and
goodwill, righteousness and unrighteousness, shame and shamelessness,
modesty, prosperity and adversity, energy, acts, learning, eloquence,
keenness of Understanding,--all these, O Yudhishthira, are forms of
Chastisement in this world. Hence, Chastisement is exceedingly
multiform. If Chastisement had not existed, all creatures would have
ground one another. Through fear of Chastisement. O Yudhisthira, living
creatures do not slay one another. The subjects, O king, always
protected by Chastisement, enhance the might of

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

their ruler. It is for this that Chastisement is regarded as the
foremost refuge of all. Chastisement, O king, quickly sets the world on
the path of righteousness. Dependent upon truth, righteousness exists in
the Brahmanas. Endued with righteousness, foremost of Brahmanas became
attached to the Vedas. From the Vedas the sacrifices flow. Sacrifices
gratify the deities. The deities, being gratified, commend the denizens
of the earth to Indra. For benefiting the denizens of the earth, Indra
gives them food (in the form of rain without which crops and vegetation
would fail). The life of all creatures depends upon food. From food
creatures derive their support and growth. Chastisement (in the form of
the Kshatriya ruler) remains wakeful amongst them. For serving this
object, Chastisement assumes the form of a Kshatriya among men.
Protecting men, he remains awake, always heedful and never decaying.
Chastisement has again these other eight names, *viz*., God, Man, Life,
Power, Heart, the Lord of all creatures, the Soul of all things, and the
Living creature. God gave both affluence and the rod of chastisement to
the king who is possessed of strength (in the form of military forces)
and who is a combination of five ingredients. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_363) Nobility of blood, ministers of great
wealth, knowledge, the different kinds of forces (such as strength of
body, energy of mind, etc.), with the eight objects mentioned below, and
the other force (*viz*., that which depends upon a well-filled
treasury), should be sought for the king, O Yudhishthira. Those eight
objects are elephants, horses, cars, foot soldiers, boats, impressed
labourers (for following the camp and doing other work), increase of
population, and cattle (such as sheep, etc.). Of the army equipped in
mail and with other accoutrements, car-warriors, elephant-warriors,
cavalry, Infantry, officers, and surgeons constitute the limbs. Beggars,
principal judges, astrologers, performers of propitiatory and Atharvan
rites, treasury, allies, grain, and all other requisites, constitute the
body, composed of seven attributes and eight limbs, of a kingdom.
Chastisement is another powerful limb of a kingdom. Chastisement (in the
form of an army) is the author of a kingdom. God himself has, with great
care, sent Chastisement for the use of the Kshatriya. This eternal
universe is impartial Chastisement's self. There is nothing more worthy
of respect by kings than Chastisement by which the ways of Righteousness
are pointed out. Brahman himself, for the protection of the world and
for establishing the duties of different individuals, sent down (or
created) Chastisement. There is another kind of *Vyavahara* arising out
of the [dispute](errata.htm#44) of litigants which also has sprung from
Brahman. Principally characterised by a belief in either of the two
parties, that *Vyavahara* is seen to be productive of good. There is
another kind of *Vyavahara* which has the Veda for its soul. It is also
said to have the Veda for its cause. There is, O tiger, among kings, a
(third) kind of *Vyavahara* which is connected with family customs but
which is consistent with the scriptures. <span
id="fr_364"></span>[2](#fn_364) That *Vyavahara* which has, as above,
been said to be characterised by a belief in either of two litigant

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

parties, should be known by us as inhering in the king. It should be
also known by the name of Chastisement, as also by the name of Evidence.
Although Chastisement is seen to be regulated by Evidence, yet it has
been said to have its soul in *Vyavahara*. That which has been called
*Vyavahara* is really based upon Vedic precepts. That *Vyavahara* which
has been indicated to have the Vedas for its soul is Morality or duty.
It is also productive of good unto persons believing in duty and
morality, men of cleansed souls have spoken of that *Vyavahara* as they
have done of ordinary law. <span id="fr_365"></span>[1](#fn_365) The
third kind of *Vyavahara* is also a preceptor of men, and it has also
its roots in the *Veda*, O Yudhishthira! It upholds the three worlds. It
has Truth for its soul and it is productive of prosperity. That which is
Chastisement has been seen by us to be eternal *Vyavahara*. That which
has been said to be *Vyavahara* is verily the *Veda*. That which is the
*Veda* is morality, duty. That which is morality and duty is the path of
Righteousness. This last it was which in the beginning had been
Grandsire Brahman, that Lord of all creatures. Brahman is the Creator of
the entire universe with the gods and *Asura* and *Rakshasas* and human
beings and snakes, and of every other thing. Hence that *Vyavahara*
which is characterised by a belief in either of two litigant parties has
also flowed from him. For this reason He has laid down the following in
respect of *Vyavahara*: Neither mother, nor father, nor brother, nor
wife, nor priest, is unpunishable with that king who rules agreeably to
his duty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_361"></span>[261:2](m12a120.htm#fr_361) *Vyavahara* is *vi*
and *avahara*, hence that through which all kinds of misappropriation
are stopped. It is a name applied to Law and administration of justice.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[262:1](m12a120.htm#fr_362) The commentator, in
a long note, gives very fanciful explanations touching every one of
these peculiarities of form. He understands *Mrigaraja* to mean the
black antelope. I cannot reject the obvious meaning of the word. The
object of the poet is simply to create a form that is frightful.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[263:1](m12a120.htm#fr_363) These are
Righteousness, Law, Chastisement, God, and Living Creature.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[263:2](m12a120.htm#fr_364) The nearest
approach in English to what is meant here by *Vyavahara* is Law. Three
kinds of *Vyavahara* or Law are here spoken of. The first is the
ordinary Law, according to <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> which the
disputes of litigants are decided, it includes booth civil and criminal
law, it is quaintly described here as *Vattripratyayalakskana*, *i.e.*,
'characterised by a belief in either of two litigant parties.' When a
suit, civil or criminal, is instituted, the king or those that act in
the king's name must call for Evidence and decide the matter by
believing either of the two parties. Then follows restoration or
punishment. In either case, it is a form of Chastisement The second kind
of *Vyavahara* or Law is the ecclesiastical law of the Vedas. These are
the precepts or injunctions laid down in those sacred books for
regulating every part of human duty. The third kind of *Vyavahara* or
Law is the particular customs of families or races. It is also called
*kulachara*. Where Kulachara is not inconsistent or in open variance
with the established civil or criminal Law, or is not opposed to the
spirit of the ecclesiastical law as laid down in the Vedas, it is
upheld. (Even the British courts of law uphold Kulachara, interpreting
it very strictly). What Bhishma says here is that even Kulachara should
not be regarded as inconsistent with the scriptures (Vedas and Smritis).

<span id="fn_365"></span>[264:1](m12a120.htm#fr_365) In the verse 52
Bhishma says that the first kind of *Vyavahara* or Law, *i.e.*, the
ordinary civil and criminal law of a realm, must be regarded as resting
on the king. But as this kind of law has the Veda for its soul and has
originally flowed from Brahman, a king incurs no sin by administering it
and by inflicting chastisement in its administration. The purport in
brief, of verse 54 is that Manu and others, in speaking of Morality and
duty have said that it is as binding as the ordinary law that is
administered by kings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXII](m12a121)
