[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b088) 
[Next](m12b090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXII

"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed by the intelligent Tuladhara on that
occasion, Jajali of great intelligence, that foremost of ascetics, said
these words unto him.'

"Jajali said, 'Thou sellest all kinds of juices and scents, O son of a
trader, as also (barks and leaves of) large trees and herbs and their
fruits and roots. "How hast thou succeeded in acquiring a certitude or
stability of understanding? Whence hath this knowledge come to thee? O
thou of great intelligence, tell me all this in detail.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by that Brahmana possessed of I
great fame, Tuladhara of the Vaisya order, well-acquainted with the
truths touching the interpretations of morality and contented with
knowledge, discoursed to Jajali who had undergone severe penances, upon
the ways of morality. <span id="fr_644"></span>[2](#fn_644)

"Tuladhara said, 'O Jajali, I know morality, which is eternal, with all
its mysteries. It is nothing else than that ancient morality which is
known to all, and which consists of universal friendliness, and is
fraught with beneficence to all creatures. <span
id="fr_645"></span>[3](#fn_645) That mode of living which is founded
upon a total harmlessness towards all creatures or (in case of actual
necessity) upon a minimum of such harm, is the highest morality. I live
according to that mode, O Jajali! This my house hath been built with
wood and grass cut by other people's hands. Lac dye, the roots of
Nymphaea lotus, filaments of the lotus, diverse kinds of good
scents <span id="fr_646"></span>[4](#fn_646) and many kinds of liquids,
O regenerate

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Rishi*, with the exception of wines, I purchase
from other people's hand and sell without cheating. He, O Jajali, is
said to know what morality or righteousness is, who is always the friend
of all creatures and who is always engaged in the good of all creatures,
in thought, word, and deed. I never solicit any one. I never quarrel
with any one, I never cherish aversion for any one. I never cherish
desire for anything. I cast equal eyes upon all things and all
creatures. Behold, O Jajali, this is my vow! My scales are perfectly
even, O Jajali, with respect to all creatures. <span
id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_647) I neither praise nor blame the acts of
others, viewing this variety in the world, O foremost of Brahmanas, to
be like the variety observable in the sky. <span
id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_648) Know, O Jajali, that I cast equal eye
upon all creatures. O foremost of intelligent men, I see no difference
between a clod of earth a piece of stone, and a lump of gold. As the
blind, the deaf, and they that are destitute of reason, are perfectly
consoled for the loss of their senses, after the same manner am I
consoled, by their example (for the enjoyments I abstain from). <span
id="fr_649"></span>[3](#fn_649) As they that are overtaken by
decrepitude, they that are afflicted by disease, and they that are
weakened and emaciated, have no relish for enjoyments of any kind, after
the same manner have I ceased to feel any relish for wealth or pleasure
or enjoyments. When a person fears nothing and himself is not feared,
when he cherishes no desire and hath no aversion for anything, he is
then said to attain to *Brahma*. When a person does not conduct himself
sinfully towards any creature in thought, word, or deed, then is he said
to attain to *Brahma*. There is no past, no future. There is no morality
or righteousness. He who is not an object of fear with any creature
succeeds in attaining to a state in which there is no fear. <span
id="fr_650"></span>[4](#fn_650) On the other hand, that person who for
harshness of speech and severity of temper, is a source of trouble unto
all creatures even as death itself, certainly attains to a state which
abounds with fear. I follow the practices of high-souled and benevolent
men of advanced years who with their children and children's children
live in the due observance of the ordinance laid down in the
scriptures. <span id="fr_651"></span>[5](#fn_651) The eternal practices
(laid down in the Vedas) are entirely given up by one who suffers
himself to be stupefied by some errors that he may have noticed in the
conduct of those that are admittedly good and wise. One, however, that
is endued with learning, or one that has subdued one's senses, or one
that is

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

possessed of strength of mind, succeeds in attaining to Emancipation,
guided by that very conduct. <span id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_652) That
wise man who, having restrained his senses, practiseth, with a heart
cleansed from all desire of injuring others, the conduct that is
followed by those called good, is sure, O Jajali, to acquire the merit
of righteousness (and Emancipation which is its fruits). In this world,
as in a river, a piece of wood that is being borne away by the current
as it pleases, is seen to come into contact (for some time) with another
piece that is being similarly borne away. There, on the current, other
pieces of wood that had been joined together, are seen again to separate
from one another. Grass, sticks, and cowdung cakes are seen to be united
together. This union is due to accident and not to purpose or
design. <span id="fr_653"></span>[2](#fn_653) He of whom no creature is
frightened in the least is himself, O ascetic, never frightened by any
creature. He, on the other hand, O learned man, of whom every creature
is frightened as of a wolf, becomes himself filled with fear as aquatic
animals when forced to leap on the shore from fear of the roaring
*Vadava* fire. <span id="fr_654"></span>[3](#fn_654) This practice of
universal harmlessness hath arisen even thus. One may follow it by every
means in one's power. He who has followers and he who has wealth may
seek to adopt it. It is sure to lead also to prosperity and
heaven. <span id="fr_655"></span>[4](#fn_655) Inconsequence of their
ability to dispel the fears of others, men possessed of wealth and
followers are regarded as foremost by the learned. They that are for
ordinary happiness practise this duty of universal harmlessness for the
sake of fame; while they that are [truly](errata.htm#104) skilled,
practise the same for the sake of attaining to *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_656"></span>[5](#fn_656) Whatever fruits one enjoys by penances,
by sacrifices, by practising liberality, by speaking the truth, and by
paying court to wisdom, may all be had by practising the duty of
harmlessness. That person who gives unto all creatures the assurance of
harmlessness obtains the merit of all sacrifices and at last wins
fearlessness for himself as his reward. There is no duty superior to the
duty of

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

abstention from injuring other creatures. He of whom, O great ascetic,
no creature is frightened in the least, obtains for himself fearlessness
of all creatures. He of whom everybody is frightened as one is of a
snake ensconced within one's (sleeping) chamber, never acquires any
merit in this world or in the next. The very gods, in their search after
it, become stupefied in the track of that person who transcends all
states, the person, *viz*., who constitutes himself the soul of all
creatures and who looketh upon all creatures as identical with his own
self. <span id="fr_657"></span>[1](#fn_657) Of all gifts, the assurance
of harmlessness to all creatures is the highest (in point of merit). I
tell thee truly, believe me, O Jajali! One who betakes himself to acts
at first wins prosperity, but then (upon the exhaustion of his merit) he
once more encounters adversity. Beholding the destruction of (the merits
of) acts, the wise do not applaud acts. There is no duty, O Jajali, that
is not prompted by some motive (of happiness). Duty, however, is very
subtile. Duties have been laid down in the Vedas for the sake of both
*Brahma* and heaven. <span id="fr_658"></span>[2](#fn_658) The subject
of duties hath many secrets and mysteries. It is so subtile that it is
not easy to understand it fully. Amongst diverse conflicting ordinances,
some succeed in comprehending duty by observing the acts of the
good. <span id="fr_659"></span>[3](#fn_659) Why dost thou not consume
them that emasculate bulls and bore their noses and cause them to bear
heavy burthens and bind them and put them under diverse kinds of
restraint, and that eat the flesh of living creatures after slaying
them? Men are seen to own men as slaves, and by beating, by binding, and
by otherwise subjecting them to restraints, cause them to labour day and
night. These people are not ignorant of the pain that results from
beating and fastening in chains. <span id="fr_660"></span>[4](#fn_660)
In every creature that is endued with the five senses live all the
deities. Surya, Chandramas, the god of wind, Brahman, Prana, Kratu, and
Yama (these dwell in living creatures), There are men that live by
trafficking in living creatures! When they earn a living by such a
sinful course, what scruples need they feel in selling dead carcases?
The goat is Agni. The sheep is Varuna. The horse is Surya. Earth is the
deity Virat. The cow and the calf are Soma. The man who sells these can
never obtain success. But what fault can attach to the sale of oil, or
of Ghrita, or honey, or drugs, O regenerate one? There are many animals
that grow up in ease and comfort in places free from gnats and biting
insects. Knowing that they are loved

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

dearly by their mothers, men persecute them in diverse ways, and lead
them into miry spots abounding with biting insects. Many draft animals
are oppressed with heavy burthens. Others, again, are made to languish
in consequence of treatment not sanctioned by the scriptures. I think
that such acts of injury done to animals are in no way distinguished
from foeticide. People regard the profession of agriculture to be
sinless. That profession, however, is certainly fraught with cruelty.
The iron-faced plough wounds the soil and many creatures that live in
the soil. Cast thy eyes, O Jajali, on those bullocks yoked to the
plough. Kine are called in the Srutis the Unslayable. That man
perpetrates a great sin who slays a bull or a cow. <span
id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_661) In days of yore, many Rishis with
restrained senses addressed Nahusha, saying, 'Thou hast, O king, slain a
cow which is declared in the scriptures to be like unto one's mother.
Thou hast also slain a bull, which is declared to be like unto the
Creator himself. <span id="fr_662"></span>[2](#fn_662) Thou hast
perpetrated an evil act, O Nahusha, and we have been exceedingly pained
at it.' For cleansing Nahusha, however, they divided that sin into a
hundred and one parts and converting the fragments into diseases cast
them among all creatures. <span id="fr_663"></span>[3](#fn_663) Thus, O
Jajali, did those highly-blessed *Rishis* cast that sin on all living
creatures, and addressing Nahusha who had been guilty of foeticide,
said, 'We shall not be able to pour libations in thy sacrifice.' Thus
said those high-souled *Rishis* and Yatis conversant with the truths of
all things, having ascertained by their ascetic power that king Nahusha
had not been intentionally guilty of that sin. <span
id="fr_664"></span>[4](#fn_664) These, O Jajali, are some of the wicked
and dreadful practices that are current in this world. Thou practisest
them because they are practised by all men from ancient times, and not
because they agree with the dictates of thy cleansed understanding. One
should practise what one considers to be one's duty, guided by reasons,
instead of blindly following the practices of the world. Listen now, O
Jajali, as to what my behaviour is towards him that injures and him that
praises me. I regard both of them in the same light. I have none whom I
like and none whom I dislike. The wise applauded such a course of
conduct as consistent with duty or religion. Even this course of
conduct, which is consistent with reasons, is followed by Yatis. The
righteous always observe it with eyes possessed of improved vision.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_644"></span>[233:2](m12b089.htm#fr_644) In some of the
Bengal texts, verse consists of 3 lines. The 3rd line, however, is
omitted in the Bombay edition.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[233:3](m12b089.htm#fr_645) The commentator
observes that in the second line the speaker explains what morality with
its mysteries is.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[233:4](m12b089.htm#fr_646) *Padmaka* or
*Padma-kashta* is the rootstock of Nymphoea lotus. A kind of medicinal
wood also is indicated by it, which is brought from Malwa and Southern
India. To this day, it enters into the composition of many drugs used by
Hindu Physicians. *Tunga* is either the filaments of the lotus, or the
tree called *Punnaga* which is identified with the Calophyllum
inophyllum of the Linnean genera. The Bombay reading *parichcchinnaih*
for *parachcchinnaih* does not seem to be correct.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[234:1](m12b089.htm#fr_647) In the Bengal
editions, verse consists of one line. In the Bombay text, it is included
with the 10th verse which is made a triplet. The meaning is that
weighing creatures I regard all of them as equal. In my scales a
Brahmana does not weigh heavier than a Chandala, or an elephant heavier
than a dog or cat.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[234:2](m12b089.htm#fr_648) The sense is this:
there is variety in this world. It is, however, like the variety of
aspects which the sky shows. It is the same Godhead that manifests
itself in diverse forms even as it is the same sky that puts forth
various aspects in consequence of the appearance and disappearance of
clouds.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[234:3](m12b089.htm#fr_649)
*Devairapihita-dwarah* means persons whose doors (senses) have been
closed by the deities, *i.e.*, men with senses that are defective or
lost.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[234:4](m12b089.htm#fr_650) That state is
*Brahma*, and there is no fear of return from it. Hence, it is called
*abhayam padam*.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[234:5](m12b089.htm#fr_651) The commentator
explains that the mention of *putra-pautrinam* indicates that
*kulachara* or family practices (if not very cruel) are authoritative.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[235:1](m12b089.htm#fr_652) The correct reading
seems to be *vimuchyate*.--The sense is this: there is an eternal course
of righteousness as laid down in the Vedas. That which is called the
conduct of the good may sometimes be stained by some errors. Fools, led
by this, give up righteousness itself. On the other hand, wise men,
avoiding those errors, take what is good and are saved. An old saying is
cited by the commentator to the effect that when all is threatened, a
wise man gives up half for saving the remainder. A fool, however, gives
up the whole when only half is threatened with destruction.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[235:2](m12b089.htm#fr_653) The word *iha* in
verse is the only indication of the speaker's desire to allude to the
union of relatives in this world.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[235:3](m12b089.htm#fr_654) K.P. Singha.
quietly omits the second half of the second line. The Burdwan
translator, as usual, blunders in rendering it. The fact is, *krosatah*
is not an adjective of *vrikat*, but stands for the roaring Vadava fire.
The commentator distinctly mentions *drishtante Vadavagnih*.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[235:4](m12b089.htm#fr_655) Both the Vernacular
translators have misunderstood this verse.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[235:5](m12b089.htm#fr_656) *Alpahrillekhah* is
explained by the commentator as *alpam vahyasukham hridilekheva
pratishthitam yesham*; hence, men who seek ordinary felicity, *viz*.,
that which has a termination. The *patavah* are of course, the truly
wise, *i.e.*, those that seek felicity that is unending. *Kritsna* is
*Brahma*; *tadartham abhayadanamitinirnaya yesham*, *i.e.*, the truly
wise practice it for the sake of *Brahma*. It is almost impossible to
understand verses such as these without the aid of the commentator.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[236:1](m12b089.htm#fr_657) *Padashinah* has
reference to *Devah*. The *sandhi* in *Devapi* is *arsha*. The deities
become stupefied in his *track*, *i.e.*, fail to see or find it out, for
such a man is *apadah*, *i.e.*, transcends the highest regions of
felicity, such as even the region of Brahman, because of their
non-eternity. Such a man attains to *Brahma*, which is infinite and
eternal.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[236:2](m12b089.htm#fr_658) *Bhuta* is
explained by the commentator as *Brahma*, and *Bhavya*, as heaven or the
regions of felicity in the next world. In the Vedas both kinds of duties
occur, such as *Samah*, etc., for Brahma, and sacrifices, &c., for
heaven.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[236:3](m12b089.htm#fr_659) The commentator
cites some conflicting ordinances about the slaughter of kine. The
subject of duty, is thus confused, contradictory declarations being
noticeable in the Vedas.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[236:4](m12b089.htm#fr_660) *Badha* here means
striking or beating. If taken in the sense of 'death' the meaning would
be putting some to death so that others may be frightened. These verses
are a noble protest against the institution of slavery.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[237:1](m12b089.htm#fr_661) Some texts read
*Prishadhro-gamlavanniva*, meaning *Prishadhara* perpetrated a great sin
by killing a cow (mistaking it for a tiger, as the story goes).

<span id="fn_662"></span>[237:2](m12b089.htm#fr_662) The cow is called
the mother because of the use to which she is subservient. Her milk
nourishes every infant as much as the mother's bosom. The bull, again,
is *Prajapati*, because like *Prajapati* he creates offspring and
assists man in the production of food.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[237:3](m12b089.htm#fr_663) Nahusha had killed
a cow and a bull for honouring the *Rishis*. The latter, however,
expressed their dissatisfaction at the act, and cleansed him of the sin
in the manner indicated in the text. The commentator cites the instance
of how Indra was cleansed of the sin of Brahmanicide. The *Rishis*, in
compassion, distributed the sin among all beings of the feminine sex.
That sin manifests itself in their periodical flows and the consequent
impurity.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[237:4](m12b089.htm#fr_664) The commentator
explains that the *Rishis* addressed Nahusha in that style even when
they knew that he had not intentionally slain the cow and the bull. The
object of the speaker is to show the enormity of the act when done
intentionally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXIII](m12b090)
