[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b018) 
[Next](m12b020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXCII

"Bhrigu said, 'Forest recluses seeking the acquisition of virtue go to
sacred waters and rivers and springs, and undergo penances in lone and
secluded woods abounding with deer and buffaloes and boars and tigers
and wild

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

elephants. They forsake all kinds of robes and food and enjoyments for
which people living in society have a taste. They subsist abstemiously
upon wild herbs and fruits and roots and leaves of diverse kinds. The
bare ground is their seat. They lie down on the bare earth or rocks or
pebbles or gravel or sand or ashes. They cover their limbs with grass
and animal skins and barks of trees. They never shave their heads and
beards or pare their nails. They perform their ablutions at regular
intervals. They pour libations on the ground, as also on the sacred fire
at the proper time without fail. They never enjoy any rest till
completion of their daily gathering of the sacred fuel (for their *homa*
fires) and sacred grass and flowers (for sacrifice and worship) and till
they have swept and rubbed clean (their sacrificial altars). They bear
without the least regard cold and heat, and rain and wind, and,
therefore, the skin of their bodies is cracked all over; and in
consequence of observing and laying down for themselves various kinds of
rites and vows and acts, their flesh and blood and skin and bones become
emaciated. <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) Endued with great
patience and fortitude, they live, always practising the quality of
goodness. That person who, with restrained soul, observes such a course
of duties originally ordained by regenerate *Rishis*, burns all his sins
like fire and obtains regions of felicity difficult of attainment.'

"I shall now describe the conduct of those called *Parivrajakas*. That
is as follows: freeing themselves from attachment to the sacred fire,
wealth, spouse and children, and robes, seats, beds, and such other
objects of enjoyment, and breaking the bonds of affection, they roam
about, regarding with an equal eye a clump of earth or rock and gold.
They never set their hearts on the acquisition or enjoyment of the
triple aggregate. They cast an equal eye on foes and friends and
neutrals or strangers. They never injure, in thought, word, or deed,
immobile things or creatures that are viviparous, or oviparous or born
of filth, or called vegetables. They have no homes. They roam over hills
and mountains, upon shores of rivers or seas, under shades of trees, and
among temples of deities. They may go to towns or villages for
residence. In a town, however, they should not live for more than five
nights, while in a village their residence should never exceed one
night. Entering a town or a village, they should, for the support of
life, repair to the abodes of only Brahmanas of liberal deeds. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81) They should never ask for any alms except
what is thrown into the (wooden) bowls they carry. They should free
themselves from lust, wrath, pride, cupidity, delusion, miserliness,
deceit, slander, vanity, and injury to living creatures. On this subject
there are some verses: that person, who, observing the vow of
taciturnity, roveth without giving any creature cause of fear, is never
inspired with any fear himself by any

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

creature. That learned person who performs the *Agnihotra* (not by
kindling of, external fire but) with the aid of the fire that is his own
body, indeed, who poureth libations into his own mouth and upon the fire
that exists in his own body, succeeds in attaining to numerous regions
of felicity in consequence of that fire being fed with such libations
obtained by a life of eleemosynation. That person of regenerate birth
who observes in the aforesaid way this mode of life having Emancipation
for its end, with a pure heart and with an understanding freed from
resolution, attains to *Brahma* after the manner of a tranquil ray of
light that is not fed by any blazing fuel.'

"Bharadwaja said, 'Beyond this region (that we inhabit) there is a
region that we have heard of but never seen. I desire to know all about
it. It behoveth thee to describe it to me.'

"Bhrigu said, 'Towards the north, on the other side of Himavat, which is
sacred and possessed of every merit, there is a region that is sacred,
blessed, and highly desirable. That is called the other world. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) The men that inhabit that region are
righteous in act, pious, of pure hearts, freed from cupidity and errors
of judgment, and not subject to afflictions of any kind. That region is,
indeed, equal to heaven, possessed as it is of such excellent
attributes. Death comes there at the proper season. Diseases never touch
the inhabitants. <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83) Nobody cherishes
any desire for the wives of other people. Every one is devoted to his
own wife. These people do not afflict or kill one another, or covet one
another's things. There no sin occurs, no doubt arises. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[3](#fn_84) There the fruits of all (religious) acts
are visible. There some enjoy seats and drinks and viands of the best
kind, and live within palaces and mansions. There some, adorned with
ornaments of gold, surround themselves with every article of enjoyment.
There are, again, some that eat very abstemiously, for only keeping body
and soul together. There some, with great toil, seek to hold the
life-breaths. <span id="fr_85"></span>[4](#fn_85) Here (in this region
that is inhabited by us), some men are devoted to righteousness and some
to deceit. Some are happy and some miserable; some are poor and some
rich. Here toil, and fear and delusion, and painful hunger make their
appearance. Here cupidity for wealth is also seen, a passion that
stupefies even those that are learned amongst men. Here diverse opinions
prevail, broached by those that do deeds which are righteous or sinful.
That man possessed of wisdom who knows all those opinions which may be
divided into two kinds, is never stained by sin. Deceit With fraud,
theft, slander, malice, oppression, injury, treachery, and untruth,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

and vices that detract from the merit of his penances who practises
them. He, on the other hand, possessed of learning, who avoids them,
finds the merit of his penances increased. Here there is much reflection
about acts that are righteous and those that are unrighteous. This
region that we inhabit is the field of action. Having done good and evil
here, one obtains good for his good acts and evil for acts that are
evil. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) Here the very Creator in days
of yore, and all the gods with the *Rishis*, having performed proper
penances, become cleansed and attain to *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) The northern portion of the earth is
highly auspicious and sacred. Those belonging to this region (that we
inhabit) that are doers of righteous deeds or that show regard for
*yoga*, become born in that region. Others (that are of a different
disposition) take their births in the intermediate species. Some again,
when their allotted periods run out, become lost on earth. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88) Employed in feeding upon one another and
stained by cupidity and delusion, these mea return to this very region
without being able to go (after death) to that northern region. Those
men of wisdom who with vows and observant of *Brahmacharyya* listen with
veneration to the instructions of preceptors, succeed in knowing the
ends reserved for all classes of men. I have now told thee in brief the
course of duties ordained by Brahman. He, indeed, is said to be
possessed of intelligence who knows what is righteousness and what its
reverse in this world.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus, O king, did Bhrigu speak unto Bharadwaja of
great energy. Of soul highly virtuous, the latter became filled with
wonder and worshipped the great sage with veneration. Thus, O monarch,
the origin of the universe has been narrated to thee in detail. What, O
thou of great wisdom, dost thou wish to hear after this?"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[40:1](m12b019.htm#fr_80) *Niyama* is explained
by the commentator as a rite; *upayoga* as a vow about food; *charyya*
as an act like visiting sacred waters; *vihita* is *vidhana*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[40:2](m12b019.htm#fr_81) The Hindus had no poor
laws. The injunctions of their scriptures have always sufficed to
maintain the poor, particularly their religious mendicants. The
mendicants themselves are restrained from disturbing the householders
often. None again save the well-to-do were to be visited by the
mendicants, so that men of scanty means might not be compelled to
support the recluses.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[41:1](m12b019.htm#fr_82) The words used by
Bharadwaja in the question are capable of being construed as an enquiry
after the next world. Bhrigu also, in his answer, uses the word *Paro
lokah*. The reference to Himavat, therefore, is explained by the
commentator as metaphorical. The whole answer of Bhrigu, however, leaves
little room for doubt that the sage speaks of a region on earth and not
in the invisible world after death.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[41:2](m12b019.htm#fr_83) Nilakantha would read
*amritya* for *mritya*. It is a forced correction for keeping up the
metaphorical sense.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[41:3](m12b019.htm#fr_84) All knowledge there is
certain.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[41:4](m12b019.htm#fr_85) *i.e.*, to practise
*yoga*. The Bengal reading is *dharanam*. The commentator goes or
explaining all the verses as metaphorical. Considerable ingenuity is
displayed by him, and he even cites the *Srutis* in support.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[42:1](m12b019.htm#fr_86) This at least is a
verse that evidently refers to the other or the next world, and,
therefore, lends colour to the supposition that throughout the whole
passage, it is the next world and no fictitious region north of the
Himalayas that is described. Some western scholars think that a verbal
translation is all that is necessary. Such passages, however, are
incapable of being so rendered. The translator must make his choice of,
either taking the verses in a plain or a metaphorical sense. If he
inclines towards the latter, he cannot possibly give a verbal version.
The genius of the two tongues are quite different.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[42:2](m12b019.htm#fr_87) Pushkara in Rajputanah
is supposed to be the spot where Brahman underwent his penances.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[42:3](m12b019.htm#fr_88) The Burdwan translator
makes a mess of this verse 21 runs into 22 as explained by the
commentator. K.P. Singha avoids the blunder, although in rendering the
last line of 22 he becomes rather inaccurate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXCIII](m12b020)
