[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b046) 
[Next](m12b048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### SECTION CCXX

"Yudhishthira said, 'By doing what does one acquire happiness, and what
is that by doing which one meets with woe? What also is that, O Bharata,
by doing which one becomes freed from fear and sojourns here crowned
with success (in respect of the objects of life)?'

"Bhishma said, 'The ancients who had their understandings directed to
the *Srutis*, highly applauded the duty of self-restraint for all the
orders generally but for the. Brahmanas in especial. Success in respect
of religious rites never occurs in the case of one that is not
self-restrained. Religious rites, penances, truth,--all these are
established upon self-restraint. Self-restraint enhances one's energy.
Self-restraint is said to be sacred. The man of self-restraint becomes
sinless and fearless and wins great results. One that is self-restrained
sleeps happily and wakes happily. He sojourns happily in the world and
his mind always remains cheerful. Every kind of excitement is quietly
controlled by self-restraint. One that is not self-restrained fails in a
similar endeavour. The man of self-restraint beholds his innumerable
foes (in the form of lust, desire, and wrath, etc.), as if these dwell
in a separate body. Like tigers and other carnivorous beasts, persons
destitute of self-restraint always inspire all creatures with dread. For
controlling these men, the Self-born (Brahman) created kings. In all the
(four) modes of life, the practice or self-restraint is distinguished
above all other virtues. The fruits of self-restraint are much greater
than those obtainable in all the modes of life. I shall now mention to
thee the indications of those persons who prize self-restraint
highly. <span id="fr_329"></span>[1](#fn_329) They are nobility,
calmness of disposition, contentment, faith, forgiveness, invariable
simplicity, the absence of garrulity, humility, reverence for superiors,
benevolence, compassion for all creatures, frankness, abstention from
talk upon kings and men in authority, from all false and useless
discourses, and from applause and censure of others. The self-restrained
man becomes desirous of emancipation and, quietly bearing present joys
and griefs, is never exhilarated or depressed by prospective ones.
Destitute of vindictiveness and all kinds of guile, and unmoved by
praise and blame, such a man is well-behaved, has good manners, is pure
of soul, has firmness or fortitude, and is a complete master of his
passions. Receiving honours in this world, such a man in afterlife goes
to heaven. Causing all creatures to acquire what they cannot acquire
without his aid, such a man rejoices and becomes happy. <span
id="fr_330"></span>[2](#fn_330) Devoted to universal benevolence, such a
man never cherishes animosity for any one. Tranquil like the ocean at a
dead calm, wisdom fills his soul and he is never cheerful. Possessed of
intelligence, and deserving of universal reverence, the man of
self-restraint never cherishes fear of any creature and is feared by no
creature in return. That man who never rejoices even at large
acquisitions and never feels sorrow when overtaken by calamity, is said
to be possessed of contented wisdom. Such a man is said to be
self-restrained. Indeed, such a

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

man is said to be a regenerate being. Versed with the scriptures and
endued with a pure soul, the man of self-restraint, accomplishing all
those acts that are done by the good, enjoys their high fruits. They,
however, that are of wicked soul never betake themselves to the path
represented by benevolence, forgiveness, tranquillity, contentment,
sweetness of speech, truth, liberality and comfort. Their path consists
of lust and wrath and cupidity and envy of others and boastfulness.
Subjugating lust and wrath, practising the vow of Brahmacharya and
becoming a complete master of his senses, the Brahmana, exerting himself
with endurance in the austerest of penances, and observing the most
rigid restraints, should live in this world, calmly waiting for his time
like one seeming to have a body though fully knowing that he is not
subject to destruction.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[123:1](m12b047.htm#fr_329) *Samudayah* is
explained by the commentator as equivalent to *hetu*.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[123:2](m12b047.htm#fr_330) Giving food and
clothes to the poor and needy in times of scarcity is referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXI](m12b048)
