[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b111) 
[Next](m12b113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth thee, O sire, to tell me those names by
which Daksha, that progenitor of creatures, adored the great deity. O
sinless one, a reverent curiosity impels me to hear them.'

"Bhishma said, 'Hear, O Bharata, what the names, both secret and
proclaimed, are of that god of gods, that deity of extraordinary feats,
that ascetic of secret vows.'

"Daksha said, 'I bow to thee, O lord of all the gods to the destroyer of
the forces of the *Asuras*. Thou art the paralyser of the strength of
the celestial chief himself. Thou art adored by both gods and Danavas.
Thou art thousand-eyed, thou art fierce-eyed, and thou art three-eyed.
Thou art the friend of the ruler of the Yakshas. Thy hands and feet
extend in all directions to all places. Thy eyes also and head and mouth
are turned on all sides. Thy ears too are everywhere in the universe,
and thou art thyself everywhere, O Lord! Thou art shaft-eared, thou art
large-eared, and thou art pot-eared. Thou art the receptacle of the
Ocean. Thy ears are like those of the elephant, or of the bull, or like
extended palms. Salutations to thee! Thou hast a hundred stomachs, a
hundred revolutions, and a hundred tongues. I bow to thee! The utterers
of the Gayatri sing thy praises in uttering the Gayatri, and the
worshippers of the Sun adore thee in adoring the Sun. The *Rishis*
regard thee as Brahmana, as Indra, and as the (illimitable) firmament
above. O thou of mighty form, the Ocean and the Sky are thy two forms.
All the deities dwell in thy form even as kine dwell within the fold. In
thy body I behold Soma, and Agni, and the lord of the Waters, and
Aditya, and Vishnu, and Brahmana, and Vrihaspati. Thou, O illustrious
one, art Cause and Effect and Action and Instrument of everything unreal
and real, and thou art Creation and Destruction. I bow unto thee that
art called Bhava and Sarva and Rudra. I bow unto thee that art the giver
of boons. I bow always unto thee that art the Lord of all creatures.
Salutations to thee that art the slayer of Andhaka. Salutations to thee
that hast three matted locks, to thee that hast three heads, to thee
that art armed with an excellent trident; to thee that hast three eyes
and that art, therefore, called Tryamvaka and Trinetra!

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Salutations to thee that art the destroyer of
the triple city! Salutations to thee that art called Chanda, and Kunda;
to thee that art the (universal) egg and also the bearer of the
(universal) egg; to thee that art the holder of the ascetic's stick, to
thee that hast ears everywhere, and to thee that art called Dandimunda!
Salutations to thee whose teeth and hair are turned upwards, to thee
that art stainless and white, and that art stretched all over the
universe; to thee that art red, to thee that art tawny, and to thee that
hast a blue throat! Salutations to thee that art of incomparable form,
that art of dreadful form, and that art highly auspicious! To thee that
art Surya, that hast a garland of Suryas round thy neck, and that hast
standards and flags bearing the device of Surya. Salutations to thee
that art the Lord of spirits and ghosts, to thee that art bull-necked,
and that art armed with the bow; to thee that crushest all foes, to thee
that art the personification of chastisement, and to thee that art clad
in leaves (of trees) and rags. Salutations to thee that bearest gold in
thy stomach, to thee that art cased in golden mail, to thee that art
gold-crested, to thee that art the lord of all the gold in the world!
Salutations to thee that hast been adored, that deservest to be adored,
and that art still being adored; to thee that art all things, that
devourest all things, and that art the soul of all things! Salutations
to thee that art the *Hotri* (in sacrifices), that art the (Vedic)
*mantras* uttered (in sacrifices), and that ownest white flags and
standards. Salutations to thee that art the navel of the universe, that
art both cause and effect in the form of the five primal elements, and
that art the coverer of all covers. Salutations to thee that art called
Krisanasa, that art of thin limbs, and that art thin. Salutations to
thee that art always cheerful and that art the personification of
confused sounds and voices. Salutations to thee that art about to be
stretched on the earth, that art already stretched, and that standing
upright. Salutations to thee that art fixed, that art running, that art
bald, and that bearest matted locks on thy head. Salutation to thee that
art fond of dancing and that strikest thy puffed cheeks making thy mouth
a drum. <span id="fr_907"></span>[1](#fn_907) Salutations to thee that
art fond of lotuses that blow in rivers, and that art always fond of
singing and playing on musical instruments. Salutations to thee that art
the eldest-born, that art the foremost of all creatures, and that art
the crusher of the *Asura* Vala. Salutations to thee that art the Master
of Time, that art the personification of Kalpa; that art the embodiment
of all kinds of destruction, great and small. Salutations to thee that
laughest awfully and as loud as the beat of a drum, and that observest
dreadful vows! Salutations for ever to thee that art fierce, and that
hast ten arms. Salutations to thee that art armed with bones and that
art fond of the ashes of funeral pyres. Salutations to thee that art
awful, that art terrible to behold, and that art an observer of dreadful
vows and practices. Salutations to thee that ownest an ugly mouth, that
hast a tongue resembling a scimitar, and that hast large teeth.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Salutations to thee that art fond of both cooked
and uncooked meat, and that regardest the gourded *Vina* as highly dear.
Salutations to thee that causest rain, that helpest the cause of
righteousness, that art identifiable with the form of Nandi, and that
art Righteousness' self! Salutations to thee that art ever moving like
wind and the other forces, that the controller of all things, and that
art always engaged in cooking all creatures (in the cauldron of
Time). <span id="fr_908"></span>[1](#fn_908) Salutations to thee that
art the foremost of all creatures, that art superior, and that art the
giver of boons. Salutations to thee that hast the best of garlands, the
best of scents, and the best of robes, and that givest the best of boons
to the best of creatures. Salutations to thee that art attached, that
art freed from all attachments, that art of the form of Yoga
contemplation, and that art adorned with a garland of *Akshas*.
Salutations to thee that art united as cause and disunited as effects,
and that art the form of shadow and of light. Salutations to thee that
art amiable, and that art frightful, and that art exceedingly so.
Salutations to thee that art auspicious, that art tranquil, and that art
most tranquil. Salutations to thee that art of one leg and many eyes,
and that hast only one head; to thee that art fierce, to thee that art
gratified with little offerings, and thee that art fond of equity.
Salutations to thee that art the artificer of the universe, and that art
ever united with the attribute of tranquillity. Salutations to thee that
bearest a foe-frightening bell, that art of the form of the jingle made
by a bell, and that art of the form of sound when it is not perceptible
by the ear. <span id="fr_909"></span>[2](#fn_909) Salutations to thee
that art like a thousand bells jingled together, and that art fond of a
garland of bells, that art like the sound that the life-breaths make,
that art of the form of all scents and of the confused noise of boiling
liquids. Salutations to thee that art beyond three *Huns*, and that art
fond of two *Huns*. Salutations to thee that art exceedingly tranquil,
and that hast the shade of mountain trees for thy habitation. <span
id="fr_910"></span>[3](#fn_910) Thou art fond of the heart-flesh of all
creatures, that cleansest from all sins, and that art of the form of
sacrificial offerings. Salutations to thee that art of the form of
Sacrifice, that art the Sacrificer himself, that art the Brahmana into
whose mouth is poured the sacrificial butter, and that art the fire into
which is poured the butter inspired with *mantras* <span
id="fr_911"></span>[4](#fn_911) Salutations to thee that art of the form
of (sacrificial) Ritwijes, that hast thy senses under control, that art
made of Sattwa, and that hast Rajas also in thy make. Salutations to
thee that art of the banks of Rivers, of Rivers themselves, and of the
lord of all Rivers (*viz*., the Ocean)! Salutations to thee that art the
giver of food, that art the lord of all food, and that art identical
with him that takes

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

food! Salutations to thee that hast a thousand heads and a thousand
feet-, to thee that hast a thousand tridents uplifted in thy hands, and
a thousand eyes! Salutations to thee that art of the form of the rising
Sun, and that art of the form of a child, that art the protector of
attendants all of whom are of the form of children, <span
id="fr_912"></span>[1](#fn_912) and that art, besides, of the form of
children's toys. Salutations to thee that art old, that art covetous,
that art already agitated, and that art about to be agitated.
Salutations to thee that hast locks of hair marked by the current of the
Ganges, and that hast locks of hair resembling blades of *Munja* grass!
Salutations to thee that art gratified with the six (well-known) acts,
and that art devoted to the performance of the three acts. <span
id="fr_913"></span>[2](#fn_913) Salutations to thee that hast assigned
the duties of the respective modes of life. Salutations to thee that
deservest to, be praised in sounds, that art of the form of sorrow, and
that art of the form of deep and confused noise. Salutations to thee
that hast eyes both white and tawny, as also dark and red. Salutations
to thee that hast conquered thy vital breaths, that art of the form of
weapons, that rivest all things, and that art exceedingly lean.
Salutations to thee that always discoursest of Religion, Pleasure,
Profit, and Emancipation. Salutations to thee that art a Sankhya, that
art the foremost of Sankhyas, and that art the introducer of the
Sankhya-Yoga. <span id="fr_914"></span>[3](#fn_914) Salutations to thee
that hast a car and that art without a car (for thy journeys). <span
id="fr_915"></span>[4](#fn_915) Salutations to thee that hast the
intersections of four roads for thy car; to thee that hast the skin of a
black deer for thy upper garments, and that hast a snake for thy sacred
thread. Salutations to thee that art Isana, that art of body as hard as
thunderbolt, and that art of green locks. Salutations to thee that art
of three eyes, that art the lord of Amvika, that art Manifest, and that
art Unmanifest. <span id="fr_916"></span>[5](#fn_916) Salutations to
thee that art Desire, that art the Giver of all desires, that art the
Killer of all desires, and that art the discriminator between the
gratified and the ungratified. Salutations to thee that art all things,
the Giver of all things, and the Destroyer of all things. Salutations to
thee that art the hues which appear in the evening sky. Salutations to
thee that art of mighty strength, that art of mighty arms, that art a
mighty Being, and that art of great

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

effulgence. Salutations to thee that lookest like a mighty mass of
clouds, and that art the embodiment of eternity! Salutations to thee
that art of well-developed body, that art of emaciated limbs, that
bearest matted locks on thy head, and that art clad in barks of trees
and skins of animals. Salutations to thee that hast matted locks as
effulgent as the Sun or the Fire, and that hast barks and skins for thy
attire. Salutations to thee that art possessed of the effulgence of a
thousand Suns, and that art ever engaged in penances. Salutations to
thee that art the excitement of Fever and that art endued with matted
locks drenched with the waters of the Ganges characterised by hundreds
of eddies. Salutations to thee that repeatedly revolvest the Moon, the
Yugas, and the clouds. <span id="fr_917"></span>[1](#fn_917) Thou art
food, thou art he who eats that food, thou art the giver of food, thou
art the grower of food, and thou art the creator of food. Salutations to
thee that cookest food and that eatest cooked food, and that art both
wind and fire! O lord of all the lords of the gods, thou art the four
orders of living creatures, *viz*., the viviparous, the oviparous, the
filth-born, and plants. Thou art the Creator of the mobile and immobile
universe, and thou art their Destroyer! O foremost of all persons
conversant with *Brahma*, they that are conversant with Brahma regard
thee as Brahma! The utterers of Brahma say that thou art the Supreme
source of Mind, and the Refuge upon which Space, Wind, and Light rest.
Thou art the Richs and the Samans, and the syllable Om. O foremost of
all deities, those utterers of Brahma that sing the Samans constantly
sing thee when they utter the syllables Hayi-Hayi, Huva-Hayi, and
Huva-Hoyi. <span id="fr_918"></span>[2](#fn_918) Thou art made up of the
Yajuses, of the Richs, and of the offerings poured on the sacrificial
fire. The hymns contained in the Vedas and the Upanishads adore
thee! <span id="fr_919"></span>[3](#fn_919) Thou art the Brahmanas and
the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, and the Sudras, and the other castes formed
by intermixture. Thou art those masses of clouds that appear in the sky;
thou art Lightning; and thou art the roar of thunder. Thou art the year,
thou art the seasons, thou art the month, and thou art the fortnight.
Thou art Yuga, thou art the time represented by a twinkle of the eye,
thou art *Kashtha*, thou art the Constellations, thou art the Planets,
thou art Kala. Thou art the tops of all trees, thou art the highest
summits of all mountains. Thou art the tiger among the lower animals,
thou art Garuda among birds, and thou art Ananta among snakes. Thou art
the ocean of milk among all oceans and thou art the bow among
instruments for hurling weapons. Thou art the thunder among weapons, and
thou art Truth among vows. Thou art Aversion and thou art Desire: thou
art attachment and thou art stupefaction (of judgment): thou art
Forgiveness and thou art Unforgiveness. Thou art Exertion, and thou art
Patience: thou art Cupidity: thou art Lust and thou art Wrath: thou art
Victory and thou art Defeat. Thou art armed with mace, and thou art
armed with shaft: thou art armed with the bow, and thou

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

bearest the *Khattanga* and the *Jharjhara* in thy hands. Thou art he
who cuttest down and piercest and smitest. Thou art he who leads (all
creatures) and he who gives them pain and grief. Thou art Righteousness
which is marked by ten virtues; thou art Wealth or Profit of every kind;
and thou art Pleasure. Thou art Ganga, thou art the Oceans, thou art the
Rivers, thou art the lakes, and thou art the tanks. Thou art the thin
creepers, thou art the thicker creeping plants, thou art all kinds of
grass, and thou art the deciduous herbs. Thou art all the lower animals
and thou art the birds. Thou art the origin of all objects and acts, and
thou art that season which yields fruits and flowers. Thou art the
beginning and thou art the end of the Vedas; thou art the *Gayatri*, and
thou art Om. Thou art Green, thou art Red, thou art Blue, thou art Dark,
thou art of Bloody hue, thou art of the colour of the Sun, thou art
Tawny, thou art Brown, and thou art Dark blue. <span
id="fr_920"></span>[1](#fn_920) Thou art without colour, thou art of the
best colour, thou art the maker of colours, and thou art without
comparison. Thou art of the name of Gold, and thou art fond of Gold.
Thou art Indra, thou art Yama, thou art the Giver of boons, thou art the
Lord of wealth, and thou art Agni. Thou art the Eclipse, thou art the
Fire called Chitrabhanu, thou art Rahu, and thou art the Sun. Thou art
the fire upon which sacrificial butter is poured. Thou art He who pours
the butter. Thou art He in honour of whom the butter is poured, thou art
the butter itself that is poured, and thou art the puissant Lord of all.
Thou art those sections of the Brahmans that are called *Trisuparna*,
thou art all the Vedas; and thou art the sections called Satarudriya in
the Yajuses. Thou art the holiest of holies, and the auspicious of all
auspicious things. Thou animatest the inanimate body. Thou art the Chit
that dwellest in the human form. Invested with attributes, thou becomest
subject to Destruction. Thou art Jiva, that is He who is never subject
to destruction when uninvested with attributes. Thou art full yet thou
becomest liable to decay and death in the form of the body which is
Jiva's accompaniment. Thou art the breath of life, and thou art Sattwa,
thou art Rajas, thou art Tamas, and thou art not subject to error. Thou
art the breaths called Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, and Vyana. Thou art
the opening of the eye and shutting of the eye. Thou art the act of
Sneezing and thou art the act of Yawning. Thou art of red eyes which are
ever turned inwards. Thou art of large mouth and large stomach. <span
id="fr_921"></span>[2](#fn_921) The bristles on thy body are like
needles. The beard is green. Thy hair is turned upwards. Thou art
swifter than the swiftest. Thou art conversant with the principles of
music both vocal and instrumental, and fond of both vocal and
instrumental music. <span id="fr_922"></span>[3](#fn_922) Thou art a
fish roving in the waters, and thou art a fish entangled in the net.
Thou art full, thou art fond of sports, and thou art of the form of all
quarrels and disputes. Thou art Time, thou art bad time,

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

thou art time that is premature, and thou art time that is
over-mature. <span id="fr_923"></span>[1](#fn_923) Thou art the killing,
thou art the razor (that kills), and thou art that which is killed. Thou
art the auxiliary and thou art the adversary, and thou art the destroyer
of both auxiliaries and adversaries. Thou art the time when clouds
appear, thou art of large teeth, and thou art Samvartaka and
Valahaka. <span id="fr_924"></span>[2](#fn_924) Thou art manifest in the
form of splendour. Thou art concealed in consequence of being invested
with Maya (or illusion). Thou art He who connects creatures with the
fruits of their acts. Thou hast a bell in thy hand. Thou playest with
all mobile and immobile things (as with thy toys). Thou art the cause of
all causes. Thou art a *Brahma* (in the form of *Pranava*), thou art
Swaha; thou art the bearer of the Danda, thy head is bald, and thou art
he who has his words, deeds and thoughts under control. <span
id="fr_925"></span>[3](#fn_925) Thou art the four Yugas, thou art the
four Vedas, thou art He from whom the four (Sacrificial) fires have
flowed. <span id="fr_926"></span>[4](#fn_926) Thou art the Director of
all the duties of the four modes of life. Thou art the maker of the four
Orders. Thou art always fond of dice. Thou art cunning. Thou art the
chief of the spirits distributed into *ganas* (clans), and their ruler.
Thou art adorned with red garlands and attired in robes that are red.
Thou sleepest on the mountain-breast, and thou art fond of the red hue.
Thou art the artisan; thou art the foremost of artists; and it is thou
from whom all arts have flowed. Thou art the tearer of the eyes of
Bhaga; thou art Fierce, and thou art He who destroyed the teeth of
Pushan. <span id="fr_927"></span>[5](#fn_927) Thou art Swaha, thou art
Swadha, thou art Vashat, thou art Salutation's form, and thou art the
words *Namas-Namas* uttered by all worshippers. Thy observances and thy
penances are not known to others. Thou art *Pranava*; thou art the
firmament bespangled with myriads of stars. Thou art Dhatri, and
Vidhatri, and Sandhatri, Vidhatri, and the Refuge of all things in the
form of the Supreme cause, and thou art independent of all Refuge. Thou
art conversant with Brahma, thou art Penance, thou art Truth, thou art
the soul of Brahmacharya, and thou art Simplicity. <span
id="fr_928"></span>[6](#fn_928) Thou art the soul of creatures, thou art
the Creator of all creatures, thou art absolute Existence, and thou art
the Cause whence the Past, the Present, and the Future, have sprung.
Thou art Earth, thou art Firmament, and thou art Heaven. Thou art
Eternal, thou art Self-restrained, and thou art the great god. Thou art

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

initiated, and thou art not initiated. Thou art forgiving; thou art
unforgiving; and thou art the chastiser of all who are rebellious. Thou
art the lunar month, thou art the cycle of the Yugas (*i.e.*, *Kalpa*),
thou art Destruction, and thou art Creation. Thou art Lust, thou art the
vital seed, thou art subtile, thou art gross, and thou art fond of
garlands made of Karnikara flowers. Thou hast a face like that of Nandi,
thou hast a face that is terrible, thou hast a handsome face, thou hast
an ugly face, and thou art without a face. Thou hast four faces, thou
hast many faces, and thou hast a fiery face when engaged in battles.
Thou art gold-stomached (*i.e.*, Narayana), thou art (unattached to all
things like) a bird (unattached to the earth whence it derives its food
and to which it belongs), thou art Ananta (the lord of mighty snakes),
and thou art Virat (hugest of the huge). Thou art the destroyer of
Unrighteousness, thou art called Mahaparswa, thou art Chandradhara, and
thou art the chief of the spirit-clans. Thou lowedst like a cow, thou
wert the protector of kine, and thou hast the lord of bulls for thy
attendant. <span id="fr_929"></span>[1](#fn_929) Thou art the protector
of the three worlds, thou art Govinda, thou art the director of the
senses, and thou art incapable of being apprehended by the senses. Thou
art the foremost of all creatures, thou art fixed, thou art immobile,
thou tremblest not, and thou art of the form of trembling! <span
id="fr_930"></span>[2](#fn_930) Thou art incapable of being resisted,
thou art the destroyer of all poisons, thou art incapable of being borne
(in battle), and thou art incapable of being transcended, thou canst not
be made to tremble, thou canst not be measured, thou canst not be
vanquished, and thou art victory. <span id="fr_931"></span>[3](#fn_931)
Thou art of swift speed, thou art the Moon, thou art Yama (the universal
destroyer), thou bearest (without flinching) cold and heat and hunger
and weakness and disease. Thou art all mental agonies, thou art all
physical diseases, thou art the curer of all diseases, and thou art
those diseases themselves which thou curest. Thou art the destroyer of
my Sacrifice which had endeavoured to escape in the form of deer. Thou
art the advent and the departure of all diseases. Thou hast a high
crest. Thou hast eyes like lotus-petals. Thy habitation is in the midst
of a forest of lotuses. Thou bearest the ascetic's staff in thy hands.
Thou hast the three Vedas for thy three eyes. Thy chastisements are
fierce and severe. Thou art the destroyer of the egg (whence the
universe springs). Thou art the drinker of both poison and fire, thou
art the foremost of all deities, thou art the drinker of Soma, thou art
the lord of the Maruts. <span id="fr_932"></span>[4](#fn_932) Thou art
the

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

drinker of Nectar. Thou art the Master of the universe. Thou shinest in
glory, and thou art the lord of all the shining ones. Thou protectest
from poison and death, and thou drinkest milk and Soma. Thou art the
foremost of the protectors of those that have fallen off from heaven,
and thou protectest him who is the first of the deities. <span
id="fr_933"></span>[1](#fn_933) Gold is thy vital seed. Thou art male,
thou art female, thou art neuter. Thou art an infant, thou art a youth,
thou art old in years with thy teeth worn out, thou art the foremost of
Nagas, thou art Sakra, thou art the Destroyer of the universe, and thou
art its Creator. Thou art Prajapati, and thou art adored by the
Prajapatis, thou art the supporter of the universe, thou hast the
universe for thy form, thou art endued with great energy, and thou hast
faces turned towards all directions. The Sun and the Moon are thy two
eyes, and the Grandsire is thy heart. Thou art the Ocean. The goddess
Saraswati is thy speech and Fire and Wind are thy might. Thou art Day
and Night. Thou art all acts including the opening and the shutting of
the eye. Neither Brahman, nor Govinda, nor the ancient Rishis, are
competent to understand thy greatness, O auspicious deity, truly. Those
subtile forms which thou hast are invisible to us. Rescue me and, O,
protect me as the sire protects the son of his loins. O, protect one! I
deserve thy protection. I bow to thee, O sinless one! Thou, O
illustrious one, art full of compassion for thy devotees. I am always
devoted to thee. Let him be always my protector who stayeth alone on the
other side of the ocean, in a form that is difficult to be apprehended,
and overwhelming many thousands of persons! <span
id="fr_934"></span>[2](#fn_934) I bow to that Soul of Yoga who is beheld
in the form of an effulgent Light by persons that have their senses
under control, that are possessed of the attribute of Sattwa, that have
regulated their breaths, and that have conquered sleep. <span
id="fr_935"></span>[3](#fn_935) I bow to him who is endued with matted
locks, who bears the ascetic's staff in his hand, who is possessed of a
body having a long abdomen, who has a *kamandalu* tied to his back, and
who is the Soul of Brahman. I bow to Him who is the soul of water, in
whose hair are the clouds, in the joints of whose body are the rivers,
and in whose stomach are the four oceans. I seek the protection to Him
who, when the end of the Yuga comes, devours all creatures and stretches
himself (for sleep) on the wide expanse of water that covers the
universe. Let him who entering Rahu's mouth drinketh Soma in the night
and who becoming Swarbhanu devoureth Surya also, protect me! <span
id="fr_936"></span>[4](#fn_936) The deities, who are mere infants and
who have all sprung from thee after

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahman's creation, enjoy their respective
shares (in sacrificial offerings). Let them (peacefully) enjoy those
offerings made with Swaha and Swadha, and let them derive pleasure from
those presents. I bow to them. <span id="fr_937"></span>[1](#fn_937) Let
those Beings that are of the stature of the thumb and that dwell in all
bodies, always protect and gratify me. <span
id="fr_938"></span>[2](#fn_938) I always bow to those Beings who
dwelling within embodied creatures make the latter cry in grief without
themselves crying in grief, and who gladden them without themselves
being glad. I always bow to those Rudras who dwell in rivers, in oceans,
in hills and mountains, in mountain-caves, in the roots of trees, in
cow-pens, in inaccessible forests, in the intersections of roads, in
roads, in open squares, in banks (of rivers and lakes and oceans), in
elephant-sheds, in stables, in car-sheds, in deserted gardens and
houses, in the five primal elements, and in the cardinal and subsidiary
directions. I bow repeatedly unto them that dwell in the space amidst
the Sun and the Moon, as also in rays of the Sun and the Moon, and them
that dwell in the nether regions, and them that have betaken themselves
to Renunciation and other superior practices for the sake of the
Supreme. <span id="fr_939"></span>[3](#fn_939) I bow always unto them
that are unnumbered, that are unmeasured, and that have no form, unto
those Rudras, that is, that are endued with infinite attributes. Since
thou, O Rudra, art the Creator of all creatures, since, O Hara, thou art
the Master of all creatures, and since thou art the indwelling Soul of
all creatures, therefore wert thou not invited by me (to my Sacrifices).
Since thou art He who is adored in all sacrifices with plentiful gifts,
and since it is Thou that art the Creator of all things, therefore I did
not invite thee. Or, perhaps, O god, stupefied by thy subtile illusion I
failed to invite thee. Be gratified with me, blessed by thyself, O
Bhava, with me possessed by the quality of Rajas. My Mind, my
Understanding, and my Chitta all dwell in thee, O god!

"Hearing these adorations, that Lord of all creatures, *viz*., Mahadeva,
ceased (to think of inflicting further injuries on Daksha). Indeed,
highly gratified, the illustrious deity addressed Daksha, saying, 'O
Daksha of excellent vows, pleased have I been with these adorations of
thine. Thou needst not praise me more. Thou shalt attain to my
companionship. Through my grace, O progenitor of creatures, thou shalt
earn the fruit of a thousand horse-sacrifices, and a hundred Vajapeyas
(in consequence of this one incomplete sacrifice of thine).

"Once more, Mahadeva, that thorough master of words, addressed Daksha
and said unto him these words fraught with high consolation, 'Be thou
the foremost of all creatures in the world. Thou shouldst not, O Daksha,
entertain any feelings of grief for these injuries inflicted on thy
Sacrifice. It has been

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

seen that in former *Kalpas* too I had to destroy thy Sacrifice. <span
id="fr_940"></span>[1](#fn_940) O thou of excellent vows, I shall grant
thee again some more boons. Take them from me. Dispelling this
cheerlessness that overspreads thy face, listen to me with undivided
attention. With the aid of arguments addressed to reason the deities and
the Danavas have extracted from the Vedas consisting of six branches and
from the system of Sankhya and Yoga a creed in consequence of which they
have practised the austerest penances for many long years. The religion,
however, which I have extracted, is unparalleled, and productive of
benefits on every side. It is open to men in all modes of life to
practise it. It leads to Emancipation. It may be acquired in many years
or through merit by persons who have restrained their senses. It is
shrouded in mystery. They that are divested of wisdom regard it as
censurable. It is opposed to the duties laid down in respect of the four
orders of men and the four modes of life, and agrees with those duties
in only a few particulars. They that are well-skilled in the science of
(drawing) conclusions (from premises) can understand its propriety: and
they who have transcended all the modes of life are worthy of adopting
it. In days of yore, O Daksha, this auspicious religion called Pasupata
had been extracted by me. The proper observance of that religion
produces immense benefits. Let those benefits be thine, O highly blessed
one! Cast off this fever of thy heart.' Having said these words,
Mahadeva, with his spouse (Uma) and with all his attendants disappeared
from the view of Daksha of immeasurable prowess. He who would recite
this hymn that was first uttered by Daksha or who would listen to it
when recited by another, would never meet with the smallest evil and
would attain to a long life. Indeed, as Siva is the foremost of all the
deities, even so is this hymn, agreeable with the *Srutis*, is the
foremost of all hymns. Persons desirous of fame, kingdom, happiness,
pleasure, profit, and wealth, as also those desirous of learning, should
listen with feelings of devotion to the recital of this hymn. One
suffering from disease, one distressed by pain, one plunged into
melancholy, one afflicted by thieves or by fear, one under the
displeasure of the king in respect of his charge, becomes freed from
fear (by listening or reciting this hymn). By listening to or reciting
this hymn, one, in even this earthly body of his, attains to equality
with the spirits forming the attendants of Mahadeva. One becomes endued
with energy and fame, and cleansed of all sin (through the virtue of
this hymn). Neither Rakshasas, nor Pisachas, nor ghosts, nor Vinayakas,
create disturbances in his house where this hymn is recited. That woman,
again, who listens to this hymn with pious faith, observing the while
the practices of Brahmacharya, wins worship as a goddess in the family
of her sire and that of her husband. <span
id="fr_941"></span>[2](#fn_941) All the acts of that person become
always crowned with success who listens or recites with rapt attention
to the whole of this hymn. In consequence of the recitation of this hymn
all the wishes one forms in one's mind and all the wishes one clothes in
words become crowned

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

with fruition. That man obtains all objects of enjoyment and pleasure
and all things that are wished for by him, who, practising
self-restraint, makes according to due rites offerings unto Mahadeva,
Guha, Uma, and Nandi, and after that utters their names without delay,
in proper order and with devotion. Such a man, departing from this life,
ascends to heaven, and has never to take birth among the intermediate
animals or birds. This was said even by the puissant Vyasa, the son of
Parasara.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_907"></span>[319:1](m12b112.htm#fr_907) Every worshipper of
Mahadeva must fill his mouth with air and then, shutting his lips,
strike his cheeks, letting the air gently out at each stroke, and
helping it with air from the lungs for keeping the current steady. By
doing this a kind of noise is made like *Bom*, *Bom*, *Babam*, *Bom*.
Mahadeva is himself fond of this music and is represented as often
making [???](errata.htm#130).

<span id="fn_908"></span>[320:1](m12b112.htm#fr_908) Vrisha is explained
by the commentator as *vrishti-kartri*; *Vrishya* as
*Dharmavriddhikartri*; *Go-vrisha* as *Nandirupa*; *Katankata* as
*Nityagamanasila*; *Danda* as *Niyantri*.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[320:2](m12b112.htm#fr_909) Godhead is
frequently likened to *anahatasavda* or sound not perceptible by the
ear, or sound in its nascent state.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[320:3](m12b112.htm#fr_910) *Huns* are mystic
sounds that stand as emblems for various things. 'Beyond three *Huns*
means, perhaps, 'beyond the influence of wrath.'

<span id="fn_911"></span>[320:4](m12b112.htm#fr_911) In Sacrifice the
butter is poured with *mantras* into the mouth of a selected Brahmana
who represents the gods, and into also the sacred fire. What is said
here is that the great god is of the form of that Brahmana and of the
sacred fire.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[321:1](m12b112.htm#fr_912) This alludes to the
sports of Krishna in the groves of Vrinda with the rustic children who
were his companions.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[321:2](m12b112.htm#fr_913) The sacred stream
of the Ganges, issuing out of Vishnu's feet, is held by Brahman in his
*Kamandalu* or jar. Thence it issues out, and coursing through the
heavens fall down on the head of Siva, for Siva alone is mighty enough
to bear that fall. The matted locks of Siva bear the mark of the fall.
This six well-known acts here referred to are *Yajana*, *Yajana*,
*Adhyayana*, *Adhyapana*, *Dana*, and *Pratigraha* (*i.e.*, performing
sacrifices, assisting at the sacrifices of others, studying, teaching,
making gifts, and accepting gifts). The three acts in which Siva is
engaged are *Yajana*, *Adhyayana*, and *Dana* (*i.e.*, the first, the
third, and the fifth in the above enumeration).

<span id="fn_914"></span>[321:3](m12b112.htm#fr_914) The commentator
explains that by *Sankhya* the speaker means 'the propounder of the
sceptical philosophy.' By *Sankhya-mukhya* which I render, 'the foremost
of Sankhyas' is meant 'follower of the theistic philosophy of
Patanjala.' By *Sankhya-yoga* is meant both *Vedanta* and *Yoga*.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[321:4](m12b112.htm#fr_915) 'That hast a car
and that hast no car' means, as the commentator explains, 'capable of
coursing, without obstruction, through Water, Fire, Wind, and Space.'

<span id="fn_916"></span>[321:5](m12b112.htm#fr_916) *Isana* is 'much
desired' or 'much coveted by all persons.'

<span id="fn_917"></span>[322:1](m12b112.htm#fr_917) *i.e.*, thou
createst and destroyest these repeatedly or settest them in motion.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[322:2](m12b112.htm#fr_918) These are syllables
with all singers of the Samans utter for lengthening short words in
order to keep up the metre.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[322:3](m12b112.htm#fr_919) *i.e.*, He who is
adored in these hymns is thyself and no other.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[323:1](m12b112.htm#fr_920) These are the ten
colours known to the *Rishis*.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[323:2](m12b112.htm#fr_921)
*Lohitantargata-drishtih* is explained by the commentator as *Lohita
antargata cha drishtirasya*. By 'red eyes' is, of course, meant eyes of
the colour of the lotus. By 'eyes turned inwards' is meant one whose
gaze is upon his soul, *i.e.*, one who is engaged in *Samadhi*.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[323:3](m12b112.htm#fr_922) *Chalachalah* is
explained as exceedingly *chalah* or swift. *Achalah* is *nasti chalo
yasmat*; hence *chaleshu* (*api*) *achalah* is swift amongst the swift,
or swifter than the swiftest.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[324:1](m12b112.htm#fr_923) The great god is a
fish wandering in the waters, *i.e.*, as *Jiva* wanders in space; he is
a fish in the net, *i.e.*, as *Jiva*, invested with Darkness or
Illusion, is obliged to take birth.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[324:2](m12b112.htm#fr_924) *Meghakala* is the
time when clouds appear, *i.e.*, the time of the universal deluge.
*Samvartaka* and *Valahaka* are the two clouds that appear on the
occasion of the universal destruction.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[324:3](m12b112.htm#fr_925) *Mili-Mili* is
explained by the commentator differently. According to him, one
connected with all things as cause is *Mili*. It is duplicated to show
that Siva is always so. I prefer taking the word as meaning 'cause of
causes.' 'The bearer of Danda, with, again, a bald head' is a
*Paramahansa*, *i.e.*, one who has renounced the world and its ways.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[324:4](m12b112.htm#fr_926) The four
Sacrificial fires are *Treta*, *Avasathya*, *Dakshina*, and *Sahya*.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[324:5](m12b112.htm#fr_927) *Silpika* is one
who is not well-skilled, or is ill-skilled, in the arts. It implies a
common artisan.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[324:6](m12b112.htm#fr_928) *Dhatri* is
*adikartri* or Vishnu. *Vidhatri* is the four-headed. Brahman
*Sandhatri* is he who joins all things into one; the second *Vidhatri*
means the designer of destinies.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[325:1](m12b112.htm#fr_929) The identity of
Maheswara with Narayana or Krishna is here preached. In his incarnation
of Krishna, Vishnu sported with the children of the cowherds of Vrinda
and sportively lowed as a cow. He also protected the kine of Vrinda from
floods, poison, etc. *Govrisheswara* is Nandi, the attendant of
Mahadeva.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[325:2](m12b112.htm#fr_930) The word *Go* in
*Gomargah* is used to signify the senses.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[325:3](m12b112.htm#fr_931) *Durvaranah* is
explained by the commentator as 'irresistible when coming as Death.'
*Durvishah* is 'destroyer of all kinds of poison in thy form of Amrita.'
*Durdharshah* is incapable of being frightened. *Durvishah* is incapable
of being measured.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[325:4](m12b112.htm#fr_932) *Vishagnipah* is
drinker of poison and fire. Siva is represented as the acceptor of all
things that are rejected by others. In this consists his true divinity,
for to the Deity nothing in the universe can be unacceptable or worthy
of being cast off. The ashes of the funeral pyre are <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> his, the poison produced by the churning of
the ocean was his. He saved the universe by swallowing the poison on
that occasion.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[326:1](m12b112.htm#fr_933) *Tushitadyapah* is
the correct reading. Thou protectest him who is the *adya* of the
*tushita*, *i.e.*, thou protectest Brahman himself.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[326:2](m12b112.htm#fr_934) The commentator
explains that what is meant by Mahadeva's staying 'alone' is that he is
the knower, the known, and knowledge. 'On the other side of the ocean'
means 'on the other side of desire and attachment, etc.' 'Overwhelming
many thousands of persons' means overwhelming all creatures,' *i.e.*,
transcending them by his energy and knowledge.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[326:3](m12b112.htm#fr_935) Of course, Yogins
are spoken of.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[326:4](m12b112.htm#fr_936) The eclipses of
both the Moon and the Sun are caused, according to the Pauranic
mythology, by Rahu devouring the Moon and the Sun at certain well-known
intervals. Rahu is an *Asura* whose head only is still alive. *Vide* Adi
Parva, On Churning of the Ocean.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[327:1](m12b112.htm#fr_937) *Garbhah* means
embryos or infants in the womb. The deities ere referred to by this
word, for they are embryos that have been born in Mahadeva, *Patitah*
has *twattah* understood after it. *Anu* means 'after' *i.e.*, 'after
Brahman's creation.'

<span id="fn_938"></span>[327:2](m12b112.htm#fr_938) These Beings are
Rudras or portions of the great Rudra.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[327:3](m12b112.htm#fr_939) *Tasmaih
paramgatah*,--*param* is *utkrishtam* *i.e.*, Renunciation and other
superior practices. *Tasmai* is 'for the sake of That,' *i.e.*, for
*Iswarah*.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[328:1](m12b112.htm#fr_940) Hence in this, the
present *Kalpa* too, I am obliged to do the same, for all Kalpas must be
similar in respect of the events that transpire in them.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[328:2](m12b112.htm#fr_941) *Matri-pakshe*
seems to be a misreading for *bhartripakshe*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXXVI](m12b113)
