[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b015) 
[Next](m12b017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXXXIX

"Bharadwaja said, 'By what acts does one become a Brahmana? By what, a
Kshatriya? O best of regenerate ones, by what acts again does one become
a Vaisya or a Sudra? Tell me this, O foremost of speakers.'

"Bhrigu said, 'That person is called a Brahmana who has been sanctified
by such rites as those called *jata* and others; who is pure in
behaviour; who is engaged in studying the Vedas; who is devoted to the
six well-known acts (of ablutions every morning and evening, silent
recitation of *mantras*, pouring libations on the sacrificial fire,
worshipping the deities, doing the duties of hospitality to guests, and
offering food to the *Viswedevas*); who is properly observant of all
pious acts; who never takes food without having offered it duly to gods
and guests; who is filled with reverence for his preceptor; and who is
always devoted to vows and truth. He is called a Brahmana in whom are
truth, gifts, abstention from injury to others, compassion, shame,
benevolence, <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) and penance. He who is
engaged in the profession of battle, who studies the Vedas, who makes
gifts (to Brahmanas) and takes wealth (from those he protects) is called
a Kshatriya. He who earns fame from keep of cattle, who is employed in
agriculture and the means of acquiring wealth, who is pure in behaviour
and attends to the study of the Vedas, is called a Vaisya. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) He who takes pleasure in eating every kind
of food, who is engaged in doing every kind of work, who is impure in
behaviour, who does not study the Vedas, and whose conduct is unclean,
is said to be a Sudra. If these characteristics be observable in a
Sudra, and if they be not found in a Brahmana, then such a Sudra is no
Sudra, and, such a Brahmana is no Brahmana. By every means should
cupidity and wrath be restrained. This as also self-restraint, are the
highest results of Knowledge. Those two passions (*viz*., cupidity and
wrath), should, with one's whole heart, be resisted. They make their
appearance for destroying one's highest good. One should always protect
one's prosperity from one's wrath, one's penances from pride; one's
knowledge from honour and disgrace; and one's soul from error. That
intelligent person, O regenerate one, who does all acts without desire
of fruit, whose whole wealth exists for charity, and who performs the
daily *Homa*, is a real Renouncer. <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66)
One should conduct oneself as a friend to all creatures, abstaining from
all acts of injury. Rejecting the acceptance of all gifts, one

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

should, by the aid of one's own intelligence, be a complete master of
one's passions. One should live in one's soul where there can be no
grief. One would then have no fear here and attain to a fearless region
hereafter. One should live always devoted to penances, and with all
passions completely restrained; observing the vow of taciturnity, and
with soul concentrated on itself; desirous of conquering the unconquered
senses, and unattached in the midst of attachments. All things that can
be perceived by the senses are called Manifest. All, however, that is
Unmanifest, that is beyond the ken of the senses, that can be
ascertained only by the subtile senses, should be sought to be
known. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) If there be no faith, one
will never succeed in attaining to that subtile sense. Therefore, one
should hold oneself in faith. The mind should be united with *Prana*,
and *Prana* should then be held within Brahma. By dissociating oneself
from all attachments, one may obtain absorption into Brahma. There is no
need of attending to any other thing. A Brahmana can easily attain to
Brahma by the path of Renunciation. The indications of a Brahmana are
purity, good behaviour and compassion unto all creatures.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[34:1](m12b016.htm#fr_64) The word *Ghrina* may
also mean aversion. Of course, here it would mean, if used in that
sense, aversion for all unrighteous acts.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[34:2](m12b016.htm#fr_65) The first half of the
first line of 6 is differently read in the Bombay edition. Both readings
are noticed by Nilakantha. I have adhered to the Bengal reading, though
the Bombay reading is clearer in sense. *Visati* is a transitive verb
having *Pratishtha* or some such noun for its object. The literal
meaning is He who acquires fame, etc.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[34:3](m12b016.htm#fr_66) Here the speaker
describes the character of *Karma-sannyasa* (renunciation of acts).
*Samarambha* generally means all kinds of acts. Here, however, only
sacrifices and other scriptural rites are intended. I follow Nilakantha
in rendering the second line, although the plain meaning would seem to
be "who poureth everything in gift."

<span id="fn_67"></span>[35:1](m12b016.htm#fr_67) The gross world is
perceivable by the ordinary senses. Behind the gross world is a subtile
one which the subtile senses *i.e.*, the senses when sharpened by
*yoga*, can perceive. With death, the gross body alone is dissolved The
subtile body or form, called the *Linga-sarira*, and made up of what is
called the *Tanmatras* of the primal elements, remains. Even that
retains all the characteristics of the world in an incipient form. The
*Linga-sarira* also must be destroyed before absorption into *Brahma*
can take place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXC](m12b017)
