[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b068) 
[Next](m12b070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXLII

"Suka said, 'I have now understood that there are two kinds of creation,
*viz*.,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

one commencing with *Kshara* (which is universal), and which is from the
(universal) Soul. The other, consisting of the senses with their
objects, is traceable to the puissance of the knowledge. This last
transcends the other and is regarded to be the foremost. <span
id="fr_487"></span>[1](#fn_487) I desire, however, to once more hear of
that course of righteousness which runs in this world, regulated by the
virtue of Time and according to which all good men frame their
conduct. <span id="fr_488"></span>[2](#fn_488) In the Vedas there are
both kinds of declarations, *viz*., do acts and avoid acts. How shall I
succeed in ascertaining the propriety of this or that? It behoveth thee
to expound this clearly. <span id="fr_489"></span>[3](#fn_489) Having
obtained, through thy instructions, a thorough knowledge of the course
of conduct of human beings, having purified myself by the practice of
only righteousness, and having cleansed my understanding, I shall, after
casting off my body, behold the indestructible Soul.' <span
id="fr_490"></span>[4](#fn_490)

"Vyasa said, 'The course of conduct that was first established by Brahma
himself was duly observed by the wise and pious persons of old, *viz*.,
the great *Rishis* of ancient times. The great *Rishis* conquer all the
worlds by the practice of Brahmacharya. Seeking all things that are good
for himself by fixing the mind on the knowledge, <span
id="fr_491"></span>[5](#fn_491) practising severe austerities by
residing in the forest and subsisting on fruits and roots, by treading
on sacred spots, by practising universal benevolence, and by going on
his rounds of mendicancy at the proper time to the huts of forest
recluses when these become smokeless and the sound of the husking rod is
hushed, a person succeeds in attaining to *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_492"></span>[6](#fn_492) Abstaining from flattery and from bowing
thy heads to others, and avoiding both good and evil, live thou in the
forest by thyself,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

appeasing hunger by any means that comes by the way.'

"Suka said, 'The declarations of the Vedas (already referred to in
respect of acts) are, in the opinion of the vulgar, contradictory.
Whether this is authoritative or that is so, when there is this
conflict, how can they be said to be scriptural? <span
id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_493) I desire to hear this: how can both be
regarded as authoritative? How, indeed, can Emancipation be obtained
without violating the ordinance about the obligatory character of acts?'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, the son of Gandhavati, *viz*., the
*Rishi*, applauding these words of his son possessed of immeasurable
energy, replied unto him, saying the following.'

"Vyasa said, 'One that is a Brahmacharin, one that leads a life of
domesticity, one that is a forest recluse, and one that leads a life of
(religious) mendicancy, all reach the same high end by duly observing
the duties of their respective modes of life. Or, if one and the same
person, freed from desire and aversion, practises (one after another)
all these four modes of life according to the ordinances that have been
laid down, he is certainly fitted (by such conduct) to understand
Brahma. The four modes of life constitute a ladder or flight of steps.
That flight is attached to *Brahma*. By ascending that Right
one--succeeds in reaching the region of Brahma. For the fourth part of
his life, the Brahmacharin, conversant--with the distinctions of duty
and freed from malice, should live with his preceptor or his preceptor's
son. While residing in the preceptor's house, he should go to bed after
the preceptor has gone to his, and rise therefrom before the preceptor
rises from his. <span id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_494) All such acts
again as should be done by the disciple, as also those which should be
done by a menial servant, should be accomplished by him. Finishing these
he should humbly take his stand by the side of the preceptor. Skilled in
every kind of work, he should conduct himself like a menial servant,
doing every act for his preceptor. Having accomplished all acts (without
leaving any portion undone), he should study, sitting at the feet of his
preceptor, with eager desire to learn. He should always behave with
simplicity, avoid evil, speech, and take lessons only when his preceptor
invites him for it. <span id="fr_495"></span>[3](#fn_495) Become pure in
body and mind, and acquiring cleverness and other virtues, he

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

should now and then speak what is agreeable. Subduing his senses, he
should look at his preceptor without eyes of longing curiosity. <span
id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_496) He should never eat before his preceptor
has eaten; never drink before his preceptor has drunk; never sit down
before his preceptor has sat down; and never go to bed before his
preceptor has gone to bed. He should gently touch his preceptor's feet
with upturned palms, the right foot with the right and the left with the
left. Reverentially saluting the preceptor, he should say unto him, 'O
illustrious one, teach me. I shall accomplish this (work), O illustrious
one! This (other work) I have already accomplished. O regenerate one, I
am ready to accomplish whatever else thy reverend self may be pleased to
command.' Having said all this, and having duly offered himself unto him
(thus), he should accomplish whatever acts of his preceptor wait for
accomplishment, and having completed them inform the preceptor once more
of their completion. Whatever scents or tastes the Brahmacharin may
abstain from while actually leading a life of Brahmacharya may be used
by him after his return from the preceptor's abode. This is consistent
with the ordinance. Whatever observances have been elaborately laid down
for Brahmacharins (in the scriptures) should all be regularly practised
by him. He should, again, be always near his preceptor (ready within
call). Having contributed to his preceptor's gratification in this way
to the best of his powers, the disciple should, from that mode of life,
pass into the others (one after another) and practise the duties of
each. Having (thus) passed a fourth part of his life in the study of the
Vedas, and observance of vows and fasts, and having given the preceptor
the (final) fee, the disciple should, according to the ordinance, take
his leave and return home (for entering into a life of
domesticity). <span id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_497) Then, having taken
spouses, obtaining them in the ways indicated in the ordinances, and
having carefully established the domestic fire, he should, observant all
the while of vows and fasts, become a house-holder and pass the second
period of life.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_487"></span>[187:1](m12b069.htm#fr_487) I follow Nilakantha
substantially in his interpretation of this verse. Two kinds of creation
are here referred to as those of which Vyasa has spoken in the previous
Sections. The first is *Ksharat prabhriti yah sargah*, meaning that
creation which consists of the four and twenty entities commencing with
*Kshara* or *Prakriti*. The other creation, consisting of the senses
with their objects, represents *buddhaiswarya* or the puissance of the
*buddhi*, these being all *buddhikalpitah*. This second creation is also
*atisargah* which means, according to the commentator, *utkrishtah* and
which is also *pradhanah* or foremost, the reason being *bandhakatwam*
or its power to bind all individuals. I take *atisargah* to mean
'derivative creation,' the second kind of creation being derived from or
based upon the other, or (as I have put it in the text) transcends or
overlies the other.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[187:2](m12b069.htm#fr_488) It is explained in
previous sections how the course of righteousness is regulated by the
character of the particular Yuga that sets in.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[187:3](m12b069.htm#fr_489) Vyasa has already
explained the character of the two apparently hostile declarations. The
meaning of Suka's question, therefore, is that if two declarations are
only apparently hostile,--if, as explained in the *Gita*, they are
identical,--how is that identity to be clearly ascertained? The fact is,
Suka wishes his sire to explain the topic more clearly.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[187:4](m12b069.htm#fr_490) The course of
conduct of human beings,' *i.e.*, the distinctions between right and
wrong. *Vimuktatma* is taken by the commentator to imply *tyaktadehah*.
The second line may also mean 'having cast off (by *Yoga*) the
consciousness of body, I shall behold my own Soul.'

<span id="fn_491"></span>[187:5](m12b069.htm#fr_491) I do not follow the
commentator in his interpretation of this line.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[187:6](m12b069.htm#fr_492) 'When the huts
become smokeless,' *i.e.*, when the cooking and the eating of the
inmates are over. 'When the sound of the husking rod is hushed,' *i.e.*,
when the pestle for cleaning <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> rice no
longer works, and consequently when the inmates are not likely to be
able to give much to the mendicant.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[188:1](m12b069.htm#fr_493) There is an
apparent conflict between the two declarations. If both are
authoritative, they cannot be regarded to be scriptural declarations in
consequence of their conflict.. if one is so and the other not so, the
scriptural character of the latter at least is lost. The scriptures
cannot but be certain and free from fault. How then (the question
proceeds) is the scriptural character of both to be maintained?

<span id="fn_494"></span>[188:2](m12b069.htm#fr_494) The Burdwan
translator makes a ridiculous blunder in rendering *Jaghanyasayi*, which
he takes to mean 'sleeping on a wretched bed.' *Jaghanya* implies, here
as elsewhere, subsequence in point of time.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[188:3](m12b069.htm#fr_495) Both the Vernacular
translators have misunderstood the last part of the second line., It
does not mean that the disciple should approach the preceptor when
summoned, implying that he should be prompt to answer the summons, but
that he should not disturb his Preceptor by clamouring for lessons or
instruction. He should go to his preceptor for taking lessons only when
his preceptor summons him for it.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[189:1](m12b069.htm#fr_496) Meaning, he should
cast submissive or humble glances instead of staring boldly or rudely.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[189:2](m12b069.htm#fr_497) Learning was never
sold in this country in ancient times. The final fee is not a return for
the services of the preceptor but a token of gratitude from the pupil.
Its value depended upon the ability of the disciple, though there are
stories in the scriptures of disciples coming to grief on account of
their persistent forwardness in pressing the acceptance of this fee.
*Vide* the story of Galava in the Udyoga Parva.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXLIII](m12b070)
