[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b080) 
[Next](m12b082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLIV

"Vyasa said, 'There is a wonderful tree, called Desire, in the heart of
a man. It is born of the seed called Error. Wrath and pride constitute
its large trunk. The wish for action is the basin around its foot (for
holding the water that is to nourish it). Ignorance is the root of that
tree, and heedlessness is the water

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

that gives it sustenance. Envy constitutes its leaves. The evil acts of
past lives supply it with vigour. Loss of judgment and anxiety are its
twigs; grief forms its large branches; and fear is its sprout. Thirst
(after diverse objects) that is (apparently) agreeable forms the
creepers that twine round it on every side. Excessively greedy men,
bound in chains of iron, sitting around that fruit-yielding tree, pay
their adorations to it, in expectation of obtaining its fruit. <span
id="fr_596"></span>[1](#fn_596) He who, subduing those chains, cutteth
down that tree and seeks to cast off both sorrow and joy, succeeds in
attaining to the end of both. <span id="fr_597"></span>[2](#fn_597) That
foolish man who nourishes this tree by indulgence in the objects of the
senses is destroyed by those very objects in which he indulges after the
manner of a poisonous pill destroying the patient to whom it is
administered. <span id="fr_598"></span>[3](#fn_598) A dexterous person,
however, by the aid of Yoga, forcibly teareth up and cutteth with the
sword of *samadhi*, the far-reaching root of this tree. <span
id="fr_599"></span>[4](#fn_599) One who knows that the end of all acts
undertaken from only the desire of fruit is rebirth or chains that bind,
succeeds in transcending all sorrow. The body is said to be a city. The
understanding is said to be its mistress. The mind dwelling within the
body is the minister of that mistress whose chief function is to decide.
The senses are the citizen that are employed by the mind (upon the
service of the mistress). For cherishing those citizens the mind
displays a strong inclination for acts of diverse kinds. In the matter
of those acts, two great faults are observable, *viz*., Tamas and
Rajas. <span id="fr_600"></span>[5](#fn_600) Upon the fruits of those
acts rest those citizens along with the chiefs of the city (*viz*.,
Mind, Understanding, and Consciousness). <span
id="fr_601"></span>[6](#fn_601) The two faults (already spoken of) live
upon the fruits of those acts that are accomplished by forbidden means.
This being the case, the understanding, which of itself is unconquerable
(by either Rajas or Tamas), descends to a state of equality with the
mind (by becoming as much tainted as the mind that serves it). Then
again the senses, agitated by

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the stained mind, lose their own stability. Those objects again for
whose acquisition the understanding strives (regarding them to be
beneficial) become productive of grief and ultimately Meet with
destruction. Those objects, after destruction, are recollected by the
mind, and accordingly they afflict the mind even after they are lost.
The understanding is afflicted at the same time, for the mind is said to
be different from the understanding only when the mind is considered in
respect of its chief function of receiving impressions about whose
certainty it is no judge. In reality, however, the mind is identical
with the understanding. <span id="fr_602"></span>[1](#fn_602) The Rajas
(productive of only sorrow and evil of every kind) that is in the
understanding then overwhelms the Soul itself that lies over the
Rajas-stained understanding like an image upon a mirror. <span
id="fr_603"></span>[2](#fn_603) It is the mind that first unites in
friendship with Rajas. Having united itself, it seizes the soul, the
understanding, and the senses (like a false minister seizing the king
and the citizens after having conspired with a foe) and makes them over
to Rajas (with which it has united itself).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_593"></span>[216:1](m12b080.htm#fr_593) *Atikramanti* is
understood at the end of the verse. *Vajropamani* is explained by the
commentator as 'so undying that they are not destroyed at even the
universal destruction; hence, of course, the *karana* bodies.' The
*karana* bodies are the potentialities, existing in the *tanmatra* of
the elemental substances, of forming diverse kinds of linga bodies in
consequence of the acts of *Jiva* in previous periods of existence.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[216:2](m12b080.htm#fr_594) *Etat* is:
*maduktam vakyam*; *yogam* implies *yogapradhanam*. *Samadhau samam* has
reference to 'yogam.' What are the speaker wishes to say in this verse
is that *dhyana* is not laid down for Sannyasins alone but it is laid
down for all others as well.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[216:3](m12b080.htm#fr_595) *Pradhanam* is
*Avidya* or Ignorance. *Viniyoga* is *Viparinama*. The particle *anu*
always interpreted as 'following' the scriptures or some special branch
of knowledge that treats of the subject spoken of.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[217:1](m12b081.htm#fr_596) The correct reading
is *ayasaih* meaning 'made of iron,' and not 'ayasaih.' K.P. Singha
adheres to the incorrect reading. The chains of iron here are either the
diverse longings cherished by worldly men, or, perhaps, the bodies with
which men are invested.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[217:2](m12b081.htm#fr_597) The dual genitive
*duhkhayoh* is used because worldly *sukha* also is regarded as
*duhkha*. 'Tyajamannah' is equivalent to 'tyaktum ichccha.' It is an
instance of *hetau sanach*.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[217:3](m12b081.htm#fr_598) *Yena* is explained
as *Stryadina hetuna*. '*Sah*' is: *Stryadih*: *Samrohati* is:
*Vardhayati*. 'Tam' is: *Vardhakam*.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[217:4](m12b081.htm#fr_599) 'Uddhriyate' is
literally 'tears up.' The use of the word 'asina' suggests also
'cutting.' The root of the tree, of course, is Avidya or Ignorance.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[217:5](m12b081.htm#fr_600) K.P. Singha wrongly
translates the first line. The Burdwan translator quotes the gloss
without understanding it. The first half of the first line, literally
rendered, is 'the senses are the mind-citizens,' meaning, as the
commentator rightly explains, that they are citizens under the lead of
the mind. 'Tadartham' means 'for the sake of the senses,' *i.e.*, 'for
cherishing them.' *Prakritih* is *mahati kriya pravrittih*, *Tadartham*
is *kriyaphalam*, *i.e.*, happiness or misery. The meaning, in brief, is
this: the body is a city. The understanding is its mistress. The mind is
her principal servitor. The senses are the citizens under the lead of
the mind. In order to cherish the senses the mind engages in acts
productive of visible and invisible fruits *i.e.*, sacrifices and gifts,
and the acquisition of houses and gardens, etc. Those acts are liable to
two faults, *viz*., Rajas and Tamas. The senses (both in this life and
the succeeding ones) depend upon the fruits (happiness or misery) of
those acts.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[217:6](m12b081.htm#fr_601) The meaning is
this: the senses, the mind, the understanding, etc., are all due to
acts. These, therefore, are said to rest upon acts and draw their
sustenance therefrom.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[218:1](m12b081.htm#fr_602) I expand the first
line of 14 for giving the meaning clearly.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[218:2](m12b081.htm#fr_603) The sense is that
the understanding, being stained or afflicted, the Soul also becomes
stained or afflicted. *Enam* is *atmanam*. *Vidhritam* is 'placed like
an image upon a mirror.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLV](m12b082)
