[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b085) 
[Next](m12b087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'All men that inhabit this earth are filled with
doubts in respect of the nature of righteousness. Who is this that is
called Righteousness? Whence also does Righteousness come? Tell me this,
O Grandsire! Is Righteousness for service in this world or is it for
service in the next world? Or, is it for service both here and
hereafter? Tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'The practices of the good, the *Smritis*, and the Vedas,
are the three indications (sources) of righteousness. Besides these, the
learned have declared that the purpose (for which an act is
accomplished) is the fourth indication of righteousness. <span
id="fr_616"></span>[1](#fn_616) The *Rishis* of old have declared what
acts are righteous and also classified them as superior or inferior in
point of merit. The rules of righteousness have been laid down for the
conduct of the affairs of the world. In both the worlds, that is, here
and hereafter, righteousness produces happiness as its fruits. A sinful
person unable to acquire merit by subtile ways, becomes stained with sin
only. Some are of opinion that sinful persons can never be cleansed of
their sins. In seasons of distress, a person by even speaking an untruth
acquires the merit of speaking the truth, even as a person who
accomplishes an unrighteous act acquires by that very means the merit of
having done a righteous act. Conduct is the refuge of righteousness.
Thou shouldst know what righteousness is, aided by conduct. <span
id="fr_617"></span>[2](#fn_617) (It is the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

nature of man that he neither sees nor proclaims his own faults but
notices and proclaims those of others). The very thief, stealing what
belongs to others, spends the produce of his theft in acts of apparent
virtue. During a time of anarchy, the thief takes great pleasure in
appropriating what belongs to others. When others, however, rob him of
what he has acquired by robbery, he then wishes forthwith for a Icing
(for invoking punishment on the head of the offenders). At even such a
time, when his indignation for offended rights of property is at its
highest, he secretly covets the wealth of those that are contended with
their own. Fearlessly and without a doubt in his mind (when he is
himself the victim of a robbery) he repairs to the king's palace with a
mind cleansed of every sin. Within even his own heart he does not see
the stain of any evil act. <span id="fr_618"></span>[1](#fn_618) To
speak the truth is meritorious. There is nothing higher than truth.
Everything is upheld by truth, and everything rests upon truth. Even the
sinful and ferocious, swearing to keep the truth amongst themselves,
dismiss all grounds of quarrel and uniting with one another set
themselves to their (sinful) tasks, depending upon truth. If they
behaved falsely towards one another, they would then be destroyed
without doubt. One should not take what belongs to others. That is an
eternal obligation. Powerful men regard it as one that has been
introduced by the weak. When, however, the destiny of these men becomes
adverse, this injunction then meets with their approval. Then again they
that surpass others in strength or prowess do not necessarily become
happy. <span id="fr_619"></span>[2](#fn_619) Therefore, do not ever set
thy heart on any act that is wrong. One behaving in this way hath no
fear of dishonest men or thieves or the king. Not having done any injury
to any one, such a man lives fearlessly and with a pure heart. A thief
fears everybody, like a deer driven from the woods into the midst of an
inhabited village. He thinks other people to be as sinful as himself.
One that is of pure heart is always filled with cheerfulness and hath no
fear from any direction. Such a person never sees his own misconduct in
others. <span id="fr_620"></span>[3](#fn_620) Persons engaged in doing
good to all creatures have said that the practice of charity is another
high duty. They that are possessed of wealth think that this duty has
been laid down by those that are indigent. When, however, those wealthy
men meet with poverty in consequence of some turn of fortune, the
practice of charity then recommends itself to them. Men that are

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

exceedingly wealthy do not necessarily meet with happiness. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[1](#fn_621) Knowing how painful it is to himself, a
person should never do that to others which he dislikes when done to him
by others. <span id="fr_622"></span>[2](#fn_622) What can one who
becomes the lover of another man's wife say to another man (guilty of
the same transgression)? it is seen, however, that even such a one, when
he sees his lady with another lover, becomes unable to forgive the
act. <span id="fr_623"></span>[3](#fn_623) How can one who, to draw
breath himself think of preventing another by a murderous act, from
doing the same? Whatever wishes one entertains with respect to one's
ownself, one should certainly cherish with respect to another. With the
surplus wealth one may happen to own one should relieve the wants of the
indigent. It is for this reason that the Creator ordained the practice
of increasing one's wealth (by trade or laying it out at
interest). <span id="fr_624"></span>[4](#fn_624) One should walk alone
that path by proceeding along which one may hope to meet with the
deities; or, at such times when wealth is gained, adherence to the
duties of sacrifice and gift is laudable.  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[5](#fn_625) The sages have said that the
accomplishment of the objects by means of agreeable (pacific) means is
righteousness. See, O Yudhishthira, that even this is the criterion that
has been kept in view in declaring the indications of righteousness and
iniquity. <span id="fr_626"></span>[6](#fn_626) In days of old the
Creator ordained righteousness endowing it with the power of holding the
world together. The conduct of the good, that is fraught with
excellence, is subjected to (numerous) restraints for acquiring
righteousness which depends upon many delicate considerations. The
indications of righteousness have now been recounted to thee, O foremost
one of Kuru's race! Do not, therefore, at any time set thy understanding
upon any act that is wrong.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_616"></span>[225:1](m12b086.htm#fr_616) Vasishtha's work
commences with the query--What is dharmah? The first answer is 'anything
consistent with the *Srutis* and the *Smritis*.' Then comes
*Sishtacharah* or the conduct of those called *Sishta* or the good.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[225:2](m12b086.htm#fr_617) However casuists
may argue and moralists pretend, a lie like that of Sir Henry Lee for
saving his prince from the hands of Cromwell (vide *Woodstock*), or like
that of the goldsmith's son, even when he was dying, for saving the
prince Chevalier from the hands of his would-be captors, is excusable in
the estimation of many and even meritorious according to some. <span
id="page_226">p. 226</span> The world again is agreed that if an
adulterer be called into the witness box, perjury would be a venal
offence compared with the meanness of betraying the honour of a
confiding woman. Hence, the exclusion of such a witness (according to
almost every system of law) in trials for adultery. The *Rishis* wrote
for men and not angels. The conduct referred to is that of the good and
pious.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[226:1](m12b086.htm#fr_618) In explaining verse
7, the commentator uses the words that I have enclosed within
parenthesis. According to him, verse 9 hath reference to the robbed
thief while he goes to the king for invoking justice.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[226:2](m12b086.htm#fr_619) There is another
reason why one should not give way to intoxication of might and should
not set at naught the eternal injunction against taking what belongs to
another K.P. Singha incorrectly translates this line.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[226:3](m12b086.htm#fr_620) Implying that such
a man is always alive to his own faults. He never thinks that others are
guilty of an offence which he, in a moment of temptation, may have
committed.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[227:1](m12b086.htm#fr_621) K.P. Singha wrongly
translates this line.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[227:2](m12b086.htm#fr_622) The construction is
not at all difficult; yet both the vernacular translators have
misunderstood it, the Burdwan version being thoroughly unintelligible.
This is only another form of the well-known saying--'do to others as you
would that they should do to you.'

<span id="fn_623"></span>[227:3](m12b086.htm#fr_623) The Burdwan
translator gives an incorrect version of the second line: *yad* is
equivalent to *yadi*: *anyasya* stands for *anyam*. The genitive
inflection is used for the accusative. *Tatah* stands for *tasmin*
implying *aupapatye vishaye*. *Kuryat* is *driggochari-kuryat*.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[227:4](m12b086.htm#fr_624) The surplus should
not be coveted for its own sake but for such use.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[227:5](m12b086.htm#fr_625) The second line is
incorrectly rendered by K.P. Singha.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[227:6](m12b086.htm#fr_626) *Priyabhyupagatam*
is *priyena praptam* and not *hinsaya*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLX](m12b087)
