[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b095.md) 
[Next](m12b097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXIX

"Kapila said, 'Beholding that all the fruits that are attainable by acts
are terminable instead of being eternal, Yatis, by adopting
self-restraint and tranquillity, attain to Brahma through the path of
knowledge. There is nothing in any of the worlds that can impede them
(for by mere fiats of their will they crown all their wishes with
success). They are freed from the influence of all pairs of opposites.
They never bow down their heads to anything or any creature. They are
above all the bonds of want. Wisdom is theirs. Cleansed they are from
every sin. Pure and spotless they live and rove about (in great
happiness). They have, in their own understandings, arrived at settled
conclusions in respect of all destructible objects and of a life of
Renunciation (by comparing the two together). Devoted to Brahma, already
become like unto Brahma, they have taken refuge in Brahma. Transcending
grief, and freed from (the equality of) Rajas, theirs are acquisitions
that are eternal. When the high end that is these men's is within reach
of attainment, what need has one for practising the duties of the
domestic mode of life?' <span id="fr_740"></span>[2](#fn_740.md)

"Syumarasmi said, 'If, indeed, that be the highest object of
acquisition, if that be truly the highest end (which is attained by
practising Renunciation) then the importance of the domestic mode of
life becomes manifest, because without the domestic mode no other mode
of life ever becomes possible. Indeed, as all living creatures are able
to live in consequence of their dependence on their respective mothers,
after the same manner the three other

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

modes of life exist in consequence of their dependence upon the domestic
mode. The householder who leads the life of domesticity, performs
sacrifices, and practises penances. Whatever is done by anybody from
desire of happiness has for its root the domestic mode of life. All
living creatures regard the procreation of offspring as a source of
great happiness. The procreation of offspring, however, becomes
impossible in any other mode of life (than domesticity). Every kind of
grass and straw, all plants and herbs (that yield corn or grain), and
others of the same class that grow on hills and mountains, have the
domestic mode of life for their root. Upon those depend the life of
living creatures. And since nothing else is seen (in the universe) than
life, domesticity may be looked upon as the refuge of the entire
universe. <span id="fr_741"></span>[1](#fn_741.md) Who then speaks the
truth that says that domesticity cannot lead to the acquisition of
Emancipation? Only those that are destitute of faith and wisdom and
penetration, only those that are destitute of reputation that are idle
and toil-worn, that have misery for their share in consequence of their
past acts, only those that are destitute of learning, behold the
plenitude of tranquillity in a life of mendicancy. The eternal and
certain distinctions (laid down in the Vedas) are the causes that
sustain the three worlds. That illustrious person of the highest order
who is conversant with the Vedas, is worshipped from the very date of
his birth. Besides the performance of *Garbhadhana*, Vedic *mantras*
become necessary for enabling persons of the regenerate classes to
accomplish all their acts in respect of both this and the other
world. <span id="fr_742"></span>[2](#fn_742.md) In cremating his body
(after death), in the matter of his attainment of a second body, in that
of his drink and food after such attainment, in that of giving away kine
and other animals for helping him to cross the river that divides the
region of life from that of Yama, in that of sinking funeral cakes in
water--Vedic *mantras* are necessary. Then again the three classes of
*Pitris*, *viz*., the Archishmats, the Varhishads, and the Kravyads,
approve of the necessity of *mantras* in the case of the dead, and
*mantras* are allowed to be efficient causes (for attainment of the
objects for which these ceremonies and rites have been directed to be
performed). When the Vedas say this so loudly and when again human
beings are said to owe debts to the *Pitris*, the *Rishis*, and the
gods, how can any one attain to Emancipation? <span
id="fr_743"></span>[3](#fn_743.md) This false doctrine (of incorporeal
existence called Emancipation), apparently dressed in colours of truth,
but subversive of the real purport of

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

the declarations of the Vedas, has been introduced by learned men reft
of prosperity and eaten up by idleness. That Brahmana who performs
sacrifices according to the declarations of the Vedas is never seduced
by sin. Through sacrifices, such a person attains to high regions of
felicity along with the animals he has slain in those sacrifices, and
himself, gratified by the acquisition of all his wishes succeeds in
gratifying those animals by fulfilling their wishes. By disregarding the
Vedas, by guile, or by deception, one never succeeds in attaining to the
Supreme. On the other hand, it is by practising the rites laid down in
the Vedas that one succeeds in attaining to Brahma.'

"Kapila said, '(If acts are obligatory, then) there are the *Darsa*, the
*Paurnamasa*, the *Agnihotra*, the *Chaturmasya*, and other acts for the
man of intelligence. In their performance is eternal merit. (Why then
perform acts involving cruelty)? Those that have betaken themselves to
the Sannyasa, mode of life, that abstain from all acts, that are endued
with patience, that are cleansed (of wrath and every fault), and that
are conversant with Brahma, succeed by such knowledge of Brahma in
paying off the debts (thou speakest of) to the gods (the *Rishis*, and
the *Pitris*) represented to be so very fond of libations poured in
sacrifices. <span id="fr_744"></span>[1](#fn_744.md) The very gods become
stupefied in tracing the track of that trackless person who constitutes
himself the soul of all creatures and who looks upon all creatures with
an equal eye. Through instructions received from the preceptor one knows
that which dwells within this frame to be of a four-fold nature, having
besides four doors and four mouths. In consequence of (their possession
of) two arms, the organ of speech, the stomach, and the organ of
pleasure, the very gods are said to have four doors. One should,
therefore, strive one's best to keep those doors under control. <span
id="fr_745"></span>[2](#fn_745.md) One should

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

not gamble with dice. One should not appropriate what belongs to
another. One should not assist at the sacrifice of a person of ignoble
birth. One should not, giving way to wrath, smite another with hands or
feet. That intelligent man who conducts himself in this way is said to
have his hands and feet well-controlled. One should not indulge in
vociferous abuse or censure. One should not speak words that are vain.
One should forbear from knavery and from calumniating others. One should
observe the vow of truthfulness, be sparing of speech, and always
heedful.' By conducting oneself in this way one will have one's organ of
speech well-restrained. One should not abstain entirely from food. One
should not eat too much. One should give up covetousness, and always
seek the companionship of the good. One should eat only so much as is
needed for sustaining life. By conducting oneself in this way one
succeeds in properly controlling the door represented by one's stomach.
One should not, O hero, lustfully take another wife when one has a
wedded spouse (with whom to perform all religious acts). One should
never summon a woman to bed except in her season. One should confine
oneself to one's own wedded spouse without seeking congress with other
women. By conducting oneself in this way one is said to have one's organ
of pleasure properly controlled. That man of wisdom is truly a
regenerate person who has all his four doors, *viz*., the organ of
pleasure, the stomach, the two arms (and two feet), and the organ of
speech, properly controlled. Everything becomes useless of that person
whose doors are not well-controlled. What can the penance of such a man
do? What can his sacrifices bring about? What cart be achieved by his
body? The gods know him for a Brahmana who has cast off his upper
garment, who sleeps on the bare ground, who makes his arm a pillow, and
whose heart is possessed of tranquillity. <span
id="fr_746"></span>[1](#fn_746.md) That person who, devoted to
contemplation, singly enjoys all the happiness that wedded couples
enjoy, and who turns not his attention to the joys and griefs of others,
should be known for a Brahmana. <span id="fr_747"></span>[2](#fn_747.md)
That man who rightly understands all this as it exists in reality and
its multiform transformations, and who knows what the end is of all
created objects, is known by the gods for a Brahmana. <span
id="fr_748"></span>[3](#fn_748.md) One who hath no fear from any creature
and from whom no

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

creature hath any fear and who constitutes himself the soul of all
creatures, should be known for a Brahmana. Without having acquired
purity of heart which is the true result of all pious acts such as gifts
and sacrifices, men of foolish understandings do not succeed in
obtaining a knowledge of what is needed in making one a Brahmana even
when explained by preceptors. Destitute of a knowledge of all this,
these men desire fruits of a different kind, *viz*., heaven and its
joys. <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_749.md) Unable to practise even a
small part of that good conduct which has come down from remote times,
which is eternal, which is characterised by certitude, which enters as a
thread in all our duties, and by adopting which men of knowledge
belonging to all the modes of life convert their respective duties and
penances into terrible weapons for destroying the ignorance and evils of
worldliness, men of foolish understandings regard acts that are
productive of visible fruits, that are fraught with the highest
puissance, and that are deathless, as fruitless after all and as
deviations (from the proper course) not sanctioned by the scriptures. In
truth, however, that conduct, embracing as it does practices the very
opposite of those that are seen in seasons of distress, is the very
essence of heedfulness and is never affected by lust and wrath and other
passions of a similar kind. <span id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_750.md) As
regards sacrifices again, it is very difficult to ascertain all their
particulars. If ascertained, it is very difficult to observe them in
practice. If practised, the fruits to which they lead are terminable.
Mark this well. (And marking this, do thou betake thyself to the path of
knowledge).'

"Syumarasmi said, 'The Vedas countenance acts and discountenance them.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Whence then is their authority when their
declarations thus contradict each other? Renunciation of acts, again, is
productive of great benefit. Both these have been indicated in the
Vedas. Do thou discourse to me on this subject, O Brahmana!'

"Kapila said, 'Betaking yourselves to the path of the good (*viz*.,
Yoga), do you even in this life realise its fruits by the direct
evidence of your senses. What, however, are the visible results of those
other objects which you (men of acts) pursue?'

"Syumarasmi said, 'O Brahmana, I am Syumarasmi by name. I have come here
for acquiring knowledge. Desirous of doing good to myself I have started
this conversation in artless candour and not from desire of disputation.
The dark doubt has taken possession of my mind. O illustrious one, solve
it to me. Thou hast said that they who take the path of the good
(*viz*., Yoga), by which Brahma is attained, realise its fruits by the
direct evidence of their senses. What, indeed, is that which is so
realisable by the direct evidence of the senses and which is pursued by
yourselves? Avoiding all sciences that have disputation only for their
foremost object, I have so studied the Agama as to have July mastered
their true meaning. By Agama I understand the declarations of the Vedas.
I also include la that word those sciences based on logic which have for
their object the bringing out of the real meaning of the Vedas. <span
id="fr_751"></span>[1](#fn_751.md) Without avoiding the duties laid down
for the particular mode of life which one may lead, one should pursue
the practices laid down in Agama. Such observance of the practices laid
down in Agama crowns one with success. In consequence of the certainty
of the conclusions of Agama, the success to which the latter leads may
be said to be almost realisable by direct evidence. As a boat that is
tied to another bound for a different port, cannot take its passengers
to the port they desire to reach, even so ourselves, dragged by our acts
due to past desires, can never cross the interminable river of birth and
death (and reach the heaven of rest and peace we may have in view).
Discourse to me on this topic, O illustrious one! Teach me as a
preceptor teaches a disciple. No one can be found amongst men that has
completely renounced all worldly objects, nor one that is perfectly
contented with oneself, nor one that has transcended grief, nor one that
is perfectly free from disease, nor one that is absolutely free from the
desire to act (for one's own benefit), nor one that has an absolute
distaste for companionship, nor one that has entirely abstained from
acts of every kind. Even men like yourself are seen to give way to joy
and indulge in grief as persons like ourselves. Like other creatures the
senses of persons like yourselves have their functions and objects. Tell
me, in what then, if we are to investigate the question of happiness,
does pure felicity consist for all the four orders of men and all the
four modes of life who and which have, as regards their inclinations,
the same resting ground.'

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

"Kapila said, 'Whatever the *Sastras* according to which one performs
the acts one feels inclined to do, the ordinances laid down in it for
regulating those acts never become fruitless. Whatever again the school
of opinion according to which one may conduct oneself, one is sure to
attain to the highest end by only observing the duties of self-restraint
of Yoga. Knowledge assists that man in crossing (this interminable river
of life and death) who pursues knowledge. That conduct, however, which
men pursue after deviating from the path of knowledge, afflicts them (by
subjecting them to the evils of life and death). It is evident that ye
are possessed of knowledge and dissociated from every worldly object
that may produce distress. But have any of you at any time succeeded in
acquiring that knowledge in consequence of which everything is capable
of being viewed as identical with one Universal Soul? <span
id="fr_752"></span>[1](#fn_752.md) Without a correct apprehension of the
scriptures, some there are, fond only of disputation, who, in
consequence of being overwhelmed by desire and aversion, become the
slaves of pride and arrogance. Without having correctly understood the
meaning of scriptural declarations, these robbers of the scriptures,
these depredators of Brahma, influenced by arrogance and error, refuse
to pursue tranquillity and practise self-restraint. <span
id="fr_753"></span>[2](#fn_753.md) These men behold fruitlessness on every
side, and if (by chance) they succeed in obtaining the puissance of
knowledge they never impart it to others for rescuing them. Made up
entirely of the quality of Tamas, they have Tamas only for their refuge.
One becomes subject to all the incidents of that nature which one
imbibes. Accordingly, of him who hath Tamas for his refuge, the passions
of envy, lust, wrath, pride, falsehood, and vanity, continually grow,
for one's qualities have one's nature for their spring. Thinking in this
strain and beholding these faults (through the aid of instructions
secured from preceptors), Yatis, who covet the highest end, betake
themselves to Yoga, leaving both good and ill.' <span
id="fr_754"></span>[3](#fn_754.md)

"Syumarasmi said, 'O Brahmana, all that I have said (about the laudable
character of acts and the opposite character of Renunciation) is
strictly conformable to the scriptures. It is, however, very true that
without a correct apprehension of the meaning of the scriptures, one
does not feel inclined to obey what the scriptures really declare.
Whatever conduct is consistent with equity is consistent with the
scriptures. Even that is what the Sruti declares. Similarly, whatever
conduct is inconsistent with equity is inconsistent with the scriptures.
This also is declared by the Sruti. It is certain that no one can do an
act that is scriptural by transgressing the scriptures. That again is

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

unscriptural which is against the Vedas. The *Sruti* declares this. Many
men, who believe only what directly appeals to their senses, behold only
this world (and not what is addressed in the scriptures to Faith). They
do not behold what the scriptures declare to be faults. They have,
accordingly, like ourselves, to give way to grief. Those objects of the
senses with which men like you are concerned are the same with which
other living creatures are concerned. Yet in consequence of your
knowledge of the soul and their ignorance of it, how vast is the
difference that exists between you and them! All the four orders of men
and all the four modes of life, however different their duties, seek the
same single end (*viz*., the highest happiness). Thou art possessed of
unquestioned talents and abilities. For ascertaining that particular
course of conduct (amongst those various duties) which is well
calculated to accomplish the desired end, thou hast, by discoursing to
me on the Infinite (Brahma), filled my soul with tranquillity. As
regards ourselves, in consequence of our inability to understand the
Soul we are destitute of a correct apprehension of the reality. Our
wisdom is concerned with things that are low, and we are enveloped in
thick darkness. (The course of conduct, however, that thou hast
indicated for enabling one to attain to Emancipation, is exceedingly
difficult of practice). Only he who is devoted to Yoga, who has
discharged all his duties, who is capable of roving everywhere depending
only on his own body, who has brought his soul under perfect control,
who has transcended the requirements of the science of morality and who
disregards the whole world (and everything belonging to it), can
transgress the declarations of the Vedas with respect to acts, and say
that there is Emancipation. <span id="fr_755"></span>[1](#fn_755.md) For
one, however, who lives in the midst of relatives, this course of
conduct is exceedingly difficult to follow. Gift, study of the Vedas,
sacrifices, begetting offspring, simplicity of dealing, when by
practising even these no one succeeds in attaining to Emancipation, fie
on him who seeks to attain to it, and on Emancipation itself that is
sought! It seems that the labour spent upon attaining to it is all
fruitless. One becomes chargeable with atheism if one disregards the
Vedas by not doing the acts they direct. O illustrious one, I desire to
hear without delay about that (Emancipation) which comes in the Vedas
after the declarations in favour of acts. Do tell me the truth, O
Brahmana! I sit at thy feet as a disciple. Teach me kindly! I wish to
know as much about Emancipation as is known to thee, O learned one!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[259:2](m12b096.htm#fr_740.md) For, as the
commentator explains, one who has acquired an empire does not seek the
dole of charity. In view of the high end that Renunciation is certain to
bring, what need has a person of the domestic mode of life which leads
to rewards that are insignificant compared to the other.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[260:1](m12b096.htm#fr_741.md) Varhi is grass or
straw. *Oshadhi* here implies paddy and other grain. *Vahiranya adrija*
implies 'other kinds of *Oshadhi* born on mountains,' *i.e.*, the Soma
and other useful hill plants and shrubs. *Teshamapi mulam garhastyam*
should be supplied after the first line. Domesticity is the root of
these, because these are cultivated or collected by persons leading the
domestic mode of life. The argument in the second line is this:
*Oschadhibhyah pranah, pranat vahihna kinchit drisyate, atah viswasyapi
mulam garhastyam*.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[260:2](m12b096.htm#fr_742.md) Literally rendered,
the words are,--'Without doubt, Vedic *mantras* enter into persons of
the regenerate classes in respect of acts whose effects are seen and
acts whose effects instead of being seen depend upon the evidence of the
scriptures.' Practically, what is said here is that all the acts of a
Brahmana are performed with the aid of Vedic *mantras*.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[260:3](m12b096.htm#fr_743.md) Mantras are
necessary in cremating a Brahmana's dead body. *Mantras* are needed for
assisting the dead spirit to attain to a brilliant form (either in the
next world or in this if there <span id="page_261">p. 261</span> be
rebirth). These *mantras* are, of course, uttered in *Sraddhas*. After
the dead spirit has been provided, with the aid of *mantras*, with a
body, food and drink are offered to him with the aid of *mantras*. Kine
and animals are given away by the representatives of the dead for
enabling the dead ancestor to cross the Vaitarani (the river that flows
between the two worlds) and for enabling him to become happy in heaven.
The funeral cake, again, according to the ordinance, is sunk in water
for making it easily attainable by him to whom it is offered. By
becoming a human being one inherits three debts. By study he pays off
his debt to the *Rishis*: by the performance of sacrifices he pays off
his debt to the gods, and by begetting children he frees himself from
the debt he owes to the *Pitris*. The argument then is this: when the
Vedas, which are the words of Supreme Godhead, have laid down these
*mantras* for the attainment of such objects in the next world, how can
Emancipation, which involves an incorporeal existence transcending the
very *Karana* (form) be possible? The very declarations of the Vedas in
favour of acts are inconsistent with incorporeal existence or with the
negation of existence with dual consciousness of knower and known.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[261:1](m12b096.htm#fr_744.md) The mention of
'Devan' as the commentator points out--*Rishis* and also *Pitris*. The
*amrita* here that these covet is, of course, the Sacrificial libation.
'Brahma-sanjnitah' implies 'conversant with Brahma,' for the *Srutis*
say that 'Brahmavid Brahmaiva bhavati.'

<span id="fn_745"></span>[261:2](m12b096.htm#fr_745.md) The terseness of
the original has not been removed in the translation. *Enam* is the
universal Soul dwelling within this physical frame. It refers to the
person who constitutes himself to be the soul of all creatures or one
who is conversant with *Brahma* or has become *Brahma* itself. That soul
is said to have a fourfold nature, *viz.*, it is *virat*
(all-embracing), *sutra* (fine as the finest thread and pervading
everything), *antaryamin* (possessed of omniscience), and *suddha*
(stainless). Its four mouths, by which are meant the four sources of
enjoyment or pleasure, are the body, the senses, the mind, and the
understanding. What the <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> speaker wishes
to point out by this is the *Bhotkritwa* (power of enjoyment) of the
Soul. The *Kartritwa* (power of action) is then pointed out by the
mention of the doors which are the two arms, the organ of speech, the
stomach and the organ of the pleasure (generation). These last operate
as doors for shutting or confining the soul within its chamber. They are
the screens or *avaranas* that conceal its real nature. The very gods
feel their force, being unable to transcend them or their demands. He
who would transcend them and shine in his own stainless nature should
seek to control or restrain them. Practically, it is Yoga that is
recommended for enabling one to attain to the position of the universal
Soul.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[262:1](m12b096.htm#fr_746.md) 'One who has cast
off his upper garment' is one who clothes himself very scantily only for
the sake of decency and not for splendour.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[262:2](m12b096.htm#fr_747.md) *Dwandwarama* very
likely means here the joys of wedded couples and not 'the pleasures
derived from pairs of opposites'. The sense seems to be this that man is
a Brahmana who, without marrying succeeds in enjoying singly all the
felicity that attaches to married life.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[262:3](m12b096.htm#fr_748.md) In reality all
things are, of course, *Brahma*. Their external aspects are only
transformations. <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> The end of all
creatures is death and rebirth till absorption takes place into *Brahma*
by means of Yoga.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[263:1](m12b096.htm#fr_749.md) The original is
very terse. I have expanded it, following the commentator. *Dana-yajna
kriya phalam* is *chitta suddhi* of purity or heart; *antarena* is
equivalent to *vina*; *anujananti* governs *Brahmanyam* understood.
*Anyat phalam* in the second line implies heaven and its joys (which
satisfy ordinary men). The practice *anu* before *jananti* is taken to
imply *gurum anu*, *i.e.*, following the instructions of preceptors.'

<span id="fn_750"></span>[263:2](m12b096.htm#fr_750.md) These three verses
run together and are extremely abstruse. There can be no doubt that the
commentator is right. The construction is this: *Yam sadacharam asritya
samsritanam swakarmabhih* (sahitam) *tapah ghoratwam agatam, tam*
(*sadacharam*) *puranam puranam saswatam dhruvam dharmeshu cha
sutritamkitichit charitum asaknuvantah phalavanti vyushtimanti dhruvam
cha karmani* (*mudah*) *vigunani*, etc., *pasyanti*. The second line of
36 stands by itself as an explanatory sentence referring to some of the
characteristics of the *sadachara* that is spoken of. *Samsritanam*,
refers to men observing the different modes of life; *ghoratwam agatam*
is *samsarandhakaranasakam bhavati*. What is meant by this is that the
penances of such men, along with the duties they are called upon to
observe by the particular mode of life they follow, become a terrible
weapon, in consequence of their *sadacharah*, for destroying the evils
of worldliness. The *sadacharah* spoken of here is *nishkamadharmah*.
The latter is no new-fangled theory of men of learning but is *puranam
saswatam*, and *dhruvam*. The *phalavanti vyushtimanti*, and *dhruva
karmani* which fools regard to be *vigyunani* and *anaikatitikani* are,
of course, those acts which are included within the word 'Yoga.' In
brief, the speaker, in these three verses, wishes to inculcate that wise
men, whatever their mode of life, observe its duties. But by virtue of
the *nishkama dharma* they follow, they convert those duties and their
penances into efficient means for dispelling the darkness of ignorance.
Fools, on the other hand, unable to practise that *nishkama dharma*,
look upon it and Yoga itself as fruitless and valueless although the
rewards these confer are visible.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[264:1](m12b096.htm#fr_751.md) The sciences that
have disputation only for their foremost object, are, according to the
commentator, the sciences of the Lokayatikas, the Saughatas (or
Buddhists), the Kapalikas, etc. The other sciences based on Logic that
are included within the word Agama are the two Mimamsas, Sankhya, and
Patanjala.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[265:1](m12b096.htm#fr_752.md) *Aikatmyam* is
explained by the commentator as *Eka eva dwaita darsana hina atma yatra
bhavati*. Practically, it is that state of the mind in which one
perceives one's identity with everything in the universe. This is that
true knowledge which brings about Emancipation or is Emancipation
itself.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[265:2](m12b096.htm#fr_753.md) They are called
'robbers of the scriptures' because they always seek to rob the
scriptures of their true meaning. They are 'depredators of *Brahma*'
because they deny the very existence of Godhead. *Nirarambhah* is
*Camadyarambha-sunyah*.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[265:3](m12b096.htm#fr_754.md) The particle *anu*
means 'following the instructions of preceptors.' *Samyame* refers to
*Dharana*, *Dhyana* and *Samadhi*. Some texts read *Siddhante* for
*samyame*.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[266:1](m12b096.htm#fr_755.md) What is intended to
be said here is that only a life of Renunciation, so hard to follow, can
lead to Emancipation. The Burdwan translator makes nonsense of the
second line of 64 by connecting it with the first line of 65, K.P.
Singha omits it entirely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXX](m12b097.md)
