[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b037) 
[Next](m12b039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXI

"Bhishma said, 'All immobile and mobile beings, distributed into four
classes, have been said to be of unmanifest birth and unmanifest death.
Existing only in the unmanifest Soul, the Mind is said to possess the
attributes of the unmanifest. <span id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219) As a
vast tree is ensconced within a small unblown *Aswattha* flower and
becomes observable only when it comes out, even so birth takes place
from what is unmanifest. A piece of iron, which is inanimate, runs
towards a piece of loadstone. Similarly, inclinations and propensities
due to natural instincts, and all else, run towards the Soul in a new
life. <span id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220) Indeed, even as those
propensities and possessions born of Ignorance and Delusion, and
inanimate in respect of their nature, are united with Soul when reborn,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

after the same manner, those other propensities and aspirations of the
Soul that have their gaze directed towards Brahma become united with it,
coming to it directly from Brahma itself. <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) Neither earth, nor sky, nor heaven, nor
things, nor the vital breaths, nor virtue and vice, nor anything else,
existed before, save the Chit-Soul. Nor have they any necessary
connection with even the Chit-Soul defiled by Ignorance. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222) The Soul is eternal. It is
indestructible. It occurs in every creature. It is the cause of the
Mind. It is without attributes, This universe that we perceive hath been
declared (in the Vedas) to be due to Ignorance or Delusion. The Soul's
apprehensions of form, etc., are due to past desires. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_223) The Soul, when it becomes endued with
those causes (*viz*., desire), is led to the state of its being engaged
in acts. In consequence of that condition (for those acts again produce
desires to end in acts anew and so on),--this vast wheel to existence
revolves, without beginning and without

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

end. <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) The Unmanifest, *viz*., the
Understanding (with the desires), is the nave of that wheel. The
Manifest (*i.e.*, the body with the senses) constitutes its assemblage
of spokes, the perceptions and acts from its circumference. Propelled by
the quality of *Rajas* (Passion), the Soul presides over it (witnessing
its revolutions). Like oilmen pressing oilseeds in their machine, the
consequences born of Ignorance, assailing the universe (of creatures)
which is moistened by Rajas, press or grind it in that wheel. In that
succession of existences, the living creature, seized by the idea of
Self in consequence of desire, engages itself in acts. In the union of
cause and effect, those acts again become (new causes). <span
id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_225) Effects do not enter into causes. Nor do
causes enter into effects. In the production of effects, Time is the
Cause. The primordial essences (eight in number as mentioned before),
and their modifications six-(teen in number), fraught with causes,
exists in a state of union, in consequence of their being always
presided over by the Soul. Like dust following the wind that moves it,
the creature-Soul, divested of body, but endued still with inclinations
born of Passion and Darkness and with principles of causes constituted
by the acts of the life that is over, moves on, following the direction
that the Supreme Soul gives it. The Soul, however, is never touched by
those inclinations and propensities. Nor are these touched by the Soul
that is superior to them. The wind, which is naturally pure, is never
stained by the dust it bears away. <span id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_226)
As the wind is truly separate from the dust it bears away, even so, the
man of wisdom should know, is the connection between that which is
called existence or life and the Soul. No one should take it that the
Soul, in consequence of its apparent union with the body and the senses
and the other propensities and beliefs and unbeliefs, is really endued
therewith as its necessary and absolute qualities. On the other hand,
the Soul should be taken as existing in its own nature. Thus did the
divine *Rishi* solve the doubt that had taken possession of his
disciple's mind. Notwithstanding all this, people depend upon means
consisting of acts and scriptural rites for casting off misery and
winning happiness. Seeds that are scorched by fire do not put forth
sprouts. After the same manner, if everything that contributes to misery
be consumed by the fire of true knowledge, the Soul escapes the
obligation of rebirth in the world.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[91:2](m12b038.htm#fr_219) The mind his no
existence except as it exists in the Soul. The
[commentator](errata.htm#73) uses the illustration of the second moon
seen by the eye in water, etc., for explaining the nature of the Mind.
It has no real existence as dissociated from the Soul.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[91:3](m12b038.htm#fr_220) *Swabhavahetuja
bhavah* is explained by the commentator as the virtuous and vicious
propensities. (*Swabhava purvasamskara; sa eva heturyesham karmanam
layah bhavah*). 'All else,' of course, means *Avidya* or *Maya*, which
flows directly from Brahma without being dependent on past acts. The
meaning, then, is this: as soon as the Soul takes a new form or body,
all the propensities and inclinations, as dependent on its past acts,
take possession of it, *Avidya* or *Maya* also takes possession of it.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[92:1](m12b038.htm#fr_221) Both the vernacular
translators have wrongly rendered this verse, notwithstanding the help
they have derived from Nilakantha's gloss. The fact is, the gloss itself
sometimes requires a gloss. Verses 3 and 4 and connected with each
other. In verse, 3, the speaker mentions two analogies *viz*., first,
that of iron, which is inanimate, following the loadstone, and, second,
of *Swabhavahetuja bhavah* (meaning, as already explained, all such
consequences as are born of the acts of previous lives), as also
*anyadapi*, *i.e.*, all else of a similar nature, meaning, of course,
the consequences of '*Avidya*' or '*Maya*' which flow directly from
Brahma instead of former acts. In verse 4, reference is again made to
*avyaktajabhavah*, meaning propensities and possessions born of
'*Avidya*' or '*Maya*'. This is only a repetition, in another form, of
what has already been stated in the second line of verse 3. The
commentator explains this very clearly in the opening words of his
gloss. After this comes the reference to the higher propensities and
aspirations that are in the Soul. The grammar of the line is this:
*Tadvat Kartuh karanalakshanah* (*bhavah*) *karanat abhisanghathah*. The
plain meaning, of course, is that like all the darker and indifferent
propensities and possessions that come to the Soul in its new life, born
of the acts of past lives, all the higher aspirations also of the Soul
come to it from *Brahma* direct. The word *karana* is used in both
instances for Brahma as the Supreme Cause of everything.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[92:2](m12b038.htm#fr_222) The sense is this:
In the beginning there was nothing save the Chit-Soul. Existent objects
exist only because of Ignorance having defiled the Soul. Their
connection again with the Soul is not absolute and necessary, That
connection may be destroyed without the Soul losing anything. What is
intended to be conveyed by this verse is that at first, *i.e.*, before
the creation, there was nothing, except *jiva* or the Soul with
Knowledge alone for its indicating attribute. The things mentioned,
*viz*., earth, etc., were not. Nor do they inhere to *jiva* with even
Ignorance or Delusion for its indicating attribute, *i.e.*, to the
*born*, Soul. The born Soul may seem to manifest all those attributes,
but it is really independent of or separate from them. Their connection
with the Soul, as already said, is neither absolute nor eternal. In the
next verse, the speaker explains the nature of those manifestations.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[92:3](m12b038.htm#fr_223) The connection
between earth, etc., with the Soul has before been said to be neither
absolute nor eternal. Whence then that connection? In 6, it is said that
all the apprehensions of the Soul with regard to earth, etc., are due to
Ignorance or Delusion flowing directly from *Brahma* and assailing it
thereafter. The apprehension of the Soul that it is a man or an animal,
that it has a body, that it is acting, etc., are to borrow the
commentator's illustration, just like that of one's being a king in a
dream who is not, however, really a king, or of one's being a child who
is not, however, really a child. Being eternal or without beginning its
first existence under the influence of Delusion is untraceable. As long,
again, as it has Knowledge alone for its attribute, it remains
indestructible, *i.e.*, free from the mutations of existence. It occurs
in every creature, *i.e.*, in man and beast.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[93:1](m12b038.htm#fr_224) The sense seems to
be this: In consequence of desires the Soul manifests itself in some
form of existence. In that state it acts. Those acts again lead to
desires anew, which, in their turn, bring on new forms or states of
existence. The circle of existence or life thus goes on, without
beginning and without end.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[93:2](m12b038.htm#fr_225) The Cause is
ignorance. The Effect is the body and the senses of a particular form of
existence. When the creature, in consequence of this union, engages in
acts, these latter become causes for new states of existence.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[93:3](m12b038.htm#fr_226) The object of this
verse is to reiterate the doctrine that the possession of the body and
the senses, etc., does not after the state of the Soul. The Soul is
really unattached to these though it may apparently exist in a state of
union with them, like the wind, which existing in a state of apparent
union with the dust it bears away is even at such times pure by itself
and as a substance, exists separately.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXII](m12b039)
