[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b062) 
[Next](m12b064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXXXVI

"Vyasa said, 'If Emancipation be desirable, then knowledge should be
acquired. For a person who is borne now up and now down along the stream
of Time or life, knowledge is the raft by which he can reach the shore.
Those wise men who have arrived at certain conclusions (regarding the
character of the soul and that which is called life) by the aid of
wisdom, are able to assist the ignorant in crossing the stream of time
or life with the raft of knowledge. They, however, that are ignorant,
are unable save either themselves or others. He who has freed himself
from desire and all other faults, and who has emancipated himself from
all attachments, should attend to, these two and ten requirements of
yoga, *viz*., place, acts, affection, objects, means, destruction,
certainty, eyes, food, suppression, mind and survey. <span
id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_405)

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He who wishes to obtain superior Knowledge,
should, by the aid of his understanding, restrain both speech and mind.
He who wishes to have tranquillity, should, by the aid of his knowledge,
restrain his soul. Whether he becomes compassionate or cruel, whether he
becomes conversant with all the Vedas or ignorant of the *Richs*,
whether he becomes righteous and observant of sacrifices or the worst of
sinners, whether he becomes eminent for prowess and wealth or plunged
into misery, that person who directs his mind towards these (attributes
that I have spoken of), is sure to cross the ocean of life which is so
difficult to cross. Without speaking of the results of the attainment of
*Brahma* by yoga, it may be said that he who sets himself to only
enquiring after the Soul transcends the necessity of observing the acts
laid down in the Vedas. The body with *jiva* within it is an excellent
car. When sacrifices and religious rites are made its *upastha*, shame
its *varutha*, Upaya and Apaya its *kuvara*, the breath called Apana its
*aksha*, the breath called Prana its *yuga*, knowledge and the allotted
period of existence its points for tying the steeds, heedfulness its
handsome *vandhura*, the assumption of good behaviour its *nemi*,
vision, touch, scent, and hearing its four steeds, wisdom its *nabhi*,
all the scriptures its *pratoda*, certain knowledge of the scriptural
declarations its driver, the soul its firmly-seated rider, faith and
self-restraint its fore-runners, renunciation its inseparable companion
following behind and bent upon doing it good, purity the path along
which it goes, meditation (or union with *Brahma*) its goal, then may
that car reach *Brahma* and shine there in effulgence. <span
id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_406) I shall now tell thee the speedy means
that should be adopted by the person who would equip his car in such a
fashion for passing through this wilderness of the world in order to
reach the goal

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

constituted by Brahma that is above decrepitude and destruction. To set
the mind upon one thing at a time is called *Dharana*. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_407) The Yogin observing proper vows and
restraints, practises in all seven kinds of *Dharana*. There are, again,
as many kinds of *Dharanas* arising out of these, upon subjects that are
near or remote. <span id="fr_408"></span>[2](#fn_408) Through these the
Yogin gradually acquires mastery over Earth, Wind, Space, Water, Fire,
Consciousness, and Understanding. After this he gradually acquires
mastery over the Unmanifest. <span id="fr_409"></span>[3](#fn_409) I
shall now describe to thee the conceptions in their order that are
realised by particular individuals amongst those that are engaged in
*yoga* according to the rules and ordinances that have been laid down. I
shall tell thee also of the nature of the success that attaches to
*yoga* commenced (according to rules) by him who looks within his own
self. <span id="fr_410"></span>[4](#fn_410) The Yogin, that abandons his
gross body, following the instructions of his preceptor, beholds his
soul displaying the following forms in consequence of its subtility. To
him in the first stage, the welkin seems to be filled with a subtile
substance like foggy vapour. <span id="fr_411"></span>[5](#fn_411) Of
the Soul which has been freed from the body, even such becomes the form.
When this fog disappears, a second (or new) form becomes visible. For,
then, the Yogin beholds within himself, in the firmament of his heart,
the form of Water. After the disappearance of water, the form of Fire
displays itself. When this disappears, the form that becomes perceivable
is that of Wind as effulgent as a well-tempered weapon of high polish.
Gradually, the form displayed by Wind becomes like that of the thinnest
gossamer. Then having acquired whiteness, and also, the subtlety of air,
the Brahman's soul is said to attain the supreme whiteness and
[subtlety](errata.htm#93) of Ether. Listen to me as I tell thee the
consequences of these diverse conditions when they occur. That Yogin who
has been able to achieve the conquest of the earth-element, attains by
such lordship to the power of Creation. Like a second Prajapati endued
with a nature that is perfectly imperturbable, he can from his own

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

body create all kinds of creatures. With only his toe, or with his hand
or feet, that person can singly cause the whole Earth to tremble who has
achieved the lordship of the Wind. Even this is the attribute of the
Wind as declared in the *Sruti*. The Yogin, who has achieved the
lordship of Space, can exist brightly in Space in consequence of his
having attained to uniformity with that element, and can also disappear
at will. By lordship over Water, one can (like Agastya) drink up rivers,
lakes, and oceans. By lordship over Fire, the Yogin becomes so effulgent
that his form cannot be looked at. He becomes visible only when he
extinguishes his consciousness of individuality,--these five elements
come within his sway. When the Understanding, which is the soul of the
five elements and of the consciousness of individuality, <span
id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412) is conquered the Yogin attains to
Omnipotence, and perfect Knowledge (or perception freed from doubt and
uncertainty with respect to all things), comes to him. In consequence of
this, the Manifest becomes merged into the Unmanifest or Supreme Soul
from which the world emanates and becomes what is called Manifest. <span
id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_413) Listen now to me in detail as I expound
the science of the Unmanifest. But first of all listen to me about all
that is Manifest as expounded in the Sankhya system of philosophy. In
both the Yoga and the Sankhya, systems, five and twenty topics of
knowledge have been treated in nearly the same way. Listen to me as I
mention their chief features. That has been said to be Manifest which is
possessed of these four attributes, *viz*., birth, growth, decay, and
death. That which is not possessed of these attributes is said to be
Unmanifest. Two souls are mentioned in the Vedas and the sciences that
are based upon them. The first (which is called Jivatman) is endued with
the four attributes already mentioned, and has a longing for the four
objects or purposes (*viz*., Religion, Wealth, Pleasure and
Emancipation). This soul is called Manifest, and it is born of the
Unmanifest (Supreme Soul). It is both Intelligent and non-Intelligent. I
have thus told thee about *Sattwa* (inert matter) and *Kshetrajna*
(immaterial spirit). Both kinds of Soul, it is said in the Vedas, become
attached to objects of the senses. The doctrine of the Sankhyas is that
one should keep oneself aloof or dissociated from objects of the senses.
That Yogin who is freed from attachment and pride, who transcends all
pairs of opposites, such as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc., who
never gives way to wrath or hate, who never speaks an untruth, who,
though slandered or struck, still shows friendship for the slanderer or
the striker, who never thinks of doing ill to others, who restrains the
three, *viz*., speech, acts, and mind, and who behaves uniformly towards
all creatures, succeeds in approaching the presence of Brahman. That
person who cherishes no desire for earthly objects, who is not unwilling
to take what comes, who is dependent on earthly objects to only that
extent which is necessary for

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

sustaining life, who is free from cupidity, who has driven off all
grief, who has restrained his senses, who goes through all necessary
acts, who is regardless of personal appearance and attire, whose senses
are all collected (for devotion to the true objects of life), whose
purposes are never left, unaccomplished, <span
id="fr_414"></span>[1](#fn_414) who bears himself with equal
friendliness towards all creatures, who regards a clod of earth and a
lump of gold with an equal eye, who is equally disposed towards friend
and foe, who is possessed of patience, who takes praise and blame
equally, <span id="fr_415"></span>[2](#fn_415) who is free from longing
with respect to all objects of desire, who practises Brahmacharya, and
who is firm and steady in all his vows and observances, who has no
malice or envy for any creature in the universe, is a Yogin who
according to the Sankhya system succeeds in winning Emancipation. Listen
now to the way and the means by which a person may win Emancipation
through Yoga (or the system of Patanjali). That person who moves and
acts after having transcended the puissance that the practice of Yoga
brings about (in the initial stages), succeeds in winning
Emancipation. <span id="fr_416"></span>[3](#fn_416) I have thus
discoursed to thee on those topics (*viz*., Emancipation according to
the Sankhya system and that according to the Yoga system) which are
dissimilar if the speaker be disposed to treat them as such (but which
in reality, are one and the same). <span id="fr_417"></span>[4](#fn_417)
Thus can one transcend all pairs of opposites. Thus can one attain to
Brahma.'" <span id="fr_418"></span>[5](#fn_418)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_405"></span>[168:1](m12b063.htm#fr_405) The place should be
a level spot, not impure (such as a crematorium, etc.), free from
*kankars*, fire, and sand, etc.; solitary and free from noise and other
sources of disturbance. Acts include abstention from food and sports and
amusements, abstention from all kinds of work having only worldly
objects to accomplish, abstention also from sleep and dreams. Affection
means that for good disciples or for progress in yoga. Objects refer to
sacred fuel, water, and suppression of expectancy and anxiety, etc.
Means refer to the seat to be used, the manner of sitting, and the
attitude of the body. Destruction refers to the conquest of desire and
attachments, *i.e.*, renunciation of all attractive things. Certainty
means the <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> unalterable belief that what
is said about yoga in the Vedas and by preceptors is true. The nom.
sing. inflection stands for the instrumental plural. Eyes include the
other senses. All these should be restrained. Food means pure food.
Suppression refers to the subjugation of our natural inclination towards
earthly objects. Mind here has reference to the regulation of the will
and its reverse, *viz*., irresolution. Survey means reflection on birth,
death, decrepitude, disease, sorrow, faults, etc. In giving these
meanings, I, of course, follow Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[169:1](m12b063.htm#fr_406) Notwithstanding
Nilakantha's gloss which shows great ingenuity and which has been
apparently followed by both of them, the Vernacular translators have
misunderstood Portions of these verses which sketch out the course of
life which one desirous of attaining to Emancipation or Brahma is to
follow. Particular virtues or attributes have been represented as
particular limbs of the car. It does not appear that there is (except in
one or two instances), any especial aptitude in any of those virtues or
attributes for corresponding with One instead of with another limb of
the figurative car. *Upastha* is that part of the car on which the
driver sits. *Varutha* is the wooden fence round a car for protecting it
against the effects of collision. Shame is the feeling that withdraws us
from all wicked acts. *Kuvara* is the pole to which the yoke is
attached. Upaya and Apaya, which have been called the *kuvara*, are
'means' and destruction'--explained in verse above. *Aksha* is the
wheel. *Yuga* is the yoke. *Vandhura* is that part of yuga where it is
attached to the pole, *i.e.*, its Middle, about which appears something
like a projecting knob. *Nemi* is the circumference of the wheel.
*Nabhi* is the central portion of the car upon which the rider or
warrior is seated. *Pratoda* is the goad with which the driver urges,
the steeds. The commentator explains that *jiva-yuktah* means having
such a *jiva* as is desirous of attaining to Emancipation or *Moksha*.
Such elaborate figures are favourite conceits of Oriental poets.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[170:1](m12b063.htm#fr_407) Adopting the
Kantian distribution of the mental phenomena, *viz*., the three great
divisions of Cognitive faculties, Pleasure and Pain, and Desire and
Will, Sir William Hamilton subdivides the first (*viz*., the Cognitive
faculties), into the acquisitive faculty, the retentive faculty, the
reproductive faculty, the representative faculty, and reason or judgment
by which concepts are compared together. *Dharana* corresponds with the
exercise of the [Representative](errata.htm#94) faculty or the power by
which the mind is held to or kept employed upon a particular image or
notion. It is this faculty that is especially trained by *yogins*.
Indeed, the initial stop consists in training it to the desirable
extent.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[170:2](m12b063.htm#fr_408) The seven kinds of
*Dharanas* appertain respectively to Earth, Wind, Space, Water, Fire,
Consciousness and Understanding.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[170:3](m12b063.htm#fr_409) All these have been
explained lower down.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[170:4](m12b063.htm#fr_410) The construction of
both these lines is difficult to understand. The prose order of the line
is '*yogatah yuktesu* (madhye) *yasya yatha*, etc., *vikrama* (tatha
vakshyami); *atmani pasyatah* (janasya) *yuktasya yogasya* (yatha)
*siddhi* (tatha vakshyami).' *Yogatah* means *upayatah*, *i.e.*,
according to rules and ordinances. *Vikrama* is used in a peculiar
sense, *viz*., *anubhavakramah*, *i.e.*, the order of conception or
conceptions in other order *Atmani pasyatah* means 'of him who looks
into himself,' *i.e.*, who withdraws his mind from the outer world and
turns it to view his own self. Without Nilakantha's aid, such verses
would be thoroughly unintelligible.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[170:5](m12b063.htm#fr_411) *Pasyatah* means
'of that which sees,' *i.e.*, of the Atman or Soul.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[171:1](m12b063.htm#fr_412) The Understanding
is called the *soul* of the five elements and of the consciousness of
individuality because these six things rest on it or have it for their
refuge. The reader will easily understand this from what has been said
in the previous Sections.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[171:2](m12b063.htm#fr_413) It is from the
Unmanifest or the Supreme Soul that the world or all that is Manifest,
springs or emanates. The Yogin, in consequence of his superior
knowledge, apprehends all that is Manifest to be but the Unmanifest
Supreme Soul.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[172:1](m12b063.htm#fr_414) *Na kritina*,
*i.e.*, *kriti eva*. 'Nirakriti' is regardless of dress and appearance.
K.P. Singha wrongly translates both these words.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[172:2](m12b063.htm#fr_415) *i.e.*, who has
neither friend nor foe. This means that he regards all creatures with an
equal eye, showing particular favour to none, and having no dislike for
any. Coldness of heart is not implied, but impartial and equal
benevolence for all. Taking praise and blame equally, *i.e.*, never
rejoicing at praise nor grieving at blame.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[172:3](m12b063.htm#fr_416) It is said that
with the practice of Yoga, during the first stages, certain
extraordinary powers come to the Yogin whether he wishes for them or
not. In a previous Section it has been said that that Yogin who suffers
himself to be led away by these extraordinary acquisitions, goes to
hell, *i.e.*, fails to attain to Emancipation beside which heaven itself
with the status of Indra is only hell. Hence, he who transcends the
puissance that Yoga brings about becomes Emancipate.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[172:4](m12b063.htm#fr_417) *Dhirah* is
explained as *dhyanavan*. Santi has reference to Emancipation, for it is
Emancipation alone that can give tranquillity or final rest. The
commentator points out that in this verse the speaker shows a decided
preference for the Sankhya philosophy.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[172:5](m12b063.htm#fr_418) *Vide* *Gita*,
verses 4 and 5, Chapter V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXXVII](m12b064)
