[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b099) 
[Next](m12b101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'By what means doth a man become sinful, by what
doth he achieve virtue, by what doth he attain to Renunciation, and by
what doth he win Emancipation?'

"Bhishma said, 'Thou knowest all duties. This question that thou askest
is only for confirmation of thy conclusions. Listen now to Emancipation,
and Renunciation, and Sin, and Virtue to their very roots. Perceiving
any one of the five objects (*viz*., form, taste, scent, sound, and
touch), desire runs after it at first. Indeed, obtaining them within the
purview of the senses, O chief of Bharata's race, desire or aversion
springs up. <span id="fr_795"></span>[2](#fn_795) One, then, for the
sake of that object (*i.e.*, for acquisition of what is liked and
avoidance of what is disliked) strives and begins acts that involve much
labour. One endeavours one's best for repeatedly enjoying those forms
and scents (and the three other objects of the remaining three senses)
that appear very agreeable. Gradually, attachment, and aversion, and
greed, and errors of judgment arise. The mind of one overwhelmed by
greed and error and affected by attachment and aversion is never
directed to virtue. One then begins with [hypocrisy](errata.htm#120) to
do acts that are good. Indeed, with hypocrisy one then seeks to acquire
virtue, and with hypocrisy one likes to acquire wealth. When one
succeeds, O son of Kuru's race, in winning wealth with hypocrisy, one
sets one's heart to such acquisition wholly. It is then that one begins
to do acts that are sinful, notwithstanding the admonitions of
well-wishers and the wise, unto all which he makes answers plausibly
consistent with reason and conformable to the injunctions of the
scriptures. Born of attachment and error, his sins, of three kinds,
rapidly increase, for he thinks sinfully, speaks sinfully, and acts
sinfully. When he fairly starts on the way of sin, they that are good
mark his wickedness. They, however, that are of a disposition similar to
that of the sinful man, enter into friendship with him. He succeeds not
in winning happiness even here. Whence then would he succeed in winning
happiness hereafter? It is thus that one becomes sinful. Listen now to
me as I speak to thee of one that is righteous. Such a man, inasmuch as
he seeks the good of others, succeeds in winning good for himself. By
practising duties that are fraught with other people's good, he attains
at last to a highly agreeable end. He who, aided by his wisdom, succeeds
beforehand in beholding the faults

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

above adverted to, who is skilled in judging of what is happiness and
what is sorrow and how each is brought about, and who waits with
reverence upon those that are good, makes progress in achieving virtue,
both in consequence of his habit and such companionship of the good. The
mind of such a person takes delight in virtue, and he lives on, making
virtue his support. If he sets his heart on the acquisition of wealth,
he desires only such wealth as may be acquired in righteous ways.
Indeed, he waters the roots of only those things in which he sees merit.
In this way, doth one become righteous and acquires friends that are
good. In consequence of his acquisition of friends, of wealth, and of
children, he sports in happiness both here and hereafter. The mastery
(in respect of enjoyment) that a living creature attains over sound,
touch, taste, form, and scent, O Bharata, represents the fruit of
virtue. <span id="fr_796"></span>[1](#fn_796) Remember this. Having
obtained the fruit of virtue, O Yudhishthira, such a man does not give
himself up to joy. Without being contented with such (visible) fruits of
virtue he betakes himself to Renunciation, led on by the eye of
knowledge. When, having acquired the eye of knowledge, he ceases to take
pleasure in the gratification of desire, in taste and in scent, when he
does not allow his mind to run towards sound, touch and form, it is then
that he succeeds in freeing himself from desire. <span
id="fr_797"></span>[2](#fn_797) He does not, however, even then cast off
virtue or righteous acts. Beholding then all the worlds to be liable to
destruction, he strives to cast off virtue (with its rewards in the form
of heaven and its happiness) and endeavours to attain to Emancipation by
the (well-known) means. <span id="fr_798"></span>[3](#fn_798) Gradually
abandoning all sinful acts he betakes himself to Renunciation, and
becoming righteous-souled succeeds at last in attaining to Emancipation.
I have now told thee, O son, of that about which thou hadst asked me,
*viz*., the topics of Sin, Righteousness, Renunciation, and
Emancipation, O Bharata! Thou shouldst, therefore, O Yudhishthira,
adhere to virtue in all situations. Eternal is the success, O son of
Kunti, of thee that adherest to righteousness.'" <span
id="fr_799"></span>[4](#fn_799)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_795"></span>[278:2](m12b100.htm#fr_795) The commentator
explains the grammar as *panchanam* (madhya ekam) *artham prapya*, etc.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[279:1](m12b100.htm#fr_796) This is the mastery
or puissance that is brought by Yoga, so that the person succeeds, flats
of the will, in creating whatever he desires.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[279:2](m12b100.htm#fr_797) The Burdwan
translator gives a ridiculous version of this verse. He cites the
commentator's words without understanding them aright.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[279:3](m12b100.htm#fr_798) What he does is to
abandon *sakamah dharmah* for betaking himself to *nishaamah dharmah* or
the practice of duties without desire of fruit, for only such a course
of conduct can lead to Emancipation.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[279:4](m12b100.htm#fr_799) By *dharma* here is
meant *nishkama dharma*, for the fruits of *sakama dharma* are not
eternal, heaven like all things else having an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXIV](m12b101)
