[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b032) 
[Next](m12b034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCVI

"Manu said, 'When the fivefold attributes are united with the five
senses and the mind, then is Brahma seen by the individual like a thread
passing through a gem. As a thread, again, may lie within gold or pearl
or a coral or any object made of earth, even so one's soul, in
consequence of one's own acts, may live within a cow, a horse, a man, an
elephant, or any other animal, or within a worm or an insect. The good
deeds an individual performs in a particular body produce rewards that
the individual enjoys in that particular body. A soil, apparently
drenched with one particular kind of liquid, supplies to each different
kind of herb or plant that grows on it the sort of juice it requires for
itself. After the same manner, the Understanding, whose course is
witnessed by the soul, is obliged to follow the path marked out by the
acts of previous lives. <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195) From
knowledge springs desire. From desire springs resolution. From
resolution flows action. From action proceed fruits (*i.e.*,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

consequences, good and bad). Fruits, therefore, are dependent on actions
as their cause. Actions have the understanding for their cause. The
understanding has knowledge for its cause; and knowledge has the Soul
for its cause. That excellent result which is achieved in consequence of
the destruction of knowledge, of fruits, of the understanding, and of
acts, is called Knowledge of Brahma. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196) Great and high is that self-existent
Essence, which yogins behold. They that are devoid of wisdom, and whose
understandings are devoted to worldly possessions never behold that
which exists in the Soul itself. Water is superior to the Earth in
extension; Light is superior to Water; Wind is superior to Light; Space
is superior to Wind; Mind is superior to Space; Understanding is
superior to Mind; Time is superior to Understanding. The divine Vishnu,
whose is this universe, is superior to Time. That god is without
beginning, middle, and end. In consequence of his being without
beginning, middle, and end, he is Unchangeable. He transcends all
sorrow, for sorrow has limits. <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197)
That Vishnu hath been called the Supreme Brahma. He is the refuge or
object of what is called the Highest. Knowing Him, they that are wise,
freed from everything that owns the power of Time, attain to what is
called Emancipation. All these (that we perceive) are displayed in
attributes. That which is called Brahma, being without attributes, is
superior to these. <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_198) Abstention from
acts is the highest religion. That religion is sure to lead to
deathlessness (Emancipation). The *Richs*, the *Yajuses*, and the
*Samans*, have for their refuge the body. They flow from the end of the
tongue. They cannot be acquired without effort and are subject to
destruction. Brahma, however, cannot be acquired in this way, for
(without depending upon the body) it depends upon that (*i.e.*, the
knower or Soul) which has the body for its refuge. Without beginning,
middle, or end, Brahma cannot be acquired by exertion (like to what is
necessary for the acquirement of the Vedas). The *Richs*, the *Samans*,
the *Yajuses* have each a beginning. Those that have a beginning have
also an end. But Brahma is said to be without beginning. And because
Brahma hath neither beginning nor end, it is said to be infinite and
unchangeable. In consequence of unchangeableness, Brahma transcends all
sorrow as also all pairs of opposites. Through unfavourable destiny,
through inability to find out the proper means, and through the
impediments offered by acts, mortals succeed not in beholding the path
by which Brahma may be reached. In consequence of attachment to worldly
possessions, of a vision of the joys of the highest heaven, and of

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

coveting something other than Brahma, men do not attain to the
Supreme. <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199) Others beholding worldly
objects covet their possession. Desirous of such objects, they have no
longing for Brahma in consequence of its transcending all
attributes. <span id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_200) How shall he that is
attached to attributes which are inferior, arrive at a knowledge of him
that is possessed of attributes that are superior? It is by inference
that one can arrive at a knowledge of Him that transcends all this in
attributes and form. By subtile intelligence alone can we know Him. We
cannot describe Him in words. The mind is seizable by the mind, the eye
by eye. <span id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_201) By knowledge the
understanding can be purified of its dross. The understanding may be
employed for purifying the mind. By the mind should the senses be
controlled. Achieving all this, one may attain to the Unchangeable. One
who has, by contemplation, become freed from attachments, and who has
been enriched by the possession of a discerning mind, succeeds in
attaining to Brahma which is without desire and above all attributes. As
the wind keeps away from the fire that is embedded within a piece of
wood, even so persons that are agitated (by desire for worldly
possessions) keep away from that which is Supreme. Upon the destruction
of all earthly objects, the mind always attains to That which is higher
than the Understanding; while upon their separation the mind always
acquires that which is below the Understanding. That person, who, in
conformity with the method already described, becomes engaged in
destroying earthly objects, attains to absorption into the body of
Brahma. <span id="fr_202"></span>[4](#fn_202) Though the Soul is
unmanifest; yet when clothed with qualities, its acts become unmanifest.
When dissolution (of the body) comes, it once more becomes manifest. The
Soul is really inactive. It exists, united with the senses that are
productive of either happiness or sorrow. United with all the senses and
endued with body, it takes refuge in the five primal elements. Through
want of power, however, it fails to act when deprived of force by the
Supreme and Unchangeable. No man sees the end of the earth but knows
this, *viz*., that the earth's end Will

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

surely come. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203) Man, agitated here
(by attachments), is surely led to his last refuge like the wind leading
a vessel tossed on the sea to a safe harbour at last. The Sun, spreading
his rays, becomes the possessor of an attribute, (*viz*., the lighter of
the world): withdrawing his rays (at the hour of setting), he once more
becomes an object divested of attributes. After the same manner, a
person, abandoning all distinctions (attachments), and betaking himself
to penances, at last enters the indestructible *Brahma* which is
divested of all attributes. By discerning Him who is without birth, who
is the highest refuge of all righteous persons, who is self-born, from
whom everything springs and unto whom all things return, who is
unchangeable, who is without beginning, middle, and end, and who is
certainty's self and supreme, a person attains to immortality
(Emancipation).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[78:1](m12b033.htm#fr_195) *Antaratmanudarsini*
is explained by the commentator as "that which has the *Antaratman* for
its *anudarsin* or witness. The Burdwan translator is incorrect in
rendering the second line.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[79:1](m12b033.htm#fr_196) The first
'knowledge' refers to the perception of the true connection between the
Soul and the not-Soul. 'Fruits' mean the physical forms that are gained
in new births. The destruction of the understanding takes place when the
senses and the mind are withdrawn into it all of them, united together,
are directed towards the Soul. *Jneyapratishthitam Jnanam* means, of
course, knowledge of *Brahma*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[79:2](m12b033.htm#fr_197) The commentator
explains that sorrow arises from the relation of the knower and the
known. All things that depend upon that relation are transitory. They
can form no part of What is eternal and what transcends that relation.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[79:3](m12b033.htm#fr_198) I take the obvious
meaning, instead of the learned explanation offered by Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[80:1](m12b033.htm#fr_199) The very *Yogins*,
if led away by the desire of acquiring extraordinary powers and the
[beatitude](errata.htm#70) of the highest heaven do not behold the
Supreme.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[80:2](m12b033.htm#fr_200) *Gunam*, literally,
attributes; hence objects possessed of attributes.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[80:3](m12b033.htm#fr_201) That which is called
the external world has no objective existence. It is purely subjective.
Hence, it is the mind that sees and hears and touches the mind itself.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[80:4](m12b033.htm#fr_202) This verse is a
cruce. There can be no doubt that Nilakantha's explanation is correct.
Only, as regards *budhyavara* I am disposed to differ from him very
slightly. The grammar of the first line is this; 'Gunadane manah sada
budhiyaraya; viprayoge cha tesham budhyavaraya.' Now 'Gunadana' means
the 'adana' (destruction) of 'guna'. (This root *da* means to cut). What
is meant by the destruction of 'guna' or attribute or earthly objects is
merging them in the *buddhi* by *yoga*; in other words, a withdrawal of
the senses into the mind, and the senses and the mind into the
understanding. "Viprayoga cha tesham" means 'in their separation,'
*i.e.*, when these objects are believed to be real and as existing
independently of the mind. The result of this would be the acquisition
of 'budhyavara,' implying the acquisition of those very objects. In the
case of yogins, whose minds may be in such a frame, the powers called
'asiswaryya' are acquired. There is no especial necessity, however, for
taking the case of yogins.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[81:1](m12b033.htm#fr_203) What is said here is
that Happiness and Sorrow have an end, though it may not be seen, and
the Soul will surely come to its final resting place. This accords with
the doctrine of infinite spiritual improvement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCVII](m12b034)
