[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b016) 
[Next](m12b018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXC

"Bhrigu said, 'Truth is Brahma; Truth is Penance; it is Truth that
creates all creatures. It is by Truth that the whole universe is upheld;
and it is with the aid of Truth that one goes to heaven. Untruth is only
another form of Darkness. It is Darkness that leads downwards. Those who
are afflicted by Darkness and covered by it fail to behold the lighted
regions of heaven. It has been said that Heaven is Light and that Hell
is Darkness. The creatures that dwell in the universe may obtain both
heaven and hell. In this world also, truth and untruth lead to opposite
courses of conduct and opposite indications, such as Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, light and darkness, pleasure and pain. Amongst these,
that which is Truth is Righteousness; that which is Righteousness is
Light; and that which is Light is Happiness. Similarly, that which is
Untruth is Unrighteousness; that which is Unrighteousness is Darkness;
and that which is Darkness is Sorrow or Misery. In this respect it is
said that they that are possessed of wisdom, beholding that the world of
lire is overwhelmed with sorrow, both bodily and mental, and with
happiness that is sure to end in misery, never suffer themselves to be
stupefied. He that is Wise will strive to rescue himself from sorrow.
The happiness of living

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

creatures is unstable both here and hereafter. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) The happiness of creatures that are
overwhelmed by Darkness disappears like the splendour of the Moon when
afflicted by Rahu. <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) Happiness is said
to be of two kinds, *viz*., bodily and mental. Both in this and the
other world, the visible and the invisible fruits (of action) are
specified (in the Vedas) for the sake of happiness. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70) There is nothing more important than
happiness and among the fruits or consequences of the triple aggregate.
Happiness is desirable. It is an attribute of the Soul. Both Virtue and
Profit are sought for its sake. Virtue is its root. This, indeed, is its
origin. All acts have for their end the attainment of happiness.'

"Bharadwaja said, 'You have said that happiness is the highest object, I
do not comprehend this. This attribute of the soul that (you say) is so
desirable is not sought by the *Rishis* who are regarded to be engaged
in something promising a higher reward. It is heard that the Creator of
the three worlds, *viz*., the puissant Brahman, lives alone, observant
of the vow of *Brahmacharya*. He never devotes himself to the happiness
obtainable from the gratification of desire. Also, the divine Master of
the universe, the lord of Uma, reduced *Kama* (the deity of desire) to
extinction. For this reason, we say that happiness is not acceptable to
high-souled people. Nor does it appear to be a high attribute of the
Soul. I cannot put faith in what thy divine self has said, *viz*., that
there is nothing higher than happiness. That there are two kinds of
consequences in respect of our acts, *viz*., the springing of happiness
from good acts and of sorrow from sinful, acts, is only a saying that is
current in the world.'

"Bhrigu said, 'On this it is said as follows: from Untruth springs
Darkness. They that are overwhelmed by Darkness pursue only
Unrighteousness and not Righteousness, being overmastered by wrath,
covetousness, malice, falsehood, and similar evils. They never obtain
happiness either here or hereafter, On the other hand, they are
afflicted by various kinds of disease and pain and trouble. They are
also tortured by Death, imprisonment, and diverse other griefs of that
kind, and by the sorrows, attending on hunger and thirst and toil. They
are also pained by the numerous bodily griefs that arise from rain and
wind and burning heat and exceeding cold. They are also overwhelmed by
numerous mental griefs caused by loss of wealth and separation from
friends, as also by griefs caused by decrepitude and death. They that
are not touched by these diverse kinds of physical and mental
afflictions, know what happiness is. These evils are never found in
heaven. There delicious breezes blow. In heaven there is also perpetual
fragrance. In heaven there is no hunger, no thirst, no decrepitude, no
sin. In this world there is both happiness and misery. In hell there is
only misery. Therefore,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

happiness is the highest object of acquisition. The Earth is the
progenitrix of all creatures. Females partake of her nature. The male
animal is like Prajapati himself. The vital seed, it should be known, is
the creative energy. In this way did Brahman ordain in days of old that
the creation should go on. Each, affected by his own acts, obtains
happiness or misery.'" <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[36:1](m12b017.htm#fr_68) The felicity that is
obtained in heaven is not everlasting, being limited in point of
duration by the degree or measure of merit that is achieved here.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[36:2](m12b017.htm#fr_69) The Pauranic theory of
both the solar and the lunar eclipse is that the Sun and the Moon are
sought to be devoured by the *Daitya*, *Rahu*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[36:3](m12b017.htm#fr_70) The sense seems to be
that Vedas declare those fruits in order that men may strive for them
when they lead to happiness.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[37:1](m12b017.htm#fr_71) Nearly the whole of
this section is prose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXCI](m12b018)
