[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b078.md) 
[Next](m12b080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLII

"Vyasa said, 'Unto a disciple that wishes to enquire after Emancipation
after having transcended all pairs of opposites and accomplished the
concerns of both profit and religion, an accomplished preceptor should
first recount all that has been said in the foregoing section, which is
elaborate, on the topic of *Adhyatma*. <span
id="fr_581"></span>[4](#fn_581.md) Space, wind, light, water and earth
counted as the fifth, and *bhava* and *abhava* and time, exist in all
living creatures having the five for their constituent
ingredients. <span id="fr_582"></span>[5](#fn_582.md) Space is unoccupied
interval. The organs of hearing consist of space. One conversant with
the science of entities endued with form should know that space has
sound for its attribute. The feet (that assist at locomotion) have wind
for their essence. The vital breaths are made of wind. The sense of
touch (skin) has wind for its essence, and touch is the attribute of
wind. Heat, the digestive fire in the stomach, light that discovers all
things, the warmth that is in the body, and eye counted as the fifth,
are all of light which has form of diverse colours for its attribute.
Liquefied discharges,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

solubility, and all kinds of liquid matter are of water. Blood, marrow,
and all else (in the body) that is cool, should be known to have water
for their essence. The tongue is the sense of taste, and taste is
regarded as the attribute of water. All solid substances are of earth,
as also bones, teeth, nails, beard, the bristles on the body, hair,
nerves, sinews, and skin. The nose is called the sense of scent. The
object of that sense, *viz*., scent, should be known as the attribute of
earth. Each subsequent element possesses the attribute or attributes of
the preceding one besides its own.  <span
id="fr_583"></span>[1](#fn_583.md) In all living creatures again are the
(three) supplementary entities (*viz*., avidya, kama, and karma). <span
id="fr_584"></span>[2](#fn_584.md) The Rishis thus declared the five
elements and the effects and attributes flowing from or belonging to
them. The mind forms the ninth in the calculation, and the understanding
is regarded as the tenth. The Soul, which is infinite, is called the
eleventh. It is regarded as this all and as the highest. The mind has
doubt for its essence. The understanding discriminates and causes
certainty. The Soul (which, as already said, is infinite), becomes known
as *Jiva* invested with body (or jivatman) through consequences derived
from acts. <span id="fr_585"></span>[3](#fn_585.md) That man who looketh
upon the entire assemblage of living creatures to be unstained, though
endued with all these entities having time for their essence, has never
to recur to acts affected by error.'" <span
id="fr_586"></span>[4](#fn_586.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[213:4](m12b079.htm#fr_581.md) *Dwandwani* is
governed by *anushthitah*. *Mahat* here is elaborate. The speaker,
having first discussed the subject elaborately, intends to speak of it
in brief in this Section.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[213:5](m12b079.htm#fr_582.md) *Panchasu* is
explained by the commentator as *Panchatmakeshu*. Hence, he properly
points out that *bhava* and *abhava* and *kala* are included by the
speaker within bhutas or primary elements. Bhava implies the four
entities called *karma*, *samanya*, *visesha* and *samavaya*. By
*abhava* is meant a negative state with respect to attributes not
possessed by a thing. We cannot think of a thing without thinking of it
as uninvested with certain attributes whatever other attributes it may
possess.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[214:1](m12b079.htm#fr_583.md) Enlarged, the
constructions of the original becomes thus: '*uttareshu* (bhuteshu)
(purvabhuta) *gunah* (santi).'

<span id="fn_584"></span>[214:2](m12b079.htm#fr_584.md) *Uttarah* imply the
three entities known by the names of *Avidya* (Ignorance), *Kama*
(desire), and *Karma* (acts). This part of the verse is skipped over by
the vernacular translators.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[214:3](m12b079.htm#fr_585.md) *i.e.*, the soul
when invested with Avidya and desire becomes a living creature and
engages in acts. It is through consequences then that are derived from
acts that the infinite Soul (or Chit) becomes Jivatman.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[214:4](m12b079.htm#fr_586.md) This is a very
difficult verse and no wonder that both the vernacular versions are
defective. K.P. Singha gives the substance, skipping over many of the
words. The Burdwan translator, though citing largely from the gloss,
misunderstands both verse and gloss completely. The grammatical
construction is this: *Ebhih sarvaih kalatmakaih bhavaih anwitam sarvam
yah akalushiam pasyati* (*sah*) *samoham karma nanuvartate*. *Sarvam*
here refers to *pranijatam* or the entire assemblage of living
creatures. *Kalatmakaih bhavaih* is *punyapapadi samskaratmabhih*.
*Bhavaih* is taken by the commentator as equivalent to *bhavanabhih*. I
prefer to take it in the sense of entity. He who looks upon these as
*akalusham*, *i.e.*, as unstained Chit (that is, he who has a knowledge
of the Soul), becomes freed from *samoham karma*, *i.e.*, succeeds in
becoming *nishkamah* in consequence of his acquaintance with
*atmatattwa*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLIII](m12b080.md)
