[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b064) 
[Next](m12b066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### SECTION CCXXXVIII

"Vyasa said, 'These, then, are the obligatory acts ordained for
Brahmanas. One possessed of knowledge always attains to success by going
through (the prescribed) acts. If no doubt arises in respect of acts,
then acts done are sure to lead to success. The doubt to which we refer
is this: whether acts are obligatory or whether they are optional. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[1](#fn_436) As regards this (doubt about the true
character of acts, it should be said that), if acts are ordained for man
for inducing knowledge (by which alone Brahma or Emancipation is to be
attained, even then) they should be regarded as obligatory (and not
optional). I shall now discourse on them by the light of inferences and
experience. Listen to me. <span id="fr_437"></span>[2](#fn_437) With
respect to acts some men say that Exertion is their cause. Others say
that Necessity is their cause. Others, again, maintain that Nature is
the cause. Some say that acts are the result of both Exertion and
Necessity. Some maintain that acts flow from Time, Exertion, and Nature.
Some say that of the three (*viz*., Exertion, Necessity, and Nature),
one only (and not the other two) is the cause. Some are of opinion that
all the three combined are the cause. <span
id="fr_438"></span>[3](#fn_438) Some persons that are engaged in the
performance of acts say, with respect to all objects, that they exist,
that they do not exist, that they cannot be said to exist, that they
cannot be said not to exist, that it is not that they cannot be said to
exist, and lastly, that it is not that they cannot be said not to exist.
(These then are the diverse views entertained by men). They, however,
that are Yogins, behold Brahma to be the universal cause. The men of the
Treta, the Dwapara, and the Kali Yugas are inspired with doubts. The
men, however, of the Krita Yuga are devoted to penances, possessed of
tranquil souls, and observant of righteousness. <span
id="fr_439"></span>[4](#fn_439) In that age all men regard the Richs,
the Samans, and the Yajuses as identical not withstanding their apparent
diversity. Analysing desire and aversion, they worship only

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

penance. <span id="fr_440"></span>[1](#fn_440) Devoted to the practice
of penances, steadfast in them, and rigid in their observance, one
obtains the fruition of all desires by penances alone. By penance one
attains to that by becoming which one creates the universe. By penance
one becomes that in consequence of which one becomes the puissant master
of all things. <span id="fr_441"></span>[2](#fn_441) That Brahma has
been [expounded](errata.htm#96) in the declarations of the Vedas. For
all that, Brahma is inconceivable by even those that are conversant with
those declarations. Once more has Brahma been declared in the Vedanta.
Brahma, however, cannot be beheld by means of acts. <span
id="fr_442"></span>[3](#fn_442) The sacrifice ordained for Brahmans
consists in japa (meditation and recitation), that for Kshatriyas
consists in the slaughter of (clean) animals for the gratification of
the deities; that for Vaisyas consists in the production of crops and,
the keep of domestic animals; and that for Sudras in menial service of
the: three other orders. By observing the duties laid down for him and
by studying the Vedas and other [scriptures](errata.htm#97), one becomes
a *Dwija* (regenerate). Whether one does any other act or not, one
becomes a Brahmana by becoming the friend of all creatures. <span
id="fr_443"></span>[4](#fn_443) In the beginning of Treta, the Vedas and
sacrifices and the divisions of caste and the several modes of life
existed in, their entirety. In consequence, however, of the duration of
life being decreased in Dwapara, those are overtaken by decline. In the
Dwapara age as also in the Kali, the Vedas are overtaken by perplexity.
Towards the close of Kali again, it is doubtful if they ever become even
visible to the eye. <span id="fr_444"></span>[5](#fn_444) In that age,
the duties of the respective order disappear, and men become afflicted
by iniquity. The juicy attributes of kine, of the earth, of water, and
(medicinal and edible) herbs, disappear. <span
id="fr_445"></span>[6](#fn_445) Through (universal) iniquity the Vedas
disappear and with them all the duties inculcated in them

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

as also the duties in respect of the four modes of life. They who remain
observant of the duties of their own order become afflicted, and all
mobile and immobile objects undergo a change for the worse. <span
id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_446) As the showers of heaven cause all
products of the earth to grow, after the same manner the Vedas, in every
age, cause all the angas to grow. <span id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_447)
Without doubt, Time assumes diverse shapes. It has neither beginning nor
end. It is Time which produces all creatures and again devours them. I
have already spoken of it to thee. Time is the origin of all creatures;
Time is that which makes them grow; Time is that which is their
destroyer; and lastly it is time that is their ruler. Subject to pairs
of opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc.), creatures
of infinite variety rest on Time according to their own natures (without
being otherwise than how they have been ordained by supreme
Brahma).' <span id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_448)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_436"></span>[176:1](m12b065.htm#fr_436) Whether *karma* is
*swabhava* or *jnanam* means (as the commentator explains) whether it is
obligatory or optional. *Jnanam*, of course, means here *jnana-janakam*,
*i.e.*, leading to knowledge. Knowledge is essential to success or
emancipation. If acts become necessary for leading to knowledge, the
doubt may then arise that they cease to be obligatory, for knowledge may
be supposed to be attainable otherwise than by acts. K.P. Singha
translates this verse correctly, the Burdwan translator incorrectly,
and, as usual, misunderstands the gloss completely.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[176:2](m12b065.htm#fr_437) The first line of
this verse is exceedingly terse. The construction, as explained by the
commentator, is *Tatra* (samsaye) *purusham prati Jnanam* (jnanajanakam)
*chet* (karma) *syat*, (tarhi) *sa* (eva) *Vedavidhih*. One cannot help
admiring Nilakantha for his patience and ingenuity.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[176:3](m12b065.htm#fr_438) *Daiva* is
explained by the commentator as *Grahah* or *Kalah*. I think, it is used
to signify some kind of blind force whose origin is untraceable. Hence,
I render it necessity. *Vritti* in verse 5 is evidently Exertion, for
the word implies course, of conduct, *Avivekam* is *samuchchayam* or a
combination of all the three.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[176:4](m12b065.htm#fr_439) Inspired with
doubt,' with reference to the declarations of the *Srutis*. 'Possessed
of <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> tranquil souls,' *i.e.*, not
penetrated by doubts of any kind.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[177:1](m12b065.htm#fr_440) In the Treta and
the other Yugas people are seen professing attachment or devotion to one
only of the Vedas and not to the others, be it the Richs, the Samans, or
the Yajuses. The speaker, dissatisfied with this refers to the Krita age
as one in which such difference of faith were not observable. The men of
that age regarded all the Vedas equally, and, in fact, as even
identical.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[177:2](m12b065.htm#fr_441) *Jiva* or *Chit*
becomes puissant and succeeds in creating the universe by means of
penance. By penance one attains to *Brahma*, and, therefore, universal
puissance. This has been sufficiently explained in the previous
Sections.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[177:3](m12b065.htm#fr_442) This is one of the
most important verses in this section, for, as the commentator explains,
this furnishes the answer to the question proposed in the previous
section, *viz*., 'what is that knowledge?' In the Vedas both acts and
knowledge have been spoken of. In the province of acts, *Brahma* has
been represented as Indra and the other gods. *Brahma*, therefore, as
spoken of there, is '*gahana*', or hidden to (or inconceivable by) even
those that are conversant with that province or sphere of the Vedas. In
the Vedanta, again, knowledge or *Vidya* has been spoken of as the means
by which to attain to *Brahma*. The knowledge or *Vidya*, therefore,
which is the subject of the question, is not what is implied by
*Pravritti dharma* or by *Nivritti* as used in the previous section.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[177:4](m12b065.htm#fr_443) The second line of
this verse corresponds with the second line of verse 87 of Chapter II of
*Manusmriti*.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[177:5](m12b065.htm#fr_444) They are seen and
not seen is an idiomatic expression for 'becoming invisible.'

<span id="fn_445"></span>[177:6](m12b065.htm#fr_445) *i.e.*, kine do not
yield copious and sweet milk; the soil ceases to be fertile; water
ceases <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> to be sweet; and the medicinal
and edible herbs lose their virtues of healing as also their flavour.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[178:1](m12b065.htm#fr_446) The commentator
thinks that *Swadharmasthah* is connected with *asramah* in the first
line. I prefer the more obvious construction.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[178:2](m12b065.htm#fr_447) *Varshati* means
*pushnati*. *Angani* means the observances necessary for the practice of
Yoga as also all kinds of rites and vows. The Vedas cause these to grow,
and they, in their turn, aid all students of the Vedas in achieving
their purposes.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[178:3](m12b065.htm#fr_448) *Prabhavah* is
*uttpattih*, or origin; *sthanam* is *poshanam*. Both the Vernacular
translators skip over the last word, thinking that *prabhavasthanam*, is
one word. The commentator notices them as separate. In the beginning of
the second line, *yatra* is understood, *Swabhavena*, is explained by
the commentator as *Brahmabhavena, natu vikritena rupena*. I think the
explanation is correct, and have adopted it accordingly in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXXIX](m12b066)
