[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b093) 
[Next](m12b095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'How, indeed, should the king protect his subjects
without injuring anybody. I ask thee this, O grandsire, tell me, O
foremost of good men!'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
conversation between Dyumatsena and king Satyavat. We have heard that
upon a certain number of individuals having been brought out for
execution at the command of his sire (Dyumatsena), prince Satyavat said
certain words that had never before been said by anybody else. <span
id="fr_712"></span>[1](#fn_712) 'Sometimes righteousness assumes the
form of iniquity, and iniquity assumes the form of righteousness. It can
never be possible that the killing of individuals can ever be a
righteous act.'

"Dyumatsena said, 'If the sparing of those that deserve to be slain be
righteousness, if robbers be spared, O Satyavat, then all distinctions
(between virtue and vice) would disappear. '*This is mine*',--'*This
(other) is not his*'--ideas like these (with respect to property) will
not (if the wicked be not punished) prevail in the Kali age. (If the
wicked be not punished) the affairs of the world will come to a
deadlock. If thou knowest how the world may go on (without punishing the
wicked), then discourse to me upon it.'

"Satyavat said, 'The three other orders (*viz*., the Kshatriyas,
Vaisyas, and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sudras) should be placed under the control of
the Brahmanas. If those three orders be kept within the bonds of
righteousness, then the subsidiary classes (that have sprung from
intermixture) will imitate them in their practices. Those amongst them
that will transgress (the commands of the Brahmanas) shall be reported
to the king.--'This one heeds not my commands,'--upon such a complaint
being preferred by a Brahmana, the king shall inflict punishment upon
the offender. Without destroying the body of the offender the king
should do that unto him which is directed by the scriptures. The king
should not act otherwise, neglecting to reflect properly upon the
character of the offence and upon the science of morality. By slaying
the wicked, the king (practically) slays a large number of individuals
that are innocent. Behold, by slaying a single robber, his wife, mother,
father and children are all slain (because they become deprived of the
means of life). When injured by a wicked person, the king should,
therefore, reflect deeply on the question of chastisement. <span
id="fr_713"></span>[1](#fn_713) Sometimes a wicked man is seen to imbibe
good behaviour from a righteous person. Then again from persons that are
wicked, good children may be seen to spring. The wicked, therefore,
should not be torn up by the roots. The extermination of the wicked is
not consistent with eternal practice. By smiting them gently they may be
made to expiate their offences. By depriving them of all their wealth,
by chains and immurement in dungeons, by disfiguring them (they may be
made to expiate their guilt). Their relatives should not be persecuted
by the infliction of capital sentences on them. If in the presence of
the *Purohita* and others, <span id="fr_714"></span>[2](#fn_714) they
give themselves up to him from desire of protection, and swear, saying,
'O Brahmana, we shall never again commit any sinful act,' they would
then deserve to be let off without any punishment. This is the command
of the Creator himself. Even the Brahmana that wears a deer-skin and the
wand of (mendicancy) and has his head shaved, should be punished (when
he transgresses). <span id="fr_715"></span>[3](#fn_715) If great men
transgress, their chastisement should be proportionate to their
greatness. As regards them that offend repeatedly, they do not deserve
to be dismissed without punishment as on the occasion of their first
offence.' <span id="fr_716"></span>[4](#fn_716) "Dyumatsena said, 'As
long as those barriers within which men should be kept are not
transgressed, so long are they designated by the name of Righteousness.
If they who transgressed those, barriers were not punished with death,
those barriers would soon be destroyed. Men of remote and remoter

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

times were capable of being governed with ease. <span
id="fr_717"></span>[1](#fn_717) They were very truthful (in speech and
conduct). They were little disposed to disputes and quarrels. They
seldom gave way to anger, or, if they did, their wrath never became
ungovernable. In those days the mere crying of *fie* on offenders was
sufficient punishment. After this came the punishment represented by
harsh speeches or censures. Then followed the punishment of fines and
forfeitures. In this age, however, the punishment of death has become
current. The measure of wickedness has increased to such an extent that
by slaying one others cannot be restrained. <span
id="fr_718"></span>[2](#fn_718) The robber has no connection with men,
with the deities, with the Gandharvas, and with the *Pitris*. What is he
to whom? He is not anybody to any one. This is the declaration of the
*Srutis*. <span id="fr_719"></span>[3](#fn_719) The robber takes away
the ornaments of corpses from cemeteries, and swearing apparel from men
afflicted by spirits (and, therefore, deprived of senses). That man is a
fool who would make any covenant with those miserable wretches or exact
any oath from them (for relying upon it).' <span
id="fr_720"></span>[4](#fn_720)

"Satyavat said, 'If thou dost not succeed in making honest men of those
rogues and in saving them by means unconnected with slaughter, do thou
then exterminate them by performing some sacrifice. <span
id="fr_721"></span>[5](#fn_721) Kings practise severe austerities for
the sake of enabling their subjects go on prosperously in their
avocations. When thieves and robbers multiply in their kingdoms they
become ashamed.. They, therefore, betake themselves to penances for
suppressing thefts and robberies and making their subjects live happily.
Subjects can be made honest by being only frightened (by the king). Good
kings never slay the wicked from motives of retribution. (On the other
hand, if they slay, they slay in sacrifices, when the motive is to do
good to the slain), Good kings abundantly succeed in ruling their
subjects properly with the aid of good conduct (instead of cruel or
punitive inflictions). If the king acts properly, the superior subjects
imitate him. The inferior people, again in their turn, imitate their
immediate superiors. Men are so constituted

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

that they imitate those whom they regard as their superiors. <span
id="fr_722"></span>[1](#fn_722) That king who, without restraining
himself, seeks to restrain others (from evil ways) becomes an object of
laughter with all men in consequence of his being engaged in the
enjoyment of all worldly pleasures as a slave of his senses. That man
who, through arrogance or error of judgment, offends against the king in
any way, should be restrained by every means. It is by this way that he
is prevented from committing offences anew. The king should first
restrain his own self if he desires to restrain others that offend. He
should punish heavily (if necessary) even friends and near relatives. In
that kingdom where a vile offender does not meet with heavy afflictions,
offences increase and righteousness decreases without doubt. Formerly, a
Brahmana. endued with clemency and possessed of learning, taught me
this. Verily, to this effect, O sire, I have been instructed by also our
grandsire of olden days, who gave such assurances of harmlessness to
people, moved by pity. Their words were, 'In the Krita age, kings should
rule their subjects by adopting ways that are entirely harmless. In the
Treta age, kings conduct themselves according to ways that conform with
righteousness fallen away by a fourth from its full complement. In the
Dwapara age, they proceed according to ways conforming with
righteousness fallen away by a moiety, and in the age that follows,
according to ways conforming with righteousness fallen away by
three-fourth. When the Kati age sets in, through the wickedness of kings
and in consequence of the nature of the epoch itself, fifteen parts of
even that fourth portion of righteousness disappear, a sixteenth portion
thereof being all that then remains of it. If, O Satyavat, by adopting
the method first mentioned (*viz*., the practice of harmlessness),
confusion sets in, the king, considering the period of human life, the
strength of human beings, and the nature of the time that has come,
should award punishments. <span id="fr_723"></span>[2](#fn_723) Indeed,
Manu, the son of the Self-born, has, through compassion for human
beings, indicated the way by means of which men may adhere to knowledge
(instead of harmfulness) for the sake of emancipation.'" <span
id="fr_724"></span>[3](#fn_724)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_712"></span>[252:1](m12b094.htm#fr_712) *i.e.*, prince
Satyavat said that the persons brought out for execution should not be
executed. The power of kings did not extend over the lives of their
subjects. In other words the prince argued against the propriety of
inflicting capital punishment upon even grave offenders.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[253:1](m12b094.htm#fr_713) Verse 10 is a
triplet.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[253:2](m12b094.htm#fr_714) The Burdwan
translator gives a very incorrect version of this verse. He
misunderstands both text and commentary completely. K.P. Singha is
correct.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[253:3](m12b094.htm#fr_715) The commentator
explains that the object of this line is to show that the very
Sannyasin, when he offends, deserves to be chastised. K.P. Singha
misunderstands the line completely. The Burdwan version is correct.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[253:4](m12b094.htm#fr_716) Both the vernacular
versions of this verse are incorrect. The first half of the first line
should be taken independently. The commentator explains that after
*gariyamsam* the words *api sasyu* should be supplied. *Aparadhe tu
punah punah*, etc., is said of offenders in general, and not eminent
offenders only.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[254:1](m12b094.htm#fr_717) *i.e.*, punishments
were not necessary in former times, or very light ones were sufficient.
The Burdwan version of this verse is thoroughly ridiculous.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[254:2](m12b094.htm#fr_718) Hence extermination
is the punishment that has become desirable.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[254:3](m12b094.htm#fr_719) Hence, by slaying
them no injury is done to any one in this or the other world.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[254:4](m12b094.htm#fr_720) *Padma* means, the
ornaments of corpses. Grave-stealers that were in every country.
*Pisachat* is *Pisachopahatat*. Evidently, idiots and mad men were the
persons who were regarded to have been possessed by evil spirits.
*Daiyatam* is an accusative which, like, *Samayam* is governed by the
transitive verb *Kurvita*. *Yah kaschit* means *yah kaschit mudyhah, na
tu prajnah*. The Burdwan version of this verse shows that the person
entrusted with this portion of the Canti was altogether incompetent for
the task. K.P. Singha gives the meaning correctly.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[254:5](m12b094.htm#fr_721) The commentator
supposes that after *sadhun* the word *kartum* is understood. The line
may also be taken as meaning,--'If thou dost not succeed in rescuing the
honest without slaying (the wicked).' *Bhuta bhavya* is sacrifice. The
prince speaks of exterminating the rogues by slaying them as animals in
a sacrifice because of the declaration in the *Srutis* that those killed
in sacrifices ascend to heaven, purged of all their sins. Such acts,
therefore, seem to be merciful to the prince, compared to death by
hanging or on the block.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[255:1](m12b094.htm#fr_722) The world thus
improves in conduct and morality through the king only behaving in a
proper way. Cruel punishments are scarcely needed to reform the world.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[255:2](m12b094.htm#fr_723) The period of human
life decreases proportionately in every succeeding age, as also the
strength of human beings. In awarding punishments, the king should be
guided by these considerations.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[255:3](m12b094.htm#fr_724) The word *satya* is
used here for Emancipation. *Mahaddahrmaphalam* is true knowledge, so
called because, of its superiority to heaven, etc. The way pointed out
by Manu is, of <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> course, the religion of
harmlessness. In verse 35, there is an address to prince Satyavat. It
seems, as I have pointed out, that verses 32 to 35 represent the words
of the grandsire to whom the prince refers in verse 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXVIII](m12b095)
