[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b059) 
[Next](m12b061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXXXIII

"Vyasa said, 'I shall now tell thee, how, when his day is gone and his
night

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

comes, he withdraws all things unto himself, or how the Supreme Lord,
making this gross universe exceedingly subtile, merges everything into
his Soul. When the time comes for universal dissolution, a dozen Suns,
and Agni with his seven flames, begin to burn. The whole universe, wrapt
by those flames, begins to blaze forth in a vast conflagration. All
things mobile and immobile that are on the earth first disappear and
merge into the substance of which this planet is composed. After all
mobile and immobile objects have thus disappeared, the earth, shorn of
trees and herbs, looks naked like a tortoise shell. Then water takes up
the attribute of earth, *viz*., scent. When earth becomes shorn of its
principal attribute, that element is on the eve of dissolution. Water
then prevails. Surging into mighty billows and producing awful roars,
only water fills this space and moves about or remains still. Then the
attribute of water is taken by Heat, and losing its own attribute, water
finds rest in that element. Dazzling flames of fire, ablaze all around,
conceal the Sun that is in the centre of space. Indeed, then, space
itself, full of those fiery flames, burns in a vast conflagration. Then
Wind comes and takes the attribute, *viz*., form of Heat or Light, which
thereupon becomes extinguished, yielding to Wind, which, possessed of
great might, begins to be awfully agitated. The Wind, obtaining its own
attribute, *viz*., sound, begins to traverse upwards and downwards and
transversely along all the ten points. Then Space takes the attribute,
*viz*., sound of Wind, upon which the latter becomes extinguished and
enters into a phase of existence resembling that of unheard or unuttered
sound. Then Space is all that remains, that element whose attribute,
*viz*., sound dwells in all the other elements, divested of the
attributes of form, and taste, and touch, and scent, and without shape
of any kind, like sound in its unmanifest state of existence. Then
sound, which is the attribute of space, is swallowed up by Mind which is
the essence of all things that are manifest. Thus Mind which in itself
is unmanifest withdraws all that is manifested by Mind. This withdrawal
of Mind as displayed into Mind as undisplayed or subtile, is called the
destruction of the vast external universe. <span
id="fr_392"></span>[1](#fn_392) Then Chandrama's having made Mind (thus)
withdraw its attribute into itself, swallows it up. When Mind, ceasing
to exist, thus enters into Chandramas, the other attributes that are
owned by Iswara are all that remain. This Chandramas, which is called
also *Sankalpa*, is then, after a very long time, brought under Iswara's
sway, then reason being that that Sankalpa has to perform a very
difficult act, *viz*., the destruction of Chitta or the faculties that
are employed in the process called judgment. When this has been
effected, the condition reached is said to be of high Knowledge.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then Time swallows up this Knowledge, and as the
*Sruti* declares, Time itself, in its turn, is swallowed up by Might, or
Energy. Might or energy, however, is (again) swallowed up by Time, which
last is then brought under her sway by Vidya. Possessed of Vidya, Iswara
then swallows up non-existence itself into his Soul. That is Unmanifest
and Supreme *Brahma*. That is Eternal, and that is the Highest of the
High. Thus all existent creatures are withdrawn into *Brahma*. Truly
hath this, which should be conceived (with the aid of the scriptures)
and which is a topic of Science, been thus declared by Yogins possessed
of Supreme Souls, after actual experience. Even thus doth the Unmanifest
*Brahma* repeatedly undergo the processes of Elaboration and Withdrawal
(*i.e.*, Creation and Destruction), and even thus Brahman's Day and
Night each consist of a thousand *yugas*.'" <span
id="fr_393"></span>[1](#fn_393)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_392"></span>[162:1](m12b060.htm#fr_392) From what has been
said in the previous Sections, the reader will have no difficulty in
understanding what is meant by *abhivyaktatmakam manah*. It is mind that
is the essence of all that is *abhivyakta* or manifest. That mind
swallows up the attribute of Space. Hence it is *avyaktam*, that
swallows up the *manaso vyaktam*. This swallowing up is *Brahmah
sampratisancharah* or destruction of the outward universe in its
manifest vastness. The commentator gives the substance of the verse in
these words: *manahkalpito virat manasi eva liyate*. From the verses
that follow it would seem that the object of this section is to describe
the yogin's *pratyahara* and not the actual dissolution of the universe.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[163:1](m12b060.htm#fr_393) Verses 16 and 17
are exceedingly difficult. The commentator has shown great learning in
expounding them. Unfortunately, the subject is a *yoga* mystery, and the
explanation and illustrations of the commentator refer to things beyond
the reach of ordinary experience and intelligence. The words
*Chandramas*, *Kala*, and *Valam*, and *Akasa* also and *Ghosa* (in
verse 17), are technical terms of *yoga*. I referred the passage to more
than one learned Pundit. My referees are of opinion that a *yoga*
mystery is here expounded, which yogins alone can understand. European
scholars will probably smile at the statement that there is a hidden
meaning in these words. Most readers will take the verses for nonsense.
Reflection, however, has convinced me that *yoga* is not nonsense. One
who has not studied the elements of Geometry or Algebra, cannot, however
intelligent, hope to understand at once a Proposition of the Principia
or [the](errata.htm#88) theorem of De Moivre. Failing to give the actual
sense, I have contented myself with giving a verbal translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXXIV](m12b061)
