[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b103) 
[Next](m12b105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Time, that is fraught, with terror unto all
creatures, is running his course. What is that source of good after
which one should strive? Tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of a
discourse between a sire and a son. Listen to it, O Yudhishthira! Once
on a time, O son of Pritha, a regenerate person devoted only to the
study of the Vedas had a very intelligent son who was known by the name
of Medhavin. Himself conversant with the religion of Emancipation, the,
son one day asked his father who was not conversant with that religion
and who was engaged in following the precepts of the Vedas, this
question.'

"The son said, 'What should a man of intelligence do, O sire, knowing
that the period of existence allotted to men runs fast away? Tell me
this truly and in proper order, O father, so that, guided by thy
instructions I may set myself to the acquisition of virtue.'

"The sire said, 'Having studied the Vedas all the while observing the
duties

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

of *Brahmacharya*, O son, one should then desire for offspring for the
sake of rescuing one's sires. Having established one's fire then and
performing the sacrifices that are ordained, one should then retire into
the woods and (having lived as a forest-recluse) one should then become
a *Muni* (by casting off everything and calmly waiting for
dissolution).'

"The son said, 'When the world is thus assailed and thus besieged on all
sides, and when such irresistible (bolts) are falling in every
direction, how can you speak so calmly?'

"The sire said, 'How is the world assailed? By what is it besieged? What
are those irresistible bolts that are falling on every side? Dost thou
frighten me with thy words?'

"The son said, 'The world is assailed by Death. It is besieged by what
is it besieged? What are those irresistible bolts that are falling on
every side? Dost thou frighten me with thy words?'

"The son said, 'The world is assailed by Death. It is besieged by
Decrepitude. Days and Nights are continually falling (like bolts). Why
do you not take heed of these? When I know that Death does not wait here
for any one (but snatches all away suddenly and without notice), how can
I possibly wait (for his coming) thus enveloped in a coat of Ignorance
and (heedlessly) attending to my concerns? When as each night passes
away the period of every one's life wears away with it, when, indeed,
one's position is similar to that of a fish in a piece of shallow water,
who can feel happy? Death encounters one in the very midst of one's
concerns, before the attainment of one's objects, finding one as
unmindful as a person while engaged in plucking flowers. <span
id="fr_823"></span>[1](#fn_823) That which is kept for being done
tomorrow should be done today; and that which one thinks of doing in the
afternoon should be done in the forenoon. Death does not wait, mindful
of one's having done or not done one's acts. Do today what is for thy
good (without keeping it for tomorrow). See that Death, who is
irresistible, may not overcome thee (before you accomplish thy acts).
Who knows that Death will not come to one this very day? Before one's
acts are completed, Death drags one away. One should, therefore,
commence to practise virtue while one is still young (without waiting
for one's old age). for life is uncertain. By acquiring virtue one is
sure to eternal happiness both here and hereafter. Overpowered by folly
one girds up one's loins for acting on behalf of one's sons and wives.
By accomplishing acts foul or fair, one gratifies these (relatives). Him
possessed of sons and animals, and with mind devotedly attached to them,
Death seizes and runs away like a tiger bearing away a sleeping
deer. <span id="fr_824"></span>[2](#fn_824) While one is still engaged

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

in winning diverse objects of desire, and while still unsatiated with
one's enjoyment, Death seizes one and runs away like a she-wolf seizing
a sheep and running away with it. '*This has been done*',--'*this
remains to be done*',--'*this other is half done*',--one may say thus to
oneself; but Death, unmindful of one's desire to finish one's unfinished
acts, seizes and drags one away. One that has not yet obtained the fruit
of what one has already done, amongst those attached to action, one
busied with one's field or shop or house, Death seizes and carries away.
The weak, the strong; the wise, the brave, the idiotic, the learned, or
him that has not yet obtained the gratification of any of his desires,
Death seizes and bears away. Death, decrepitude, disease, sorrow, and
many things of a similar kind, are incapable of being avoided by
mortals. How, then, O father, canst thou sit so at thy ease? As soon as
a creature is born, Decrepitude and Death come and possess him for his
destruction. All these forms of existence mobile and immobile, are
possessed by these two (*viz*., Decrepitude and Death). When the
soldiers that compose Death's army are on their march, nothing can
resist them, except that one thing, *viz*., the power of Truth, for in
Truth alone Immortality dwells. The delight that one feels of residing
in the midst of men is the [abode](errata.htm#125) of Death. The *Sruti*
declares that that which is called the forest is the true fold for the
*Devas*, while the delight one feels in dwelling in the midst of men is,
as it were, the cord for binding the dweller (and making him
helpless). <span id="fr_825"></span>[1](#fn_825) The righteous cut it
and escape. The sinful do not succeed in cutting it (and freeing
themselves). He who does not injure other creatures in thought, word and
deed, and who never injures others by taking away their means of
sustenance, is never injured by any creature. <span
id="fr_826"></span>[2](#fn_826) For these reasons, one should practise
the vow of truth, be steadily devoted to the vow of truth, and should
desire nothing but the truth. Restraining all one's senses and looking
upon all creatures with an equal eye, one should vanquish Death with the
aid of Truth. Both Immortality and Death are planted in the body. Death
is encountered from folly, and Immortality is won by Truth. Transcending
desire and wrath, and abstaining from injury, I shall adopt Truth and
happily achieving what is for my good, avoid Death like an Immortal.
Engaged in the Sacrifice that is constituted by Peace, and employed also
in the Sacrifice of *Brahma*, and restraining my senses, the Sacrifices
I shall perform are those of speech, mind, and acts, when the sun enters
his northerly course. <span id="fr_827"></span>[3](#fn_827) How can one
like me perform an Animal Sacrifice which is fraught with cruelty?

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

\[paragraph continues\] How can one like me, that is possessed of
wisdom, perform like a cruel Pisacha, a Sacrifice of Slaughter after the
manner of what is laid down for the Kshatriyas,--a Sacrifice that is,
besides, endued with rewards that are terminable? In myself have I been
begotten by my own self. O father, without seeking to procreate
offspring, I shall rest myself on my own self. I shall perform the
Sacrifice of Self, I need no offspring to rescue me. <span
id="fr_828"></span>[1](#fn_828) He whose words and thoughts are always
well-restrained, he who has Penances and Renunciation, and Yoga, is sure
to attain to everything through these. There is no eye equal to
Knowledge. There is no reward equal to Knowledge. There is no sorrow
equal to attachment. There is no happiness equal to Renunciation. For a
Brahmana there can be no wealth like residence in solitude, an equal
regard for all creatures, truthfulness of speech, steady observance of
good conduct, the total abandonment of the rod (of chastisement),
simplicity, and the gradual abstention from all acts. <span
id="fr_829"></span>[2](#fn_829) What need hast thou with wealth and what
need with relatives and friends, and what with spouses? Thou art a
Brahmana and thou hast death to encounter. Search thy own Self that is
concealed in a cave. Whither have thy grandsires gone and whither thy
sire too?' <span id="fr_830"></span>[3](#fn_830)

"Bhishma said, 'Hearing these words of his son, the sire acted in the
way that was pointed out, O king! Do thou also act in the same way,
devoted to the religion of Truth.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_823"></span>[287:1](m12b104.htm#fr_823) All Brahmanas have
to pluck flowers in the morning for offering them to the deities they
worship. The task takes many minutes, because a good many have to be
plucked for the purpose. This being a daily occupation and they going as
they do to places where flowers abound, the act of plucking goes on
while the plucker is mentally engaged with other things.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[287:2](m12b104.htm#fr_824) The Bengal reading
*sputam vyaghro mrigamiva*, etc. is preferable to the Bombay reading
*sputam vyaghram mahaughova*. If the Bombay reading be accepted, the
meaning would be 'Him Death snatches away *as a mighty wave sweeps away
a sleeping tiger*.' The idea of a sleeping tiger being swept away by a
surging wave is very unfamiliar.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[288:1](m12b104.htm#fr_825) Devas here
evidently refer to the senses. The senses are, as it were, cattle. Their
true fold is the forest and not peopled cities and towns. In the forest
there are no temptations to try them as in the midst of cities and
towns.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[288:2](m12b104.htm#fr_826)
*Jivitarthapanayenaih* is connected with *hinsati*. To take it (as the
Burdwan translator does) as an adjective qualifying 'pranibhih' would be
incorrect.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[288:3](m12b104.htm#fr_827) The Sacrifice of
Peace is opposed to the Sacrifice of Slaughter. The Sacrifice of Brahma
is Yoga which leads to a knowledge of the Soul. The Sacrifice of Speech
is Vedic recitation or Japa. The Sacrifice of Mind is contemplation, and
that of Acts is baths, performance of other acts of purity, waiting
dutifully upon the preceptor, etc.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[289:1](m12b104.htm#fr_828) To perform the
Sacrifice of Self is to merge the Soul in the Supreme Soul.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[289:2](m12b104.htm#fr_829) The Bombay reading
*danda-vidhanam* is a blunder for the Bengal reading *danda nidhanam*.
To interpret vidhanam as equivalent to abandonment or giving up, by
taking the prefix *vi*, in the sense of *vigata* would be an act of
violence to the word.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[289:3](m12b104.htm#fr_830) The *guha* or cave
referred to is the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXVIII](m12b105)
