[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b042) 
[Next](m12b044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXVI

"Bhishma said, 'The *yogin* who wishes to always practise sinless
*Brahmacharya* and who is impressed with the faults attaching to dreams
should, with his whole heart, seek to abandon sleep. In dreams, the
embodied soul, affected by the attributes of Passion and Darkness, seems
to become possessed of another body and move and act influenced by
desire. <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_266) In consequence of
application for the acquisition of knowledge and of continued reflection
and recapitulation, the *yogin* remains always awake. Indeed, the
*yogin* can keep himself continually awake by devoting himself to
knowledge. On this topic it has been asked what is this state in which
the embodied creature thinks himself surrounded by and engaged in
objects and acts? True it is that the embodied being, with its senses
really suspended, still thinks itself to be possessed of body with all
the senses of knowledge and of action. As regards the question started,
it is said that that master of *yoga*, named Hari, comprehends truly how
it happens. The great *Rishis* say that the explanation offered by Hari
is correct and consistent with reason. The learned say that it is in
consequence of the senses being worn out with fatigue, dreams are
experienced by all creatures. (Though the senses are suspended) the
mind, however, never disappears (or becomes inactive) and hence arise
dreams. This is said by all to be their noted cause. As the imaginings
of a person that is awake and

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

engaged in acts, are due only to the creative power of the mind, after
the same manner the impressions in a dream appertain only to the mind. A
person with desire and attachment obtains those imaginings (in dreams)
based upon the impressions of countless lives in the past. Nothing that
impresses the mind once is ever lost, and the Soul being cognisant of
all those impressions causes them to come forth from obscurity. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_267) Whichever among the three attributes of
Goodness, Passion, and Darkness is brought about by the influence of
past acts and by whichever amongst them the mind is affected for the
time being in whatever way, the elements (in their subtile forms)
display or indicate accordingly (in the way of images). <span
id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_268) After images have thus been produced,
the particular attribute of Goodness or Passion or Darkness that may
have been brought by past act rises in the mind and conduces to its last
result, *viz*., happiness or misery. Those images having wind, bile, and
phlegm for their chief causes, which men apprehend through ignorance and
in consequence of propensities fraught with Passion and Darkness,
cannot, it has been said, be easily discarded. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[3](#fn_269) Whatever objects again a person
perceives in the mind (while wakeful) through the senses in a state of
perspicuity are apprehended by the mind in dreams while the senses are
obscured in respect of their functions. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[4](#fn_270) The Mind exists unobstructedly in all
things. This is due to the nature of the Soul. The Soul should be
comprehended. All the elements and the objects they compose exist in the
Soul. <span id="fr_271"></span>[5](#fn_271) In the state called
dreamless slumber (*sushupti*), the manifest human body which, of
course, is the door of dreams, disappears in the mind. Occupying the
body the mind enters the soul which is manifest and upon which all
existent and non-existent things depend, and becomes transformed into a
wakeful witness with certainty of apprehension. Thus dwelling in pure
Consciousness which is the soul of all things; it is regarded by the
learned as

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

transcending both Consciousness and all things in the universe. <span
id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_272) That *yogin* who in consequence of
desire covets any of the divine attributes (of Knowledge or
Renunciation, etc.) should regard a pure mind to be identical with the
object of his desire. All things rest in a pure mind or soul. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_273) This is the result attained to by one
who is engaged in penances. That yogin, however, who has crossed
Darkness or ignorance, becomes possessed of transcending effulgence.
When darkness or ignorance has been transcended, the embodied Soul
becomes Supreme *Brahma*, the cause of the universe. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[3](#fn_274) The deities have penances and
[Vedic](errata.htm#76) rites. Darkness (or pride and cruelty), which is
destructive of the former, has been adopted by the *Asuras*. This,
*viz*., *Brahma*, which has been said to have Knowledge only for its
attribute, is difficult of attainment by either the deities or the
*Asuras*. It should be known that the qualities of Goodness, Passion and
Darkness belong to the deities and the *Asuras*. Goodness is the
attribute of the deities; while the two others belong to the *Asuras*.
*Brahma* transcends all those attributes. It is pure Knowledge. It is
Deathlessness. It is pure effulgence. It is undeteriorating. Those
persons of cleansed souls who know *Brahma* attain to the highest end.
One having knowledge for one's eye can say this much with the aid of
reason and analogy. *Brahma* which is indestructible can be comprehended
by only withdrawing the senses and the mind (from external objects into
the soul itself).'" <span id="fr_275"></span>[4](#fn_275)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[105:2](m12b043.htm#fr_266) The correct
reading, I apprehend, is *upagatasprihah* and not *apagatasprihah*.
Nilakantha is silent. All that he says is that the first verse has
reference to 'yogins,' the second to *yogins* and 'non-*yogins*' alike.
Both the vernacular translators adhere to *apagatasprihah*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[106:1](m12b043.htm#fr_267) I expand verse 8 a
little for giving its meaning more clearly than a literal version would
yield. All the impressions, it is said here, in dreams, are due either
to the impressions of this life or those received by, the mind in the
countless lives through which it has passed. All those impressions,
again, are well-known to the Soul though memory may not retain them.
Their reappearance in dreams is due to the action of the Soul which
calls them up from the obscurity in which they are concealed. Avisena's
theory of nothing being ever lost that is once acquired by the mind and
the recollection of a past impression being, due to a sudden irradiation
of the divine light, was, it seems, borrowed from Hindu philosophy.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[106:2](m12b043.htm#fr_268) The sense is this:
a particular attribute among the three, *viz*., Goodness or Passion or
Darkness, is brought to the mind by the influence of past acts of either
this or any previous life. That attribute immediately affects the mind
in a definite way. The result of this is that the elements in their
subtile forms actually produce the images that correspond with or
appertain to the affecting attribute and the manner in which it affects
the mind.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[106:3](m12b043.htm#fr_269) Nothing less than
*yoga* can discard or destroy them, for they really spring from desires
generated by past acts.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[106:4](m12b043.htm#fr_270) The Bombay reading
*Manohrishyan* is better.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[106:5](m12b043.htm#fr_271) Both the external
and the internal worlds are due to Consciousness, which, in its turn,
arises from delusion affecting the Soul. That which is called the Mind
is only a product of the Soul. The world both external and internal, is
only the result of Mind as explained in previous sections. Hence the
Mind exists in all things. What is meant by all things existing in the
Soul is that the Soul is omniscient and he who succeeds in knowing the
Soul wins omniscience.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[107:1](m12b043.htm#fr_272) The body is called
the door of dreams because the body is the result of past acts, and
dreams cannot take place till the Soul, through past acts, becomes
encased in a body. What is meant by the body disappearing in the mind is
that in dreamless slumber the mind Mo longer retains any apprehension of
the body. The body being thus lost in the mind, the mind (with the body
lost in it) enters the Soul, or becomes withdrawn into it. *Nidarsanam*
is explained as *Nischitadarsanam Sakshirupam*. The sense of the verse
is that in dreamless slumber the senses are withdrawn into the mind; the
mind becomes withdrawn into the Soul. It is the Soul alone that then
lives in its state of original purity, consciousness and all things
which proceed from it disappearing at the time.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[107:2](m12b043.htm#fr_273) *i.e.*, the mind
becoming pure, he gains omniscience and omnipotence.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[107:3](m12b043.htm#fr_274) The Burdwan
translator, using the very words of Nilakantha, jumbles them wrongly
together and makes utter nonsense of both the original and the gloss.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[107:4](m12b043.htm#fr_275) *Brahma* cannot, as
the commentator properly explains, be seized like a creature by the
horns. All that one can do is to explain its nature by reason and
analogy. It can be comprehended only in the way indicated, *i.e.*, by
*Pratyahara*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXVII](m12b044)
