[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b122.md) 
[Next](m12b124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXCVI

"Parasara said, 'I have now discoursed to thee on what the ordinances
are of the duties in respect of one that leads the domestic mode of
life. I shall now speak to thee of the ordinances about penances. Listen
to me as I discourse on the topic. It is generally seen, O king, that in
consequence of sentiments fraught with Rajas and Tamas, the sense of
meum, born of attachment, springs up in the heart of the householder.
Betaking oneself to the domestic mode of life, one acquires kine,
fields, wealth of diverse kinds, spouses, children, and servants. One
that becomes observant of this mode of life continually casts one's eye
upon these objects. Under these circumstances, one's attachments and
aversions increase, and one ceases to regard one's (transitory)
possessions as eternal and indestructible. When a person becomes
overwhelmed by attachment and aversion, and yields himself up to the
mastery of earthly objects, the desire of enjoyment then seizes him,
taking its rise from heedlessness, O king. Thinking that person to be
blessed who has the largest share of enjoyments in this world, the man
devoted to enjoyment does not, in consequence of his attachment thereto,
see that there is any other happiness besides what waits upon the
gratification of the senses. Overwhelmed with cupidity that results from
such attachment, he then seeks to increase the number of his relatives
and attendants, and for gratifying these latter he seeks to increase his
wealth by every means in his power. Filled with affection for children,
such a person commits, for the sake of acquiring wealth, acts that he
knows to be evil, and gives way to grief if his wealth be lost. Having
earned honours and always guarding against the defeat of his plans, he
betakes himself to such means as would gratify his desire of enjoyment.
At last he

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

meets with destruction as the inevitable consequence of the conduct he
pursues. It is well-known, however, that true felicity is theirs that a
e endued with intelligence, that are utterers of the eternal Brahma,
that seek to accomplish only acts that are auspicious and beneficial,
and that abstain from all acts that are optional and spring from desire
alone. <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1](#fn_1032.md) From loss of all such
objects in which are centred our affections, from loss of wealth, O
king, and from the tyranny of physical diseases add mental anguish, a
person falls into despair. From this despair arises art awakening of the
soul. From such awakening proceeds study of the Scriptures. From
contemplation of the import of the scriptures, O king, one sees the
value of penance. A person possessed of the knowledge of what is
essential and what accidental, O king, is very rare,--he, that is, who
seeks to undergo penances, impressed with the truth that the happiness
one derives from the possession of such agreeable objects as spouses and
children leads ultimately to misery. <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[2](#fn_1033.md) Penances, O child, are for all. They
are ordained for even the lowest order of men (*viz*., Sudras). Penances
set the self-restrained man having the mastery over all his senses on
the way to heaven. It was through penances that the puissant Lord of all
creatures, O, king, observing vows at particular intervals created all
existent objects. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, Agni, the Aswins,
the Maruts, the Viswedevas, the Saddhyas, the Pitris, the Maruts, the
Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the other
denizens of heaven, and, indeed, all other celestials whatever, O child,
have all been crowned with success through their penances. Those
Brahmanas whom Brahmana created at the outset, succeeded through their
penances in honouring not the Earth alone but the heaven also in which
they roved at pleasure. In this world of mortals, they that are kings,
and those others that are householders born in high families, have all
become what they are only in consequence of their penances. <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[3](#fn_1034.md) The silken robes they wear, the
excellent ornaments that adorn their persons, the animals and vehicles
they ride, and the seats they use are all the result of their penances.
The many charming and beautiful women, numbering by thousands, that they
enjoy, and their residence in palatial mansions, are all due to their
penances. Costly beds and diverse kinds of delicious viands become
theirs that act righteously. There is nothing in the three worlds, O
scorcher of foes, that penances cannot attain. Even those that are
destitute of true knowledge win Renunciation as the consequence of their
penances. <span id="fr_1035"></span>[4](#fn_1035.md) Whether in affluent
circumstances or miserable, a person should cast off

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

cupidity, reflecting on the scriptures, with the aid of his Mind and
understanding, O best of kings. Discontent is productive of misery.
(Discontent is the result of cupidity). Cupidity leadeth to the
stupefaction of the senses. The senses being stupefied, one's wisdom
disappears like knowledge not kept up by continued application. When
one's wisdom disappears, one fails to discriminate what is proper from
what is improper. Hence, when one's happiness is destroyed (and one
becomes subject to misery) one should practise the austerest of
penances. <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1](#fn_1036.md) That which is
agreeable is called happiness. That which is disagreeable is said to be
misery. When penances are practised, the result is happiness. When they
are not practised, the result is misery. Behold the fruits of practising
and abstaining from penances! <span id="fr_1037"></span>[2](#fn_1037.md) By
practising stainless penances, people always meet with auspicious
consequences of every kind, enjoy all good things, and attain to great
fame. <span id="fr_1038"></span>[3](#fn_1038.md) He, however, who by
abandoning (stainless penances), betakes himself to penances from desire
of fruit, meets with many disagreeable consequences, and disgrace and
sorrow of diverse kinds, as the fruits thereof, all of which have
worldly possessions for their cause. <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[4](#fn_1039.md) Notwithstanding the desirability of
practising righteousness, penances, and gifts, the wish springs up in
his mind of accomplishing all kinds of forbidden acts. By thus
perpetrating diverse kinds of sinful acts, he goes to hell. <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[5](#fn_1040.md) That person, O best of men, who, in
both happiness and misery, does not fall away from the duties ordained
for him, is said to have the scriptures for his eye. It is said that the
pleasure one derives from the gratification of one's senses of touch,
tongue, sight, scent, and hearing, O monarch, lasts only so long as a
shaft urged from the bow takes in falling down upon the earth. Upon the
cessation of that pleasure, which is so short-lived, one experiences the
most keen agony. It is only the senseless that do not applaud the
felicity of Emancipation that is unrivalled. Beholding the misery that
attends the gratification of the senses, they that are possessed of
wisdom cultivate the virtues of tranquillity and self-restraint for the
purpose of attaining to Emancipation. In consequence of their righteous
behaviour, wealth, and pleasure can never succeed in afflicting
them. <span id="fr_1041"></span>[6](#fn_1041.md) Householders

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

may, without any compunction, enjoy wealth and other possessions that
are obtained without Exertion. As regards, however, the duties of their
order that are laid down in the scriptures, these, I am of opinion, they
should discharge with the aid of Exertion. <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1](#fn_1042.md) The practice of those that are
honoured, that are born in high families, and that have their eyes
always turned towards the import of the scriptures, is incapable of
being followed by those that are sinful and that are possessed of
unrestrained minds. All acts that are done by man under the influence of
vanity, meet with destruction. Hence, for them that are respectable and
truly righteous there is no other act in this world to do than
penance. <span id="fr_1043"></span>[2](#fn_1043.md) As regards, those
house-holders, however, that are addicted to acts, they should, with
their whole hearts, set themselves to acts. Following the duties of
their order, O king, they should with cleverness and attention perform
sacrifices and other religious rites. Indeed, as all rivers, male and
female, have their refuge in the Ocean, even so men belonging to all the
other orders have their refuge in the householder.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[357:1](m12b123.htm#fr_1032.md) After *sukham*
supply *bhavati* or some such verb. *Tyajatam* stands by itself and
refers to *kamya karma*, meaning they that abstain from such acts as are
not *nitya* but as are only *kamya* or optional.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[357:2](m12b123.htm#fr_1033.md) The sense is that
those who betake themselves to penances as the consequence of despair,
are many. Those men, however, are very rare who adopt penances, being at
once impressed that the happiness of domesticity is unreal and ends in
misery.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[357:3](m12b123.htm#fr_1034.md) *i.e.*, their
penances of past lives.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[357:4](m12b123.htm#fr_1035.md) I am not sure
that I have correctly understood the second line of this verse.
*Akrita-karmanam* is explained by the commentator as
*anut-pannatattwajnanam* and *upabhogavarityagah* is Renunciation or
*Vairagyam phalani* has *tapasah* understood before it. But why
*phalani* instead of *phalam*?

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[358:1](m12b123.htm#fr_1036.md) The second line
of this verse concludes the argument. The *tasmat* has reference to all
the statements before, and *not* to only the first line of 26. The
statement in the second line is the same as the second line of verse 13
above.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[358:2](m12b123.htm#fr_1037.md) I expand the
second line a little for making it intelligible.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[358:3](m12b123.htm#fr_1038.md) By 'stainless
penances' is meant *nishkamam tapah* or penances undertaken without
desire of fruit.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[358:4](m12b123.htm#fr_1039.md) *Tyaktwa* has
*nishkalmasham tapah* understood after it. The order of the words is
*Phalarthi apriyani* etc., *vishyatmakam tat phalam prapnoti*. The
distinction between *nishkamam* and *sakamam tapah* is this; through the
former one attains to happiness. Even the earthly wealth he earns
becomes fraught with happiness; through the latter, however, one meets
with diverse kinds of sorrow resulting from the earthly possessions he
succeeds in obtaining.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[358:5](m12b123.htm#fr_1040.md) The grammar of
the first line is this: *Dharme tapasi dane cha* (*sati avihitakarme*)
*vidhitsa*, etc. If *vidhitsa* be taken with '*dharma*, etc.,' the verse
would be unmeaning.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[358:6](m12b123.htm#fr_1041.md) The first line is
difficult to construe. *Tatah* means 'inconsequence of the pain that
attends the gratification of the senses.' *Sarvasya* refers to
*vivekinah*; *jyayase phalartham* is 'for the sake of the highest
fruit,' which, of course, is Emancipation. *Gunah* is 'same', 'dama,
etc.'

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[359:1](m12b123.htm#fr_1042.md) The commentator
points out that the object of this verse is to show that everything one
owns or does is not the result of the past acts. Spouses, food, drink,
etc., one obtains as the result of past acts or *praravdha karma*. In
respect of these, *purushakara* or Exertion is weak. Hence, to put forth
Exertion for their acquisition would not be wise. As regards the
acquisition of righteousness, however, there Exertion is efficacious.
Hence, one should, with Exertion, seek to conform to one's own duties as
laid down in the scriptures. Without such a distinction between destiny
(praravdha) and Exertion (purushakara), the injunctions and
interdictions of the Scriptures would be unmeaning. The Burdwan
translator, citing portions of the commentary without at all
understanding them, makes utter nonsense of the verse. K.P. Singha gives
the meaning correctly.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[359:2](m12b123.htm#fr_1043.md) Sacrifices and
all other acts undertaken from a sense of vanity, are destructible as
regards their consequences, for heaven is terminable. Penances, however,
that are undertaken without desire of fruit are not so, for these lead
to Emancipation. *Tesham* refers to those mentioned in the first line of
verse 37. It should not be taken to mean men in general, as the Burdwan
translator wrongly does.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXCVII](m12b124.md)
