[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b120.md) 
[Next](m12b122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXCIV

"Parasara said, 'The lowest order, it is proper, should derive their
sustenance from the three other orders. Such service, rendered with
affection and reverence, makes them righteous. <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[2](#fn_1022.md) If the ancestors of any Sudra were not
engaged in service, he should not still engage himself in any other
occupation (than service). Truly, he should apply himself to service as
his occupation. In my opinion, it is proper for them to associate, under
all circumstances, with good men devoted to righteousness, but never
with those that are wicked. As in the Eastern hills, jewels and metals
blaze with greater splendour in consequence of their adjacence to the
Sun, even so the lowest order blazes with splendour in consequence of
their association with the good. A piece of white cloth assumes that hue
with which it is dyed. Even such is the case with Sudras. <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[3](#fn_1023.md) Hence also, one should attach oneself
to all good qualities but never to qualities that are evil. The life of
human beings in this world is fleeting and transitory. That wise man
who, in happiness as also in misery, achieves only what is good, is
regarded as a true observer of the scriptures. That man who is endued
with intelligence would never do an act which is dissociated from
virtue, however high may the advantages be of that act. Indeed, such an
act is not regarded as truly beneficial. That lawless

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

king who, snatching thousands of kine from their lawful owners, gives
them away (unto deserving persons), acquires no fruit (from that act of
giving) beyond an empty sound (expressive of the act he does). On the
other hand, he incurs the sin of theft. The Self-born at first created
the Being called Dhatri held in universal respect. Dhatri created a son
who was engaged in upholding all the worlds. <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1](#fn_1024.md) Worshipping that deity, the Vaisya
employs himself, for the means of his support, in agriculture and the
rearing of cattle. The Kshatriyas should employ themselves in the task
of protecting all the other classes. The Brahmanas should only enjoy. As
regards the Sudras, they should engage themselves in the task of humbly
and honestly collecting together the articles that are to be offered in
sacrifices, and in cleaning altars and other places where sacrifices are
to be performed. If each order acts in this way, righteousness would not
suffer any diminution. If righteousness is preserved in its entirety,
all creatures inhabiting the earth would be happy. Beholding the
happiness of all creatures on earth, the deities in heaven become filled
with gladness. Hence, that king who, agreeably to the duties laid down
for his order, protects the other classes, becomes worthy of respect.
Similarly, the Brahmana that is employed in studying the scriptures, the
Vaisya that is engaged in earning wealth, and the Sudra that is always
engaged in serving the three other classes with concentrated attention,
become objects of respect. By conducting themselves in the other ways, O
chief of men, each order is said to fall away from virtue. Keeping aside
gifts by thousands, even twenty *cowries* that one may give painfully,
having earned them righteously, will be productive of the great benefit.
Those [persons](errata.htm#133.md), O king, who make gifts unto Brahmanas
after reverencing them duly, reap excellent fruits commensurate with
those gifts. That gift is highly prized which the donor makes after
seeking out the donee and honouring him properly. That gift is middling
which the donor makes upon solicitation. That gift, however, which is
made contemptuously and without any reverence, is said to be very
inferior (in point of merit). Even this is what those utterers of the
truth, *viz*., the sages, say. While sinking in this ocean of life, man
should always seek to cross that ocean by various means. Indeed, he
should so exert himself that he might be freed from the bonds of this
world. The Brahmana shines by self restraint; the Kshatriya by victory;
the Vaisya by wealth; while the Sudra always shines in glory through
cleverness in serving (the three other orders).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[352:2](m12b121.htm#fr_1022.md) *Nirdishta*
refers to *Seva*.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[352:3](m12b121.htm#fr_1023.md) *i.e.*, they take
the hues of the society they keep. Hence, it is very desirable for them
to live with the good.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[353:1](m12b121.htm#fr_1024.md) This son of
Dhatri is the god of the clouds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXCV](m12b122.md)
