[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b116) 
[Next](m12b118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXC

"Yudhishthira said, 'This curiosity, O sire, is always dwelling in my
mind. O grandsire of the Kurus, I desire to hear everything about it
from thee. Why was the celestial Rishi, the high-souled Usanas, called
also Kavi engaged in doing what was agreeable to the Asuras and
disagreeable to the deities? Why was he engaged in diminishing the
energy of the deities? Why were the Danavas always engaged in
hostilities with the foremost of the deities? Possessed of the splendour
of an immortal, for what reason did Usanas obtain the name of Sukra? How
also did he acquire such superior excellence? Tell me all about these
things. Though possessed of great energy, why does he not succeed in
travelling to the centre of the firmament? I desire, O grandsire, to
learn everything about all these matters.' <span
id="fr_989"></span>[1](#fn_989)

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O king, with attention to all this as it
occurred actually. O sinless one, I shall narrate these matters to thee
as I have heard and understood them. Of firm vows and honoured by all,
Usanas, that descendant of Bhrigu's race, became engaged in doing what
was disagreeable to the deities for an adequate cause. <span
id="fr_990"></span>[2](#fn_990) The royal Kuvera, the chief of the
Yakshas and the Rakshasas, is the lord of the treasury of Indra, that
master of the universe. <span id="fr_991"></span>[3](#fn_991) The great
ascetic Usanas, crowned with Yoga-success, entered the person of Kuvera,
and depriving the lord of treasures of his liberty by means of Yoga,
robbed him of all his wealth. <span id="fr_992"></span>[4](#fn_992)
Seeing his wealth taken away from him, the lord of treasures became
highly displeased. Filled with anxiety, and his wrath also being
excited, he went to that foremost of gods, *viz*., Mahadeva. Kuvera,
represented the matter unto Siva of immeasurable energy, that first of
gods, fierce and amiable, and possessed of various forms. And he said,
'Usanas, having spiritualised himself by Yoga entered my form and
depriving myself of liberty, has taken away all my wealth. Having by

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Yoga entered my body he has again left it.'
Hearing these words, Maheswara of supreme Yoga-powers became filled with
rage. His eyes, O king, became blood-red, and taking up his lance he
waited (ready to strike down Usanas). Indeed, having taken up that
foremost of weapons, the great god began to say, 'Where is he? Where is
he?' Meanwhile, Usanas, having ascertained the purpose of Mahadeva
(through Yoga-power) from a distance, waited in silence. Indeed, having
ascertained the fact of the wrath of the high-souled Maheswara of
superior Yoga-power, the puissant Usanas began to reflect as to whether
he should go to Maheswara or fly away or remain where he was. Thinking,
with the aid of his severe penances, of the high-souled Mahadeva, Usanas
of soul crowned with Yoga-success, placed himself on the point of
Mahadeva's lance. The bow-armed Rudra, understanding that Usanas, whose
penances had become successful and who had converted himself into the
form of pure Knowledge, was staying at the point of his lance (and
finding that he was unable to hurl the lance at one who was upon it),
bent that weapon with hand. When the fierce-armed and puissant Mahadeva
of immeasurable energy had thus bent his lance (into the form of a bow),
that weapon came to be called from that time by the name of
*Pinaka*. <span id="fr_993"></span>[1](#fn_993) The lord of Uma,
beholding Bhargava thus brought upon the palm of his hand, opened his
mouth. The chief of the gods then threw Bhargava into his mouth and
swallowed him at once. The puissant and high-souled Usanas of Bhrigu's
race, entering the stomach of Maheswara, began to wander there.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How, O king, could Usanas succeed in wandering
within the stomach of that foremost of superior intelligence? What also
did that illustrious god do while the Brahmana was within his
stomach?' <span id="fr_994"></span>[2](#fn_994)

"Bhishma said, 'In days of yore (having swallowed up Usanas), Mahadeva
of severe vows entered the waters and remained there like an immovable
stake of wood, O king, for millions of years (engaged in
Yoga-meditation). His Yoga penances of the austerest type having been
over, he rose from the mighty lake. Then that primeval god of the gods,
*viz*., the eternal Brahman, approached him, and enquired after the
progress of his penances and after his welfare. The deity having the
bull for his emblem answered, saying, 'My penances have been
well-practised.' Of inconceivable soul, possessed of great intelligence,
and ever devoted to the religion of truth, Sankara saw that Usanas
within his stomach had become greater in consequence of those penances
of his. <span id="fr_995"></span>[3](#fn_995) That foremost of Yogins
(*viz*., Usanas), rich with that wealth of penances and the wealth (he
had appropriated from Kuvera), shone brightly in the three worlds,
endued with great energy. <span id="fr_996"></span>[4](#fn_996) After
this, Mahadeva

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

armed with Pinaka, that soul of Yoga, once more betook himself to
Yoga-meditation. Usanas, however, filled with anxiety, began to wander
within the stomach of the great god. The great ascetic began to hymn the
praises of the god from where he was, desirous of finding an outlet for
escape. Rudra, however, having stopped all his outlets, prevented him
from coming out. The great ascetic Usanas, however, O chastiser of foes,
from within Mahadeva's stomach, repeatedly addressed the god, saying,
'Show me thy kindness!' Unto him Mahadeva said, 'Go out through my
urethra.' He had stopped up all other outlets of his body. Confined on
[every side](errata.htm#131) and unable to find out the outlet
indicated, the ascetic began to wander hither and thither, burning all
the while with Mahadeva's energy. At last he found the outlet and issued
through it. In consequence of this fact he came to be called by the name
of Sukra, and it is in consequence of that fact he also became unable to
attain (in course of his wandering) the central point of the firmament.
Beholding him come out of his stomach and shining brightly with energy,
Bhava, filled with anger, stood with lance uplifted in his hand. The
goddess Uma then interposed and forbade the angry lord of all creatures,
*viz*., her spouse, to slay the Brahmana. And in consequence of Uma's
having thus prevented her lord from accomplishing his purpose the
ascetic Usanas (from the day) became the son of the goddess.'

"The goddess said, 'This Brahmana no longer deserves to be slain by
thee. He has become my son. O god, one who comes out of thy stomach does
not deserve slaughter at thy hands.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Pacified by these words of his spouse, Bhava smiled
and said repeatedly these words, O king, 'Let this one go whithersoever
he likes.' Bowing unto the boon-giving Mahadeva and to also his spouse
the goddess Uma, the great ascetic Usanas, endued with superior
intelligence, proceeded to the place he chose. I have thus narrated to
thee, O chief of the Bharatas, the story of the high-souled Bhargava
about which thou didst ask me.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_989"></span>[343:1](m12b117.htm#fr_989) The planet Venus is
supposed to be the sage *Usanas* or *Sukra*.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[343:2](m12b117.htm#fr_990) The commentator
explains the allusion by saying that formerly Vishnu, induced by the
deities, used his discus for striking off the head of *Usanas'* mother.
Hence the wrath of Usanas against the deities and his desire to succour
their foes, the Danavas.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[343:3](m12b117.htm#fr_991) The construction of
this verse is very difficult. The order of the words, is--*Indrotha
jagatah prabhuh*. *Dhanada*, etc., *tasya kosasaya prabhavishnuh*.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[343:4](m12b117.htm#fr_992) Persons crowned
with *Yoga*-success are competent to enter the bodies of others and
deprive the latter of the power of will. Indeed, the belief is that the
latter then become mere automata incapable of acting in any other way
except as directed by the enlivening possessor.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[344:1](m12b117.htm#fr_993) The etymology of
*Pinaka* is *panina anamayat*. The initial and final letter of *pani*
(*pi*) and the middle letter of *anamayat* (*na*), with the suffix *ka*
make *Pinaka*.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[344:2](m12b117.htm#fr_994) The last half of
the last line may be taken as applying to Usanas.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[344:3](m12b117.htm#fr_995) The *vriddhim* that
Mahadeva saw could not be his own, for the greatest cannot be greater.
The commentator, therefore, is right in holding that *vriddhim* refers
to the greatness of Usanas within Mahadeva's stomach.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[344:4](m12b117.htm#fr_996) The *sa* refers to
Usanas and not to Mahadeva, as the commentator rightly points out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXCI](m12b118)
