[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b071) 
[Next](m12b073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXLV

"Suka said, 'While living in the due observance of the duties of the
foremost of life, how should one, who seeks to attain to That which is
the highest object of knowledge, set one's soul on Yoga according to the
best of one's power?'

"Vyasa said, 'Having acquired (purity of conduct and body) by the
practice of the first two modes of life, *viz*., Brahmacharya and
domesticity, one should, after that, set one's soul on Yoga in the third
mode of life. Listen now with concentrated attention to what should be
done for attaining to the highest object of acquisition! <span
id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_521) Having subdued all faults of the mind
and of heart by easy means in the practice of the first three modes of
life (*viz*., pupilage, domesticity, and seclusion) one should pass into
the most excellent and the most eminent of all the modes, *viz*.,
Sannyasa or Renunciation. Do thou then pass thy days, having acquired
that purity. Listen also to me. One should, alone and without anybody to
assist him or bear him company, practise Yoga for attaining to success
(in respect of one's highest object of acquisition). One who practises
Yoga without companionship, who beholds everything as a repetition of
his own self, and who never discards anything (in consequence of all
things being pervaded by the Universal Soul), never falls away from
Emancipation. Without keeping the sacrificial fires and without a fixed
habitation, such a person should enter a village for only begging his
food. He should provide himself for the day without storing for the
morrow. He should betake himself to penances, with heart fixed on the
Supreme. <span id="fr_522"></span>[2](#fn_522) Eating little and that
even under proper regulations, he should not eat more than once a day.
The other indications of a (religious) mendicant are the human skull,
shelter under trees, rags for wearing, solitude unbroken by the
companionship of any one, and indifference to all creatures. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[3](#fn_523) That

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

person into whom words enter like affrighted elephants into a well, and
from whom they never come back to the speaker, is fit to lead this mode
of life which has Emancipation for its object. <span
id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_524) The mendicant (or Renouncer) should
never take note of the evil acts of any person. He should never hear
what is said in dispraise of others. Especially should he avoid speaking
evil of a Brahmana. He should always say only what is agreeable to the
Brahmanas. When anything is said in dispraise (of himself), he should
(without answering) remain perfectly silent. Such silence, indeed, is
the medical treatment prescribed for him. That person in consequence of
whose single self the place he occupies becomes like the eastern sky,
and who can make a spot teeming with thousands of men and things appear
to himself perfectly solitary or unoccupied, is regarded by the deities
to be a true *Brahmana*. <span id="fr_525"></span>[2](#fn_525) Him the
gods know for a Brahmana who clothes himself with whatever comes by the
way, who subsists upon whatever he gets, and who sleeps on whatever spot
he finds. Him the gods know for a Brahmana who is afraid of company as
of a snake; of the full measure of gratification (from sweet viands and
drinks) as of hell; and of women as of a corpse. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[3](#fn_526) Him the gods know for a Brahmana who is
never glad when honoured and never angry when insulted, and who has
given assurances of compassion unto all creatures. One in the observance
of the last mode of life should not view death with joy. Nor should he
view life with joy. He should only wait for his hour like a servant
waiting for the behest (of his master). He should purify his heart of
all faults. He should purify his speech of all faults. He should cleanse
himself of all sins. As he has no foes, what fear can assail him? He who
fears no creature and whom no creature fears, can have no fear from any
quarter, freed as he is from error of every kind. As the footprints of
all other creatures that move upon legs are engulfed within those of
elephants, after the same manner all ranks and conditions are absorbed
within Yoga <span id="fr_527"></span>[4](#fn_527). After the same
manner, every other duty and observance is supposed to be

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

engulfed within the one duty of abstention from injury (to all
creatures). <span id="fr_528"></span>[1](#fn_528) He lives an
everlasting life of felicity who avoids injuring other creatures. One
who abstains from injury, who casts an equal eye upon all creatures, who
is devoted to truth, who is endued with fortitude, who has his senses
under control, and who grants protection to all beings, attains to an
end that is beyond compare. The condition called death succeeds not in
transcending such a person who is content with self-knowledge, who is
free from fear, and who is divested of desire and expectancy. On the
other hand, such a person succeeds in transcending death. Him the gods
know for a Brahmana who is freed from attachments of every kind, who is
observant of penances, who lives like space which while holding
everything is yet unattached to any thing, who has nothing which he
calls his own, who leads a life of solitude, and whose is tranquillity
of soul. The gods know him for a Brahmana whose life is for the practice
of righteousness, whose righteousness is for the good of them that wait
dutifully upon him, and whose days and nights exist only for the
acquisition of merit. <span id="fr_529"></span>[2](#fn_529) The gods
know him for a Brahmana who is freed from desire, who never exerts
himself for doing such acts as are done by worldly men, who never bends
his head unto any one, who never flatters another, (and who is free from
attachments of every kind). All creatures are pleased with happiness and
filled with fear at the prospect of grief. The man of faith, therefore,
who should feel distressed at the prospect of filling other creatures
with grief, must abstain entirely from acts of every kind. <span
id="fr_530"></span>[3](#fn_530) The gift of assurances of harmlessness
unto all creatures transcends in point of merit all other gifts. He who,
at the outset, forswears the religion of injury, succeeds in attaining
to Emancipation (in which or) whence is the assurance of harmlessness
unto all creatures. <span id="fr_531"></span>[4](#fn_531) That man who
does not pour into his open mouth even the five or six mouthfuls that
are laid down for the forest recluse, is said to be the navel of the
world, and the refuge of the universe. The head and other limbs, as also
the acts good and bad, become possessed by Fire. Such a man, who
sacrifices in his own self, makes a liberation of his senses and mind
into the fire that dwells within the limited space of his own

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

heart. In consequence again of his pouring such a libation into such a
fire within his own self, the universe with all creatures including the
very gods, becomes gratified. <span id="fr_532"></span>[1](#fn_532) They
who apprehend the *Jiva*-soul that is endued with effulgence, that is
enveloped in three cases, that has three attributes for its
characteristics, to be *Iswara* partaking of that which is foremost,
*viz*., the nature of the Supreme Soul, becomes object of great regard
in all the worlds. The very gods with all human beings speak highly of
their merits. He who succeeds in beholding in the soul that resides in
his own body all the Vedas, space and the other objects of perception,
the rituals that occur in scriptures, all those entities that are
comprehensible in sound only and the superior nature of the Supreme
Soul, is sought to be worshipped by the very deities as the foremost of
all beings. He who sees in the soul that resides within his body, that
foremost of beings which is not attached to the earth, which is
immeasurable in even the (measureless) firmament, which is made of gold,
which is born of the egg and resides within the egg, which is equipped
with many feathers, and which has two wings like a bird, and which is
rendered effulgent by many rays of light, is sought to be worshipped by
the very deities as the foremost of all beings. <span
id="fr_533"></span>[2](#fn_533) The very deities worship him in whose
understanding is set the wheel of Time, which is constantly resolving,
which knows no decay, which swallows up the period of existence of every
creature, which has the six seasons for its naves, which is equipped
with two and ten radii consisting of the two and ten months, which has
excellent joint, and towards whose gaping mouth proceeds this universe
(ready to be devoured). <span id="fr_534"></span>[3](#fn_534) The
Supreme Soul is the capacious unconsciousness of dreamless slumber. That
Unconsciousness is the body of the universe. It pervadeth all created
things. *Jiva*, occupying a portion of that capacious unconsciousness
gratifies the deities. These last, being gratified, gratify the open
mouth of that unconsciousness. <span id="fr_535"></span>[4](#fn_535)
Endued with effulgence as also with the principle of eternity,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Jiva* is without a beginning. It acquires (by
following particular paths) infinite regions of eternal happiness. He of
whom no creature is afraid, has never to fear any creature. He who never
does anything censurable and who never censures another, is said to be a
truly regenerate person. Such a man succeeds in beholding the Supreme
Soul. He whose ignorance has been dispelled and whose sins have been
washed away, never enjoys either here or hereafter the happiness that is
enjoyed by others (but attains to complete Emancipation). A person in
the observance of the fourth mode of life wanders on the earth like one
unconnected with everything. Such a one is freed from wrath and error.
Such a one regards a clod of earth and lump of gold with an equal eye.
Such a man never stores anything for his use. Such a one has no friends
and foes. Such a one is utterly regardless of praise or blame, and of
the agreeable and the disagreeable.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_521"></span>[196:1](m12b072.htm#fr_521) The commentator
correctly explains that by the first line of this verse, Vyasa answers
his son's question. The two modes referred to are the first and the
second, and not the second and the third as K.P. Singha in his
vernacular version wrongly states. Having answered the question, the
speaker (in the second line) proceeds to indicate the simple or straight
path for reaching the highest object of men's endeavour, *viz*.,
*Paramartham* or *Brahma*.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[196:2](m12b072.htm#fr_522) *Bhava-samahitah*
is explained as *chitta-samadhanavan*.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[196:3](m12b072.htm#fr_523) The skull is to be
used as a drinking vessel. *Kuchela*, which I render 'rags', is supposed
by the commentator to signify reddish or brown cloth which has, from
age, lost its colour.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[197:1](m12b072.htm#fr_524) Elephants, when
hurled into a well, become utterly helpless and unable to come out. That
person, therefore, into whom words enter like elephants into a well, is
he who answers not the evil speeches of others. What is said here is
that only a person of such forbearance should betake himself to
mendicancy or Sannyasa.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[197:2](m12b072.htm#fr_525) I have given a
closely literal version of this verse. The commentator explains that
first fine refers to the person who deems himself to be everything and
everything to be himself. The second line refers to the same individual
who, by Yoga, can withdraw his senses and the mind and consequently make
the most populous place appear as totally solitary or unoccupied. This
is the Yoga process called *Pratyahara* and is described in section 233
ante. The Burdwan translator gives an incorrect version. K.P. Singha
follows the commentator.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[197:3](m12b072.htm#fr_526) *Suhitya*, whence
*sauhitya*, means no satiety but the full measure of gratification from
eating. The speaker wishes to lay down that a mendicant or renouncer
should never take food to the full measure of gratification. He should
eat without completely appeasing his hunger.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[197:4](m12b072.htm#fr_527) I follow the
commentator in his exposition of *kaunjara* which he derives as *kun*
(earth or the body which is made of earth) *jaravati iti kunjarah*,
*i.e.*, a Yogin in Samadhi. The sense seems to be that the fruits of
Yoga include or absorb the fruits of every other act. The rank and
status of Indra himself is absorbed within what is attained to by Yoga.
There is no kind of felicity that is not engulfed in the felicity of
Emancipation, which Yoga alone can confer.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[198:1](m12b072.htm#fr_528) The commentator
thinks that by the 'one duty of abstention from injury' is implied the
fourth mode of life or Sannyasa. What is said, therefore, is that the
observance of the single duty of harmlessness includes that of every
other duty; or, what amounts to the same thing, the fourth mode of life
is singly capable of giving merit which all the others may give
together.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[198:2](m12b072.htm#fr_529) *Haryartham* means
'for the sake of Hari.' *i.e.*, one who takes away merit, implying a
disciple or attendant. Some texts read *Ratyrtham*, meaning 'for the
happiness (of others).'

<span id="fn_530"></span>[198:3](m12b072.htm#fr_530) Because all acts
are fraught with injury to others. Whether 'acts' betaken in its general
sense or in the particular sense of 'religious acts,' their character is
such.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[198:4](m12b072.htm#fr_531) Both the vernacular
translators have completely misunderstood the second line of this Verse.
The commentator correctly explains that *Tikshnam tanum* means the
religion of injury, *i.e.*, the religion of sacrifices and acts. 'So'
for 'sa' is *arsha*; as also *anantyam* for *anantyam* which, of course,
implies *moksham* or Emancipation. The commentator correctly supplies
*yatah* after *apnoti* and shows that *prajabhyah* is equivalent to
*prajanam*. The last clause of the second line, therefore, means *sa
moksham apnoti*, *yatah prajabhyah* (or prajanam) *abhayam*. The dative,
not ablative as the vernacular translators take it, is not bad grammar,
although the genitive is more agreeable with usage.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[199:1](m12b072.htm#fr_532) A tentative version
is offered here, following the actual words used in the original.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[199:2](m12b072.htm#fr_533) All these
expressions apply to the Supreme Soul. Immeasurable in the firmament
implies that the Supreme Being is vaster than the firmament. 'Made of
gold' means, as the commentator explains, Chit having knowledge only for
its attribute.' 'Born of the egg,' *i.e.*, belonging to the universe.
'Within the egg' means 'capable of being apprehended in the heart.'
'Equipped with many feathers,' *i.e.*, having many limbs each of which
is presided over by a particular deity. The two wings are absence of
attachment or complete dissociation from everything, and joy and
gladness and aptitude for enjoyment. 'Rendered effulgent by many rays of
light,' *i.e.*, transformed into a living and active agent by means of
eyes, cars, etc.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[199:3](m12b072.htm#fr_534) The sense is that
he who understands the wheel of Time is a person worthy of universal
regard. The excellent joints of that wheel are the *parva* days, *viz*.,
those sacred lunations on which religious rites are performed.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[199:4](m12b072.htm#fr_535) I give a little
version of verse 33, following the commentator as regards the meaning of
*samprasadam*. The sense, however, of the verse is this: *Brahma*, in
the previous sections, has often been spoken of as *Sushupti* or the
unconsciousness of dreamless slumber. The universe flows from *Brahma*.
Unconsciousness, therefore, is the cause or origin or body of the
universe. That unconsciousness, therefore, pervades all things, *viz*.,
gross and subtile. *Jiva*, finding a place within that unconsciousness
existing in the form of gross and subtile, gratifies the deities,
*prana* and the senses. These, thus gratified by *jiva*, at last gratify
the open mouth of the original unconsciousness that waits to receive or
swallow them. All these verses are based upon the figurative ideas that
find expression in the Upanishads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXLVI](m12b073)
