[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b074.md) 
[Next](m12b076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXLVIII

"Vyasa said, 'The mind creates (within itself) numerous ideas (of
objects or existent things). The Understanding settles which is which.
The heart discriminates which is agreeable and which is disagreeable.
These are the three forces that impel to acts. The objects of the senses
are superior to the senses. The mind is superior to those objects. The
understanding is superior to mind. The Soul is regarded as superior to
Understanding. (As regards the ordinary purposes of man) the
Understanding is his Soul. When the understanding, of its own motion,
forms ideas (of objects) within itself, it then comes to be called
Mind. <span id="fr_549"></span>[3](#fn_549.md) In consequence of the senses
being different from one another (both in respect of their objects and
the manner of their operation), the Understanding (which is one and the
same) present different aspect in consequence

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

of its different modifications. When it hears, it becomes the organ of
hearing, and when it touches, it becomes the organ of touch. Similarly,
when it sees, it becomes the organ of vision, and when it tastes, it
becomes the organ of taste, and when it smells, it becomes the organ of
scent. It is the Understanding that appears under different guises (for
different functions) by modification. It is the modifications of the
Understanding that are called the senses. Over them is placed as their
presiding chief (or overseer) the invisible Soul. Residing in the body,
the Understanding exists in the three states (of Sattwa, Rajas, and,
Tamas). Sometimes it obtains cheerfulness, sometimes it gives way to
grief; and sometimes its condition becomes such that it is united with
neither cheerfulness nor grief. The Understanding, however, whose chief
function (as already said) is to create entities, transcends those three
states even as the ocean, that lord of rivers, prevails against the
mighty currents of the rivers that fall into it. <span
id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_550.md) When the Understanding desires for
anything, it comes to be called by the name of Mind. The senses again,
though (apparently different) should all be taken as included within the
Understanding. The senses, which are engaged in bearing impressions of
form, scent etc., should all be subdued. <span
id="fr_551"></span>[2](#fn_551.md) When a particular sense becomes
subservient to the Understanding, the latter though in reality not
different (from that sense), enters the Mind in the form of existent
things. Even this is what happens with the senses one after another
(separately and not simultaneously) with reference to the ideas that are
said to be apprehended by them. <span id="fr_552"></span>[3](#fn_552.md)
All the three states that exist (*viz*., Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas),
inhere to these three (*viz*., Mind, Understanding, and Consciousness)
and like the spokes of a car-wheel acting in consequence of their
attachment to the circumference of the wheel, they follow the different
objects (that exist in Mind, Understanding, and Consciousness). <span
id="fr_553"></span>[4](#fn_553.md) The mind must make a lamp

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

of the senses for dispelling the darkness that shuts out the knowledge
of the Supreme Soul. This knowledge that is acquired by Yogins with the
aid of all especial agency of Yoga, is acquired without any especial
efforts by men that abstain from worldly objects. <span
id="fr_554"></span>[1](#fn_554.md) The universe is of this nature (*viz*.,
it is only a creation of the understanding). The man of knowledge,
therefore, is never stupefied (by attachment to things of this world).
Such a man never grieves, never rejoices, and is free from envy (at
seeing another possessing a larger share of earthly objects). The Soul
is incapable of being seen with the aid of the senses whose nature is to
wander among all (earthly) objects of desire. Even righteous men, whose
senses are pure, fail to behold the soul with their aid, what then
should be said of the vicious whose senses are impure? When, however, a
person, with the aid of his mind, tightly holds their reins, it is then
that his Soul discovers itself like an object (unseen in darkness)
appearing to the view in consequence of the light of a lamp. Indeed, as
all things become visible when the darkness that envelopes them is
dispelled, even the soul becomes visible when the darkness that covers
it is removed. <span id="fr_555"></span>[2](#fn_555.md) As an aquatic fowl,
though moving on the water, is never drenched by that element, after the
same manner the Yogin of freed soul is never soiled by the imperfections
of the three attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). After the same
manner, the man of wisdom, by even enjoying all earthly objects without
being attached to any of them, is never soiled by faults of any kind
that arise in the case of others from such enjoyment. He who avoids acts
after having done them duly, <span id="fr_556"></span>[3](#fn_556.md) and
takes delight in the one really existent entity, *viz*., the Soul, who
has constituted himself the soul of all created beings, and who succeeds
in keeping himself aloof from the three attributes, obtains an
understanding and senses that are created by the Soul. The qualities are
incapable of apprehending the Soul. The Soul, however, apprehends them
always. The Soul is the witness that beholds the qualities and duly
calls them up into being. Behold, this is the difference between the
understanding and the Soul both of which are exceedingly subtile. One of
them creates the qualities. The other never creates them. Though they
are different from each other by nature, yet they are always united. The
fish living in the water is different from the element in which it
lives. But as the fish and the water forming its home are always united,
after the same manner Sattwa and Kshetrajna exists in a state of union.
The gnat born within a rotten fig is really not the fig but different

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

from it. Nevertheless, as the gnat and the fig are seen to be united
with each other, even so are Sattwa and Kshetrajna. As the blade in a
clump of grass, though distinct from the clump, nevertheless exists in a
state of union with it, even so these two, though different from each
other, each existing in its own self, are to be seen in a state of
constant union.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_549"></span>[204:3](m12b075.htm#fr_549.md) In the original,
the word atman is used in various senses. Sometimes it stands for the
Jiva-soul, sometimes for the Supreme Soul, sometimes for essence or the
principal portion of anything, sometimes for one's own self, and
sometimes even for the person or body. It is not difficult to
distinguish in which sense the word is used in what place.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[205:1](m12b075.htm#fr_550.md) *Vela* is tide or
current. The Understanding, although it exists with the three states of
Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas, can yet transcend them by Yoga. The ordinary
and extraordinary states of the understanding are spoken of in this
verse.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[205:2](m12b075.htm#fr_551.md) The Bengal texts
make this a verse of one line. In the Bombay text, verse 9 is made a
triplet, so that this line is included in it. *Medhyani* is explained as
*medha, rupadi jnanam, tatra tani*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[205:3](m12b075.htm#fr_552.md) If I have
understood this verse correctly, the theory of perception laid down is a
sort of idealism which has not, perhaps, its counterpart in European
metaphysics. The senses are first said to be only modifications of the
understanding. The mind also is only a modification of the same. A
particular sense, say the eye, becomes subservient to the understanding
at a particular moment. As soon as this happens, the understanding,
though in reality it is only the eye, becomes united with the eye, and
entering the mind raises an image there, the consequence of which is
that that image is said to be seen. External world there is, of course,
as independent of mind and understanding. That which is called a tree is
only an idea or image created in the mind by the understanding with the
aid of the sense of vision.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[205:4](m12b075.htm#fr_553.md) The speaker here
combats the theory that the qualities of *Sattwa*, *Rajas*, and *Tamas*
inhere to the objects themselves of the senses. His own view is that
they inhere to the Mind, the Understanding, and Consciousness. The
qualities may be seen to exist with objects, but in reality they follow
objects in consequence of their permanent connection with the mind, the
understanding, and consciousness which have agency in the production of
objects. The commentator cites the instance of a wife's beautiful and
symmetrical limbs. These excite pleasure in the husband, envy in a
co-wife, and desire (mixed with pain at its not being <span
id="page_206">p. 206</span> gratified) in a weak-hearted gazer. All the
while the limbs remain unchanged. Then again, the husband is not always
pleased with them, nor is the co-wife always filled with envy at their
sight, nor is the gazer always agitated. Like the spokes of a wheel
which are attached to the circumference and which move with
circumference, the qualities of Sattwa, etc., attached to the mind,
understanding and consciousness, move along with them, *i.e.*, follow
those objects in the production of which the mind, etc., are causes.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[206:1](m12b075.htm#fr_554.md) This version of
verse is offered tentatively. I give the substance without following the
exact order of the original. Compare this verse with 42 of section 194
*ante*.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[206:2](m12b075.htm#fr_555.md) As soon as the
darkness of the understanding is dispelled and true knowledge succeeds,
the Soul becomes visible.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[206:3](m12b075.htm#fr_556.md) *i.e.*, who adopts
the Sannyasa or the last mode of life after having duly gone through the
preceding modes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXLIX](m12b076.md)
