[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b069) 
[Next](m12b071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXLIII

"Vyasa said, 'Observant of meritorious vows, the householder, for the
second period of life, should dwell in his house, having taken spouses
according to the ways indicated in the ordinance and having established
afire (of his own). As regards the domestic mode of life, four kinds of
conduct have been laid down by the learned. The first consists of
keeping a store of grain sufficient

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

to last for three years. The second consists of keeping a store to last
for one year. The third consists of providing for the day without
thinking of the morrow. The fourth consists of collecting grain after
the manner of the pigeon. <span id="fr_498"></span>[1](#fn_498) Of
these, each succeeding one is superior in point of merit to that which
precedes it, according to what has been laid down in the
scriptures. <span id="fr_499"></span>[2](#fn_499) A householder
observing the first kind of conduct may practise all the six well-known
duties (*viz*., sacrifice on his own account, sacrifice on that of
others, teaching, learning, making gifts, and accepting gifts). He who
observes the second kind of conduct should practise three only, of these
duties (*viz*., learning, giving, and taking). He who observes the third
kind of conduct should practise only two of the duties of domesticity
(*viz*., learning and giving). The householder practising the fourth
kind of domesticity should observe only one duty (*viz*., learning the
scriptures). The duties of the householder are all said to be
exceedingly meritorious. The householder should never cook any food for
only his own use; nor should be slaughter animals (for food) except in
sacrifices. <span id="fr_500"></span>[3](#fn_500) If it be an animal
which the householder desires to kill (for food), or if it be a tree
which he wishes to cut down (for fuel), he should do either act
according to the ritual laid down in the Yajuses for that much is due to
both animate and inanimate existences. The house-holder should never
sleep during the day, or during the first part of the night, or during
the last part thereof. He should never eat twice between morning and
evening, and should never summon his wife to bed except in her season.
In his house, no Brahmana should be suffered to remain unfed or
unworshipped. He should always worship such guests as are presenters of
sacrificial offerings, as are cleansed by Vedic lore and observance of
excellent vows, as are high-born and conversant with the scriptures, as
are observers of the duties of their own order, as are self-restrained,
mindful of all religious acts, and devoted to penances. The scriptures
ordain that what is offered to the deities and the *Pitris* in
sacrifices and religious rites is meant for the service of guests like
these. In this mode of life the scriptures ordain that a share of the
food (that is cooked) should be given unto every creature (irrespective
of his birth or character), unto one, that is, who for the sake of show
keeps his nails and beard, unto one who from pride displays what his own
(religious) practices are, unto one who has improperly abandoned his
sacred fire, and even unto one who has injured his preceptor. One
leading a domestic mode of life should give (food) unto Brahmacharins
and Sannyasins. The householder should every day become an eater of
*vighasa*, and should

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

every day eat *amrita*. Mixed with clarified butter, the remains of the
food that is offered in sacrifices constitute *amrita*. That householder
who eats after having fed (all relatives and) servants is said to eat
*vighasa*. The food that remains after the servants have been fed is
called *vighasa*, and that which is left after the presentation of
sacrificial offerings is called *amrita*. One leading a domestic mode of
life should be content with his own wedded wife. He should be
self-restrained. He should avoid malice and subdue his senses. He should
never quarrel with his *Ritwik*, *Purohita*, and preceptor, with his
maternal uncle, guests and dependants, with the aged and the young in
years, with those that are afflicted with diseases, with those that
practise as physicians, with kinsmen, relatives, and friends, with his
parents, with women that belong to his own paternal family, with his
brother and son and wife, with his daughter, and with his servants. By
avoiding disputes with these, the householder becomes cleansed of all
sins. By conquering such disputes, he succeeds in conquering all the
regions of felicity (in the world hereafter). There is no doubt in
this. <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_501) The preceptor (if duly
reverenced) is able to lead one to the regions of Brahman. The father
(if reverenced) can lead to the regions of Prajapati. The guest is
puissant enough to lead to the region of Indra. The
[*Ritwik*](errata.htm#100) has power in respect of the regions of the
deities. Female relatives of the paternal line have lordship in respect
of the regions of the *Apsaras*, and kinsmen (by blood), in respect of
the region of the Viswedevas. Relatives by marriage and collateral
kinsmen have power in respect of the several quarters of the horizon
(*viz*., north, etc.), and the mother and the maternal uncle have power
over the earth. The old, the young, the afflicted the wasted have power
over the sky. <span id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_502) The eldest brother
is like unto the sire himself (to all his younger brothers). The wife
and the son are one's own body. One's menial servants are one's own
shadow. The daughter is an object of great affection. For these reason,
a house-holder endued with learning, observant of duties, and possessed
of endurance, should bear, without warmth or anxiety of heart every kind
of annoyance and even censure from the last named relatives. No
righteous household should do any act, urged by considerations of
wealth. There are three courses of duty in respect of a life of
domesticity. Of these, that which comes next (in the order of
enumeration) is more meritorious than the preceding one. <span
id="fr_503"></span>[3](#fn_503) As regards the four (principal) modes of
life also, the same rule of merit applies, *viz*., the one that comes
after is superior to the one preceding it. Accordingly, domesticity is
superior to Brahmacharya, forest life is superior to domesticity, and a
life of mendicancy or complete renunciation is superior to a forest
life.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One desirous of prosperity should accomplish all
those duties and rites that have been ordained in the scriptures in
respect of those modes. That kingdom grows in prosperity where these
highly deserving persons live, *viz*., those that lead a life of
domesticity according to the Kumbhadhanya method, they that lead it
according to the Unchha method, and they that lead it according to the
Kapoti method. <span id="fr_504"></span>[1](#fn_504) That man who
cheerfully leads a life of domesticity in the observance of those
duties, succeeds in sanctifying ten generations of his ancestors above
and ten generations of descendants below. A householder, duly observing
the duties of domesticity, obtains an end that yields felicity equal to
what occurs in the regions attained by great kings and emperors. Even
this is the end that has been ordained for those who have subdued their
senses. For all high-souled householders heaven has been ordained. That
heaven is equipped with delightful cars for each (moving at the will of
the rider). Even that is the delightful heaven indicated in the Vedas.
For all householders of restrained souls, the regions of heaven
constitute the high reward. The Self-born Brahman ordained that the
domestic mode of life should be the productive cause of heaven. And
since it has been so ordained, a person, by gradually attaining to the
second mode of life, obtains happiness and respect in heaven. After this
comes that high and superior mode of life, called the third, for those
that are desirous of casting off their bodies. Superior to that of
householders, that is the life of forest recluses,--of those, that is,
who waste their bodies (by diverse kinds of austerities) into skeletons
overlaid with dried skins. Listen as I discourse to thee upon it.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_498"></span>[190:1](m12b070.htm#fr_498) The fourth kind of
conduct, called *kapoti* is also called *unchha*. It consists of
collecting such seeds of grain as have fallen down from the ears and as
have been abandoned by the reapers.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[190:2](m12b070.htm#fr_499) Thus the second is
more meritorious than the first, the third than the second, and the
fourth than the third. The fourth or last, therefore, is the first in
point of merit.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[190:3](m12b070.htm#fr_500) It is said that the
householder who cooks must give a share of the cooked food to a
*Brahmacharin* or *Yati* or any one who comes as a guest. If he does not
do it but eats the whole of what has been cooked, he is regarded as
eating what belongs to a Brahmana. This, of course, is a high sin.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[191:1](m12b070.htm#fr_501) The commentator
supposes that these relatives and kinsmen are named because of the great
likelihood there is of disputes arising with them on account of shares
of inheritance.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[191:2](m12b070.htm#fr_502) The sense is this:
these various persons, if duly reverenced by the householder, are able
to send the latter to the places indicated or make him comfortable in
those places.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[191:3](m12b070.htm#fr_503) *Vide* verses 2 and
3 of this Section. Of the four courses, the first or *Kusaladhanya*, is
left out here. The three others, of course, are the *Kumbhadhanya*, the
*Aswastana* (otherwise called *Unchhasila*), and the *Kapoti*. The
Burdwan translator makes a blunder in enumerating the three kinds of
domesticity here referred to.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[192:1](m12b070.htm#fr_504) The Burdwan version
of this verse is incorrect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXLIV](m12b071)
