[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b014.md) 
[Next](m12b016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXXXVIII

"Bhrigu said, 'Brahman first created a few Brahmanas who came to be
called *Prajapatis* (lords of creation). Possessed of splendour equal to
that of the fire or the Sun, they were created out of the energy of that
First-born Being. The puissant Lord then created Truth, Duty, Penance,
the eternal Vedas, all kinds of pious acts, and Purity, for enabling
creatures to attain to heaven (by practising them). After this, the
Deities and the *Danavas*, the Gandharvas, the *Daityas*, the Asuras,
the great snakes, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Serpents, the
Pisachas, and human beings with their four divisions, *viz*., Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, O best of regenerate ones, and all the
other orders of creatures that exist, were created. The complexion the
Brahmanas obtained was white; that which the Kshatriyas obtained was
red; that which the Vaisyas got was yellow; and that which was given to
the Sudras was black.'

"Bharadwaja said, 'If the distinction between the four orders (of human
beings) be made by means only of colour (attribute), then it seems that
all the four orders have been mingled together. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62.md) Lust, wrath, fear, cupidity, grief,
anxiety, hunger, toil, possess and prevail over all men. How can men be
distinguished by the possession of attributes? The bodies of all men
emit sweat, urine, faeces, phlegm, bile, and blood. How then can men be
distributed

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

into classes? Of mobile objects the number is infinite; the species also
of immobile objects are innumerable. How, then, can objects of such very
great diversity be distributed into classes?'

"Bhrigu said, 'There is really no distinction between the different
orders. The whole world at first consisted of Brahmanas. Created (equal)
by Brahman, men have, in consequence of their acts, become distributed
into different orders. They that became fond of indulging in desire and
enjoying pleasures, possessed of the attributes of severity and wrath,
endued with courage, and unmindful of the duties of piety and
worship,--these Brahmanas possessing the attribute of Passion,--became
Kshatriyas. Those Brahmanas again who, without attending to the duties
laid down for them, became possessed of both the attributes of Goodness
and Passion, and took to the professions of cattle-rearing and
agriculture, became Vaisyas. Those Brahmanas again that became fond of
untruth and injuring other creatures, possessed of cupidity,--engaged in
all kinds of acts for a living, and fallen away from purity of
behaviour, and thus wedded to the attribute of Darkness, became Sudras.
Separated by these occupations, Brahmanas, falling away from their own
order, became members of the other three orders. All the four orders,
therefore, have always the right to the performance of all pious duties
and of sacrifices. Even thus were the four orders at first created equal
by Brahman who ordained for all of them (the observances disclosed in)
the words of *Brahma* (in the Vedas). Through cupidity alone, many fell
away, and became possessed by ignorance. The Brahmanas are always
devoted to the scriptures on Brahma; and mindful of vows and restraints,
are capable of grasping the conception of Brahma. Their penances
therefore, never go for nothing. They amongst them are not Brahmanas
that are incapable of understanding that every created thing is Supreme
Brahma. These, falling away, became members of diverse (inferior)
orders. Losing the light of knowledge, and betaking themselves to an
unrestrained course of conduct, they take birth as *Pisachas* and
Rakshasas and Pretas and as individuals of diverse *Mleccha* species.
The great *Rishis* who at the beginning sprang into life (through
Brahman's Will) subsequently created, by means of their penances, men
devoted to the duties ordained for them and attached to the rites laid
down in the Eternal Vedas. That other Creation, however, which is
eternal and undecaying, which is based upon *Brahma* and has sprung from
the Primeval God, and which has its refuge upon *yoga*, is a mental
one.'" <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md)

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[32:2](m12b015.htm#fr_62.md) The commentator
explains that the words expressive of hue or colour really mean
attributes. What is intended to be said is that the Brahmanas had the
attribute of Goodness (*Sattwa*); the second order had the attribute of
Passion (*Rajas*); the third got a mixture of the two, *i.e.*, both
goodness and passion (*Sattwa* and *Rajas*); while the lowest order got
the remaining attribute, *viz*., Darkness (*Tamas*).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[33:1](m12b015.htm#fr_63.md) The distinction here
laid down seems to be this: the eternal creation is due to the yoga or
mental action of the Primeval Deity. That creation which we behold is
the result of the penances of those sages who were first created.
Perhaps, what is intended to be said is that the principle of life, of
life proceeding from life, and primal matter with space, etc., are all
due to the fiat of God; while all visible and tangible objects,
resulting from the action of those principles and from primal matter and
space, are attributable to the ancient sages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXXIX](m12b016.md)
