[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b107.md) 
[Next](m12b109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'How great was the love of virtue possessed by
Vritra of immeasurable energy, whose knowledge was incomparable and
whose devotion to Vishnu was so great. The status occupied by Vishnu of
immeasurable energy is exceedingly difficult of apprehension. How, O
tiger among kings, could Vritra (who was an Asura) comprehended it (so
well)? Thou hast spoken of Vritra's acts. I too have listened to thee in
full faith. In consequence, however, of my seeing that one point (in thy
discourse) is unintelligible (and that, therefore, it requires
explanation), my curiosity has been roused for questioning thee
again. <span id="fr_887"></span>[1](#fn_887.md) How, indeed, was Vritra,
who was virtuous, devoted to Vishnu, endued with knowledge of truth
derivable from a just comprehension of the *Upanishads* and *Vedanta*,
vanquished by Indra, O foremost of men? O chief of the Bharatas, resolve
me this doubt. Indeed, tell me, O tiger among kings, how Vritra was
vanquished by Sakra! <span id="fr_888"></span>[2](#fn_888.md) O

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

grandsire, O thou of mighty arms, tell me in detail how the battle took
place (between the chief of the deities and the foremost of *Asuras*).
My curiosity to hear it is very great.'

Bhishma said, 'In days of yore, Indra, accompanied by the celestial
forces, proceeded on his car, and beheld the *Asura* Vritra stationed
before him like a mountain. He was full five hundred Yojanas in height,
O chastiser of foes, and three hundred Yojanas in circumference.
Beholding that form of Vritra, which was incapable of being vanquished
by the three worlds united together, the celestial became penetrated
with fear and full of anxiety. Indeed, suddenly seeing that gigantic
form of his antagonist, O king, Indra was struck with palsy in the lower
extremities. Then, on the eve of that great battle between the deities
and the *Asuras*, there arose loud shouts from both sides, and drums and
other musical instruments began to beat and blow. Beholding Sakra
stationed before him, O thou of Kuru's race, Vritra felt neither awe nor
fear, nor was he disposed to muster all his energies for the
fight. <span id="fr_889"></span>[1](#fn_889.md) Then the encounter
commenced, inspiring the three worlds with terror, between Indra, the
chief of the deities, and Vritra of high soul. The entire welkin was
enveloped by the combats of both sides with swords and axes and lances
and darts and spears and heavy clubs and rocks of diverse sizes and bows
of loud twang and diverse kinds of celestial weapons and fires and
burning brands. All the celestials with Grandsire at their head, and all
the highly-blessed *Rishis*, came to witness the battle, on their
foremost of cars; and the *Siddhas* also, O bull of Bharata's race, and
the *Gandharvas*, with the [Apsaras](errata.htm#127.md), on their own
beautiful and foremost of cars, came there (for the same purpose). Then
Vritra, that foremost of virtuous persons, quickly overwhelmed the
welkin and the chief of the deities with a thick shower of rocks. The
celestials, at this, filled with rage, dispelled with their showers of
arrows that thick downpour of rocks showered by Vritra in battle. Then
Vritra, O tiger among the Kurus, possessed of mighty strength and endued
with large powers of illusion, stupefied the chief of the deities by
fighting wholly with the aid of his powers of illusion. When he of a
hundred sacrifices, thus afflicted by Vritra. was overcome by
stupefaction, the sage Vasishtha restored him to his senses by uttering
*Somanas*.' <span id="fr_890"></span>[2](#fn_890.md)

"Vasishtha said, 'Thou art the foremost of the gods, O chief of the
deities, O slayer of *Daityas* and *Asuras*! The strength of the three
worlds is in thee! Why, then, O Sakra, dost thou languish so! There,
Brahman, and Vishnu, and Siva, that lord of the universe, the
illustrious and divine Soma, and all the highest *Rishis* (stand,
beholding thee)! Do not, O Sakra, yield to weakness, like an ordinary
person! Firmly resolved on battle, slay thy foes, O chief of the
celestials! There, that Master of all the worlds, *viz*., the Three-eyed
(Siva), the adored of all the worlds, is eyeing thee! Cast off this
stupefaction, O chief of the celestials! There, those regenerate
*Rishis*, headed by

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Vrihaspati, are praising thee, for thy victory,
in celestial hymns.' <span id="fr_891"></span>[1](#fn_891.md)

"Bhishma continued, 'While Vasava of great energy was thus being
restored to consciousness by the high-souled Vasishtha, his strength
became greatly enhanced. The illustrious chastiser of Paka then, relying
upon his intelligence, had recourse to high Yoga and with its aid
dispelled these illusions of Vritra. Then Vrihaspati, the son of
Angiras, and those foremost of *Rishis* possessed of great prosperity,
beholding the prowess of Vritra, repaired to Mahadeva, and impelled by
the desire of benefiting the three worlds, urged him to destroy the
great *Asura*. The energy of that illustrious lord of the universe
thereupon assumed the character of a fierce fever and penetrated the
body of Vritra the lord of *Asuras*. <span
id="fr_892"></span>[2](#fn_892.md) The illustrious and divine Vishnu,
adored of all the worlds, bent upon protecting the universe, entered the
thunderbolt of Indra. Then Vrihaspati of great intelligence and
Vasishtha of exceeding energy, and all the other foremost of *Rishis*,
repairing to Him of a hundred sacrifices, *viz*., the boon-giving
Vasava, the adored of all the worlds, addressed him, saying, 'Slay
Vritra, O puissant one, without delay!'

"Maheswara said, 'Yonder, O Sakra, stands the great Vritra, accompanied
by a great force. He is the soul of the universe, capable of going
everywhere, endued with large powers of illusion, and possessed of great
celebrity. This foremost of *Asuras* is, therefore, incapable of being
vanquished by even the three worlds united together. Aided by Yoga, do
thou slay him, O chief of the deities. Do not disregard him. For full
sixty thousand years, O chief of the celestials, Vritra practised the
severest penances for obtaining strength. Brahman gave him the boons he
had solicited, *viz*., the greatness that belongs to Yogins, large
powers of illusion, excess of might, and superabundant energy. I impart
to thee my energy, O Vasava! The Danava has now lost his coolness. Do
thou, therefore, slay him now with thy thunderbolt!'

"Sakra said, 'Before thy eyes, O foremost of gods, I shall, through thy
grace, slay with my thunderbolt this invincible son of Diti.'

"Bhishma continued, 'When the great *Asura* or Daitya was overtaken by
that fever (born of Mahadeva's energy), the deities and the *Rishis*,
filled with joy, uttered loud cheers, At the same time drums, and conchs
of loud blare, and kettle drums and tabors began to beat and blow by
thousands. Suddenly all the *Asuras* became afflicted with the loss of
memory. In a trice, their powers of illusion also disappeared. The
*Rishis* and the deities, ascertaining the foe to be thus possessed,
uttered the praises of both Sakra and Isana, and began to urge the
former (to make no delay in destroying Vritra). The form that Indra
assumed on the eve of the encounter, while seated on his car and while
his praises were being hymned by the *Rishis*, became such that none
could look at it without awe.'" <span id="fr_893"></span>[3](#fn_893.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_887"></span>[304:1](m12b108.htm#fr_887.md) A *Pyakta-parsant*
is explained by the commentator in this way. Vritra was a firm devotee
of Vishnu. He did not, therefore, deserve defeat and fall. How, then,
was he vanquished by Indra? *Avyaktam* is equivalent to *aspashtam*.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[304:2](m12b108.htm#fr_888.md) The word used in
verse 4 is *vinihatah* and that in verse 5 is *nirjitah*. There can be
no doubt that both imply the same idea.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[305:1](m12b108.htm#fr_889.md) *Astha* is efforts.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[305:2](m12b108.htm#fr_890.md) *Rathantara* is
another name for certain *Samans*, which are so called because of men
being able to cross the world with their aid as by a car. (*Ratha* car,
and *tri* to cross).

<span id="fn_891"></span>[306:1](m12b108.htm#fr_891.md) 'Praising thee, for
thy victory, etc.,' *i.e.*. the *Rishis* are uttering hymns of praise
for conferring victory on thee.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[306:2](m12b108.htm#fr_892.md) *Raudrah* may mean
also 'appertaining to Rudra, which is another name of Mahadeva.'

<span id="fn_893"></span>[306:3](m12b108.htm#fr_893.md) This account of the
encounter between Vritra and Indra is substantially different from what
occurs in the *Vana Parva*. Then again the part the *Rishis* are made to
take in the slaughter of the *Asura* is certainly censurable. The great
*Rishis*, even for benefiting the three <span id="page_307">p.
307</span> worlds, would not certainly injure any creature. In the above
account, Vasishtha and Vrihaspati and the others are very much
represented as persons who have bet largely on Indra's success. In the
account occurring in the *Vana Parva*, Indra is represented as standing
in awful dread of Vritra and hurling his thunderbolt without even
deliberate aim, and refusing to believe that his foe was dead till
assured by all the deities. The present account seems to be a much older
than that in the *Vana Parva*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXXII](m12b109.md)
