[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c053) 
[Next](m12c055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCLV

"The guest continued, 'For all that, O Brahmana, I shall endeavour to
instruct thee duly. Listen to me as I recite to thee that which I have
heard from my preceptor. In that place whence, in course of a former
creation, the wheel of righteousness was set in motion, in that forest
which is known by the name of Naimisha, and which is situate on the
banks of the Gomati, there is a city called after the Nagas. There, in
that region, all the deities, being assembled together, had in days of
old performed a grand sacrifice. There the foremost of earthly kings,
Mandhatri, vanquished Indra, the chief of the celestials. A mighty Naga,
of righteous soul, dwells in the city that stands in that region. That
great Naga is known by the name of Padmanabha or Padma. Walking in the
triple path (of acts, knowledge, and adoration) he gratifies all
creatures in thought, word, and deed. Reflecting upon all things with
great care, he protects the righteous and chastises the wicked by
adopting the quadruple policy of conciliation, provoking dissensions,
making gifts or bribes, and using force. Repairing thither, thou
shouldst put to him the questions thou wishest. He will show thee truly
what the highest religion is. That Naga is always fond of guests. Endued
with great intelligence, he is well conversant with the scriptures. He
is possessed of all desirable virtues the like of which are not to be
noticed in any other person. By disposition he is always observant of
those duties which are performed with or in water. <span
id="fr_345"></span>[1](#fn_345) He is devoted to the study of the Vedas.
He is endued with penances and self-restraint. He has great wealth. He
performs sacrifice, makes gifts, abstains from inflicting injury and
practises forgiveness. His

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

conduct in all respects is excellent. Truthful in speech and freed from
malice, his behaviour, is good and his senses are under proper control.
He eats after feeding all his guests and attendants. He is kind of
speech. He has knowledge of what is beneficial and what is simple and
right and what is censurable. He takes stock of what he does and what he
leaves undone. He never acts with hostility towards any one. He is
always engaged in doing what is beneficial to all creatures. He belongs
to a family that is as pure and stainless as the water of a lake in the
midst of the Ganges.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[206:1](m12c054.htm#fr_345) The commentator
explains that *nityah-salilah* means pure as water. I think this is not
the sense of the word here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCLVI](m12c055)
