[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c019.md) 
[Next](m12c021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### SECTION CCCXXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Without abandoning the domestic mode of life, O
royal sage of Kuru's race, who ever attained to Emancipation which is
the annihilation of the Understanding (and the other faculties)? Do tell
me this! How may the gross and the subtile form be cast off? Do thou
also, O grandsire, tell me what the supreme excellence of Emancipation
is.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Janaka and Sulabha, O Bharata! In days of yore there
was a king of Mithila, of the name of Dharmadhyaja, of Janaka's race. He
was devoted to the practices of the religion of Renunciation. He was
well conversant with the Vedas, with the scriptures on Emancipation, and
with the scriptures bearing on his own duty as a king. Subjugating his
senses, he ruled his Earth. Hearing of his good behaviour in the world,
many men of wisdom, well-conversant with wisdom, O foremost of men,
desired to imitate him. 'In the same *Satya Yuga*, a woman of the name
of Sulabha, belonging to the mendicant order, practised the duties of
Yoga and wandered over the whole Earth. In course of her wanderings over
the Earth, Sulabha heard from many *Dandis* of different places that the
ruler of Mithila was devoted to the religion of Emancipation. Hearing
this report about king Janaka and desirous of ascertaining whether it
was true or not, Sulabha became desirous of having a personal interview
with Janaka. Abandoning, by her Yoga powers, her former form and
features, Sulabha assumed the most faultless features and unrivalled
beauty. In the twinkling of an eye and with the speed of the quickest
shaft, the fair-browed lady of eyes like lotus-petals repaired to the
capital of the Videhas. Arrived at the chief city of Mithila teeming
with a large population, she adopted the guise of a mendicant and
presented herself before the king. The monarch, beholding, her delicate
form, became filled with wonder and enquired who she was, whose she was,
and whence she came. Welcoming her, he assigned her an excellent seat,
honoured her by offering water to wash her feet, and gratified her with
excellent refreshments. Refreshed duly and gratified with the rites of
hospitality offered unto her, Sulabha, the female mendicant, urged the
king, who was surrounded by his ministers and seated in the midst of
learned scholars, (to declare himself in respect of his adherence to the
religion of Emancipation). Doubting whether Janaka had succeeded in
attaining to Emancipation, by following the religion of Nivritti,
Sulabha, endued with Yoga-power, entered the understanding of the king
by her own understanding. Restraining, by means of the rays of light
that emanated from her own eyes, the rays issuing from the eyes of the
king, the lady, desirous of ascertaining the truth, bound up king Janaka
with Yoga bonds. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md)' That best of
monarch, priding himself upon

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

his own invincibleness and defeating the intentions of Sulabha seized
her resolution with his own resolution. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) The king, in his subtile form, was without
the royal umbrella and sceptre. The lady Sulabha, in hers, was without
the triple stick. Both staying then in the same (gross) form, thus
conversed with each other. Listen to that conversation as it happened
between the monarch and Sulabha.

"Janaka said, O holy lady, to what course of conduct art thou devoted?
Whose art thou? Whence hast thou come? After finishing thy business
here, whither wilt thou go? No one can, without questioning, ascertain
another's acquaintance with the scriptures, or age, or order of birth.
Thou shouldst, therefore, answer these questions of mine, when thou has
come to me. Know that I am truly freed from all vanity in respect of my
royal umbrella and sceptre. I wish to know thee thoroughly. Thou art
deserving I hold, of my respect. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94.md) Do
thou listen to me as I speak to thee on Emancipation for there is none
else (in this world) that can discourse to thee on that topic. Hear me
also I tell thee who that person is from whom in days of old I acquired
this distinguishing knowledge. <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95.md) I am
the beloved disciple of the high-souled and venerable Panchasikha,
belonging to the mendicant order, of Parasara's race. My doubts have
been dispelled and am fully conversant with the Sankhya and the Yoga
systems, and the ordinances as in respect of sacrifices and other rites,
which constitutes the three well-known paths of Emancipation. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[4](#fn_96.md) Wandering over the earth and pursuing the
while the path that is pointed out by the scriptures, the learned
Panchasikha formerly dwelt in happiness in my abode for a period of four
months in the rainy season. That foremost of Sankhyas discoursed to me,
agreeably to the truth, and in an intelligible manner suited to my
comprehension, on the several kinds of means for attaining to
Emancipation. He did not, however, command me to give up my kingdom.
Freed from attachments, and fixing my Soul on supreme Brahma, and
unmoved by companionship, I lived, practising in its entirety that
triple conduct which is laid down in treatises on Emancipation.
Renunciation (of all kinds of attachments) is the highest means
prescribed for Emancipation. It is from Knowledge that Renunciation, by
which one

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

becomes freed is said to flow. From Knowledge arises the endeavour after
Yoga, and through that endeavour one attains to knowledge of Self or
Soul. Through knowledge of Self one transcends joy and grief. That
enables one to transcend death and attain to high success. That high
intelligence (knowledge of Self) has been acquired by me, and
accordingly I have transcended all pairs of opposites. Even in this life
have I been freed from stupefaction and have transcended all
attachments. As a soil, saturated with water and softened thereby,
causes the (sown) seed to sprout forth, after the same manner, the acts
of men cause rebirth. As a seed, fried on a pan or otherwise, becomes
unable to sprout forth although the capacity for sprouting was there,
after the same manner my understanding having been freed from the
productive principle constituted by desire, by the instruction of the
holy Panchasikha of the mendicant order, it no longer produces its fruit
in the form of attachment to the object of the senses. I never
experience love for my spouse or hate for my foes. Indeed, I keep aloof
from both, beholding the fruitlessness of attachment and wrath. I regard
both persons equally, *viz*., him that smears my right hand with
sandal-paste and him that wounds my left. Having attained my (true)
object, I am happy, and look equally upon a clod of earth, a piece of
stone, and a lump of gold. I am freed from attachments of every kind,
though am engaged in ruling a kingdom. In consequence of all this I am
distinguished over all bearers of triple sticks. Some foremost of men
that are conversant with the topic of Emancipation say that Emancipation
has a triple path, (these are knowledge, Yoga, and sacrifices and
rites). Some regard knowledge having all things of the world for its
object as the means of emancipation. Some hold that the total
renunciation of acts (both external and internal) is the means thereof.
Another class of persons conversant with the scriptures of Emancipation
say that Knowledge is the single means. Other, *viz*. Yatis, endued with
subtile vision, hold that acts constitute the means. The high-souled
Panchasikha, discarding both the opinion about knowledge and acts,
regarded the third as the only means of Emancipation. If men leading the
domestic mode of life be endued with Yama and Niyama, they become the
equals of Sannyasins. If, on the other hand, Sannyasins be endued with
desire and aversion and spouses and honour and pride and affection, they
become the equals of men leading domestic modes of life. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) If one can attain to Emancipation by means
of knowledge, then may Emancipation exist in triple sticks (for there is
nothing to prevent the bearers of such stick from acquiring the needful
knowledge). Why then may Emancipation not exist in the umbrella and the
sceptre as well, especially when there is equal reason in taking up the
triple stick and the sceptre? <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98.md) One
becomes attached to all those things and acts with which one has need
for the sake of one's own self for particular reasons. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99.md) If a person, beholding the faults of the
domestic mode of life, casts it off for

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

adopting another mode (which he considers to be fraught with great
merit), be cannot, for such rejection and adoption be regarded as one
that is once freed from all attachments, (for all that he has done has
been to attach himself to a new mode after having freed himself from a
previous one). <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) Sovereignty is
fraught with the rewarding and the chastising of others. The life of a
mendicant is equally fraught with the same (for mendicants also reward
and chastise those they can). When, therefore, mendicants are similar to
kings in this respect, why would mendicants only attain to Emancipation,
and not kings? Notwithstanding the possession of sovereignty, therefore,
one becomes cleansed of all sins by means of knowledge alone, living the
while in Supreme Brahma. The wearing of brown cloths, shaving of the
head, bearing of the triple stick, and the Kamandalu,--these are the
outward signs of one's mode of life. These have no value in aiding one
to the attainment of Emancipation. When, notwithstanding the adoption of
these emblems of a particular mode of life, knowledge alone becomes the
cause of one's Emancipation from sorrow, it would appear that the
adoption of mere emblems is [perfectly](errata.htm#159.md) useless. Or, if,
beholding the mitigation of sorrow in it, thou hast betaken thyself to
these emblems of Sannyasi, why then should not the mitigation of sorrow
be beheld in the umbrella and the sceptre to which I have betaken
myself? Emancipation does not exist in poverty; nor is bondage to be
found in affluence. One attains to Emancipation through Knowledge alone,
whether one is indigent or affluent. For these reasons, know that I am
living in a condition of freedom, though ostensibly engaged in the
enjoyments of religion, wealth, and pleasure, in the form of kingdom and
spouses, which constitute a field of bondage (for the generality of
men). The bonds constituted by kingdom and affluence, and the bondage to
attachments, I have cut off with the sword of Renunciation whetted on
the stone of the scriptures bearing upon Emancipation. As regards myself
then, I tell thee that I have become freed in this way. O lady of the
mendicant order, I cherish an affection

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

for thee. But that should not prevent me from telling thee that thy
behaviour does not correspond with the practices of the mode of life to
which thou hast betaken thyself! Thou hast great delicacy of formation.
Thou hast an exceedingly shapely form. The age is young. Thou hast all
these, and thou hast Niyama (subjugation of the senses). I doubt it
verily. Thou hast stopped up my body (by entering into me with the aid
of the Yoga power) for ascertaining as to whether I am really
emancipated or not. This act of thine ill corresponds with that mode of
life whose emblems thou bearest. For Yogin that is endued with desire,
the triple stick is unfit. As regards thyself, thou dost not adhere to
thy stick. As regards those that are freed, it behoves even them to
protect themselves from fall. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md)
Listen now to me as to what thy transgression has been in consequence of
thy contact with me and thy having entered into my gross body with the
aid of thy understanding. To what reason is thy entrance to be ascribed
into my kingdom or my palace? At whose sign hast thou entered into my
heart? <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102.md) Thou belongest to the
foremost of all the orders, being, as thou art, a Brahmana woman. As
regards myself, however, I am a Kshatriya. There is no union for us two.
Do not help to cause an intermixture of colours. Thou livest in the
practice of those duties that lead to Emancipation. I live in the
domestic mode of life, This act of thine, therefore, is another evil
thou hast done, for it produces an unnatural union of two opposite modes
of life. I do not know whether thou belongest to my own *gotra* or dost
not belong to it. As regards thyself also, thou dost not know who I am
(*viz*., to what *gotra* I belong). If thou art of my own gotra, thou
hast, by entering into my person, produced another evil,--the evil,
*viz*., of unnatural union. If, again, thy husband be alive and dwelling
in a distant place, thy union with me has produced the fourth evil of
sinfulness, for thou art not one with whom I may be lawfully united.
Dost thou perpetrate all these sinful acts, impelled by the motive of
accomplishing a particular object? Dost thou do these from ignorance or
from perverted intelligence? If, again, in consequence of thy evil
nature thou hast thus become thoroughly independent or unrestrained in
thy behaviour, I tell thee that if thou hast any knowledge of the
scriptures, thou wilt understand that everything thou hast done has been
productive of evil. A third fault attaches to thee in consequence of
these acts of thine, a fault that is destructive of peace of mind. By
endeavouring to display thy superiority, the indication of a wicked
woman is seen in thee. Desirous of asserting thy victory as thou

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

art, it is not myself alone whom thou wishest to defeat, for it is plain
that thou wishest to obtain a victory over even the whole of my court
(consisting of these learned and very superior Brahmanas), by casting
thy eyes in this way towards all these meritorious Brahmanas, it is
evident that thou desirest to humiliate them all and glorify thyself (at
their expense). Stupefied by thy pride of Yoga-puissance that has been
born of thy jealousy (at sight of my power,) thou hast caused a union of
thy understanding with mine and thereby hast really mingled together
nectar with poison. That union, again, of man and woman, when each
covets the other, is sweet as nectar. That association, however, of man
and woman when the latter, herself coveting, fails to obtain an
individual of the opposite sex that does not covet her, is, instead of
being a merit, only a fault that is as noxious as poison. Do not
continue to touch me. Know that I am righteous. Do thou act according to
thy own scriptures. The enquiry thou hadst wished to make, *viz*.,
whether I am or I am not emancipated, has been finished. It behoves thee
not to conceal from me all thy secret motives. It behoves thee not, that
thus disguisest thyself, to conceal from me what thy object is, that is
whether this call of thine has been prompted by the desire of
accomplishing some object of thy own or whether thou hast come for
accomplishing the object of some other king (that is hostile to me). One
should never appear deceitfully before a king; nor before a Brahmana;
nor before one's wife when that wife is possessed of every wifely
virtue. Those who appear in deceitful guise before these three very soon
meet with destruction. The power of kings consists in their sovereignty.
The power of Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas is in the Vedas. Women
wield a high power in consequence of their beauty and youth and
blessedness. These then are powerful in the possession of these powers.
He, therefore, that is desirous of accomplishing his own object should
always approach these three with sincerity and candour, insincerity and
deceit fail to produce success (in these three quarters). It behoveth
thee, therefore, to apprise me of the order to which thou belongest by
birth, of thy learning and conduct and disposition and nature, as also
of the object thou hast in view in coming to this place!--"

"Bhishma continued, 'Though rebuked by the king in these unpleasant,
improper, and ill-applied words, the lady Sulabha was not at all
abashed. After the king had said these words, the beautiful Sulabha then
addressed herself for saying the following words in reply that were more
handsome than her person.

"'Sulabha said, O king, speech ought always to be free from the nine
verbal faults and the nine faults of judgment. It should also, while
setting forth the meaning with perspicuity, be possessed of the eighteen
well-known merits. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) Ambiguity,
ascertainment of the faults and merits of premises and conclusions,
weighing the relative strength or weakness of those faults and merits,
establishment of the conclusion, and the element

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of persuasiveness or otherwise that attaches to the conclusion thus
arrived at,--these five characteristics appertaining to the
sense--constitute the authoritativeness of what is said. Listen now to
the characteristics of these requirements beginning with ambiguity, one
after another, as I expound them according to the combinations. When
knowledge rests on distinction in consequence of the object to be known
being different from one another, and when (as regards the comprehension
of the subject) the understanding rests upon many points one after
another, the combination of words (in whose case this occurs) is said to
be vitiated by ambiguity. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md) By
ascertainment (of faults and merits), called Sankhya, is meant the
establishment, by elimination, of faults or merits (in premises and
conclusions), adopting tentative meanings. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105.md) *Krama* or weighing the relative
strength or weakness of the faults or merits (ascertained by the above
process), consists in settling the propriety of the priority or
subsequence of the words employed in a sentence. This is the meaning
attached to the word *Krama* by persons conversant with the
interpretation of sentences or texts. By Conclusion is meant the final
determination, after this examination of what has been said on the
subjects of religion, pleasure, wealth, and Emancipation, in respect of
what is particularly is that has been said in the text. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106.md) The sorrow born of wish or aversion
increases to a great measure. The conduct, O king, that one pursues in
such a matter (for dispelling the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

sorrow experienced) is called Prayojanam. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107.md) Take it for certain, O king, at my word,
that these characteristics of Ambiguity and the other (numbering five in
all), when occurring together, constitute a complete and intelligible
sentence. <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108.md) The words I shall utter
will be fraught with sense, free from ambiguity (in consequence of each
of them not being symbols of many things), logical, free from pleonasm
or tautology, smooth, certain, free from bombast, agreeable or sweet,
truthful, not inconsistent with the aggregate of three, (*viz*.,
Righteousness, Wealth and Pleasure), refined (*i.e.*, free from
Prakriti), not elliptical or imperfect, destitute of harshness or
difficulty of comprehension, characterised by due order, not far-fetched
in respect of sense, corrected with one another as cause and effect and
each having a specific object. <span id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_109.md) I
shall not tell thee anything, prompted by desire or wrath or fear or
cupidity or abjectness or [deceit](errata.htm#160.md) or shame or
compassion or pride. (I answer thee because it is proper for me to
answer what thou hast said). When the speaker, the hearer, and the words
said, thoroughly agree with one another in course of a speech, then does
the sense or meaning come out very clearly. When, in the matter of what
is to be said, the speaker shows disregard for the understanding of the
hearer by uttering words whose meaning is understood by himself, then,
however good those words may be, they become incapable of being seized
by the hearer. <span id="fr_110"></span>[4](#fn_110.md) That speaker,
again, who, abandoning all regard for his own meaning uses words that
are of excellent sound and sense, awakens only erroneous, impressions in
the mind of the hearer. Such words in such connection become certainly
faulty. That speaker, however, who employs words that are, while
expressing his own meaning, intelligible to the hearer, as well, truly
deserves to be called a speaker. No other man deserves the name. It
behoveth thee, therefore, O king, to hear with concentrated attention
these words of mine, fraught with meaning and endued with wealth of
vocables. Thou hast asked me who I am, whose I am, whence

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I am coming, etc. Listen to me, O king, with
undivided mind, as I answer these questions of thine. As lac and wood,
as grains of dust and drops of water, exist commingled when brought
together, even so are the existences of all creatures. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md) Sound, touch, taste, form, and scent,
these and the senses, though diverse in respect of their essences, exist
yet in a state of commingling like lac and wood. It is again well known
that nobody asks any of these, saying, who art thou? Each of them also
has no knowledge either of itself or of the others. The eye cannot see
itself. The ear cannot hear itself. The eye, again, cannot discharge the
functions of any of the other senses, nor can any of the senses
discharge the functions of any sense save its own. If all of them even
combine together, even they fail to know their own selves as dust and
water mingled together cannot know each other though existing in a state
of union. In order to discharge their respective functions, they await
the contact of objects that are external to them. The eye, form, and
light, constitute the three requisites of the operation called seeing.
The same, as in this case, happens in respect of the operations of the
other senses and the ideas which is their result. Then, again, between
the functions of the senses (called vision, hearing, etc.,) and the
ideas which are their result (*viz*., form, sound, etc.), the mind is an
entity other than the senses And is regarded to have an action of its
own. With its help one distinguishes what is existent from what is
non-existent for arriving at certainty (in the matter of all ideas
derived from the senses). With the five senses of knowledge and five
senses of action, the mind makes a total of eleven. The twelfth is the
Understanding. When doubt arises in respect of what is to be known, the
Understanding comes forward and settles all doubts (for aiding correct
apprehension). After the twelfth, Sattwa is another principle numbering
the thirteenth. With its help creatures are distinguished as possessing
more of it or less of it in their constitutions. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112) After this, Consciousness (of self.md) is
another principle (numbering the fourteenth). It helps one to an
apprehension of self as distinguished from what is not self. Desire is
the fifteenth principle, O king. Unto it inhere the whole
universe. <span id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_113.md) The sixteenth principle
is Avidya. Unto it inhere the seventeenth and the eighteenth principles

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

called Prakriti and Vyakti (*i.e.*, Maya and Prakasa). Happiness and
sorrow, decrepitude and death, acquisition and loss, the agreeable end
the disagreeable,--these constitute the nineteenth principle and are
called couples of opposites. Beyond the nineteenth principle is another,
*viz*., Time called the twentieth. Know that the births and death of all
creatures are due to the action of this twentieth principle. These
twenty exist together. Besides these, the five Great primal elements,
and existence and non-existence, bring up the tale to seven and twenty.
Beyond these, are three others, named Vidhi, Sukra, and Vala, that make
the tale reach thirty. <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md) That in
which these ten and twenty principles occur is said to be body. Some
persons regard unmanifest Prakriti to be the source or cause of these
thirty principles. (This is the view of the atheistic Sankhya school).
The Kanadas of gross vision regard the Manifest (or atoms) to be their
cause. Whether the Unmanifest or the Manifest be their cause, or whether
the two (*viz*., the Supreme or Purusha and the Manifest or atoms) be
regarded as their cause, or fourthly, whether the four together (*viz*.,
the Supreme or Purusha and his Maya and Jiva and Avidya or Ignorance) be
the cause, they that are conversant with Adhyatma behold Prakriti as the
cause of all creatures. That Prakriti which is Unmanifest, becomes
manifest in the form of these principles. Myself, thyself, O monarch,
and all others that are endued with body are the result of that Prakriti
(so far as our bodies are concerned). Insemination and other (embryonic)
conditions are due to the mixture of the vital seed and blood. In
consequence of insemination the result which first appears is called by
the name of 'Kalala.' From 'Kalala' arises what is called Vudvuda
(bubble). From the stage called 'Vudvuda' springs what is called 'Pesi.'
From the condition called 'Pesi' that stage arises in which the various
limbs become manifested. From this last condition appear nails and hair.
Upon the expiration of the ninth month, O king of Mithila, the creature
takes its birth so that, its sex being known, it comes to be called a
boy or girl. When the creature issues out of the womb, the form it
presents is such that its nails and fingers seem to be of the hue of
burnished copper. The next stage is said to be infancy, when the form
that was seen at the time of birth becomes changed. From infancy youth
is reached, and from youth, old age. As the creature advances from one
stage into another, the form presented in the previous stage becomes
changed. The constituent elements of the body, which serve diverse
functions in the general economy, undergo change every moment in every
creature. Those changes,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

however, are so minute that they cannot be noticed. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md) The birth of particles, and their death,
in each successive condition, can not be marked, O king, even as one
cannot mark the changes in the flame of a burning lamp. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116.md) When such is the state of the bodies of
all creatures,--that is when that which is called the body is changing
incessantly even like the rapid locomotion of a steed of good
mettle,--who then has come whence or not whence, or whose is it or whose
is it not, or whence does it not arise? What connection does there exist
between creatures and their own bodies? <span
id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_117.md) As from the contact of flint with iron,
or from two sticks of wood when rubbed against each other, fire is
generated, even so are creatures generated from the combination of the
(thirty) principles already named. Indeed, as thou thyself seest thy own
body in thy body and as thou thyself seest thy soul in thy own soul, why
is it that thou dost not see thy own body and thy own soul in the bodies
and souls of others? If it is true that thou seest an identity with
thyself and others, why then didst thou ask me who I am and whose? If it
is true that hast, O king been freed from the knowledge of duality that
(erroneously) says--this is mine and this other is not mine,--then what
use is there with such questions as Who art thou, whose art thou and
whence dost thou come? What indications of Emancipation can be said to
occur in that king who acts as others act towards enemies and allies and
neutrals and in victory and truce and war? What indications of
Emancipation occur in him who does not know the true nature of the
aggregate of three as manifested in seven ways in all acts and who, on
that account, is attached to that aggregate of three? <span
id="fr_118"></span>[4](#fn_118.md) What indications of Emancipation exist
in him who fails to cast an equal eye on the agreeable, on the weak, and
the strong? Unworthy as thou art of it,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

thy pretence of Emancipation should be put down by thy counsellers! This
thy endeavour to attain to Emancipation (when thou hast so many faults)
is like the use of medicine by a patient who indulges in all kinds of
forbidden food and practices. O chastiser of foes, reflecting upon
spouses and other sources of attachment, one should behold these in
one's own soul. What else can be looked upon as the indication of
Emancipation? Listen now to me as I speak in detail of these and certain
other minute sources of attachment appertaining to the four well known
acts (of lying down for slumber, enjoyment, eating, and dressing) to
which thou art still bound though thou professest thyself to have
adopted the religion of Emancipation. That man who has to rule the whole
world must, indeed, be a single king without a second. He is obliged to
live in only a single palace. In that palace he has again only one
sleeping chamber. In that chamber he has, again, only one bed on which
at night he is to lie down. Half that bed again he is obliged to give to
his Queen-consort. This may serve as an example of how little the king's
share is of all he is said to own. This is the case with his objects of
enjoyment, with the food he eats, and with the robes he wears. He is
thus attached to a very limited share of all things. He is, again,
attached to the duties of rewarding and punishing. The king is always
dependent on others. He enjoys a very small share of all he is supposed
to own, and to that small share he is forced to be attached (as well as
others are attached to their respective possessions). In the matter also
of peace and war, the king cannot be said to be independent. In the
matter of women, of sports and other kinds of enjoyment, the king's
inclinations are exceedingly circumscribed. In the matter of taking
counsel and in the assembly of his councillors what independence can the
king be said to have? When, indeed, he sets his orders on other men, he
is said to be thoroughly independent. But then the moment after, in the
several matters of his orders, his independence is barred by the very
men whom he has ordered. <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) If the
king desires to sleep, he cannot gratify his desire, resisted by those
who have business to transact with him. He must sleep when permitted,
and while sleeping he is obliged to wake up for attending to those that
have urgent business with him--bathe, touch, drink, eat, pour libations
on the fire, perform sacrifices, speak, hear,--these are the words which
kings have to hear from others and hearing them have to slave to those
that utter them. Men come in batches to the king and solicit him for
gifts. Being, how-ever, the protector of the general treasury, he cannot
make gifts unto even the most deserving. If he makes gifts, the treasury
becomes exhausted. If he does not, disappointed solicitors look upon him
with hostile eyes. He becomes vexed and as the result of this,
misanthropical

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

feelings soon invade his mind. If many wise and heroic and wealthy men
reside together, the king's mind begins to be filled with distrust in
consequence. Even when there is no cause of fear, the king entertains
fear of those that always wait upon and worship him. Those I have
mentioned O king, also find fault with him. Behold, in what way the
king's fears may arise from even them! Then again all men are kings in
their own houses. All men, again, in their own houses are house-holders.
Like kings, O Janaka, all men in their own houses chastise and reward.
Like kings others also have sons and spouses and their own selves and
treasuries and friends and stores. In these respects the king is not
different from other men.--The country is ruined,--the city is consumed
by fire,--the foremost of elephants is dead,--at all this the king
yields to grief like others, little regarding that these impressions are
all due to ignorance and error. The king is seldom freed from mental
griefs caused by desire and aversion and fear. He is generally afflicted
also by headaches and diverse diseases of the kind. The king is
afflicted (like others) by all couples of opposites (as pleasure and
pain, etc). He is alarmed at everything. Indeed, full of foes and
impediments as kingdom is, the king, while he enjoys it, passes nights
of sleeplessness. Sovereignty, therefore, is blessed with an exceedingly
small share of happiness. The misery with which it is endued is very
great. It is as unsubstantial as burning flames fed by straw or the
bubbles of froth seen on the surface of water. Who is there that would
like to obtain sovereignty, or having acquired sovereignty can hope to
win tranquillity? Thou regardest this kingdom and this palace to be
thine. Thou thinkest also this army, this treasury, and these
counsellers to belong to thee. Whose, however, in reality are they, and
whose are they not? Allies, ministers, capital, provinces, punishment,
treasury, and the king, these seven which constitute the limbs of a
kingdom exist, depending upon one another, like three sticks standing
with one another's support. The merits of each are set off by the merits
of the others. Which of them can be said to be superior to the rest? At
those times those particular ones are regarded as distinguished above
the rest when some important end is served through their agency.
Superiority, for the time being, is said to attach to that one whose
efficacy is thus seen. The seven limbs already mentioned, O best of
kings, and the three others, forming an aggregate of ten, supporting one
another, are said to enjoy the kingdom like the king himself. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120.md) That king who is endued with great
energy and who is firmly attached to Kshatriya practices, should be
satisfied with only a tenth part of the produce of the subject's field.
Other kings are seen to be satisfied with less than a

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

tenth part of such produce. There is no one who owns the kingly office
without some one else owning it in the world, and there is no kingdom
without a king. <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) If there be no
kingdom, there can be no righteousness, and if there be no
righteousness, whence can Emancipation arise? Whatever merit is most
sacred and the highest, belongs to kings and kingdoms. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122.md) By ruling a kingdom well, a king earns
the merit that attaches to a Horse-sacrifice with the whole Earth given
away as Dakshina. But how many kings are there that rule their kingdoms
well? O ruler of Mithila, I can mention hundreds and thousands of faults
like these that attach to kings and kingdoms. Then, again, when I have
no real connection with even my body, how then can I be said to have any
contact with the bodies of others? Thou canst not charge me with having
endeavoured to bring about an intermixture of castes. Hast thou heard
the religion of Emancipation in its entirety from the lips of
Panchasikha together with its means, its methods, its practices, and its
conclusion? <span id="fr_123"></span>[3](#fn_123.md) If thou hast prevailed
over all thy bonds and freed thyself from all attachments, may I ask
thee, O king, who thou preservest thy connections still with this
umbrella and these other appendages of royalty? I think that thou hast
not listened to the scriptures, or, thou hast listened to them without
any advantage, or, perhaps, thou hast listened to some other treatises
looking like the scriptures. It seems that thou art possessed only of
worldly knowledge, and that like an ordinary man of the world thou art
bound by the bonds of touch and spouses and mansions and the like. If it
be true that thou Met been emancipated from all bonds, what harm have I
done thee by entering thy person with only my Intellect? With Yatis,
among all orders of men, the custom is to dwell in uninhabited or
deserted abodes. What harm then have I done to whom by entering thy
understanding which is truly of real knowledge? I have not touched thee,
O king, with my hands, of arms, or feet, or thighs, O sinless one, or
with any other part of the body. Thou art born in a high race. Thou hast
modesty. Thou hast foresight. Whether the act has been good or bad, my
entrance into thy body has been a private one, concerning us two only.
Was it not improper for thee to publish that private act before all thy
court? These Brahmanas are all worthy of respect. They are foremost of
preceptors. Thou also art entitled to their respect, being their king.
Doing them reverence, thou art entitled to receive reverence from them.
Reflecting on all this, it was not proper for thee to

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

proclaim before these foremost of men the fact of this congress between
two persons of opposite sexes, if, indeed, thou art really acquainted
with the rules of propriety in respect of speech. O king of Mithila, I
am staying in thee without touching thee at all even like a drop of
water on a lotus leaf that stays on it without drenching it in the
least. If, notwithstanding instructions of Panchasikha of the mendicant
order, thy knowledge has become abstracted from the sensual objects to
which it relates? Thou hast, it is plain, fallen off from the domestic
mode of life but thou hast not yet attained to Emancipation that is so
difficult to arrive at. Thou stayest between the two, pretending that
thou hast reached the goal of Emancipation. The contact of one that is
emancipated with another that has been so, or Purusha with Prakriti,
cannot lead to an intermingling of the kind thou dreariest. Only those
that regard the soul to be identical with the body, and that think the
several orders and modes of life to be really different from one
another, are open to the error of supposing an intermingling to be
possible. My body is different from thine. But my soul is not different
from thy soul. When I am able to realise this, I have not the slightest
doubt that my understanding is really not staying in thine though I have
entered into thee by Yoga. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) A pot
is borne in the hand. In the pot is milk. On the milk is a fly. Though
the hand and pot, the pot and milk, and the milk and the fly, exist
together, yet are they all distinct from each other. The pot does not
partake the nature of the milk. Nor does the milk partake the nature of
the fly. The condition of each is [dependent](errata.htm#163.md) on itself,
and can never be altered by the condition of that other with which it
may temporarily exist. After this manner, colour and practices, though
they may exist together with and in a person that is emancipate, do not
really attach to him. How then can an intermingling of orders be
possible in consequence of this union of myself with thee? Then, again,
I am not superior to thee in colour. Nor am I a Vaisya, nor a Sudra. I
am, O king, of the same order with the, borne of a pure race. There was
a royal sage of the name of Pradhana. It is evident that thou hast heard
of him. I am born in his race, and my name is Sulabha. In the sacrifices
performed by my ancestors, the foremost of the gods, *viz*., Indra, used
to come, accompanied by Drona and Satasringa, and Chakradwara (and other
presiding geniuses of the great mountains). Born in such a race, it was
found that no husband could be obtained for me that would be fit for me.
Instructed then in the religion of Emancipation, I wander over the Earth
alone, observant of the practices of asceticism. I practise no hypocrisy
in the matter of the life of Renunciation. I am not a thief that
appropriates what belongs to others. I am not a confuser of the
practices belonging to the different orders. I am firm in the practices
that belong to that mode of life to which I properly belong. I am firm
and steady in my vows. I

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

never utter any word without reflecting on its propriety. I did not come
to thee, without having deliberated properly, O monarch! Having heard
that thy understanding has been purified by the religion of
Emancipation, I came here from desire of some benefit. Indeed, it was
for enquiring of thee about Emancipation that I had come. I do not say
it for glorifying myself and humiliating my opponents. But I say it,
impelled by sincerity only. What I say is, he that is emancipated never
indulges in that intellectual gladiatorship which is implied by a
dialectical disputation for the sake of victory. He, on the other hand,
is really emancipate who devotes himself to Brahma, that sole seat of
tranquillity. <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125.md) As a person of the
mendicant order resides for only one night in an empty house (and leaves
it the next morning), even after the same manner I shall reside for this
one night in thy person (which, as I have already said, is like an empty
chamber, being destitute of knowledge). Thou hast honoured me with both
speech and other offers that are due from a host to a guest. Having
slept this one night in thy person, O ruler of Mithila, which is as it
were my own chamber now, tomorrow I shall depart.

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words fraught with excellent sense
and with reason, king Janaka failed to return any answer
thereto.'" <span id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[57:1](m12c020.htm#fr_92.md) *Sanchodayishyanti*
implies questioned. Here it means questioning the king internally or by
Yoga power.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[58:1](m12c020.htm#fr_93.md) *Utsmayan* is
explained by the Commentators as 'priding himself upon his own
invincibleness.' *Ayaya bhavam* implies her determination to make the
king dumb. *Visesayan* is *abhibhavan*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[58:2](m12c020.htm#fr_94.md) *Sammantum* is
explained by the Commentator as equivalent to *samyak jnatum*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[58:3](m12c020.htm#fr_95.md) It is difficult to say
in what sense the word *vaiseshikam* is used here. There is a particular
system of philosophy called Vaiseshika or Kanada; the system believed to
have been originally promulgated by a Rishi of the name of Kanada. That
system has close resemblance to the atomic theory of European
philosophers. It has many points of striking resemblance with Kapila's
system or *Sankhya*. Then, again, some of the original principles, as
enunciated in the *Sankhya* system, are called by the name of *Visesha*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[58:4](m12c020.htm#fr_96.md) The mention of *Vidhi*
indicated, as the commentator explains, *Karmakanda*. The value of
*Karma* in the path of Emancipation is to purify the Soul.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[59:1](m12c020.htm#fr_97.md) K. P. Singha wrongly
translates this verse.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[59:2](m12c020.htm#fr_98.md) There is equal reason
in taking up etc., implies that the bearing of the sceptre is only a
mode of life like that of holders of the triple-stick. Both the king and
the *Sannyasin* are free to acquire knowledge and both, therefore, may
attain to Emancipation notwithstanding their respective emblems. In the
emblems themselves there is no efficacy or disqualification.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[59:3](m12c020.htm#fr_99.md) The object of this
verse is to show that all persons, led by interest, become attached to
particular things. The littleness or greatness of those things cannot
aid or bar people's way to Emancipation. 'I may be a king, says Janaka,
and thou mayst be a mendicant. Neither thy mendicancy nor my royalty can
aid or obstruct our Emancipation. Both of us, by Knowledge, can achieve
what we wish, notwithstanding our outward surroundings.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[60:1](m12c020.htm#fr_100.md) Hence, by changing
my royal life for that of a bearer of the triple-stick I can gain
nothing.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[61:1](m12c020.htm#fr_101.md) *Yukte* in the first
line means in the *Yogin*. The Bombay reading *Tridandanke* is a mistake
for *Tridandakam*. The Bombay text reads *na muktasyasti gopana*,
meaning that 'there is no relief for one that has fallen down after
having arisen in Yoga.' The Bengal text reads *vimuktasya*. I adopt the
Bengal reading.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[61:2](m12c020.htm#fr_102.md) What the king says
is that he, the king, had made no assignation with the lady is
consequence of which she could be justified in entering his body. The
word *Sannikarsha* here means *sanketa*. Both the vernacular translators
render this word wrongly.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[62:1](m12c020.htm#fr_103.md) These faults and
merits are set forth in the verses that follow.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[63:1](m12c020.htm#fr_104.md) *Saukshmyam*, is
literally minuteness. It means ambiguity here. I have rendered verse 81
very closely to give the reader an idea of the extreme terseness of
these verses. For bringing out the meaning of the verse, the following
illustration may serve. A sentence is composed containing some words
each of which is employed in diverse senses, as the well-known verse of
Parasara which has been interpreted to sanction the remarriage of Hindu
widows. Here, the object indicated by the words used are varied.
Definite knowledge of the meaning of each word is arrived at by means of
distinctions, *i.e.*, by distinguishing each meaning from every other.
In such cases, the understanding before arriving at the definite
meaning, rests in succession upon diverse points, now upon one, now upon
another. Indeed, the true meaning is to be arrived at in such cases by a
process of elimination. When such processes become necessary and or
seizing the sense of any sentence, the fault is said to be the fault of
minuteness or ambiguity.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[63:2](m12c020.htm#fr_105.md) To take the same
example; first take the well-known words of Parasara as really
sanctioning the remarriage of widows. Several words in the verse would
point to this meaning, several others would not. Weighing probabilities
and reasons, let the meaning be tentatively adopted that second husbands
are sanctioned by the Rishi for the Hindu widow. This is Sankhya.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[63:3](m12c020.htm#fr_106.md) Having tentatively
adopted the meaning the second husbands are sanctioned by the verse
referred to, the conclusion should be either its acceptance or
rejection. By seeing the incompatibility of the tentative meaning with
other settled conclusions in respect of other texts or other writers,
the tentative meaning is capable of being rejected, and the final
conclusion arrived at, to the effect, that the second husband is to be
taken only according to the *Niyoga-vidhi* and not by marriage.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[64:1](m12c020.htm#fr_107.md) By *prayojanam* is
meant the conduct one pursues for gratifying one's wish to acquire or
avoid any object. Wish, in respect of either acquisition or avoidance,
if ungratified, becomes a source of pain. The section or conduct that
one adopts for removing that pain is called *Prayojanam*. In the
Gautama-sutras it is said that *yamarthamadhikritya pravartate, tat
prayojanam*. The two definitions are identical.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[64:2](m12c020.htm#fr_108.md) By occurrence of
these five characteristics together is meant that when these are
properly attended to by a speaker or writer, only then can his sentence
be said to be complete and intelligible. In Nyaya philosophy, the five
requisites are *Pratijna*, *Hetu*, *Udaharana*, *Upanaya*, and
*Nigamana*. In the Mimansa philosophy, the five requisites have been
named differently. *Vishaya*, *Samsaya*, *Purvapaksha*, *Uttara*, and
*Nirnaya*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[64:3](m12c020.htm#fr_109.md) These
characteristics, the commentator points out, though numbering sixteen,
include the four and twenty mentioned by Bhojadeva in his Rhetoric
called *Saraswati-kanthabharana*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[64:4](m12c020.htm#fr_110.md) *Parartham* means,
as the commentator explains, of excellent sense. It does not mean
*Paraprayojanam* as wrongly rendered by the Burdwan translator. The
latter's version of the text is thoroughly unmeaning.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[65:1](m12c020.htm#fr_111.md) What Sulabha says
here is this: the great primal elements are the same whether they make
up this body or that other body; and then it is the same Chit that
pervades every combination of the great elements. The object of this
observation is to show that Janaka should not have asked these questions
about Sulabha, he and she being essentially the same person. To regard
the two as different would indicate obscuration of vision.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[65:2](m12c020.htm#fr_112.md) What is meant by
this is that when creatures are said to possess more of sattwa and less
of sattwa, sattwa seems to be a principle that is existent in the
constitutions of creatures.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[65:3](m12c020.htm#fr_113.md) By the word *Kala*
is meant the 16 principles beginning with Prana. What is intended to be
said is that as long as the principle of Desire exists, rebirth becomes
possible. The universe, therefore, rests on the principle of Desire or
*Vasana*. The senses, etc. all arise from this principle of *Vasana*.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[66:1](m12c020.htm#fr_114.md) By *Vidhi* is meant
that righteousness and its reverse which constitute the seed of Desire.
By *Sukra* is meant that which helps that seed to grow or put forth its
rudiments. By *Vala* is meant the exertion that one makes for gratifying
one's desire.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[67:1](m12c020.htm#fr_115.md) The fact then of
continual change of particles in the body was
[well-known](errata.htm#161.md) to the Hindu sages. This discovery is not
new of modern physiology. Elsewhere it has been shown that Harvey's
great discovery about the circulation of the blood was not unknown to
the Rishis.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[67:2](m12c020.htm#fr_116.md) The instance
mentioned for illustrating the change of corporal particles is certainly
a very happy one. The flame of a burning lamp, though perfectly steady
(as in a breezeless spot), is really the result of the successive
combustion of particles of oil and the successive extinguishment of such
combustion Both this and the previous verse have been rendered
inaccurately by K.P. Singha.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[67:3](m12c020.htm#fr_117.md) Hence the questions
of Janaka, asking as to who the lady was or whose, were futile.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[67:4](m12c020.htm#fr_118.md) The seven ways are
as follows: Righteousness and Wealth and Pleasure independently and
distinct from one another count three, then the first and second, the
first and third, and second and third, count three and lastly, all three
existing together. In all acts, one or other of these seven may be
found. The first and second exist in all acts whose result is the
righteous acquisition of wealth; the first and third exist in the
procreation of children in lawful wedlock; the second and third in
ordinary acts of worldly men. Of acts in which all three combine, the
rearing of children may be noticed, for it is at once a duty, a source
of wealth, and a pleasure. K.P. Singha omits all reference to these
seven ways, while the Burdwan translator, misunderstanding the gloss,
makes utter nonsense of it.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[68:1](m12c020.htm#fr_119.md) The king may order
some men to do [some things](errata.htm#162.md). These men, after obeying
those orders, return to him to report the fact of what they have
accomplished. The king is obliged to grant them interviews for listening
to them.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[69:1](m12c020.htm#fr_120.md) The commentator
explains that the three others are Vriddhi, Kshaya, and Sthana, all of
which arise from policy. Some of the seven limbs are inanimate, such as
the treasury. But it is said that the treasury supports the ministers,
and the ministers support the treasury.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[70:1](m12c020.htm#fr_121.md) Hence, when every
kingdom has a king, and kings too are many, no one should indulge in
pride at the thought of his being a king.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[70:2](m12c020.htm#fr_122.md) The object of this
verse is to show that as Janaka rules his kingdom without being attached
to it, he cannot lay claim to the merit that belongs to kings.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[70:3](m12c020.htm#fr_123.md) *Upaya* or means
implies here the attitude of sitting (as in Yoga). *Upanishad* or method
implies *sravana* and *manana* *i.e.*, listening and thinking.
*Upasanga* or practices imply the several limbs of *Dhyana*, etc.
*Nischaya* or conclusion has reference to Brahma.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[71:1](m12c020.htm#fr_124.md) I expand this verse
fully.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[72:1](m12c020.htm#fr_125.md) The *na* in the
second line is connected with *Vyayachcchate*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[72:2](m12c020.htm#fr_126.md) The object of this
verse is to show that the words uttered by Sulabha were unanswerable. To
attain to Emancipation one must practise a life of Renunciation instead
of continuing in the domestic mode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCXXII](m12c021.md)
