[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c047) 
[Next](m12c049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

### SECTION CCCXLIX

Janamejaya said, "The illustrious Hari becomes gracious unto them that
are devoted to him with their whole souls. He accepts also all worship
that is offered to Him agreeably to the ordinance. Of those persons that
have burnt off their fuel, <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313) and
that are divested of both merit and demerit, that have attained the
Knowledge as handed down from preceptor to preceptor--such persons
always attain to that end which is called the fourth, *viz*., the
essence of the Purushottama or Vasudeva, <span
id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314)--through the three others. Those
persons, however, that are devoted to Narayana with their whole souls at
once attain to the highest end <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315)
Without doubt, the religion of devotion seems to be superior (to that of
Knowledge) and is very dear to Narayana. These, without going through
the three successive stages (of Aniruddha, Pradyumna, and Sankarshana),
at once attain to the immutable Hari. The end that is attained by
Brahmanas, who, attending to due observances, study the Vedas with the
Upanishads according to the rules laid down for regulating such study,
and by those that adopt the religion of Yatis, is inferior, I think, to
that attained by persons devoted to Hari with their whole souls. Who
first promulgated this religion of Devotion? Was it some deity or some
Rishi that declared it? What are the practices of those that are said to
be devoted with their whole souls? When did those practices begin? I
have doubts on these topics. Do thou remove those doubts. Great is nay
curiosity to hear thee explain the several points." <span
id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316)

Vaisampayana said, "When the diverse divisions of the Pandava and the
Kuru armies were drawn up in the array for the battle and when Arjuna
became cheerless, the holy one himself explained the question of what is
the end and what is not the end attained by persons of different
characters. I have before this recited to thee the words of the holy
one. The

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

religion preached by the holy one on that occasion is difficult of
comprehension. Men of uncleansed souls cannot apprehend it at all.
Having created this religion in days of yore, *viz*., in the Krita age,
in perfect [consonance](errata.htm#229) with the Samans, it is borne, O
king, by the Supreme Lord, *viz*., Narayana, himself. This very topic
was raised by the highly blessed Partha to Narada (for the
[latter's](errata.htm#230) discourse) in the midst of the Rishis and in
the presence of Krishna and Bhishma. My preceptor, *viz*., the
Island-born Krishna heard what Narada said. Receiving it from the
celestial Rishis, O best of kings, my preceptor imparted it to me in
exactly the same way in which he had obtained it from the celestial
Rishi. I shall now recite it to thee, O monarch, in the same way as it
has been received from Narada. Listen, therefore, to me. In that Kalpa
when Brahma the Creator, O king, took his birth in the mind of Narayana
and issued from the latter's mouth, Narayana himself performed, O
Bharata, his Daiva and Paitra rites in accordance with this religion.
Those Rishis that subsist upon the froth of water then obtained it from
Narayana. From the froth-eating Rishis, this religion was obtained by
those Rishis that go by the name of Vaikanasas. From the Vaikanasas,
Shoma got it. [Afterwards](errata.htm#231), it disappeared from the
universe. After the second birth of Brahma, *viz*., when he sprang from
the eyes of Narayana, O king, the Grandsire (that is. Brahma) then
received this religion from Shoma. Having received it thus, Brahma
imparted this religion, which has Narayana for its soul, unto Rudra. In
the Krita age of that ancient Kalpa, Rudra, devoted to Yoga, O monarch,
communicated it to all those Rishis that are known by the name of
Valikhilyas. Through the illusion of Narayana, it once more disappeared
from the universe. In the third birth of Brahma, which was due to the
speech of Narayana, this religion once more sprang up, O king, from
Narayana himself. Then a Rishi of the name of Suparna obtained it from
that foremost of Beings. The Rishi Suparna used to recite this excellent
religion, this foremost of cults, three times during the day. In
consequence of this, it came to be called by the name of Trisauparna in
the world. This religion has been referred to in the Rigveda. The duties
it inculcates are exceedingly difficult of observance. From the Rishi
Suparna, this eternal religion was obtained, O foremost of men, by the
God of wind, that sustainer of the lives of all creatures in the
universe. The God of wind communicated it unto such Rishis as subsist
upon what remains of sacrificial offerings after feeding guests and
others. From those Rishis this excellent religion was obtained by the
Great Ocean. It once more disappeared from the universe and became
merged into Narayana. In the next birth of the high-souled Brahman when
he Sprang from the ear of Narayana, listen, O chief of men, to what
happened in that Kalpa. The illustrious Narayana, otherwise called Hari,
when he resolved upon Creation, thought of a Being who would be puissant
enough to create the universe. While thinking of this, a Being sprang
from his ears competent to create the universe. The Lord of all called
him by the name of Brahma. Addressing Brahma, the Supreme Narayana said
unto him,--Do thou,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O son, create all kinds of creatures from thy
mouth and feet. O thou of excellent vows, I shall do what will be
beneficial for thee, for I shall impart to thee both energy and strength
sufficient to render thee competent for this task. Do thou receive also
from me this excellent religion known by the name of Sattwata. Aided by
that religion do thou create the Krita age and ordain it duly. Thus
addressed, Brahma bowed his head unto the illustrious Hari, the god of
the gods and received from him that foremost of all cults with all its
mysteries and its abstract of details, together with the
Aranyakas,--*viz*., that cult, which sprang from the mouth of Narayana.
Narayana then instructed Brahma of immeasurable energy in that cult, and
addressing him, said,--Thou art the creator of the duties that are to be
observed in the respective Yugas. Having said this unto Brahma, Narayana
disappeared and proceeded to that spot which is beyond the reach of
Tamas, where the Unmanifest resides, and which is known by the men of
acts without desire of fruits. After this, the boon-giving Brahma, the
Grandsire of the worlds, created the different worlds with their mobile
and immobile creatures. The age that first commenced was highly
auspicious and came to be called by the name of Krita. In that age, the
religion of Sattwa existed, pervading the entire universe. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_317) With the aid of that primeval religion
of righteousness, Brahma, the Creator of all the worlds, worshipped the
Lord of all the deities, *viz*., the puissant Narayana, otherwise called
Hari. Then for the spread of that religion and desirous of benefiting
the worlds, Brahman instructed that Manu who is known by the name of
Swarochish in that cult. Swarochish-Manu, that Lord of all the worlds,
that foremost of all persons endued with puissance, then cheerfully
imparted the knowledge of that cult to his own son, O king, who was
known by the name of Sankhapada. The son of Manu, *viz*., Sankhapada,
communicated the knowledge of that to his own son Suvarnabha who was the
Regent of the cardinal and subsidiary points of the compass. When, upon
the expiration of the Kriti Yuga, the Treta came, that cult once more
disappeared from the world. In a subsequent birth of Brahman, O best of
kings, *viz*., that which was derived from the nose of Narayana. O
Bharata, the illustrious and puissant Narayana or Hari with eyes like
lotus petals, himself sang this religion in the presence of Brahma. Then
the son of Brahma, created by a fiat of his will, *viz*., Sanatkumara,
studied this cult. From Sanatkumara, the Prajapati Virana, in the
beginning of the Krita age, O tiger among Kurus, obtained this cult.
Virana having studied it in this way, taught it to the ascetic Raivya.
Raivya, in his turn, imparted it to his son of pure soul, good vows, and
great intelligence, *viz*., Kukshi, that righteous Regent of the
cardinal and subsidiary points of the compass. After this, that cult,
born of the mouth of Narayana, once more disappeared from the world. In
the next birth of Brahma, *viz*., that which he was derived from an egg
which sprang from Hari, this cult once more

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

issued from the mouth of Narayana. It was received by Brahma, O king,
and practised duly in all its details by him. Brahma then communicated
it, O monarch, to those Rishis that are known by the name of Varhishada.
From the Varhishadas it was obtained by a Brahmana well-versed in the
Sama-Veda, and known by the name of Jeshthya. And
[because](errata.htm#232) he was well-versed with the Samans, therefore
was he known also by the name of Jeshthya-Samavrata Hari. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_318) From the Brahmana known by the name of
Jeshthya, this cult was obtained by a king of the name of Avikampana.
After this, that cult, derived from the puissant Hari, once more
disappeared from the world. During the seventh birth of Brahma due to
the lotus, O king, that sprang from the navel of Narayana, this cult was
once more declared by Narayana himself, unto the Grandsire of pure soul,
the Creator of all the worlds, in the beginning of this Kalpa. The
Grandsire gave it in days of yore to Daksha (one of his sons created by
a fiat of his will). Daksha, in his turn, imparted it to the eldest of
all the sons of his daughters, O monarch, *viz*., Aditya who is senior
in age to Savitri. From Aditya, Vivaswat obtained it. In the beginning
of the Treta Yuga, Vivaswat imparted the knowledge of this cult to Manu.
Manu, for the protection and support of all the worlds, then gave it to
his son Ikshaku. <span id="fr_319"></span>[2](#fn_319) Promulgated by
Ikshaku, that cult over-spreads the whole world. When the universal
destruction comes, it will once more return to Narayana and be merged in
Him. The religion which is followed and practised by the Yatis, has, O
best of kings, been narrated to thee before this in the Hari Gita, with
all its ordinances in brief. The celestial Rishi Narada got it from that
Lord of universe, *viz*., Narayana himself, O king, with all its
mysteries and abstract of details. Thus, O monarch, this foremost of
cults is primeval and eternal. Incapable of being comprehended with ease
and exceedingly difficult of being practised, it is always upheld by
persons wedded to the attribute of Sattwa. It is by means of acts that
are well-performed and accomplished with a full knowledge of duties and
in which there is nothing of injury to any creature,--that Hari the
Supreme Lord becomes gratified. Some persons adore Narayana as possessed
of only one form, *viz*., that of Aniruddha. Some adore Him as endued
with two forms, *viz*., that of Aniruddha and Pradyumna. Some adore Him
as having three forms, *viz*., Aniruddha, Pradyumna, and Sankarshana. A
fourth class adore him as consisting of four forms, *viz*., Aniruddha,
Pradyumna, Sankarshana, and Vasudeva. Hari is Himself the Kshetrajna
(Soul). He is without parts (being ever full). He is the Jiva in all
creatures, transcending the five primal elements. He is the Mind, O
monarch, that directs and controls the five senses. Endued with the
highest intelligence. He is the Ordainer of the universe, and the
Creator thereof. He is both active and inactive. He is both Cause and
the Effect. He is the one immutable Purusha, who

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

sports as He likes, O king. Thus have I recited to thee the religion of
desireless Devotees, O best of kings, incapable of being comprehended by
persons of uncleansed souls but this I acquired through the grace of my
preceptor. Persons are very rare, O king, that are devoted to Narayana
with whole souls. If, O son of Kuru's race the world had been full of
such persons, that are full of universal compassion, that are endued
with knowledge of the soul, and that are always employed in doing good
to others, then the Krita age would have set in. All men would have
betaken themselves to the accomplishment of acts without desire of
fruit. It was even in this way, O monarch, that, that foremost of
regenerate persons, (*viz*., the illustrious Vyasa), my preceptor, fully
conversant with all duties, discoursed unto king Yudhishthira the just
on this religion of Devotion, in the presence of many Rishis and in the
hearing of Krishna and Bhishma. He had obtained it from the celestial
Rishi Narada endued with wealth of penances. Those persons that are
devoted to Narayana with their whole souls and are desireless succeed in
attaining to the region of that highest of deities, identical with
Brahma, pure in complexion, possessed of the effulgence of the moon and
endued with immutability.

Janamejaya said, "I see that those regenerate persons whose souls have
been awakened practise diverse kinds of duties. Why is it that other
Brahmanas instead of practising those duties betake themselves to the
observance of other kinds of vows and rites?"

Vaisampayana said, "Three kinds of disposition, O monarch, have been
created in respect of all embodied creatures, *viz*., that which relates
to the attribute of Sattwa, that which relates to the attribute of
Rajas, and lastly that which relates to the attribute of Tamas, O
Bharata. As regards embodied creatures, O perpetuator of Kuru's race,
that person is the foremost who is wedded to the attribute of Sattwa,
for, O tiger among men, it is certain that he will attain to
Emancipation. It is with the aid of this very attribute of Sattwa that
one endued therewith succeeds in understanding the person that is
conversant with Brahma. As regards Emancipation, it is entirely
dependent upon Narayana. Hence it is that persons striving after
Emancipation are regarded as made up of the attribute of Sattwa. By
thinking of Purushottama the foremost of Beings, the man that is devoted
with his whole soul to Narayana, acquires great wisdom. Those persons
that are endued with wisdom, that have betaken themselves to the
practices of Yatis and the religion of Emancipation,--those persons of
quenched thirst, always find that Hari favours them with the fruition of
their desire. <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_320) That man subject to
birth (and death) upon whom Hari casts a kind eye should be known as
endued with the attribute of Sattwa and devoted to the acquisition of
Emancipation. The religion followed by a person that is devoted with his
whole soul to

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Narayana is regarded as similar or equal in
merit to the system of the Sankhyas. By adopting that religion one
attains to the highest end and attains to Emancipation which has
Narayana for its soul. That person upon whom Narayana looks with
compassion succeeds in becoming awakened. <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_321) No one, O king, can become awakened
through his own wishes. That nature which partakes of both Rajas and
Tamas is said to be mixed. Hari never casts a kind eye upon the person
subject to birth (and death) that is endued with such a mixed nature and
that has, on that account, the principle of Pravritti in him. Only
Brahma, the Grandsire of the worlds, looks upon the person that is
subject to birth and death because of his mind being overwhelmed with
the two inferior attributes of Rajas and Tamas. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_322) Without doubt, the deities and the
Rishis are wedded to the attributes of Sattwa, O best of kings. But then
they that are divested of that attribute in its subtile form are always
regarded to be of mutable nature". <span id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_323)

Janamejaya said, "How can one that is fraught with the principle of
change succeed in attaining to that Purushottama (the foremost of
Purusha)? Do tell me all this, which is, no doubt, known to thee. Do
thou discourse to me also of Pravritti in due order."

Vaisampayana said, "That which is the [twenty-fifth](errata.htm#233) (in
the enumeration of topics as made in the Sankhya system) *viz*., when it
becomes able to abstain entirely from acts, succeeds in attaining to the
Purushottama which is exceedingly subtile, which is invested with the
attribute of Sattwa (in its subtile form), and which is fraught with the
essences symbolised by three letters of the alphabet (*viz*., A, U, and
M). The Sankhya system, the Aranyaka-Veda, and the Pancharatra
scriptures, are all one and the same and form parts of one whole. Even
this is the religion of those that are devoted with their whole souls to
Narayana, the religion that has Narayana for its essence. <span
id="fr_324"></span>[4](#fn_324) As waves of the ocean, rising from the
ocean, rush away from it only to return to it in the end, even so
diverse kinds of [knowledge](errata.htm#234), springing from Narayana,
return to Narayana in the end. I have thus explained to thee, O son of
Kuru's race, what

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

the religion of Sattwa is. If thou beest competent for it, O Bharata, do
thou practise that religion duly. Even thus did the highly-blessed
Narada explain to my preceptor,--the Island-born Krishna--the eternal
and immutable course, called Ekanta, (ending in One) followed by the
Whites <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_325) as also by the yellow-robed
Yatis. Vyasa gratified with Dharma's son Yudhishthira, imparted this
religion to king Yudhishthira the just who was possessed of great
intelligence. Derived from my preceptor I have also communicated it to
thee! O best of kings, this religion is for these reasons, exceedingly
difficult of practice. Others, hearing it, become as much confounded as
thou hast suffered thyself to be. It is Krishna who is the protector of
the universe and its beguiler. It is He who is the destroyer and the
cause, O monarch."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_313"></span>[187:1](m12c048.htm#fr_313) 'Those who have
burnt of their fuel' means men that have freed themselves from desire.
*Param paryyagati* means knowledge as handed down from preceptor to
preceptor.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[187:2](m12c048.htm#fr_314) Vasudeva is called
the Fourth because below Him is Sankarshana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[187:3](m12c048.htm#fr_315) What is stated in
these two verses is the difference between the ends of those that rely
on Knowledge, and those that are devoted to Narayana with their whole
souls. The former attain to Vasudeva, it is true, but then they have to
pass gradually through the three others one after another, *viz*.,
Aniruddha, Pradyumna, and Sankarshana. The latter, however, at once
attain to Vasudeva. It is curious to note how the Burdwan translator,
with the commentary before him and from which he quotes, misunderstands
the second verse completely. K. P. Singha's version also is not clear
though not incorrect.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[187:4](m12c048.htm#fr_316) The word *Ekantin*
is explained by the commentator to mean a *nishkama* worshipper, *i.e.*,
one who adores the Supreme Deity without the expectation of any fruit
whatever. There can be no error, however in rendering it as one devoted
with his whole soul. Such devotion verily implies *nishkama* worship.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[189:1](m12c048.htm#fr_317) *i.e.*, all
creatures were righteous and compassionate. Of evil, there was nothing
in that age.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[190:1](m12c048.htm#fr_318) One of the foremost
of Samans is called by the name of Jeshthya. One conversant with the
Jeshthya Saman would have this name.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[190:2](m12c048.htm#fr_319) Ikshaku was the
progenitor of the solar race of kings.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[191:1](m12c048.htm#fr_320) This desire, of
course, relates to the acquisition of Emancipation. *Yoga-kshema*
literally means the acquisition of what is desired and the protection of
what has been acquired.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[192:1](m12c048.htm#fr_321) *Buddha* or
*Pratibuddha* literally implies *awakened*. The sense, of course, is
that such a person has succeeded in casting off all impurities and
desires. He has, as it were been awakened from the slumber of ignorance
or darkness.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[192:2](m12c048.htm#fr_322) Those that follow
the religion of *Pravritti* acquire heaven, etc., through their merits.
Merits however, are exhaustible. They have, therefore, to fall down from
heaven. The Creator Brahma casts his eye on (*illegible*--*JBH*) that
follow *Pravritti*. The religion of *Nivritti*, however, leads to
Emancipation. It is Narayana that looks upon men that betake to
*Nivritti*.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[192:3](m12c048.htm#fr_323) What is stated here
is this the deities and Rishis are certainly endued with Sattwa. But
then that Sattwa is of a great form. Hence, they cannot attain to
Emancipation. It is only that Sattwa which is of subtile form that leads
to Emancipation. The deities, without being able to attain to
Emancipation, remain in a state that is mutable or fraught with change.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[192:4](m12c048.htm#fr_324) That is, the
practices which constitute the religion of the *Ekantins* are not really
different for those laid down in the scriptures adverted to above.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[193:1](m12c048.htm#fr_325) Who are the Whites
referred to in this place? The commentator explains that the word has
reference to persons leading the domestic mode of life. Yatis wear robes
that are coloured yellow or yellowish red. [Households](errata.htm#235),
however, use cloth that is white. The word may also mean the inhabitants
of White Island.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCL](m12c049)
