[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c005) 
[Next](m12c007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCVII

'"Janaka said, Thou hast, O foremost of Rishis, said that Unity is the
attribute of that which is Akshara (Indestructible) and variety or
multiplicity is the attribute of what is known as Kshara (Destructible).
I have not, however, clearly understood the nature of these two. Doubts
are still lurking in my mind. Ignorant men look upon the Soul as endued
with the incident of multiplicity. They, however that are possessed of
knowledge and wisdom regard the Soul to be one and the same. I how-ever,
have a very dull understanding. I am, therefore, unable to comprehend

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

how all this can happen. The causes also that thou hast assigned for the
unity and the multiplicity of Akshara and Kshara I have almost forgotten
in consequence of the restlessness of my understanding. I therefore,
desire to hear thee once more discourse to me on those same incidents of
unity and multiplicity, on him who is knowing, on what is destitute of
knowledge, on Jiva-soul, Knowledge, Ignorance. Akshara, Kshara, and on
the Sankhya and the Yoga systems, in detail and separately and agreeable
to the truth.

"'Vasishtha said, I shall tell thee what thou askest! Listen however, to
me, O monarch, as I expound to thee the practices of Yoga separately.
Contemplation, which constitutes an obligatory practices with Yogins, is
their highest puissance <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34). Those
conversant with Yoga say that Contemplation is of two kinds. One is the
concentration of the mind, and the other is called *Pranayama*
(regulation of breath). Pranayama is said to be endued with substance;
while concentration of mind is unendued with it. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) Excepting the three times when a man
passes urine and stools and eats, one should devote the whole of his
time to contemplation. With-drawing the senses from their objects by the
aid of the mind, one possessed of intelligence, having made oneself
pure, should agreeably to the two and twenty modes of transmitting the
Prana breath, unite the Jiva-soul with That which transcends the four
and twentieth topic (called Ignorance or Prakriti) <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36) which is regarded by the wise as dwelling
in every part of the body and as transcending decay and destruction. It
is by means of those two and twenty methods that the Soul may always be
known, as heard by us. It is certain that this practice of Yoga is his
whose mind is never affected by evil passions. It is not any other
person's. Dissociated from all attachments, abstemious in diet, and
subduing all the senses, one should fix one's mind on the Soul, during
the first and the last part of the night, after having, O king of
Mithila, suspended the functions of the senses, quieted the mind by the
understanding, and assumed a posture as motionless as that of a block of
stone. When men of knowledge, conversant with the rules of Yoga, become
as fixed as a stake of wood, and as immovable as a mountain, then are
they said to be in Yoga. When one does not hear, and smell, and taste,
and see; when one is not conscious of any touch; when one's mind becomes
perfectly free from every purpose; when one is not conscious of any
thing, when one cherishes no thought; when one becomes like a piece of
wood, then is one called by the wise to be in perfect Yoga. At such a
time one shines like a lamp that burns in a place where there is no
wind; at such a time one becomes

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

freed even from one's subtile form, and perfectly united with Brahma.
When one attains to such progress, one has no longer to ascend or to
fall among intermediate beings. When persons like ourselves say that
there has been a complete identification of the Knower, the Known, and K
now-ledge, then is the Yogin said to behold the Supreme Soul. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) While in Yoga, the Supreme Soul displays
itself in the Yogin's heart like a blazing fire, or like the bright Sun,
or like the lightning's flame in the sky. That Supreme Soul which is
Unborn and which is the essence of nectar, that is seen by high-souled
Brahmanas endued with intelligence and wisdom and conversant with the
Vedas, is subtiler than what is subtile and greater than what is great.
That Soul, though dwelling in all creatures, is not seen by them. The
creator of the worlds, He is seen only by a person endued with wealth of
intelligence when aided by the lamp of the mind. He dwells on the other
share of thick Darkness and transcends him called Iswara. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) Persons conversant with the Vedas and
endued with omniscience call Him the dispeller of Darkness, stainless,
transcending Darkness, without attributes and endued therewith.

"'This is what is called the Yoga of Yogins. What else is the indication
of Yoga? By such practices do Yogins succeeded in beholding the Supreme
Soul that transcends destruction and decay. This much that I have told
thee in detail concerns about the science of Yoga. I shall now discourse
to thee of that Sankhya philosophy by which the Supreme Soul is seen
through the gradual destruction of errors. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39) The Sankhyas, whose system is built on
Prakriti, say that Prakriti, which is Unmanifest, is the foremost. From
Prakriti, they say, O monarch, the second principle called Mahat, is
produced. It is heard by us that from Mahat flows the third principle
called Consciousness. The Sankhyas blessed with sight of the Soul say
that from Consciousness flow the five subtile essence of sound, form,
touch, taste, and scent. All these eight they call by the name of
Prakriti. The modifications of these eight are sixteen in number. They
are the five gross essence of space, light, earth, water, and wind, and
the ten senses of action and of knowledge including the mind. Men of
wisdom devoted to the Sankhya path and conversant with all its
ordinances and dispensations regard these four and twenty topics as
embracing the whole range of Sankhya enquiry. That which is produced
becomes merged in the producing. Created by the Supreme Soul one after
another, these principles are destroyed in a reverse order. At every new
Creation, the Gunas start into existence in the lateral order (as stated
above), and (when Destruction comes) they merge, (each into its
progenitor) in a reverse order, like the waves of the ocean disappearing
in the ocean that gives them birth. O

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

best of kings, this is the manner in which the Creation and the
Destruction of Prakriti takes place. The Supreme Being is all that
remains when Universal Destruction takes place, and it is He that
assumes multifarious forms when Creation starts into life. This is even
so, O king, as ascertained by men of knowledge. It is Prakriti that
causes the Overpresiding Purusha to thus assume diversity and revert
back to unity. Prakriti also herself has the same indications. Only
fully conversant with the nature of the topics of enquiry knows that
Prakriti also assumes the same kind of diversity and unity, for when
Destruction comes she reverts into unity and when Creation flows she
assumes diversity of form. The Soul makes Prakriti, which contains the
principles of production or growth, to assume manifold forms. Prakriti
is called Kshetra (or soil). Transcending the four and twenty topics or
principles is the Soul which is great. It presides over that Prakriti or
Kshetra. Hence, O great king, the [foremost](errata.htm#142) of Yatis
say that the Soul is the Presider. Indeed, it has been heard by us that
in consequence of the Soul's presiding [over all](errata.htm#143)
Kshetras He is called the Presider. And because He knows that Unmanifest
Kshetra, He is, therefore, also called Kshetrajna (Knower of Kshetra).
And because also the Soul enters into Unmanifest Kshetra (*viz*., the
body), therefore he is called Purusha. Kshetra is something quite
different from Kshetrajna. Kshetra is Unmanifest. The Soul, which
transcends the four and twenty principles, is called the Knower.
Knowledge and the object known are different from each other. Knowledge,
again, has been said to be Unmanifest, while the object of knowledge is
the Soul which transcends the four and twenty principles. The Unmanifest
is called Kshetra. Sattwa (understanding), and also Iswara (the supreme
Lord), while Purusha, which is the twenty-fifth principle has nothing
superior to it and is not a principle (for it transcends all principles
and is only called a principle conventionally). This much O king, is an
account of the Sankhya philosophy. The Sankhyas called the cause of the
universe, and merging all the grosser principles into the Chit behold
the Supreme Soul. Rightly studying the four and twenty topics along with
Prakriti, and ascertaining their true nature, the Sankhyas succeed in
beholding That which transcends the four and twenty topics or
principles. <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) Jiva in reality is that
very Soul which transcends Prakriti and is beyond the four and twenty
topics. When he succeeds in knowing that Supreme Soul by dissociating
himself from Prakriti, he then becomes identifiable with the Supreme
Soul. I have now told thee every thing about the Sankhya System truly.
Those who are conversant with this philosophy succeed in attaining are
subject to error have direct cognisance of Brahma. They that succeed in
attaining to tranquillity. Indeed, as men whose understanding are
subject to error have direct cognisance of Brahma. They that succeed in
attaining to that state have

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

never to come back to this world after the dissolution of their bodies;
while as regards those that are said to be emancipate in this life,
puissance, and that indescribable felicity which attaches itself to
Samadhi, and immutability, become theirs, in consequence of their having
attained to the nature of the Indestructible. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) They who behold this universe as many
(instead of seeing it as one and uniform) are said to see incorrectly.
These men are blind to Brahma. O chastiser of foes, such persons have
repeatedly to come back into the world and assume bodies (in diverse
orders of Being). They who are conversant with all that has been said
above become possessed of omniscience, and accordingly when they pass
from this body no longer become subject to the control of any more
physical frames. All things, (or the entire universe), have been said to
be the result of the Unmanifest. The Soul, which is the twenty-fifth,
transcends all things. They who know the Soul have no fear of returning
to the world.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[21:1](m12c006.htm#fr_34) For enables them to
conquer Ignorance.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[21:2](m12c006.htm#fr_35) When *Pranayama* is
performed with the aid of *mantras* or *yapa*, it is said to be *saguna*
or *sagarbha* or endued with substance. Concentration of mind, however,
is made without the aid of such *yapa*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[21:3](m12c006.htm#fr_36) The two and twenty
*sanchodans* of *Preranas* are the two and twenty modes of transmitting
the *Prana* breath from the toe of the foot to the crown of the head.
That which transcends *Prakriti* is the Supreme Soul.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[22:1](m12c006.htm#fr_37) The reading I adopt is
*na-kathyate*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[22:2](m12c006.htm#fr_38) *Atmanah* is *Iswarat
parah*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[22:3](m12c006.htm#fr_39) *Parisankhyadarsanam*
is explained by the commentator thus: Parisankhyanam, is *parivarianam*,
*i.e.*, the gradual *pravilapam* of errors; Lena darsanam or
*sakshatkaram*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[23:1](m12c006.htm#fr_40) The commentator
explains that *nistattwah* means *nirgatam tattwam aparoksham yasmat*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[24:1](m12c006.htm#fr_41) *Param Aparam*, and
*Avyayam* are theirs in consequence of *Ajksharabhavatwa*. *Aparam*
means *satyakamatwa*, *satyasamkalpatwa*, etc.' *i.e.*, puissance.
*Param* is the indescribable felicity of *Samadhi*. The *Srutis* declare
that knower of Brahma becomes Brahma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCVIII](m12c007)
