[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c009) 
[Next](m12c011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to discourse to me
on that which is freed from duty and its reverse, which is freed from
every doubt, which transcends birth and death, as also virtue and sin,
which is auspiciousness, which is eternal fearlessness, which is Eternal
and Indestructible, and Immutable, which is always Pure, and which is
ever free from the toil of exertion.'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall in this connection recite to thee the old
narrative, O Bharata, of the discourse between Yajnavalkya and Janaka.
Once on a time the famous king Daivarati of Janaka's race, fully
conversant with the import of all questions, addressed this question to
Yajnavalkya, that foremost of Rishis.

"'Janaka said, 'O regenerate Rishi, how many kinds of senses are there?
How many kinds also are there of Prakriti? What is the Unmanifest and
highest Brahma? What is higher than Brahma? What is birth and what is
death? What are the limits of Age? It behoveth thee, O foremost of
Brahmanas, to discourse on all these topics unto me that am solicitous
of obtaining thy grace; I am ignorant while thou art an Ocean of
knowledge. Hence, I ask thee! Verily, I desire to hear thee discourse on
all these subjects!

"'Yajnavalkya said, Hear, O monarch, what I say in an answer to these
questions of thine, I shall impart to thee the high knowledge

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

which Yogins value, and especially that which is possessed by the
Sankhyas. Nothing is unknown to thee. Still thou askest me. One however,
that is questioned should answer. This is the eternal practice. Eight
principles have been called by the name of Prakriti, while sixteen have
been called modifications. Of Manifest, there are seven. These are the
views of those persons who are conversant with the science of Adhyatma.
The Unmanifest (or original Prakriti), Mahat, Consciousness, and the
five subtile elements of Earth, Wind, Space, Water, and Light,--these
eight are known by the name of Prakriti. Listen now to the enumeration
of those called modifications. They are the ear, the skin, the tongue,
and the nose; and sound, touch, form, taste, and scent, as also speech,
the two arms, the two feet, the lower duct (within the body), and the
organs of pleasure. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) Amongst these,
the ten beginning with sound, and having their origin in the five great
principles, <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57) are called *Visesha*.
The five senses of knowledge are called *Savisesha*, O ruler of Mithila.
Persons conversant with the Science of Adhyatma regard the mind as the
sixteenth. This is conformable to thy own views as also to those of
other learned men well acquainted with the truths about principles. From
the Unmanifest, O king, springs the Mahat-soul. The learned say this to
be the first creation relating to Pradhana (or Prakriti): From Mahat, O
king of men, is produced Consciousness. This has been called the second
creation having the Understanding for its essence. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[3](#fn_58) From Consciousness hath sprung the Mind
which is the essence of sound and the others that are the attributes of
space and the rest. This is the third creation, said to relate to
Consciousness. From mind have sprung the great elements, (numbering
five), O king! Know that this is the fourth creation called mental, as I
say. Persons conversant with the primal elements say that Sound and
Touch and Form and Taste and Scent are the fifth creation, relating to
the Great (primal) elements. The creation of the Ear, the Skin, the
Tongue, and the Scent, forms the sixth and is regarded as having for its
essence multiplicity of thought. The senses that come after the Ear and
the others (*i.e.*, the senses of action) then arise, O monarch. This is
called seventh creation and relates to the senses of Knowledge. Then, O
monarch, come the breath that rises upward (*viz*., Prana) and those
that have a transverse motion (*viz*., Saman, Udana, and Vyana). This is
the eighth creation and is called Arjjava. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[4](#fn_59) Then come those breaths that course
transversely in the lower parts of the body (*viz*., Samana, Udana

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and Vyana) and also that called Apana coursing downwards. This, ninth
creation, is also called Arjjava, O king. These nine kinds of creation,
and these principles, O monarch, which latter number four and twenty,
are declared to thee according to what has been laid down in the
scriptures. After this, O king, listen to me as I tell thee durations of
time as indicated by the learned in respect of these principles or
attribute.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[35:1](m12c010.htm#fr_56) These, including Mind,
form the tale of sixteen called *Vikriti* or modifications of
*Prakriti*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[35:2](m12c010.htm#fr_57) These are the subtile
principles or *Tanmatras* and not the gross elements.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[35:3](m12c010.htm#fr_58) *Mahat* is sometimes
called *Buddhi* hence the creation of Consciousness from *Mahat* must be
creation relating to *Buddha*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[35:4](m12c010.htm#fr_59) *Arjjava* mean
'relating to straight paths or courses,' so called from the straight
course of these winds or breaths. By reference to these breaths is
intended the other limbs of the physical system besides those already
indicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCXII](m12c011)
