[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c014) 
[Next](m12c016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCXVI

"'Yajnavalkya said, That which is without attributes, O son, can never
be explained by ascribing attributes to it. Listen, however, to me as I
expound to thee what is possessed of attributes and what is devoid of
them. High-souled Munis conversant with the truth regarding all the
topics or principles say that when Purusha seizes attributes like a
crystal catching the reflection of a red flower, he comes to be called
as possessed of attributes; but when freed from attributes like the
crystal freed from reflection, he comes to be viewed in his real nature,
that is, as beyond all

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

attributes. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) Unmanifest Prakriti is
by her nature endued with attributes. She cannot transcend them.
Destitute of intelligence by nature, she becomes attached to attributes.
Unmanifest Prakriti cannot know anything, while Purusha, by his nature,
is possessed of knowledge,--There is nothing higher than myself,--even
this is what Purusha is always conscious of. For this reason the
unmanifest (or Prakriti), although naturally inanimate and
unintelligent, still becomes animate and intelligent in consequence of
her union with Purusha who is Eternal and Indestructible instead of
remaining in her own nature due to destructibility. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) When Purusha, through ignorance,
repeatedly becomes associated with attributes, he fails to understand
his own real nature and therefore he fails to attain to Emancipation. In
consequence Purusha's lordship over the principles that flow from
Prakriti, he is said to partake of the nature of those principles. In
consequence also of his agency in the matter of creation, he is said to
possess the attribute of creation. In consequence of his agency in the
matter of Yoga, he is said to possess the attribute of Yoga. For his
lordship over those particular principles known by the name of Prakriti,
he is said to possess the nature of Prakriti. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68) For his agency in the matter of creating
the seeds (of all immobile objects), he is said to partake of the nature
of those seeds. And because he causes the several principles or
attributes to start into life, he is, therefore, said to be subject to
decay and destruction (for those principles themselves are subject
thereto). In consequence, again, of his being the witness of everything,
and in consequence also of there being nothing else than he, as also for
his consciousness of identity with Prakriti, Yatis crowned with ascetic
success, conversant with Adhyatma, and freed from fever of every kind,
regard him as existing by himself without a second, immutable,
unmanifest (in the form of Cause), unstable, and manifest (in the form
of effects). This is what has been heard by us. Those Sankhyas, however,
that depend upon Knowledge only (for their Emancipation) and the
practice of compassion for all creatures, say that it is Prakriti which
is One but Purushas are many. <span id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69) As a
matter of fact, Purusha is different from Prakriti which though
unstable, still appears as stable. As a blade of reed is different from
its outer cover, even so is Purusha different from Prakriti. Indeed, the
worm that is ensconced within the Udumvara should be known as

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

different from the Udumvara. Though existing with the Udumvara, the worm
is not to be regarded as forming a portion of the Udumvara. The fish is
distinct from the water in which it lives, and the water is distinct
from the fish that lives in it. Though the fish and water exist
together, yet it is never drenched by water. The fire that is contained
in an earthen sauce pan is distinct from the earthen sauce pan, and the
sauce pan is distinct from the fire it contains. Although the fire
exists in and with the sauce pan, yet it is not to be regarded as
forming any part of it. The lotus-leaf that floats on a piece of water
is distinct from the piece of water on which it floats. Its co-existence
with water does not make it a portion of the water. The perennial
existence of those objects in and with those mentioned, is never
correctly understood by ordinary people. They who behold Prakriti and
Purusha in any other light are said to possess a vision that is
incorrect. It is certain that they have repeatedly to sink into terrible
hell. I have thus told thee the philosophy of the Sankhyas that
excellent science by which all things have been correctly ascertained.
Ascertaining the nature of Purusha and Prakriti in this way, the
Sankhyas attain to Emancipation. I have also told thee of the systems of
those others that are conversant with the great principles of the
universe. I shall now discourse to thee on the science of the Yogins.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[42:1](m12c015.htm#fr_66) I expand this verse
for bringing out the meaning. A verbal rendering will become
unintelligible.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[42:2](m12c015.htm#fr_67) This is a difficult
verse, I am not sure that I have understood it correctly. The sense to
be that *Prakriti*, which is really unintelligent and incapable of
enjoyment or endurance, becomes intelligent and capable of enjoyment or
endurance in consequence of being united with Purusha who is
intelligent. Thus when pleasurable or painful sensation are felt, it is
the body that seems to feel it only in consequence of the Soul that
presides over it.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[42:3](m12c015.htm#fr_68) The first line of 7 is
the same in sense as the second line of 8. In the Bombay text, only the
second line of 8 occurs, while the first line of 7 has been justly
omitted. In fact, *Tattwa* and the *Prakriti* are the same thing.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[42:4](m12c015.htm#fr_69) This refers to the
opinion of the atheistic Sankhyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCXVII](m12c016)
