[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*NOTE: There was no section CCLXIV in the source edition.--JBH*

### SECTION CCCLXV

"The Brahmana said, 'Without doubt, this is very wonderful, O Naga, I
have been highly gratified by listening to thee. By these words of thine
that are fraught with subtile meaning, thou hast shown me the way I am
to follow. Blessed be thou, I desire to depart hence O best of Nagas,
thou shouldst recollect me now and then and enquire after me by sending
thy servant.'

"The Naga said, 'The object that brought thee higher is still in thy
breast, for thou hast not as yet disclosed it to me. Where then wilt
thou go? Tell me, O regenerate one, what should be done by me, and what
that object is which brought thee hither. After the accomplishment of
thy business, whatever it is, expressed or unexpressed in speech, thou
mayst depart, O foremost of regenerate persons, saluting me and
dismissed by me cheerfully, O thou of excellent vows. Thou hast
conceived a friendship for me. O regenerate Rishi, it behoveth thee not
to depart from this place after having only seen me, thyself sitting
under the shade of this tree. Thou hast become dear to me and I have
become dear to thee, without doubt. All the persons in this city are
thine. What objection then is there, O sinless one, to pass some time in
my house?--'

"The Brahmana said, 'It is even so, O thou of great wisdom, O Naga that
hast acquired a knowledge of the soul. It is very true that the deities
are not superior to thee in any respect. He that is thyself, is verily
myself, as he that is myself is truly thyself. Myself, thyself, and all
other creatures, shall all have to enter into the Supreme Soul. Doubt
penetrated my mind, O chief of Nagas, in the matter of the best means
for winning righteousness or merit. That doubt has been dispelled by thy
discourse, for I have

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

learnt the value of the Unccha vow. I shall hence follow that which is
so very efficacious in the matter of beneficial consequences. That, O
blessed one, has become my certain conclusion now, based on excellent
reasons. I take thy leave. Blessings to thee. My object has been
accomplished, O Naga.'"

"Bhishma said, 'Having saluted that foremost of Nagas in this way, the
Brahmana (named Dharmaranya), firmly resolved to follow the Unccha mode
of life, proceeded to the presence, O king, of Chyavana of Bhrigu's
race, from desire of being formally instructed and initiated in that
vow. <span id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_357.md) Chyavana performed the
Samskara rites of the Brahmana and formally initiated him into the
Unccha mode of life. The son of Bhrigu, O monarch, recited this history
to king Janaka in his place. King Janaka, in his turn, narrated it to
the celestial Rishi Narada of high soul. The celestial Rishi Narada too,
of stainless acts, repairing on one occasion to the abode of Indra, the
chief of the deities, gave to Indra this history upon being asked by
him. The chief of the celestials, having obtained it thus from Narada,
recited this blessed history to a conclave consisting of all the
foremost Brahmanas, O monarch. On the occasion, again, of my dreadful
encounter with Rama of Bhrigu's race (on the field of Kurukshetra), the
celestial Vasus, O king, recited this history to me. <span
id="fr_358"></span>[2](#fn_358.md) Asked by thee, O foremost of righteous
men, I have recited this history that is excellent and sacred and
fraught with great merit. Thou hadst asked me about that constitutes the
highest duty, O king. This history is my answer to thy query. A brave
man he was, O monarch, that betook himself to the practice of the Unccha
vow in this way, without expectation of any fruit. Firmly resolved, that
Brahmana, instructed, by the chief of Nagas in this way about his duty,
betook himself to the practice of Yama and Niyama, and subsisting the
while upon such food as was allowed by the Unccha vow, proceeded to
another forest.'"

*The end of Santi Parva*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_357"></span>[217:1](m12c063.htm#fr_357.md) The formal
initiation or *diksha* is a ceremony of great importance. No sacrifice
or vow, no religious rite, can be performed without the *diksha*. The
rite of *diksha* is performed with the assistance of a preceptor or
priest. In leaving the domestic mode for the life of a forest recluse,
the *diksha* is necessary. In following the Unccha vow, this rite is
needed. Any religious act performed by one without having undergone the
formal *diksha*, becomes sterile of results.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[217:2](m12c063.htm#fr_358.md) Bhishma abducted,
with the might of his single arms, the three daughters of the king of
Kasi, *viz*., Amva, Amvika, and Amvalika. He wished to marry the
princesses to his brother Vichitravirya. The eldest princess, having
previously to her abduction selected king Salwa for her lord was let
off. When, however, she presented herself before her lover, the latter
refused to wed her. She, therefore, applied to Rama for wreaking
vengeance on Bhishma whom she regarded as the author of her wrongs. Rama
took up her cause and fought with Bhishma, but was obliged to
acknowledge defeat at the hands of his antagonist who was his disciple
in arms. For fuller particulars, *vide* *Amvopakhyana Parvan* in Udyoga
Parvan.
