[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060109)  [Next](2060111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XCIX"></span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.XCIX-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIX. To Theophilus.</span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p2"></span>Jerome forwards to Theophilus a translation
of the latter’s paschal letter for 404 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.XCIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> and apologizes for his delay in
sending it, on the ground that ill-health and grief for the death of
Paula have prevented him from doing literary work. The date of the
letter is 404 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.XCIX-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p3"></span>To the most blessed pope Theophilus, Jerome.

<span id="v.XCIX-p4"></span>1. From the time that I received the letters
of your holiness together with the paschal treatise <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) until the present day I have been
so harassed with sorrow and mourning, with anxiety, and with the
different reports which have come from all quarters concerning the
condition of the church, that I have hardly been able to turn your
volume into Latin. You know the truth of the old saying, grief chokes
utterance; and it is more than ever true when to sickness of the mind is
added sickness of the body. I have now been five days in bed in a
burning fever: consequently it is only by using the greatest haste that
I can dictate this very letter. But I wish to shew your holiness in a
few words what pains I have taken, in translating your treatise, to
transfer the charm of diction which marks every sentence in the
original, and to make the style of the Latin correspond in some degree
with that of the Greek.

<span id="v.XCIX-p6"></span>2. At the outset you use the language of
philosophy; and, without appearing to particularize, you slay one <span
id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) while you instruct all. In the
remaining sections—a task most difficult of accomplishment—you combine
philosophy and rhetoric and draw together for us Demosthenes and Plato.
What diatribes you have launched against self-indulgence! What eulogies
you have bestowed upon the virtue of continence! With what secret stores
of wisdom you have spoken of the interchange of day and night, the
course of the moon, the laws of the sun, the nature of our world; always
appealing to the authority of scripture lest in a paschal treatise you
should appear to have borrowed anything from secular sources! To be
brief, I am afraid to praise you for these things lest I should be
charged with offering flattery. The book is excellent both in the
philosophical portions and where, without making personal attacks, you
plead the cause which you have espoused. Wherefore, I beseech you,
pardon me my backwardness: I have been so completely overcome by the
falling asleep of the holy and venerable Paula <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) that except my translation of this
book I have hitherto written nothing bearing on sacred subjects. As you
yourself know, I have suddenly lost the comforter whom I have led about
with me, not—the Lord is my witness—to minister to my own needs, but for
the relief and refreshment of the saints upon whom she has waited with
all diligence. Your holy and estimable daughter Eustochium (who refuses
to be comforted for the loss of her mother), and with her all the
brotherhood humbly salute you. Kindly send me the books which you say
that you have lately written that I may translate them or, if not that,
at least read them. Farewell in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[188:2660](2060110.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="v.XCIX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p5"></span> Letter C.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[188:2661](2060110.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="v.XCIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p7"></span> Origen.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[188:2662](2060110.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="v.XCIX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.XCIX-p8"></span> See Letter CVIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter C](2060111)
