[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060085)  [Next](2060087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXXV"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LXXV-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXV. To Theodora.</span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p2"></span>Theodora the wife of the learned Spaniard
Lucinius (for whom see Letter LXXI.) had recently lost her husband,
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span id="v.LXXV-Page_155"></span>a
bereavement which suggested the present letter. In it Jerome recounts
the many virtues of Lucinius and especially his zeal in resisting the
gnostic heresy of Marcus which during his life was prevalent in Spain.
The date of the letter is 399 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p3"></span>1. So overpowered am I by the sad
intelligence of the falling asleep of the holy and by me deeply revered
Lucinius that I am scarcely able to dictate even a short letter. I do
not, it is true, lament his fate, for I know that he has passed to
better things: like Moses he can say: “I will now turn aside and see
this great sight,” <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) but I am
tormented with regret that I was not allowed to look upon the face of
one, who was likely, as I believed, in a short time to come hither. True
indeed is the prophetic warning concerning the doom of death that it
divides brothers, <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) and with
harsh and cruel hand sunders those whose names are linked together in
the bonds of love. But we have this consolation that it is slain by the
word of the Lord. For it is said: “O death, I will be thy plagues; O
grave, I will be thy destruction,” and in the next verse: “An east wind
shall come, the wind of the Lord shall come up from the wilderness, and
his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up.” <span
id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) For, as Isaiah says, “there shall
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out
of his roots”: <span id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271) and He says
Himself in the Song of Songs, “I am the rose of Sharon and the lily of
the valley.” <span id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) Our rose is the
destruction of death, and died that death itself might die in His dying.
But, when it is said that He is to be brought “from the wilderness,” the
virgin’s womb is indicated, which without sexual intercourse or
impregnation has given to us God in the form of an infant able to quench
by the glow of the Holy Spirit the fountains of lust and to sing in the
words of the psalm: “as in a dry and pathless and waterless land, so
have I appeared unto thee in the sanctuary.” <span
id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273) Thus when we have to face the hard
and cruel necessity of death, we are upheld by this consolation, that we
shall shortly see again those whose absence we now mourn. For their end
is not called death but a slumber and a falling asleep. Wherefore also
the blessed apostle forbids us to sorrow concerning them which are
asleep, <span id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) telling us to believe
that those whom we know to sleep now may hereafter be roused from their
sleep, and when their slumber is ended may watch once more with the
saints and sing with the angels:—“Glory to God in the highest and on
earth peace among men of good will.” <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) In heaven where there is no sin,
there is glory and perpetual praise and unwearied singing; but on earth
where sedition reigns, and war and discord hold sway, peace must be
gained by prayer, and it is to be found not among all but only among men
of good will, who pay heed to the apostolic salutation: “Grace to you
and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) For “His abode is in peace and His
dwelling place is in Zion,” <span id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277)
that is, on a watch-tower, <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) on
a height of doctrines and of virtues, in the soul of the believer; for
the angel of this latter daily beholds the face of God, <span
id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) and contemplates with unveiled face
the glory of God.

<span id="v.LXXV-p16"></span>2. Wherefore, though you are already
running in the way, I urge a willing horse, as the saying goes, and
implore you, while you regret in your Lucinius a true brother, to
rejoice as well that he now reigns with Christ. For, as it is written in
the book of Wisdom, he was “taken away lest that wickedness should alter
his understanding…for his soul pleased the Lord…and he…in a short time
fulfilled a long time.” <span id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) We
may with more right weep for ourselves that we stand daily in conflict
with our sins, that we are stained with vices, that we receive wounds,
and that we must give account for every idle word. <span
id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281) Victorious now and free from care
he looks down upon you from on high and supports you in your struggle,
nay more, he prepares for you a place near to himself; for his love and
affection towards you are still the same as when, disregarding his claim
on you as a husband, he resolved to treat you even on earth as a sister,
or indeed I may say as a brother, for difference of sex while essential
to marriage is not so to a continent tie. And since even in the flesh,
if we are born again in Christ, we are no longer Greek and Barbarian,
bond and free, male and female, but are all one in Him, <span
id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) how much more true will this be
when this corruptible has put on incorruption and when this mortal has
put on immortality. <span id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) “In the
resurrection,” the Lord tells us, “they neither marry nor are given in
marriage but are as the angels…in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) Now when it is said that they
neither marry nor are given in marriage but are as the angels in heaven,
there is no taking away of a natural and real body but only an
indication of the greatness of the glory to come. For the words are not
“they shall be angels” but “they shall be as the angels”: thus while
likeness to the angels is promised <span id="page_156">p. 156</span>
<span id="v.LXXV-Page_156"></span>identity with them is refused. “They
shall be,” Christ tells us, “as the angels,” that is like the angels;
therefore they will not cease to be human. Glorious indeed they shall
be, and graced with angelic splendour, but they will still be human; the
apostle Paul will still be Paul, Mary will still be Mary. Then shall
confusion overtake that heresy <span
id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285) which holds out great but vague
promises only that it may take away hopes which are at once modest and
certain.

<span id="v.LXXV-p23"></span>3. And now that I have once mentioned the
word “heresy,” where can I find a trumpet loud enough to proclaim the
eloquence of our dear Lucinius, who, when the filthy heresy of
Basilides <span id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) raged in Spain and
like a pestilence ravaged the provinces between the Pyrenees and the
ocean, upheld in all its purity the faith of the church and altogether
refused to embrace Armagil, Barbelon, Abraxas, Balsamum, and the absurd
Leusibora. Such are the portentous names which, to excite the minds of
unlearned men and weak women, they pretend to draw from Hebrew sources,
terrifying the simple by barbarous combinations which they admire the
more the less they understand them. <span
id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287) The growth of this heresy is
described for us by Irenæus, bishop of the church of Lyons, a man of the
apostolic times, who was a disciple of Papias the hearer of the
evangelist John. He informs us that a certain Mark, <span
id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) of the stock of the gnostic
Basilides, came in the first instance to Gaul, that he contaminated with
his teaching those parts of the country which are watered by the Rhone
and the Garonne, and that in particular he misled by his errors
high-born women; to whom he promised certain secret mysteries and whose
affection he enlisted by magic arts and hidden indulgence in unlawful
intercourse. Irenæus goes on to say that subsequently Mark crossed the
Pyrenees and occupied Spain, making it his object to seek out the houses
of the wealthy, and in these especially the women, concerning whom we
are told that they are “led away with divers lusts, ever learning and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.” <span
id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289) All this he wrote about three
hundred years ago <span id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) in the
extremely learned and eloquent books which he composed under the title
*Against all heresies.*

<span id="v.LXXV-p29"></span>4. From these facts you in your wisdom will
realize how worthy of praise our dear Lucinius shewed himself when he
shut his ears that he might not have to hear the judgement passed upon
blood shedders, <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291) and dispersed
all his substance and gave to the poor that his righteousness might
endure for ever. <span id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292) And not
satisfied with bestowing his bounty upon his own country, he sent to the
churches of Jerusalem and Alexandria gold enough to alleviate the want
of large numbers. But while many will admire and extol in him this
liberality, I for my part will rather praise him for his zeal and
diligence in the study of the scriptures. With what eagerness he asked
for my poor works! He actually sent six copyists (for in this province
there is a dearth of scribes who understand Latin) to copy for him all
that I have ever dictated from my youth until the present time. The
honour was not of course paid to me who am but a little child, the least
of all Christians, living in the rocks near Bethlehem because I know
myself a sinner; but to Christ who is honoured in his servants <span
id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293) and who makes this promise to them,
“He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth
him that sent me.” <span id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294)

<span id="v.LXXV-p34"></span>5. Therefore, my beloved daughter, regard
this letter as the epitaph which love prompts me to write upon your
husband, and if there is any spiritual work of which you think me to be
capable, boldly command me to undertake it: that so ages to come may
know that He who says of Himself in Isaiah, “He hath made me a polished
shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me,” <span
id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295) has with His sharp arrow so wounded
two men severed by an immense interval of sea and land, that, although
they know each other not in the flesh, they are knit together in love in
the spirit.

<span id="v.LXXV-p36"></span>May you be kept holy both in body and
spirit by the Samaritan—that is, saviour and keeper—of whom it is said
in the psalm, “He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor
sleep.” <span id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) May the watcher and
the holy one who came down to Daniel <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297) come also to you, that you too may
be able to say, “I sleep but my heart waketh.” <span
id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[155:2269](2060086.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="v.LXXV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p4"></span> [Exod. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#003)<span id="v.LXXV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[155:2270](2060086.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="v.LXXV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p5"></span> [Hos. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXV-p5.1"></span>,
Vulg. Quia ipse inter fratres dividet. A.V. follows the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[155:2271](2060086.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="v.LXXV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p6"></span> [Hos.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[155:2272](2060086.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="v.LXXV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p7"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXV-p7.1"></span>, Vulg.

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[155:2273](2060086.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="v.LXXV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p8"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[155:2274](2060086.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="v.LXXV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p9"></span> [Ps.
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXV-p9.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[155:2275](2060086.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="v.LXXV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p10"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="v.LXXV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[155:2276](2060086.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="v.LXXV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p11"></span> [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="v.LXXV-p11.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[155:2277](2060086.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="v.LXXV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p12"></span> [Rom. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)<span id="v.LXXV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[155:2278](2060086.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="v.LXXV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p13"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXV-p13.1"></span>.
“Salem” (A.V.), the Hebrew word for peace.

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[155:2279](2060086.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="v.LXXV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p14"></span> See Jerome’s *Book of Hebrew Names*. Cf.
also Letter CVIII. § 9.

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[155:2280](2060086.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="v.LXXV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p15"></span> [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="v.LXXV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[155:2281](2060086.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="v.LXXV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p17"></span> [Wisd. iv.
11-14](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#011)<span id="v.LXXV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[155:2282](2060086.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="v.LXXV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p18"></span> [Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="v.LXXV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[155:2283](2060086.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="v.LXXV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p19"></span> [Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="v.LXXV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[155:2284](2060086.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="v.LXXV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p20"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="v.LXXV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[155:2285](2060086.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="v.LXXV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p21"></span> [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="v.LXXV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[156:2286](2060086.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="v.LXXV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p22"></span> Origenism.

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[156:2287](2060086.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="v.LXXV-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p24"></span> Probably as revived by Priscillian, who
was put to death 385. See Jerome *On Illustrious Men*, c. 121.

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[156:2288](2060086.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="v.LXXV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p25"></span> These terms, the meanings of which are
very uncertain, are either the names of æons or magical formulæ used by
the Marcosians in the celebration of their mysteries.

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[156:2289](2060086.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="v.LXXV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p26"></span> A gnostic of the school of Valentinus, who
taught in the middle of the second century. Jerome is in error when he
describes him as a disciple of Basilides.

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[156:2290](2060086.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="v.LXXV-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p27"></span> [2 Tim.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="v.LXXV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[156:2291](2060086.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="v.LXXV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p28"></span> An error for ‘two hundred years ago.’

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[156:2292](2060086.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="v.LXXV-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p30"></span> [Is. xxxiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXV-p30.1"></span>.
Jerome’s allusion may be to the execution of Priscillian in 385.
Lucinius may have shared the views of Ambrose and Martin against the
shedding of blood.

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[156:2293](2060086.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="v.LXXV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p31"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="v.LXXV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[156:2294](2060086.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="v.LXXV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p32"></span> [Luke ix.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#048)<span id="v.LXXV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[156:2295](2060086.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="v.LXXV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p33"></span> [Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span id="v.LXXV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[156:2296](2060086.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="v.LXXV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p35"></span> [Isa. xlix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[156:2297](2060086.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="v.LXXV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p37"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)<span id="v.LXXV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[156:2298](2060086.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="v.LXXV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p38"></span> [Dan. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)<span id="v.LXXV-p38.1"></span>.
Lit. May *Hir,* that is the watcher, *Hir* being the Hebrew word.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[156:2299](2060086.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="v.LXXV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXV-p39"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXV-p39.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXVI](2060087)
