[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060182)  [Next](2060184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Preface to the Book on Hebrew Names.</span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p2"></span>The origin and scope of this book is
described in the Preface itself. It was written in the year 388, two
years after Jerome had settled at Bethlehem. He had, immediately on
arriving in Palestine, three years previously, set to work to improve
his knowledge of Hebrew, with a view to his translation of the Old
Testament, which was begun in 391. This book, therefore, and the two
which follow, may be taken as records of studies preparatory to the
Vulgate.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p3"></span>Philo, the most erudite man among the
Jews, is declared by Origen to have done what I am now doing; he set
forth a book of Hebrew Names, classing them under their initial letters,
and placing the etymology of each at the side. This work I originally
proposed to translate into Latin. It is well known in the Greek world,
and is to be found in all libraries. But I found that the copies were so
discordant to one another, and the order so confused, that I judged it
to be better to say nothing, rather than to write what would justly be
condemned. A work of this kind, however, appeared likely to be of use;
and my friends Lupulianus and Valerianus <span
id="fr_5375"></span>[5376](#fn_5375.md) urged me to attempt it, because, as
they thought, I had made some progress in the knowledge of Hebrew. I,
therefore, went through all the books of Scripture in order, and in the
restoration which I have now made of the ancient fabric, I think that I
have produced a work which may be found valuable by Greeks as well as
Latins.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p5"></span>I here in the Preface beg the reader to
take notice that, if he finds anything omitted in this work, it is
reserved for mention in another. I have at this moment on hand a book of
Hebrew Questions, an undertaking of a new kind such as has never until
now been heard of amongst either the Greeks or the Latins. I say this,
not with a view of arrogantly puffing up my own work, but because I know
how much labour I have spent on it, and wish to provoke those whose
knowledge is deficient to read it. I recommend all those who wish to
possess both that work and the present one, and also the book of Hebrew
Places, which I am about to publish, to make no account of the Jews and
all their ebullitions of vexation. Moreover, I have added the meaning of
the words and names in the New Testament, so that the fabric might
receive its last touch and might stand complete. I wished also in this
to imitate Origen, whom all but the ignorant acknowledge as the greatest
teacher of the Churches next to the Apostles; for in this work, which
stands among the noblest monuments of his genius, he endeavoured as a
Christian to supply what Philo, as a Jew, had omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5375"></span>[485:5376](2060183.htm#fr_5375.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p4"></span> Nothing is known of these men. It is
very improbable that this Valerianus was the bishop of Apuleia, who
must, however, have been known to Jerome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Book on the Sites and...](2060184.md)
