[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060219)  [Next](2060221.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Ezekiel.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p2"></span>The Commentary on Ezekiel is in fourteen
Books. It was dedicated to Eustochium, and was written between the years
410 and 414. The Prefaces gain a special interest from their
descriptions of the sack of Rome by Alaric and the consequent
immigration into Palestine. We give several passages.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p3"></span>In Preface to Book i.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p4"></span>Having completed the eighteen books of the
exposition of Isaiah, I was very desirous, Eustochium, Christ’s virgin,
to go on to Ezekiel, in accordance with my frequent promises to you and
your mother Paula, of saintly memory, and thus, as the saying is, put
the finishing touches to the work on the prophets; but alas!
intelligence was suddenly brought me of the death of Pammachius
and <span id="fr_5433"></span>[5434](#fn_5433.md) Marcella, <span
id="fr_5434"></span>[5435](#fn_5434.md) the siege of Rome, and the falling
asleep of many of my brethren and sisters. I <span id="page_500">p.
500</span> <span id="vii.iv.x-Page_500"></span>was so stupefied and
dismayed that day and night I could think of nothing but the welfare of
the community; it seemed as though I was sharing the captivity of the
saints, and I could not open my lips until I knew something more
definite; and all the while, full of anxiety, I was wavering between
hope and despair, and was torturing myself with the misfortunes of other
people. But when the bright light of all the world was put out, or,
rather, when the Roman Empire was decapitated, and, to speak more
correctly, the whole world perished in one city, <span
id="fr_5435"></span>[5436](#fn_5435.md) “I became dumb and humbled myself,
and kept silence from good words, but my grief broke out afresh, my
heart glowed within me, and while I meditated the fire was kindled;” and
I thought I ought not to disregard the saying, <span
id="fr_5436"></span>[5437](#fn_5436.md) “An untimely story is like music in
a time of grief.” But seeing that you persist in making this request,
and a wound, though deep, heals by degrees; and <span
id="fr_5437"></span>[5438](#fn_5437.md) the scorpion lies beneath the
ground with <span id="fr_5438"></span>[5439](#fn_5438.md) Enceladus and
Porphyrion, and the many-headed Hydra has at length ceased to hiss at
us; and since opportunity has been given me which I ought to use, not
for replying to insidious heretics, but for devoting myself to the
exposition of Scripture, I will resume my work upon the prophet Ezekiel.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p11"></span>Book ii. has, instead of a Preface,
merely a line calling the attention of Eustochium to its opening words.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p12"></span>The Preface to Book iii. has a noteworthy
passage on the sack of Rome and its results.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p13"></span>Who would believe that Rome, built up by
the conquest of the whole world, had collapsed, that the mother of
nations had become also their tomb; that the shores of the whole East,
of Egypt, of Africa, which once belonged to the imperial city, were
filled with the hosts of her men-servants and maid-servants, that we
should every day be receiving in this holy Bethlehem men and women who
once were noble and abounding in every kind of wealth but are now
reduced to poverty? We cannot relieve these sufferers: all we can do is
to sympathise with them, and unite our tears with theirs. The burden of
this holy work was as much as we could carry; the sight of the
wanderers, coming in crowds, caused us deep pain; and we therefore
abandoned the exposition of Ezekiel, and almost all study, and were
filled with a longing to turn the words of Scripture into action, and
not to say holy things but to do them. Now, however, in response to your
admonition, Eustochium, Christ’s virgin, we resume the interrupted
labour, and approach our third Book.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p14"></span>The Prefaces to Books iv., v., and vi.
contain nothing remarkable. The following is the important part of the
Preface to Book vii.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p15"></span>There is not a single hour, nor a single
moment, in which we are not relieving crowds of brethren, and the quiet
of the monastery has been changed into the bustle of a guest house. And
so much is this the case that we must either close our doors, or abandon
the study of the Scriptures on which we depend for keeping the doors
open. And so, turning to profit, or rather stealing the hours of the
nights, which, now that winter is approaching, begin to lengthen
somewhat, I am endeavouring by the light of the lamp to dictate these
comments, whatever they maybe worth, and am trying to mitigate with
exposition the weariness of a mind which is a stranger to rest. I am not
boasting, as some perhaps suspect, of the welcome given to the brethren,
but I am simply confessing the causes of the delay. Who could boast when
the flight of the people of the West, and the holy places, crowded as
they are with penniless fugitives, naked and wounded, plainly reveal the
ravages of the Barbarians? We cannot see what has occurred, without
tears and moans. Who would have believed that mighty Rome, with its
careless security of wealth, would be reduced to such extremities as to
need shelter, food, and clothing? And yet, some are so hard-hearted and
cruel that, instead of showing compassion, they break up the rags and
bundles of the captives, and expect to find gold about those who are
nothing than prisoners. In addition to this hindrance to my dictating,
my eyes are growing dim with age and to some extent I share the
suffering of the saintly Isaac: I am quite unable to go through the
Hebrew books with such light as I have at night, for even in the full
light of day they are hidden from my eyes owing to the smallness of the
letters. In fact, it is only the voice of the brethren which enables me
to master the commentaries of Greek writers.

<span id="vii.iv.x-p16"></span>*The Prefaces to Books viii. to xiv.
contain nothing of special interest.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5433"></span>[499:5434](2060220.htm#fr_5433.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p5"></span> Under whose care Eustochium had been
trained.

<span id="fn_5434"></span>[499:5435](2060220.htm#fr_5434.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p6"></span> By the Goths under Alaric. The city was
taken in <span class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.x-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>
410.

<span id="fn_5435"></span>[500:5436](2060220.htm#fr_5435.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p7"></span> [Ps.
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.iv.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5436"></span>[500:5437](2060220.htm#fr_5436.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p8"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
22.6](../../../bib/apo/sir022.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.iv.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5437"></span>[500:5438](2060220.htm#fr_5437.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p9"></span> Rufinus who died <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.x-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 410, in Sicily, on his way to the
Holy Land from Aquileia and Rome, whence he had been driven by the
troubles in Italy.

<span id="fn_5438"></span>[500:5439](2060220.htm#fr_5438.md) <span
id="vii.iv.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.x-p10"></span> The giants who bore those names. See
Hor. III. od. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel.](2060221.md)
