[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060003)  [Next](2060005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.I"></span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="iv.I-Page_xi"></span>

<span id="iv.I-p1"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="iv.I-p1.1"></span>Prolegomena to Jerome.</span>

<span id="iv.I-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iv.I-p2.1"></span>I.—<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.I-p2.2"></span>Introductory.</span></span>

<span id="iv.I-p3"></span>St. Jerome’s importance lies in the facts: (1)
That he was the author of the Vulgate Translation of the Bible into
Latin, (2) That he bore the chief part in introducing the ascetic life
into Western Europe, (3) That his writings more than those of any of the
Fathers bring before us the general as well as the ecclesiastical life
of his time. It was a time of special interest, the last age of the old
Greco-Roman civilization, the beginning of an altered world. It included
the reigns of Julian (361–63), Valens (364–78), Valentinian (364–75),
Gratian (375–83), Theodosius (379–95) and his sons, the definitive
establishment of orthodox Christianity in the Empire, and the sack of
Rome by Alaric (410). It was the age of the great Fathers, of Ambrose
and Augustine in the West, of Basil, the Gregories, and Chrysostom in
the East. With several of these Jerome was brought into personal
contact; of Ambrose he often speaks in his writings (Apol. i. 2, iii.
14, in this series Vol. iii., pp. 484 and 526; also this Vol., pp. 74
and 496, Pref. to Origen and S. Luke; and the Pref. to Didymus on the
Holy Spirit, quoted in Rufinus’ Apology, ii. 24, 43, Vol. iii. of this
series, pp. 470 and 480; also On Illust. Men, c. 124, Vol. iii. 383; see
also Index—Ambrose); with Augustin he carried on an important
correspondence (see Table of Contents); he studied under Gregory
Nazianzen (80, 93; see also Illust. Men, c. 117, Vol. iii. 382) at the
time of the Council at Constantinople, 381; he was acquainted with
Gregory of Nyssa (Illust. Men, c. 128, Vol. iii. 338); he translated the
diatribe of Theophilus of Alexandria against Chrysostom (214, 215). He
ranks as one of the four Doctors of the Latin Church, and his influence
was the most lasting; for, though he was not a great original thinker
like Augustin, nor a champion like Ambrose, nor an organiser and
spreader of Christianity like Gregory, his influence outlasted theirs.
Their influence in the Middle Ages was confined to a comparatively small
circle; but the monastic institutions which he introduced, the value for
relics and sacred places which he defended, the deference which he
showed for Episcopal authority, especially that of the Roman Pontiff,
were the chief features of the Christian system for a thousand years;
his Vulgate was the Bible of Western Christendom till the Reformation.
To the theologian he is interesting rather for what he records than for
any contribution of his own to the science; but to the historian his
vivid descriptions of persons and things at an important though
melancholy epoch of the world are of inestimable value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2060005.md)
