[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060196)  [Next](2060198.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Job.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p2"></span>This was put into circulation about
the same time as the sixteen prophets, that is, about the year 393. It
was written in 392. It has no dedication, but is full of personal
interest, and shows the deplorable state in which the text of many parts
of Scripture was before his time, thus justifying his boast, “I have
rescued Job from the dunghill.”

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p3"></span>I am compelled at every step in my
treatment of the books of Holy Scripture to reply to the abuse of my
opponents, who charge my translation with being a censure of the
Seventy; as though Aquila among Greek authors, and Symmachus and
Theodotion, had not rendered word for word, or paraphrased, or combined
the two methods in a sort of translation which is neither the one nor
the other; and as though Origen had not marked all the books of the Old
Testament with obeli and asterisks, which he either introduced or
adopted from Theodotion, and inserted in the old translation, thus
showing that what he added was deficient in the older version. My
detractors must therefore learn either to receive altogether what they
have in part admitted, or they must erase my translation and at the same
time their own asterisks. For they must allow that those translators who
it is clear have left out numerous details, have erred in some points;
especially in the book of Job, where, if you withdraw such passages as
have been added and marked with asterisks, the greater part of the book
will be cut away. This, at all events, will be so in Greek. On the other
hand, previous to the publication of our recent translation with
asterisks and obeli, about seven or eight hundred lines were missing in
the Latin, so that the book, mutilated, torn, and disintegrated,
exhibits its deformity to those who publicly read it. The present
translation follows no ancient translator, but will be found to
reproduce now the exact words, now the meaning, now both together of the
original Hebrew, Arabic, and occasionally the Syriac. For an
indirectness and a slipperiness attaches to the whole book, even in the
Hebrew; and, as orators say in Greek, it <span
id="fr_5400"></span>[5401](#fn_5400.md) is tricked out with figures of
speech, and while it says one thing, it does another; just as if you
close your hand to hold an eel or a little <span
id="fr_5401"></span>[5402](#fn_5401.md) muræna, the more you squeeze it,
the sooner it escapes. I remember that in order to understand this
volume, I paid a not inconsiderable sum for the services of a teacher, a
native of Lydda, who was amongst the Hebrews reckoned to be in the front
rank; whether I profited at all by his teaching, I do not know; of this
one thing I am sure, that I could translate only that which I previously
understood. Well, then, from the beginning of the book to the words of
Job, the Hebrew version is in prose. Further, from the words of Job
where he says, <span id="fr_5402"></span>[5403](#fn_5402.md) “May the day
perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, a
man-child is conceived,” to the place where before the close of the book
it is written <span id="fr_5403"></span>[5404](#fn_5403.md) “Therefore I
blame myself and repent in dust and ashes,” we have hexameter verses
running in dactyl and spondee: and owing to the idiom of the language
other feet are frequently introduced not containing the same number of
syllables, but the same quantities. Sometimes, also, a sweet and musical
rhythm is produced by the breaking up of the verses in accordance with
the laws of metre, a fact better known to prosodists than to the
ordinary reader. But from the aforesaid verse to the end of the book the
small remaining section is a prose composition. And if it seem
incredible to any one that the Hebrews really have metres, and that,
whether we consider the Psalter or the Lamentations of Jeremiah, or
almost all the songs of Scripture, they bear a resemblance to our
Flaccus, and the Greek Pindar, and Alcæus, and Sappho, let him read
Philo, Josephus, Origen, Eusebius of Cæsarea, and with the aid of their
testimony he will find that I speak the truth. Wherefore, let my barking
critics listen as I tell them that my motive in toiling at this book was
not to censure the ancient translation, but that those passages in it
which are obscure, or those which have been omitted, or at all events,
through the fault of copyists have been corrupted, might have light
thrown upon them by our translation; for we have some slight knowledge
of Hebrew, and, as regards Latin, my life, almost from the cradle, has
been spent in the company of grammarians, rhetoricians, and
philosophers. But if, since the version of the Seventy was published,
and even now, when the Gospel of Christ is beaming forth, the Jewish
Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, judaising heretics, have been
welcomed amongst the Greeks—heretics, who, by their deceitful
translation, have concealed many mysteries of salvation, and yet, in the
Hexapla are found in the <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="vii.iii.viii-Page_492"></span>Churches and are expounded by
churchmen; ought not I, a Christian, born of Christian parents, and who
carry the standard of the cross on my brow, and am zealous to recover
what is lost, to correct what is corrupt, and to disclose in pure and
faithful language the mysteries of the Church, ought not I, let me ask,
much more to escape the reprobation of fastidious or malicious readers?
Let those who will keep the old books with their gold and silver letters
on purple skins, or, to follow the ordinary phrase, in “uncial
characters,” loads of writing rather than manuscripts, if only they will
leave for me and mine, our poor pages and copies which are less
remarkable for beauty than for accuracy. I have toiled to translate both
the Greek versions of the Seventy, and the Hebrew which is the basis of
my own, into Latin. Let every one choose which he likes, and <span
id="fr_5404"></span>[5405](#fn_5404.md) he will find out that what he
objects to in me, is the result of sound learning, not of malice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5400"></span>[491:5401](2060197.htm#fr_5400.md) <span
id="vii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii.viii-p4.2"></span>σχηματισμένος</span> .

<span id="fn_5401"></span>[491:5402](2060197.htm#fr_5401.md) <span
id="vii.iii.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p5"></span> A small fish well known to the
ancients, but apparently not identified with any species known to us.

<span id="fn_5402"></span>[491:5403](2060197.htm#fr_5402.md) <span
id="vii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p6"></span> [Job iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5403"></span>[491:5404](2060197.htm#fr_5403.md) <span
id="vii.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p7"></span> [Job
42.6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5404"></span>[492:5405](2060197.htm#fr_5404.md) <span
id="vii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.viii-p8"></span> Reading *studiosum me magis quam
malevolum probet.* Substituting *se* for *me,* according to some
manuscripts, we must translate “and thus show that he is actuated more
by a love of learning than by malice.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms.](2060198.md)
