[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060017)  [Next](2060019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.VII"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.VII-p1.1"></span>Letter VII. To Chromatius, Jovinus, and
Eusebius. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) </span>

<span id="v.VII-p3"></span>This letter (written like the preceding in
374 <span class="c17"><span id="v.VII-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>) is
addressed by Jerome to three of his former companions in the religious
life. It commends Bonosus (§3), asks guidance for the writer’s sister
(§4), and attacks the conduct of Lupicinus, Bishop of Stridon (§5).

<span id="v.VII-p4"></span>1. Those whom mutual affection has joined
together, a written page ought not to sunder. I must not, therefore,
distribute my words some to one and some to another. For so strong is
the love that binds you together that affection unites all three of you
in a bond no less close than that which naturally connects two of your
number. <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) Indeed, if the conditions
of writing would only admit of it, I should amalgamate your names and
express them under a single symbol. The very letter which I have
received from you challenges me in each of you to see all three, and in
all three to recognize each. When the reverend Evagrius transmitted it
to me in the corner of the desert which stretches between the Syrians
and the Saracens, my joy was intense. It wholly surpassed the rejoicings
felt at Rome when the defeat of Cannæ was retrieved, and Marcellus at
Nola cut to pieces the forces of Hannibal. Evagrius frequently comes to
see me, and cherishes me in Christ as his own bowels. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Yet as he is separated from me by a long
distance, his departure has gener<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="v.VII-Page_9"></span>ally left me as much regret as his arrival has
brought me joy.

<span id="v.VII-p7"></span>2. I converse with your letter, I embrace it,
it talks to me; it alone of those here speaks Latin. For hereabout you
must either learn a barbarous jargon or else hold your tongue. As often
as the lines—traced in a well-known hand—bring back to me the faces
which I hold so dear, either I am no longer here, or else you are here
with me. If you will credit the sincerity of affection, I seem to see
you all as I write this.

<span id="v.VII-p8"></span>Now at the outset I should like to ask you
one petulant question. Why is it that, when we are separated by so great
an interval of land and sea, you have sent me so short a letter? Is it
that I have deserved no better treatment, not having first written to
you? I cannot believe that paper can have failed you while Egypt
continues to supply its wares. Even if a Ptolemy had closed the seas,
King Attalus would still have sent you parchments from Pergamum, and so
by his skins you could have made up for the want of paper. The very name
parchment is derived from a historical incident of the kind which
occurred generations ago. <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) What
then? Am I to suppose the messenger to have been in haste? No matter how
long a letter may be, it can be written in the course of a night. Or had
you some business to attend to which prevented you from writing? No
claim is prior to that of affection. Two suppositions remain, either
that you felt disinclined to write or else that I did not deserve a
letter. Of the two I prefer to charge you with sloth than to condemn
myself as undeserving. For it is easier to mend neglect than to quicken
love.

<span id="v.VII-p10"></span>3. You tell me that Bonosus, like a true son
of the Fish, has taken to the water. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) As for me who am still foul with my old
stains, like the basilisk and the scorpion I haunt the dry places. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) Bonosus has his heel already on the
serpent’s head, whilst I am still as food to the same serpent which by
divine appointment devours the earth. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) He can scale already that ladder of which
the psalms of degrees <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) are a type;
whilst I, still weeping on its first step, hardly know whether I shall
ever be able to say: “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from
whence cometh my help.” <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) Amid the
threatening billows of the world he is sitting in the safe shelter of
his island, <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) that is, of the
church’s pale, and it may be that even now, like John, he is being
called to eat God’s book; <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) whilst
I, still lying in the sepulchre of my sins and bound with the chains of
my iniquities, wait for the Lord’s command in the Gospel: “Jerome, come
forth.” <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) But Bonosus has done
more than this. Like the prophet <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)
he has carried his girdle across the Euphrates (for all the devil’s
strength is in the loins <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) ), and
has hidden it there in a hole of the rock. Then, afterwards finding it
rent, he has sung: “O Lord, thou hast possessed my reins. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) Thou hast broken my bonds in sunder. I
will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving.” <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) But as for me, Nebuchadnezzar has
brought me in chains to Babylon, to the babel that is of a distracted
mind. There he has laid upon me the yoke of captivity; there inserting
in my nostrils a ring of iron, <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)
he has commanded me to sing one of the songs of Zion. To whom I have
said, “The Lord looseth the prisoners; the Lord openeth the eyes of the
blind.” <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) To complete my contrast
in a single sentence, whilst I pray for mercy Bonosus looks for a crown.

<span id="v.VII-p25"></span>4. My sister’s conversion is the fruit of
the efforts of the saintly Julian. He has planted, it is for you to
water, and the Lord will give the increase. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) Jesus Christ has given her to me to
console me for the wound which the devil has inflicted on her. He has
restored her from death to life. But in the words of the pagan poet, for
her

<span id="v.VII-p27"></span>There is no safety that I do not fear. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109)

<span id="v.VII-p29"></span>You know yourselves how slippery is the path
of youth—a path on which I have myself fallen, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) and which you are now traversing not
without fear. She, as she enters upon it, must have the advice and the
encouragement of all, she must be aided by frequent letters from you, my
reverend brothers. And—for “charity endureth all things,” <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) —I beg you to get from Pope <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) Valerian <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) a letter to confirm her resolution. A
girl’s courage, as you know, is strength<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>
<span id="v.VII-Page_10"></span>ened when she realizes that persons in
high place are interested in her.

<span id="v.VII-p34"></span>5. The fact is that my native land is a prey
to barbarism, that in it men’s only God is their belly, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) that they live only for the present,
and that the richer a man is the holier he is held to be. Moreover, to
use a well-worn proverb, the dish has a cover worthy of it; for
Lupicinus is their priest. <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) Like
lips like lettuce, as the saying goes—the only one, as Lucilius tells
us, <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) at which Crassus ever
laughed—the reference being to a donkey eating thistles. What I mean is
that an unstable pilot steers a leaking ship, and that the blind is
leading the blind straight to the pit. The ruler is like the ruled.

<span id="v.VII-p38"></span>6. I salute your mother and mine with the
respect which, as you know, I feel towards her. Associated with you as
she is in a holy life, she has the start of you, her holy children, in
that she is your mother. Her womb may thus be truly called golden. With
her I salute your sisters, who ought all to be welcomed wherever they
go, for they have triumphed over their sex and the world, and await the
Bridegroom’s coming, <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) their lamps
replenished with oil. O happy the house which is a home of a widowed
Anna, of virgins that are prophetesses, and of twin Samuels bred in the
Temple! <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) Fortunate the roof which
shelters the martyr-mother of the Maccabees, with her sons around her,
each and all wearing the martyr’s crown! <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) For although you confess Christ every
day by keeping His commandments, yet to this private glory you have
added the public one of an open confession; for it was through you that
the poison of the Arian heresy was formerly banished from your city.

<span id="v.VII-p42"></span>You are surprised perhaps at my thus making
a fresh beginning quite at the close of my letter. But what am I to do?
I cannot refuse expression to my feelings. The brief limits of a letter
compel me to be silent; my affection for you urges me to speak. I write
in haste, my language is confused and ill-arranged; but love knows
nothing of order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[8:91](2060018.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.VII-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p2"></span> Jovinus was archdeacon of Aquileia. All
three became bishops—Chromatius of Aquileia, the others of unknown sees.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[8:92](2060018.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.VII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p5"></span> Chromatius and Eusebius were brothers.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[8:93](2060018.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.VII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p6"></span> [Philem.
12](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#012)<span id="v.VII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[9:94](2060018.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.VII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p9"></span> See Pliny, H. N. xiii. 21.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[9:95](2060018.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.VII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p11"></span> The Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.VII-p11.1"></span>ΙΧΘΥΣ</span> represented to the early Christians
the sentence <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.VII-p11.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.VII-p11.3"></span>Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς Θεοῦ `Υὼς Σωτήρ</span>. Hence the
fish became a favorite emblem of Christ. Tertullian connects the symbol
with the water of baptism, saying: “We little fishes are born by our
Fish, Jesus Christ, in water and can thrive only by continuing in the
water.” The allusion in the text is to the baptism of Bonosus. See
Schaff, “Ante-Nicene Christianity,” p. 279.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[9:96](2060018.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.VII-p11.4"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p12"></span> [Deut. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)<span id="v.VII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[9:97](2060018.htm#fr_96) <span
id="v.VII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p13"></span> [Gen. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)<span id="v.VII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[9:98](2060018.htm#fr_97) <span
id="v.VII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p14"></span> Viz., [Psa.
cxx.-cxxxiv](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#000)<span
id="v.VII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[9:99](2060018.htm#fr_98) <span
id="v.VII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p15"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)<span id="v.VII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[9:100](2060018.htm#fr_99) <span
id="v.VII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p16"></span> See Letter III.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[9:101](2060018.htm#fr_100) <span
id="v.VII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p17"></span> [Rev.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#010)<span id="v.VII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[9:102](2060018.htm#fr_101) <span
id="v.VII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p18"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="v.VII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[9:103](2060018.htm#fr_102) <span
id="v.VII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p19"></span> [Jer.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#005)<span id="v.VII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[9:104](2060018.htm#fr_103) <span
id="v.VII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p20"></span> [Job xl.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016)<span id="v.VII-p20.1"></span> (said
of Behemoth); cf. Letter XXII. § 11.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[9:105](2060018.htm#fr_104) <span
id="v.VII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p21"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)<span id="v.VII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[9:106](2060018.htm#fr_105) <span
id="v.VII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p22"></span> [Ps.
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="v.VII-p22.1"></span>,
P.B.V.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[9:107](2060018.htm#fr_106) <span
id="v.VII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p23"></span> Cf. [2 Kings xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028)<span id="v.VII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[9:108](2060018.htm#fr_107) <span
id="v.VII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p24"></span> [Ps.
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003), [Ps.
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)<span id="v.VII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[9:109](2060018.htm#fr_108) <span
id="v.VII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p26"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="v.VII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[9:110](2060018.htm#fr_109) <span
id="v.VII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p28"></span> Virg. A. iv. 298.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[9:111](2060018.htm#fr_110) <span
id="v.VII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p30"></span> Jerome again refers to his own frailty in
Letters XIV. § 6, XVIII. § 11, and XLVIII. § 20.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[9:112](2060018.htm#fr_111) <span
id="v.VII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p31"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)<span id="v.VII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[9:113](2060018.htm#fr_112) <span
id="v.VII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p32"></span> *Papa.* The word “pope” was at this time
used as a name of respect (“father in God”) for bishops generally. Only
by degrees did it come to be restricted to the bishop of Rome. Similarly
the word *"imperator,”* originally applied to any Roman general, came to
be used of the Emperor alone.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[9:114](2060018.htm#fr_113) <span
id="v.VII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p33"></span> Bishop of Aquileia.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[10:115](2060018.htm#fr_114) <span
id="v.VII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p35"></span> [Phi. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="v.VII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[10:116](2060018.htm#fr_115) <span
id="v.VII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p36"></span> Sacerdos. In the letters this word
generally denotes a bishop. Lupicinus held the see of Stridon.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[10:117](2060018.htm#fr_116) <span
id="v.VII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p37"></span> Cic. de Fin. v. 30.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[10:118](2060018.htm#fr_117) <span
id="v.VII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p39"></span> [Matt. xxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#004)<span id="v.VII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[10:119](2060018.htm#fr_118) <span
id="v.VII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p40"></span> [Luke
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036), [Acts
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009), [1 Sam.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)<span id="v.VII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[10:120](2060018.htm#fr_119) <span
id="v.VII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p41"></span> [2 Macc.
vii](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#000)<span id="v.VII-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter VIII](2060019)
