[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060081)  [Next](2060083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXXI"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LXXI-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXI. To Lucinius.</span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p2"></span>Lucinius was a wealthy Spaniard of Bætica
who in conformity with the ascetic ideas of his time had made a vow of
continence with his wife Theodora. Being much interested in the study of
scripture he pro<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="v.LXXI-Page_152"></span>posed to visit Bethlehem, and in <span
class="c17"><span id="v.LXXI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397 sent several
scribes thither to transcribe for him Jerome’s principal writings. To
these on their return home Jerome now entrusts the following letter. In
it he encourages Lucinius to fulfil his purpose of coming to Bethlehem,
describes the books which he is sending to him, and answers two
questions relating to ecclesiastical usage. He also sends him some
trifling presents.

<span id="v.LXXI-p3"></span>Shortly after receiving the letter (written
in 398 <span class="c17"><span id="v.LXXI-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>)
Lucinius died and Jerome wrote to Theodora to console her for her loss
(Letter LXXV).

<span id="v.LXXI-p4"></span>1. Your letter which has suddenly arrived
was not expected by me, and coming in an unlooked for way it has helped
to rouse me from my torpor by the glad tidings which it conveys. I
hasten to embrace with the arms of love one whom my eyes have never
seen, and silently say to myself:—‘“oh that I had wings like a dove! for
then would I flee away and be at rest.”’ <span
id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) Then would I find him “whom my soul
loveth.” <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) In you the Lord’s
words are now truly fulfilled: “many shall come from the east and west
and shall sit down with Abraham.” <span
id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203) In those days the faith of my
Lucinius was foreshadowed in Cornelius, “centurion of the band called
the Italian band.” <span id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204) And when
the apostle Paul writes to the Romans: “whensoever I take my journey
into Spain I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my journey, and
to be brought on my way thitherward by you;” <span
id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) he shews by the tale of his
previous successes what he looked to gain from that province. <span
id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) Laying in a short time the
foundation of the gospel “from Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum,” <span id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) he enters Rome in
bonds, that he may free those who are in the bonds of error and
superstition. Two years he dwells in his own hired house <span
id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208) that he may give to us the house
eternal which is spoken of in both the testaments. <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) The apostle, the fisher of
men, <span id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) has cast forth his net,
and, among countless kinds of fish, has landed you like a magnificent
gilt-bream. You have left behind you the bitter waves, the salt tides,
the mountain-fissures; you have despised Leviathan who reigns in the
waters. <span id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) Your aim is to seek
the wilderness with Jesus and to sing the prophet’s song: “my soul
thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land
where no water is; to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen
thee in the sanctuary,” <span id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) or,
as he sings in another place, “lo, then would I wander far off and
remain in the wilderness. I would hasten my escape from the windy storm
and tempest.” <span id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) Since you have
left Sodom and are hastening to the mountains, I beseech you with a
father’s affection not to look behind you. Your hands have grasped the
handle of the plough, <span id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) the hem
of the Saviour’s garment, <span id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) and
His locks wet with the dew of night; <span
id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) do not let them go. Do not come
down from the housetop of virtue to seek for the clothes which you wore
of old, nor return home from the field. <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) Do not like Lot set your heart on
the plain or upon the pleasant gardens; <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) for these are watered not, as the
holy land, from heaven but by Jordan’s muddy stream made salt by contact
with the Dead Sea.

<span id="v.LXXI-p23"></span>2. Many begin but few persevere to the end.
“They which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the crown.” <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) But of us on the other hand it is
said: “So run that ye may obtain.” <span
id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) Our master of the games is not
grudging; he does not give the palm to one and disgrace another. His
wish is that all his athletes may alike win garlands. My soul rejoices,
yet the very greatness of my joy makes me feel sad. Like Ruth <span
id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) when I try to speak I burst into
tears. Zacchæus, the convert of an hour, is accounted worthy to receive
the Saviour as his guest. <span id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222)
Martha and Mary make ready a feast and then welcome the Lord to
it. <span id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) A harlot washes His feet
with her tears and against His burial anoints His body with the ointment
of good works. <span id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224) Simon the
leper invites the Master with His disciples and is not refused. <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) To Abraham it is said: “Get thee
out of thy country and from thy kindred and from thy father’s house,
unto a land that I will shew thee.” <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) He leaves Chaldæa, he leaves
Mesopotamia; he seeks what he knows not, not to lose Him whom he has
found. He does not deem it possible to keep both his country and his
Lord; even at that early day he is already fulfilling the prophet
David’s words: “I am a stranger with thee and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were.” <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) He is called
“a Hebrew,” in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXXI-p32.2"></span>περάτής</span>, a passer-over, for not content
with present excellence but forgetting those things which are behind he
reaches forth to that which is before. <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) He makes his own the words of the
psalmist: “they shall go from strength to strength.” <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) Thus his name has a mystic meaning
and he has opened for you a way to seek not your own things but those of
another. You too must leave your home as he did, and must take for your
parents, brothers, and relations only those <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="v.LXXI-Page_153"></span>who are linked to you in
Christ. “Whosoever,” He says, “shall do the will of my father…the same
is my brother and sister and mother.” <span
id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230)

<span id="v.LXXI-p36"></span>3. You have with you one who was once your
partner in the flesh but is now your partner in the spirit; once your
wife but now your sister; once a woman but now a man; once an inferior
but now an equal. <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) Under the
same yoke as you she hastens toward the same heavenly kingdom.

<span id="v.LXXI-p38"></span>A too careful management of one’s income, a
too near calculation of one’s expenses—these are habits not easily laid
aside. Yet to escape the Egyptian woman Joseph had to leave his garment
with her. <span id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) And the young man
who followed Jesus having a linen cloth cast about him, when he was
assailed by the servants had to throw away his earthly covering and to
flee naked. <span id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) Elijah also when
he was carried up in a chariot of fire to heaven left his mantle of
sheepskin on earth. <span id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) Elisha
used for sacrifice the oxen and the yokes which hitherto he had employed
in his work. <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) We read in
Ecclesiasticus: “he that toucheth pitch shall be defiled
therewith.” <span id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) As long as we are
occupied with the things of the world, as long as our soul is fettered
with possessions and revenues, we cannot think freely of God. “For what
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?” <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) “Ye cannot,” the Lord says, “serve
God and Mammon.” <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238) Now the
laying aside of money is for those who are beginners in the way, not for
those who are made perfect. Heathens like Antisthenes <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) and Crates <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240) the Theban have done as much before
now. But to offer one’s self to God, this is the mark of Christians and
apostles. These like the widow out of their penury cast their two mites
into the treasury, and giving all that they have to the Lord are counted
worthy to hear his words: “ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging
the twelve tribes of Israel.” <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241)

<span id="v.LXXI-p49"></span>4. You can see for yourself why I mention
these things; without expressly saying it I am inviting you to take up
your abode at the holy places. Your abundance has supported the want of
many that some day their riches may abound to supply your want; <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) you have made to yourself “friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness that they may receive you into
everlasting habitations.” <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243)
Such conduct deserves praise and merits to be compared with the virtue
of apostolic times. Then, as you know, believers sold their possessions
and brought the prices of them and laid them down at the apostles’
feet: <span id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) a symbolic act designed
to shew that men must trample on covetousness. But the Lord yearns for
believers’ souls more than for their riches. We read in the Proverbs:
“the ransom of a man’s soul are his own riches.” <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) We may, indeed, take a man’s own
riches to be those which do not come from some one else, or from
plunder; according to the precept: “honour God with thy just
labours.” <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) But the sense is
better if we understand a man’s “own riches” to be those hidden
treasures which no thief can steal and no robber wrest from him. <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247)

<span id="v.LXXI-p56"></span>5. As for my poor works which from no
merits of theirs but simply from your own kindness you say that you
desire to have; I have given them to your servants to transcribe, I have
seen the paper-copies made by them, and I have repeatedly ordered them
to correct them by a diligent comparison with the originals. For so many
are the pilgrims passing to and fro that I have been unable to read so
many volumes. They have found me also troubled by a long illness from
which this Lent I am slowly recovering as they are leaving me. If then
you find errors or omissions which interfere with the sense, these you
must impute not to me but to your own servants; they are due to the
ignorance or carelessness of the copyists, who write down not what they
find but what they take to be the meaning, and do but expose their own
mistakes when they try to correct those of others. It is a false rumour
which has reached you to the effect that I have translated the books of
Josephus <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) and the volumes of
the holy men Papias <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) and
Polycarp. <span id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250) I have neither the
leisure nor the ability to preserve the charm of these masterpieces in
another tongue. Of Origen <span id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) and
Didymus <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) I have translated a
few things, to set before my countrymen some specimens of Greek
teaching. The canon of the Hebrew verity <span
id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) —except the octoteuch <span
id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) which I have at present in hand—I
have placed at the disposal of your slaves and copyists. Doubtless you
already possess the version from the septuagint <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255) <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>
<span id="v.LXXI-Page_154"></span>which many years ago I diligently
revised for the use of students. The new testament I have restored to
the authoritative form of the Greek original. <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256) For as the true text of the old
testament can only be tested by a reference to the Hebrew, so the true
text of the new requires for its decision an appeal to the Greek.

<span id="v.LXXI-p66"></span>6. You ask me whether you ought to fast on
the Sabbath <span id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) and to receive
the eucharist daily according to the custom—as currently reported—of the
churches of Rome and Spain. <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258)
Both these points have been treated by the eloquent Hippolytus, <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) and several writers have collected
passages from different authors bearing upon them. The best advice that
I can give you is this. Church-traditions—especially when they do not
run counter to the faith—are to be observed in the form in which
previous generations have handed them down; and the use of one church is
not to be annulled because it is contrary to that of another. <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260) As regards fasting, I wish that we
could practise it without intermission as—according to the Acts of the
Apostles <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) —Paul did and the
believers with him even in the season of Pentecost and on the Lord’s
Day. They are not to be accused of manichæism, for carnal food ought not
to be preferred before spiritual. As regards the holy eucharist you may
receive it at all times <span id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262)
without qualm of conscience or disapproval from me. You may listen to
the psalmist’s words:—“O taste and see that the Lord is good;” <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) you may sing as he does:—“my heart
poureth forth a good word.” <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264)
But do not mistake my meaning. You are not to fast on feast-days,
neither are you to abstain on the week days in Pentecost. <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) In such matters each province may
follow its own inclinations, and the traditions which have been handed
down should be regarded as apostolic laws.

<span id="v.LXXI-p76"></span>7. You send me two small cloaks and a
sheepskin mantle from your wardrobe and ask me to wear them myself or to
give them to the poor. In return I send to you and your sister <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) in the Lord four small haircloths
suitable to your religious profession and to your daily needs, for they
are the mark of poverty and the outward witness of a continual
penitence. To these I have added a manuscript containing Isaiah’s ten
most obscure visions which I have lately elucidated with a critical
commentary. When you look upon these trifles call to mind the friend in
whom you delight and hasten the voyage which you have for a time
deferred. And because “the way of man is not in himself” but it is the
Lord that “directeth his steps;” <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) if any hindrance should interfere—I
hope none may—to prevent you from coming, I pray that distance may not
sever those united in affection and that I may find my Lucinius present
in absence through an interchange of letters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[152:2202](2060082.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="v.LXXI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p5"></span> [Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="v.LXXI-p5.1"></span>. PBV.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[152:2203](2060082.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="v.LXXI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p6"></span> [Song of Sol.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[152:2204](2060082.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="v.LXXI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p7"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="v.LXXI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[152:2205](2060082.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="v.LXXI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p8"></span> [Acts x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[152:2206](2060082.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="v.LXXI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p9"></span> [Rom. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024)<span id="v.LXXI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[152:2207](2060082.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="v.LXXI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p10"></span> Italy.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[152:2208](2060082.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="v.LXXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p11"></span> [Rom. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)<span id="v.LXXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[152:2209](2060082.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="v.LXXI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p12"></span> [Acts xxviii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030)<span id="v.LXXI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[152:2210](2060082.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="v.LXXI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p13"></span> Utriusque instrumenti æternam domum. The
‘twofold record’ is that of the old and new testaments both of which
speak of the church under the figure of a house. For the term
“instrument” see note on Letter.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[152:2211](2060082.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="v.LXXI-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p14"></span> [Matt. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019)<span id="v.LXXI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[152:2212](2060082.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="v.LXXI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p15"></span> Cf. [Ps. civ.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#026)<span id="v.LXXI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[152:2213](2060082.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="v.LXXI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p16"></span> [Ps.
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[152:2214](2060082.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="v.LXXI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p17"></span> [Ps.
55:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[152:2215](2060082.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="v.LXXI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p18"></span> [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="v.LXXI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[152:2216](2060082.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="v.LXXI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p19"></span> [Matt. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)<span id="v.LXXI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[152:2217](2060082.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="v.LXXI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p20"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[152:2218](2060082.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="v.LXXI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p21"></span> [Matt.
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018)<span id="v.LXXI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[152:2219](2060082.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="v.LXXI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p22"></span> [Gen. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)<span id="v.LXXI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[152:2220](2060082.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="v.LXXI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p24"></span> Jerome quoting from memory substitutes
‘crown’ for ‘prize.’

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[152:2221](2060082.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="v.LXXI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p25"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span id="v.LXXI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[152:2222](2060082.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="v.LXXI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p26"></span> [Ruth i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#014)<span id="v.LXXI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[152:2223](2060082.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="v.LXXI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p27"></span> [Luke xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005)<span id="v.LXXI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[152:2224](2060082.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="v.LXXI-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p28"></span> [Joh. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[152:2225](2060082.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="v.LXXI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p29"></span> [Mark xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[152:2226](2060082.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="v.LXXI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p30"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006)<span id="v.LXXI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[152:2227](2060082.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="v.LXXI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p31"></span> [Gen. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[152:2228](2060082.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="v.LXXI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p32"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="v.LXXI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[152:2229](2060082.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="v.LXXI-p32.3"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p33"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="v.LXXI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[152:2230](2060082.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="v.LXXI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p34"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007)<span id="v.LXXI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[153:2231](2060082.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="v.LXXI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p35"></span> [Matt. xii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050)<span id="v.LXXI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[153:2232](2060082.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="v.LXXI-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p37"></span> His wife Theodora.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[153:2233](2060082.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="v.LXXI-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p39"></span> [Gen. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#012)<span id="v.LXXI-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[153:2234](2060082.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="v.LXXI-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p40"></span> [Mark
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#052)<span id="v.LXXI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[153:2235](2060082.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="v.LXXI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p41"></span> [2 Kings
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013)<span id="v.LXXI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[153:2236](2060082.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="v.LXXI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p42"></span> [1 Kings xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#021)<span id="v.LXXI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[153:2237](2060082.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="v.LXXI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p43"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
13.1](../../../bib/apo/sir013.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[153:2238](2060082.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="v.LXXI-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p44"></span> [2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[153:2239](2060082.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="v.LXXI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p45"></span> [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="v.LXXI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[153:2240](2060082.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="v.LXXI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p46"></span> A disciple of Socrates, subsequently the
founder of the Cynic School. Fl. 366 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXI-p46.1"></span>b.c.</span>

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[153:2241](2060082.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="v.LXXI-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p47"></span> See note on Letter LXVI. § 8.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[153:2242](2060082.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="v.LXXI-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p48"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="v.LXXI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[153:2243](2060082.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="v.LXXI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p50"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014)<span id="v.LXXI-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[153:2244](2060082.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="v.LXXI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p51"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="v.LXXI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[153:2245](2060082.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="v.LXXI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p52"></span> [Acts
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span id="v.LXXI-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[153:2246](2060082.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="v.LXXI-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p53"></span> [Prov. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXI-p53.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[153:2247](2060082.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="v.LXXI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p54"></span> [Prov. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)<span id="v.LXXI-p54.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[153:2248](2060082.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="v.LXXI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p55"></span> Cf. [Matt. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#020)<span id="v.LXXI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[153:2249](2060082.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="v.LXXI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p57"></span> See note on Letter XXII. § 35.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[153:2250](2060082.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="v.LXXI-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p58"></span> A writer of the sub-apostolic age who had
been a disciple of the apostle John. He was bishop of Hierapolis in
Phrygia.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[153:2251](2060082.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="v.LXXI-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p59"></span> Another sub-apostolic writer who was also
a disciple of John. He became bishop of Smyrna and underwent martyrdom
at the age of 86.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[153:2252](2060082.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="v.LXXI-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p60"></span> See note on Letter XXXIII.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[153:2253](2060082.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="v.LXXI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p61"></span> The blind theologian of Alexandria by
whose teaching Jerome had himself profited. See Letter XXXIV. § 3.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[153:2254](2060082.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="v.LXXI-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p62"></span> The old testament as translated direct
from the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[153:2255](2060082.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="v.LXXI-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p63"></span> The first eight books.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[153:2256](2060082.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="v.LXXI-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p64"></span> This work Jerome accomplished between the
years 383 and 390 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXI-p64.1"></span>a.d.</span> Only the Psalter and Job are
extant.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[154:2257](2060082.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="v.LXXI-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p65"></span> This task he undertook at the request of
pope Damasus in 383 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXI-p65.1"></span>a.d.</span> See Letter XXVII.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[154:2258](2060082.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="v.LXXI-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p67"></span> *i.e.* on Saturday.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[154:2259](2060082.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="v.LXXI-p67.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p68"></span> At this time the communion was celebrated
daily at Constantinople, in Africa, and in Spain. At Rome it was
celebrated on every day of the week except Saturday (the Sabbath). See
Socrates, H. E. v. 22.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[154:2260](2060082.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="v.LXXI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p69"></span> A leading Roman churchman, bishop of
Portus, in the early part of the third century, the rival and enemy of
pope Callistus and author of many theological treatises, one of
which—the *Refutation of all Heresies*—has recently become famous.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[154:2261](2060082.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="v.LXXI-p69.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p70"></span> Compare the similar advice given by
Gregory the Great to Augustine of Canterbury (Bede, H. E. 1. 27).

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[154:2262](2060082.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="v.LXXI-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p71"></span> Nothing in the book of Acts bears out this
statement. Fasting at the times mentioned was forbidden in Jerome’s day.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[154:2263](2060082.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="v.LXXI-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p72"></span> Daily if you will and on fast days as well
as on feast days.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[154:2264](2060082.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="v.LXXI-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p73"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXI-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[154:2265](2060082.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="v.LXXI-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p74"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXI-p74.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[154:2266](2060082.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="v.LXXI-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p75"></span> *i.e.* the period of fifty days between
Easterday and Whitsunday. See Letter XLI. §3.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[154:2267](2060082.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="v.LXXI-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p77"></span> *i.e.* his wife Theodora.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[154:2268](2060082.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="v.LXXI-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXI-p78"></span> [Jer. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="v.LXXI-p78.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXII](2060083)
