[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060079)  [Next](2060081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXIX"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter LXIX. To Oceanus.</span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p2"></span>Oceanus, a Roman nobleman zealous for the
faith, had asked Jerome to back him in a protest against Carterius a
Spanish bishop who contrary to the apostolic rule that a bishop is to be
“the husband of one wife” had married a second time. Jerome refuses to
take the line suggested on the ground that Carterius’s first marriage
having preceded his baptism cannot be taken into account. He therefore
advises Oceanus to let the matter drop. The date of the letter is 397
<span class="c17"><span id="v.LXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p3"></span>1. I never supposed, son Oceanus, that the
clemency of the Emperor would be assailed by criminals, or that persons
just released from prison would after their own experience of its filth
and fetters complain of relaxations allowed to others. In the gospel he
who envies another’s salvation is thus addressed: “Friend, is thine eye
evil because I am good?” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) “God
hath concluded them all in sin <span
id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) that he might have mercy upon
all.” <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) “When sin abounded
grace did much more abound.” <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012)
The first born of Egypt are slain and not even a beast belonging to
Israel is left behind in Egypt. <span
id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) The heresy of the Cainites rises
before me and the once slain viper lifts up its shattered head,
destroying not partially as most often hitherto but altogether the
mystery of Christ. <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) This <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span id="v.LXIX-Page_142"></span>heresy
declares that there are some sins which Christ cannot cleanse with His
blood, and that the scars left by old transgressions on the body and the
soul are sometimes so deep that they cannot be effaced by the remedy
which He supplies. What else is this but to say that Christ has died in
vain? He has indeed died in vain if there are any whom He cannot make
alive. When John the Baptist points to Christ and says: “Behold the lamb
of God which taketh away the sins <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) of the world” <span
id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) he utters a falsehood if after all
there are persons living whose sins Christ has not taken away. For
either it must be shewn that they are not of the world whom the grace of
Christ thus ignores: or, if it be admitted that they are of the world,
we have to choose between the horns of a dilemma. Either they have been
delivered from their sins, in which case the power of Christ to save all
men is proved; or they remain undelivered and as it were still under the
charge of misdoing, in which case Christ is proved to be powerless. But
far be it from us to believe of the Almighty that He is powerless in
aught. For “what things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the
Son likewise.” <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) To ascribe
weakness to the Son is to ascribe it to the Father also. The shepherd
carries the whole sheep and not only this or that part of it: all the
epistles of the apostle <span id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) speak
continually of the grace of Christ. And, lest a single announcement of
this grace might seem a little thing, Peter says: “Grace unto you and
peace be multiplied.” <span id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) The
Scripture promises abundance; yet we affirm scarcity.

<span id="v.LXIX-p15"></span>2. To what does all this tend, you ask. I
reply; you remember the question that you proposed. It was this. A
Spanish bishop named Carterius, old in years and in the priesthood has
married two wives, one before he was baptized, and, she having died,
another since he has passed through the laver; and you are of opinion
that he has violated the precept of the apostle, who in his list of
episcopal qualifications commands that a bishop shall be “the husband of
one wife.” <span id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) I am surprised
that you have pilloried an individual when the whole world is filled
with persons ordained in similar circumstances; I do not mean presbyters
or clergy of lower rank, but speak only of bishops of whom if I were to
enumerate them all one by one I should gather a sufficient number to
surpass the crowd which attended the synod of Ariminum. <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) Still it does not become me to
defend one by incriminating many; nor if reason condemns a sin, to make
the number of those who commit it an excuse for it. At Rome an eloquent
pleader caught me, as the phrase goes, between the horns of a dilemma:
whichever way I turned I was held fast. Is it sinful, said he, to marry
a wife, or is it not sinful? I in my simplicity, not being wary enough
to avoid the snare laid for me, replied that it was not sinful. Then he
propounded another question: Is it good deeds which are done away with
in baptism or is it evil? Here again my simplicity induced me to say
that it was sins which were forgiven. At this point, just as I began to
fancy myself secure, the horns of the dilemma commenced to close in on
me from this side and from that and their points hidden before began to
shew themselves. If, said he, to marry a wife is not sinful, and if
baptism forgives sins, all that is not done away with is held over. On
the instant a dark mist rose before my eyes as though I had been struck
by a strong boxer. Yet recalling the sophism attributed to
Chrysippus: <span id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) “Whether you lie
or whether you speak the truth, in either case you lie,” I came to
myself again and turned upon my opponent with a dilemma of my own. Pray
tell me, I said, does baptism make a new man or does it not? He
grudgingly admitted that it did. I pursued my advantage by saying, Does
it make him wholly new or only partially so? He replied, Wholly. Then I
asked, Is there nothing then of the old man held over in baptism? He
assented. Hereupon I propounded the argument; If baptism makes a man new
and creates a wholly new being, and if there is nothing of the old man
held over in the new, that which once was in the old cannot be imputed
to the new. At first my thorny friend held his tongue; afterwards
however, making Piso’s mistake, <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) though he had nothing to say he
could not remain silent. Sweat stood upon his brow, his cheeks turned
pale, his lips trembled, his tongue clove to his mouth, his throat
became dry; and fear (not age) made him cower. At last he broke out in
these words, Have you not read how the apostle permits none to be
ordained priest save the husband of one wife, and that what he lays
stress upon is the fact of the marriage and not the time at which it is
contracted? Now as the fellow had challenged me with syllogisms, and as
I saw that he was feeling his way towards some intricate and awkward
questions, I proceeded to turn his own weapons against him. I said
therefore, Whom did the apostle select for the episcopate, baptized
persons or catechumens? He refused <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>
<span id="v.LXIX-Page_143"></span>to reply. I however made a fresh
onslaught repeating my question a second time and a third. You would
have taken him for Niobe changed to stone by excessive weeping. I turned
to the audience and said: It is all the same to me, good people, whether
I bind my opponent awake or sleeping; but it is easier to fetter a man
who offers no resistance. If those whom the apostle admits into the
ranks of the clergy are not catechumens but the faithful, and if he who
is ordained bishop is always one of the faithful, being one of the
faithful he cannot have the faults of a catechumen imputed to him. Such
were the darts I hurled at my paralysed opponent. Such the quivering
spears I cast at him. At last his mouth opened and he vomited forth the
contents of his mind. Certainly, he blurted out, that is the doctrine of
the apostle Paul.

<span id="v.LXIX-p20"></span>3. Accordingly I bring out two epistles of
the apostle, the first to Timothy, and the second to Titus. In the first
is the following passage: “If a man desire the office of a bishop he
desireth a good work. A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of
one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt
to teach, not given to wine, no striker…but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous; one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in
subjection with all gravity. (For if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the church of God?) Not a novice lest
being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he
fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.” <span
id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) While immediately at the
commencement of the epistle to Titus the following behests are laid
down: “For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou shouldest set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I
had appointed thee: if any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children not accused of riot or unruly. For a bishop must be
blameless as the steward of God; not self-willed, not soon angry, not
given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre; but a lover of
hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate; holding
fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by
sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.” <span
id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) In both epistles commandment is
given that only monogamists should be chosen for the clerical office
whether as bishops or as presbyters. <span
id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) Indeed with the ancients these
names were synonymous, one alluding to the office, the other to the age
of the clergy. No one at any rate can doubt that the apostle is speaking
only of those who have been baptized. If therefore it in no wise
prejudices the case of one who is to be ordained bishop that before his
baptism he has not possessed all the requisite qualifications (for it is
asked what he is and not what he has been), why should a previous
marriage—the one thing which is in itself not sinful—prove a hindrance
to his ordination? You argue that as his marriage was not a sin it was
not done away with at his baptism. This is news to me indeed, that what
in itself was not a sin is to be reckoned as such. All fornication and
contamination with open vice, impiety towards God, parricide and incest,
the change of the natural use of the sexes into that which is against
nature <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) and all extraordinary
lusts are washed away in the fountain of Christ. Can it be possible that
the stains of marriage are indelible, and that harlotry is judged more
leniently than honourable wedlock? I do not, Carterius might say, hold
you to blame for the hosts of mistresses and the troops of
favourites <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) that you have
kept; I do not charge you with your bloodshedding and sow-like
wallowings in the mire of uncleanness: yet you are ready to drag from
her grave for my confusion my poor wife, who has been dead long years,
and whom I married that I might be kept from those sins into which you
have fallen. Tell this to the heathen who form the church’s harvest with
which she stores her granaries; tell this to the catechumens who seek
admission to the number of the faithful; tell them, I say, not to
contract marriages before their baptism, not to enter upon honourable
wedlock, but like the Scots and the Atacotti <span
id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) and the people of Plato’s
republic <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) to have community of
wives and no discrimination of children, nay more, to beware of any
semblance even of matrimony; lest, after they have come to believe in
Christ, He shall tell them that those whom they have had have not been
concubines or mistresses but wedded wives.

<span id="v.LXIX-p28"></span>4. Let every man examine his own conscience
and let him deplore the violence he has done to it at every period of
his life; and then when he has brought himself to deliver a true
judgment on his own former misdeeds, let him give ear to the chiding of
Jesus: “Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye;
and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
brother’s eye.” <span id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) Truly like
the scribes and pharisees we strain out the gnat and swallow the camel,
we pay tithe of mint and anise, and we omit the just judgment which God
requires. <span id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) What parallel can
be drawn between a wife <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="v.LXIX-Page_144"></span>and a prostitute? Is it fair to make a
marriage now dissolved by death a ground of accusation, while dissolute
living wins for itself a garland of praise? He, had his former wife
lived, would not have married another; but as for you, how can you
defend the bestial unions you indiscriminately make? Perhaps indeed you
will say that you feared to contract marriage lest by so doing you might
disqualify yourself for ordination. He took a wife that he might have
children by her; you by taking a harlot have lost the hope of children.
He withdrew into the privacy of his own chamber when he sought to obey
nature and to win God’s blessing: “Be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the earth.” <span id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033) You on
the contrary outraged public decency in the hot eagerness of your lust.
He covered a lawful indulgence beneath a veil of modesty; you pursued an
unlawful one shamelessly before the eyes of all. For him it is written
“Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled,” while to you the words
are read, “but whoremongers and adulterers God wilt judge,” <span
id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034) and “if any man destroyeth the
temple of God, him shall God destroy.” <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035) All iniquities, we are told, are
forgiven us at our baptism, and when once we have received God’s mercy
we need not afterwards dread from Him the severity of a judge. The
apostle says:—“And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God.” <span id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036) All
sins then are forgiven; it is an honest and faithful saying. But I ask
you, how comes it that, while your uncleanness is washed away, my
cleanness is made unclean? You reply, “No, it is not made unclean, it
remains just what it was. Had it been uncleanness, it would have been
washed away like mine.” I want to know what you mean by this shuffling.
Your remarks seem to have no more point in them than the round end of a
pestle. Is a thing sin because it is not sin? or is a thing unclean
because it is not unclean? The Lord, you say, has not forgiven because
He had nothing to forgive; yet because He has not forgiven, that which
has not been forgiven still remains.

<span id="v.LXIX-p35"></span>5. What the true effect of baptism is, and
what is the real grace conveyed by water hallowed in Christ, I will
presently tell you; meantime I will deal with this argument as it
deserves. ‘An ill knot,’ says the common proverb, ‘requires but an ill
wedge to split it.’ The text quoted by the objector, “a bishop must be
the husband of one wife,” admits of quite another explanation. The
apostle came of the Jews and the primitive Christian church was gathered
out of the remnants of Israel. Paul knew that the Law allowed men to
have children by several wives, <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037) and was aware that the example of
the patriarchs had made polygamy familiar to the people. Even the very
priests might at their own discretion enjoy the same license. <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) He gave commandment therefore that
the priests of the church should not claim this liberty, that they
should not take two wives or three together, but that they should each
have but one wife at one time. Perhaps you may say that this explanation
which I have given is disputed; in that case listen to another. You must
not have a monopoly of bending the Law to suit your will instead of
bending your will to suit the Law. Some by a strained interpretation say
that wives are in this passage to be taken for churches and husbands for
their bishops. A decree was made by the fathers assembled at the council
of Nicæa <span id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) that no bishop
should be translated from one church to another, lest scorning the
society of a poor yet virgin see he should seek the embraces of a
wealthy and adulterous one. For as the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXIX-p38.1"></span>λογισμόι</span>, that is, “disputings,” refers
to the fault and misdoing of sons in the faith, <span
id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040) and as the precept concerning the
management of a house refers to the right direction of body and of
soul, <span id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041) so by the wives of the
bishops we are to understand their churches. Concerning whom it is
written in Isaiah, “Make haste ye women and come from the show, for it
is a people of no understanding.” <span
id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042) And again “Rise up, ye women that
are wealthy, <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043) and hear my
voice.” <span id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) And in the Book of
Proverbs, “Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies. The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her.” <span
id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045) In the same book too it is written,
“Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down
with her hands.” <span id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) Nor does
this, say they, derogate from the dignity of the episcopate; for the
same figure is used in relation to God. Jeremiah writes: “As a wife
treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously
with me, O house of Israel.” <span id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047)
And the apostle employs the same comparison: “I have espoused you,” he
says to his converts, “to one husband, that I may present you as a
chaste virgin to Christ.” <span id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048) The
word woman is in the Greek ambiguous and should in all these places be
understood as meaning wife. You will say that this interpretation is
harsh and does violence to the sense. In that case give back to the
scripture its simple <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="v.LXIX-Page_145"></span>meaning and save me from the necessity of
fighting you on your own ground. <span
id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) I will ask you the following
question, Can a man who before his baptism has kept a concubine, and
after her death has received baptism and has taken a wife, become a
clergyman or not? You will answer me that he can, because his first
partner was a concubine and not a wife. What the apostle condemns then,
it would seem, is not mere sexual intercourse but marriage contracts and
conjugal rights. Many persons, we see, because of narrow circumstances
refuse to take upon them the burthen of matrimony. Instead of taking
wives they live with their maid-servants and bring up as their own the
children which these bear to them. Thus, if through the bounty of the
Emperor they gain for their mistresses the right of wearing a matron’s
robes, <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) they will at once come
beneath the yoke of the apostle and sorely against their will will have
to receive their partners as their wedded wives. But, if their poverty
prevents them from obtaining an imperial rescript such as I have
mentioned, the decrees of the Church will vary with the laws of Rome. Be
careful therefore not to interpret the words “the husband of one wife,”
that is, of one woman, as approving indiscriminate intercourse and
condemning only contracts of marriage.

<span id="v.LXIX-p50"></span>I bring forward all these explanations not
for the purpose of resisting the true and simple sense of the words in
question but to shew you that you must take the holy scriptures as they
are written, and that you must not empty of its efficacy the baptismal
rite ordained by the Saviour, or render vain the whole mystery of the
cross.

<span id="v.LXIX-p51"></span>6. Let me now fulfil the promise I made a
little while ago and with all the skill of a rhetorician sing the
praises of water and of baptism. In the beginning the earth was without
form and void, there was no dazzling sun or pale moon, there were no
glittering stars. There was nothing but matter inorganic and invisible,
and even this was lost in abysmal depths and shrouded in a distorting
gloom. The Spirit of God above moved, as a charioteer, over the face of
the waters, <span id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) and produced from
them the infant world, a type of the Christian child that is drawn from
the laver of baptism. A firmament is constructed between heaven and
earth, and to this is allotted the name heaven,—in the Hebrew *Shamayim*
or ‘what comes out of the waters,’— <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) and the waters which are above the
heavens are parted from the others to the praise of God. Wherefore also
in the vision of the prophet Ezekiel there is seen above the cherubim a
crystal stretched forth, <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) that
is, the compressed and denser waters. The first living beings come out
of the waters; and believers soar out of the laver with wings to heaven.
Man is formed out of clay <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) and
God holds the mystic waters in the hollow of his hand. <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055) In Eden a garden <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056) is planted, and a fountain in the
midst of it parts into four heads. <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057) This is the same fountain which
Ezekiel later on describes as issuing out of the temple and flowing
towards the rising of the sun, until it heals the bitter waters and
quickens those that are dead. <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058)
When the world falls into sin nothing but a flood of waters can cleanse
it again. But as soon as the foul bird of wickedness is driven away, the
dove of the Holy Spirit comes to Noah <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) as it came afterwards to Christ in
the Jordan, <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060) and, carrying in
its beak a branch betokening restoration and light, brings tidings of
peace to the whole world. Pharaoh and his host, loth to allow God’s
people to leave Egypt, are overwhelmed in the Red Sea figuring thereby
our baptism. His destruction is thus described in the book of Psalms:
“Thou didst endow the sea with virtue through thy power: thou brakest
the heads of the dragons in the waters: thou brakest the heads of
leviathan in pieces.” <span id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061) For
this reason adders and scorpions haunt dry places <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062) and whenever they come near water
behave as if rabid or insane. <span id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063)
As wood sweetens Marah so that seventy palm-trees are watered by its
streams, so the cross makes the waters of the law lifegiving to the
seventy who are Christ’s apostles. <span
id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064) It is Abraham and Isaac who dig
wells, the Philistines who try to prevent them. <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065) Beersheba too, the city of the
oath, <span id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) and \[Gihon\], the
scene of Solomon’s coronation, <span
id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067) derive their names from springs. It
is beside a well that Eliezer finds Rebekah. <span
id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068) Rachel too is a drawer of water and
wins a kiss thereby <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) from the
supplanter <span id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) Jacob. When the
daughters of the priests of Midian are in a strait to reach the well,
Moses opens a way for them and delivers them from outrage. <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) The Lord’s forerunner at Salem (a
name which means peace or perfection) makes ready the people for Christ
with spring-water. <span id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072) The
Saviour Himself does not preach the kingdom of heaven until by His
baptismal immersion He has cleansed the Jordan. <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) <span id="page_146">p. 146</span>
<span id="v.LXIX-Page_146"></span>Water is the matter of His first
miracle <span id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) and it is from a well
that the Samaritan woman is bidden to slake her thirst. <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) To Nicodemus He secretly
says:—“Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.” <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) As
His earthly course began with water, so it ended with it. His side is
pierced by the spear, and blood and water flow forth, twin emblems of
baptism and of martyrdom. <span id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077)
After His resurrection also, when sending His apostles to the Gentiles,
He commands them to baptize these in the mystery of the Trinity. <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) The Jewish people repenting of
their misdoing are sent forthwith by Peter to be baptized. <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) Before Sion travails she brings
forth children, and a nation is born at once. <span
id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) Paul the persecutor of the church,
that ravening wolf out of Benjamin, <span
id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) bows his head before Ananias one of
Christ’s sheep, and only recovers his sight when he applies the remedy
of baptism. <span id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) By the reading of
the prophet the eunuch of Candace the queen of Ethiopia is made ready
for the baptism of Christ. <span id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083)
Though it is against nature the Ethiopian does change his skin and the
leopard his spots. <span id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) Those who
have received only John’s baptism and have no knowledge of the Holy
Spirit are baptized again, lest any should suppose that water
unsanctified thereby could suffice for the salvation of either Jew or
Gentile. <span id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) “The voice of the
Lord is upon the waters…The Lord is upon many waters…the Lord maketh the
flood to inhabit it.” <span id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) His
“teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn which came up from
the washing; whereof everyone bear twins, and none is barren among
them.” <span id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) If none is barren
among them, all of them must have udders filled with milk and be able to
say with the apostle: “Ye are my little children, of whom I travail in
birth again until Christ be formed in you;” <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) and “I have fed you with milk and
not with meat.” <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) And it is to
the grace of baptism that the prophecy of Micah refers: “He will turn
again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities,
and will cast all our sins <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090)
into the depths of the sea.” <span id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091)

<span id="v.LXIX-p93"></span>7. How then can you say that all sins are
drowned in the baptismal laver if a man’s wife is still to swim on the
surface as evidence against him? The psalmist says:—“Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity.” <span
id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) It would seem that we must add
something to this song and say “Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputeth not a wife.” Let us hear also the declaration which Ezekiel the
so called “son of man” <span id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) makes
concerning the virtue of him who is to be the true son of man, the
Christian: “I will take you,” he says, “from among the heathen…then will
I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness…a new heart also will I give you and a new spirit.” <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) “From all your filthiness” he says,
“will I cleanse you.” If all is taken away nothing can be left. If
filthiness is cleansed, how much more is cleanness kept from defilement.
“A new heart also will I give you and a new spirit.” Yes, for “in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything nor uncircumcision but a
new nature.” <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) Wherefore the
song also which we sing is a new song, <span
id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) and putting off the old man <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) we walk not in the oldness of the
letter but in the newness of the spirit. <span
id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) This is the new stone wherein the
new name is written, “which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth
it.” <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) “Know ye not,” says the
apostle, “that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism
into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory
of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.” <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) Do we read so often of newness and
of making new and yet can no renewing efface the stain which the word
wife brings with it? We are buried with Christ by baptism and we have
risen again by faith in the working of God who hath called Him from the
dead. And “when we were dead in our sins and in the uncircumcision of
our flesh, God hath quickened us together with Him, having forgiven us
all trespasses; blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way nailing
it to His cross.” <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) Can it be
that when our whole being is dead with Christ and when all the sins
noted down in the old “handwriting” are blotted out, the one word “wife”
alone lives on? Time would fail me were I to try to lay before you in
order all the passages in the Holy Scriptures which relate to the
efficacy of baptism or to explain the mysterious doctrine of that second
birth which though it is our second is yet our first in Christ.

<span id="v.LXIX-p104"></span>8. Before I make an end of dictating (for
I <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="v.LXIX-Page_147"></span>perceive that I have already exceeded the
just limits of a letter) I wish to give a brief explanation of the
previous verses of the epistle in which the apostle describes the life
of him that is to be made a bishop. We shall thus recognize him as
Doctor of the Nations <span id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) not
only for his praise of monogamy but also for all his precepts. At the
same time I beg that no one will suppose that in what I write my design
is to blacken the priests of the present day. My one object is to
promote the interest of the church. Just as orators and philosophers in
giving their notions of the perfect orator and the perfect philosopher
do not detract from Demosthenes and Plato but merely set forth abstract
ideals; so, when I describe a bishop and explain the qualifications laid
down for the episcopate, I am but supplying a mirror for priests. Every
man’s conscience will tell him that it rests with himself what image he
will see reflected there, whether one that will grieve him by its
deformity or one that will gladden him by its beauty. I turn now to the
passage in question. <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) “If a
man desire the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.” Work, you
see, not rank; toil not pleasure; work that he may increase in
lowliness, not grow proud by reason of elevation. “A bishop then must be
blameless.” The same thing that he says to Titus, “if any be
blameless.” <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) All the virtues
are comprehended in this one word; thus he seems to require an
impossible perfection. For if every sin, even every idle word, is
deserving of blame, who is there in this world that is sinless and
blameless? Still he who is chosen to be shepherd of the church must be
one compared with whom other men are rightly regarded as but a flock of
sheep. Rhetoricians define an orator as a good man able to speak. To be
worthy of so high an honour he must be blameless in life and lip. For a
teacher loses all his influence whose words are rendered null by his
deeds. “The husband of one wife.” Concerning this requirement I have
spoken above. I will now only warn you that if monogamy is insisted on
before baptism the other conditions laid down must be insisted on before
baptism too. For it is impossible to regard the remaining obligations as
binding only on the baptized and this alone as binding also on the
unbaptized. “Vigilant (or “temperate” for <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXIX-p107.2"></span>νηφαλιος</span> means both), wise, <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) of good behaviour, given to
hospitality, apt to teach.” The priests who minister in God’s temple are
forbidden to drink wine and strong drink, <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) to keep their wits from being
stupefied with drunkenness and to enable their understanding to do its
duty in God’s service. By the word ‘wise’ those are excluded who plead
simplicity as an excuse for a priest’s folly. For if the brain be not
sound, all the members will be amiss. The phrase “of good behaviour” is
an extension of the previous epithet “blameless.” One who has no faults
is called “blameless;” one who is rich in virtues is said to be “of good
behaviour.” Or the words may be differently explained in accord with
Tully’s maxim, <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) ‘the main
thing is that what you do you should do gracefully.’ For some persons
are so ignorant of their own measure <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) and so stupid and foolish that they
make themselves laughing stocks to those who see them because of their
gesture or gait or dress or conversation. Fancying that they knew what
is and what is not good taste they deck themselves out with finery and
bodily adornments and give banquets which profess to be elegant: but all
such attempts at dress and display are nastier than a beggar’s rags. As
regards the obligation of priests to be teachers we bare have the
precepts of the old Law <span id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) and
the fuller instructions given on the subject to Titus. <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) For an innocent and unobtrusive
conversation does as much harm by its silence as it does good by its
example. If the ravening wolves are to be frightened away it must be by
the barking of dogs and by the staff of the shepherd. “Not given to
wine, no striker.” With the virtues they are to aim at he contrasts the
vices they are to avoid.

<span id="v.LXIX-p114"></span>9. We have learned what we ought to be:
let us now learn what priests ought not to be. Indulgence in wine is the
fault of diners out and revellers. When the body is heated with drink it
soon boils over with lust. Wine drinking means self-indulgence,
self-indulgence means sensual gratification, sensual gratification means
a breach of chastity. He that lives in pleasure is dead while he
lives, <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) and he that drinks
himself drunk is not only dead but buried. One hour’s debauch makes Noah
uncover his nakedness which through sixty years of sobriety he had kept
covered. <span id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) Lot in a fit of
intoxication unwittingly adds incest to incontinence, and wine overcomes
the man whom Sodom failed to conquer. <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) A bishop that is a striker is
condemned by Him who gave His back to the smiters, <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) and when He was reviled reviled not
again. <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) “But moderate”; <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) one good thing is set over against
two evil things. Drunkenness and passion are to be held in check by
moderation. “Not a brawler, not covetous.” Nothing is more overweening
than the assurance of the ignorant who fancy that incessant chatter will
carry <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="v.LXIX-Page_148"></span>conviction with it and are always ready for
a dispute that they may thunder with turgid eloquence against the flock
committed to their charge. That a priest must avoid covetousness even
Samuel teaches when he proves before all the people that he has taken
nothing from any man. <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) And the
same lesson is taught by the poverty of the apostles who used to receive
sustenance and refreshment from their brethren and to boast that they
neither had nor wished to have anything besides food and raiment. <span
id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) What the epistle to Timothy calls
covetousness, that to Titus openly censures as the desire for filthy
lucre. <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) “One that ruleth well
his own house.” Not by increasing riches, not by providing regal
banquets, not by having a pile of finely-wrought plates, not by slowly
steaming pheasants so that the heat may reach the bones without melting
the flesh upon them; no, but by first requiring of his own household the
conduct which he has to inculcate in others. “Having his children in
subjection with all gravity.” They must not, that is, follow the example
of the sons of Eli who lay with the women in the vestibule of the Temple
and, supposing religion to consist in plunder, diverted to the
gratification of their own appetites all the best parts of the
victims. <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) “Not a novice lest
being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.”
I cannot sufficiently express my amazement at the great blindness which
makes men discuss such questions as that of marriage before baptism and
causes them to charge people with a transaction which is dead in
baptism, nay even quickened into a new life with Christ, while no one
regards a commandment so clear and unmistakable as this about bishops
not being novices. One who was yesterday a catechumen is to-day a
bishop <span id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) ; one who was
yesterday in the amphitheatre is to-day in the church; one who spent the
evening in the circus stands in the morning at the altar: one who a
little while ago was a patron of actors is now a dedicator of virgins.
Was the apostle ignorant of our shifts and subterfuges? did he know
nothing of our foolish arguments? He not only says that a bishop must be
the husband of one wife, but he has given commandment that he must be
blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt
to teach, moderate, <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) not given
to wine, no striker, not a brawler, not covetous, not a novice. Yet to
all these requirements we shut our eyes and notice nothing but the wives
of the aspirants. Who cannot give instances to shew the need of the
warning: “lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation
of the devil?” A priest <span id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) who
is made such in a moment knows nothing of the lowliness and meekness
which mark the meanest of the faithful, he knows nothing of Christian
courtesy, he is not wise enough to think little of himself. He passes
from one dignity to another, yet he has not fasted, he has not wept, he
has not taken himself to task for his life, he has not striven by
constant meditation to amend it, he has not given his substance to the
poor. Yet he is moved from one see <span
id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) to another, he passes, that is,
from pride to pride. There can be no doubt that arrogance is what the
Apostle means when he speaks of the condemnation and downfall of the
devil. And all men fall into this who are in a moment made masters,
actually before they are disciples. “Moreover he must have a good report
of them which are without.” The last requirement is like the first. One
who is really “blameless” obtains the unanimous approval not only of his
own household but of outsiders as well. By aliens and persons outside
the church we are to understand Jews, heretics and Gentiles. A Christian
bishop then must be such that they who cavil at his religion may not
venture to cavil at his life. At present however we see but too many
bishops who are willing, like the charioteers in the horse races, to bid
money for the popular applause; while there are some so universally
hated that they can wring no money from their people, a feat which
clowns accomplish by means of a few gestures.

<span id="v.LXIX-p129"></span>10. Such are the conditions, son Oceanus,
which the master-teachers of the church ought with anxiety and fear to
require of others and to observe themselves. Such too are the canons
which they should follow in the choice of persons for the priesthood;
for they must not interpret the law of Christ to suit private
animosities and feuds or to gratify ill-feeling which is sure to recoil
on the man who cherishes it. Consider how unimpeachable is the character
of Carterius in whose life his ill-wishers can find nothing to censure
except a marriage contracted before baptism. “He that said, Do not
commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. If we commit no adultery yet if
we kill, we are become transgressors of the law.” <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) “Whosoever shall keep the whole law
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.” <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) Accordingly when they cast in our
teeth a marriage entered into before baptism, we must require of them
compliance with all the precepts which are given to the baptized. For
they pass over much that is not allowable while they censure much that
is allowed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[141:2010](2060080.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="v.LXIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p4"></span> [Matt. xx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015)<span id="v.LXIX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[141:2011](2060080.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="v.LXIX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p5"></span> A.V. ‘unbelief.’

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[141:2012](2060080.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="v.LXIX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p6"></span> [Rom. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span id="v.LXIX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[141:2013](2060080.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="v.LXIX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p7"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="v.LXIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[141:2014](2060080.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="v.LXIX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p8"></span> [Exod.
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038)<span id="v.LXIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[141:2015](2060080.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="v.LXIX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p9"></span> The Cainites appear to have denied the
efficacy of the atonement.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[142:2016](2060080.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="v.LXIX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p10"></span> A.V. ‘sin.’

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[142:2017](2060080.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="v.LXIX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p11"></span> [Joh. i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="v.LXIX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[142:2018](2060080.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="v.LXIX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p12"></span> [Joh. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="v.LXIX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[142:2019](2060080.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="v.LXIX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p13"></span> *i.e.* Paul.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[142:2020](2060080.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="v.LXIX-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p14"></span> [1 Pet. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[142:2021](2060080.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="v.LXIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p16"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[142:2022](2060080.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="v.LXIX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p17"></span> This synod held in 359 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.LXIX-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> was attended by
about 450 bishops. It put forth an Arian formula which caused general
consternation. “The whole world,” says Jerome, “groaned and was
astonished to find itself Arian.”

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[142:2023](2060080.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="v.LXIX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p18"></span> See note on Letter LXI. 3.

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[142:2024](2060080.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="v.LXIX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p19"></span> Cf. Cic. In Pis. 1.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[143:2025](2060080.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="v.LXIX-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p21"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[143:2026](2060080.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="v.LXIX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p22"></span> [Tit. i.
5-9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span id="v.LXIX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[143:2027](2060080.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="v.LXIX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p23"></span> Rendered ‘elders’ in A.V.

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[143:2028](2060080.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="v.LXIX-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p24"></span> Cf. [Rom.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)<span id="v.LXIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[143:2029](2060080.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="v.LXIX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p25"></span> Exoleti.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[143:2030](2060080.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="v.LXIX-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p26"></span> A Scottish tribe, cannibals according to
Jerome (Against Jov. ii. 7.)

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[143:2031](2060080.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="v.LXIX-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p27"></span> Bk. V. 457.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[143:2032](2060080.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="v.LXIX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p29"></span> [Matt. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)<span id="v.LXIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[143:2033](2060080.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="v.LXIX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p30"></span> [Matt.
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="v.LXIX-p30.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[144:2034](2060080.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="v.LXIX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p31"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="v.LXIX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[144:2035](2060080.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="v.LXIX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p32"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.LXIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[144:2036](2060080.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="v.LXIX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p33"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="v.LXIX-p33.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[144:2037](2060080.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="v.LXIX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p34"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[144:2038](2060080.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="v.LXIX-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p36"></span> [Ex. xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010)<span id="v.LXIX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[144:2039](2060080.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="v.LXIX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p37"></span> [Lev.
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)<span id="v.LXIX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[144:2040](2060080.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="v.LXIX-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p38"></span> Canon xv.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[144:2041](2060080.htm#fr_2040) <span
id="v.LXIX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p39"></span> Cf. [Phil.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="v.LXIX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[144:2042](2060080.htm#fr_2041) <span
id="v.LXIX-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p40"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004)<span id="v.LXIX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[144:2043](2060080.htm#fr_2042) <span
id="v.LXIX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p41"></span> [Isa. xxvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p41.1"></span>,
LXX. A.V. follows the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[144:2044](2060080.htm#fr_2043) <span
id="v.LXIX-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p42"></span> A.V. that are at ease.

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[144:2045](2060080.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="v.LXIX-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p43"></span> [Isa. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009)<span id="v.LXIX-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[144:2046](2060080.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="v.LXIX-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p44"></span> [Prov.
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[144:2047](2060080.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="v.LXIX-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p45"></span> [Prov. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[144:2048](2060080.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="v.LXIX-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p46"></span> [Jer. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)<span id="v.LXIX-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[144:2049](2060080.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="v.LXIX-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p47"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[145:2050](2060080.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="v.LXIX-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p48"></span> *i.e.* that of strained interpretations.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[145:2051](2060080.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="v.LXIX-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p49"></span> V. Dict. Ant. s. v. stola and cf. Cic.
[Phil. 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#018),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#044)<span id="v.LXIX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[145:2052](2060080.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="v.LXIX-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p52"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[145:2053](2060080.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="v.LXIX-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p53"></span> It is hardly necessary to remark that this
derivation is purely fanciful and has no foundation in fact.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[145:2054](2060080.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="v.LXIX-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p54"></span> [Ezek. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)<span id="v.LXIX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[145:2055](2060080.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="v.LXIX-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p55"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="v.LXIX-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[145:2056](2060080.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="v.LXIX-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p56"></span> Query a reference to [Isa. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="v.LXIX-p56.1"></span>: the
Latin is obscure.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[145:2057](2060080.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="v.LXIX-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p57"></span> Paradisus.

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[145:2058](2060080.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="v.LXIX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p58"></span> [Gen.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010)<span id="v.LXIX-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[145:2059](2060080.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="v.LXIX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p59"></span> [Ezek.
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#008)<span id="v.LXIX-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[145:2060](2060080.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="v.LXIX-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p60"></span> [Gen.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[145:2061](2060080.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="v.LXIX-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p61"></span> [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="v.LXIX-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[145:2062](2060080.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="v.LXIX-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p62"></span> [Ps.
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014)<span id="v.LXIX-p62.1"></span>
LXX.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[145:2063](2060080.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="v.LXIX-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p63"></span> [Deut. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)<span id="v.LXIX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[145:2064](2060080.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="v.LXIX-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXIX-p64.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXIX-p64.2"></span>δροφόβους</span> et lymphaticos faciunt.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[145:2065](2060080.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="v.LXIX-p64.3"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p65"></span> [Exod.
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023), [Luke
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#000), [Luke
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#000)<span id="v.LXIX-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[145:2066](2060080.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="v.LXIX-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p66"></span> [Gen.
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#018)<span id="v.LXIX-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[145:2067](2060080.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="v.LXIX-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p67"></span> [Gen. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031)<span id="v.LXIX-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[145:2068](2060080.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="v.LXIX-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p68"></span> [1 Kings
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038), [2 Chr.
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030)<span id="v.LXIX-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[145:2069](2060080.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="v.LXIX-p68.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p69"></span> [Gen.
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#016)<span id="v.LXIX-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[145:2070](2060080.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="v.LXIX-p69.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p70"></span> [Gen.
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[145:2071](2060080.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="v.LXIX-p70.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p71"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036)<span id="v.LXIX-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[145:2072](2060080.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="v.LXIX-p71.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p72"></span> [Exod.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#017)<span id="v.LXIX-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[145:2073](2060080.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="v.LXIX-p72.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p73"></span> [Joh. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)<span id="v.LXIX-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[145:2074](2060080.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="v.LXIX-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p74"></span> [Matt.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="v.LXIX-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[146:2075](2060080.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="v.LXIX-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p75"></span> The turning of the water into wine at Cana
([John 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p75.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[146:2076](2060080.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="v.LXIX-p75.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p76"></span> [John
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="v.LXIX-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[146:2077](2060080.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="v.LXIX-p76.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p77"></span> [Joh. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="v.LXIX-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[146:2078](2060080.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="v.LXIX-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p78"></span> [Joh. xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="v.LXIX-p78.1"></span>:
Jerome here follows Tertullian and Cyril of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[146:2079](2060080.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="v.LXIX-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p79"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="v.LXIX-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[146:2080](2060080.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="v.LXIX-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p80"></span> [Acts ii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span id="v.LXIX-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[146:2081](2060080.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="v.LXIX-p80.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p81"></span> [Isa.
66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)<span id="v.LXIX-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[146:2082](2060080.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="v.LXIX-p81.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p82"></span> [Gen. xlix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027)<span id="v.LXIX-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[146:2083](2060080.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="v.LXIX-p82.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p83"></span> [Acts
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#018)<span id="v.LXIX-p83.1"></span>.
Comp. Letter LX. 8.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[146:2084](2060080.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="v.LXIX-p83.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p84"></span> [Acts viii.
27-38](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027)<span id="v.LXIX-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[146:2085](2060080.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="v.LXIX-p84.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p85"></span> [Jer. xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)<span id="v.LXIX-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[146:2086](2060080.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="v.LXIX-p85.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p86"></span> [Acts xix.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[146:2087](2060080.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="v.LXIX-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p87"></span> [Ps.
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010)<span id="v.LXIX-p87.1"></span>.
A.V. ‘the Lord sitteth upon the flood.’

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[146:2088](2060080.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="v.LXIX-p87.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p88"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[146:2089](2060080.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="v.LXIX-p88.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p89"></span> [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="v.LXIX-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[146:2090](2060080.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="v.LXIX-p89.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p90"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="v.LXIX-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[146:2091](2060080.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="v.LXIX-p90.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p91"></span> A.V. “thou wilt cast all their sins.”

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[146:2092](2060080.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="v.LXIX-p91.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p92"></span> [Mic. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span id="v.LXIX-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[146:2093](2060080.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="v.LXIX-p93.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p94"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[146:2094](2060080.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="v.LXIX-p94.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p95"></span> [Ezek. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[146:2095](2060080.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="v.LXIX-p95.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p96"></span> [Ezek. xxxvi.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#024)<span id="v.LXIX-p96.1"></span>.
A.V. punctuates differently.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[146:2096](2060080.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="v.LXIX-p96.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p97"></span> [Gal. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span id="v.LXIX-p97.1"></span>,
‘nature’ for ‘creature,’ a slip of memory.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[146:2097](2060080.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="v.LXIX-p97.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p98"></span> [Rev. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003)<span id="v.LXIX-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[146:2098](2060080.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="v.LXIX-p98.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p99"></span> [Eph. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span id="v.LXIX-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[146:2099](2060080.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="v.LXIX-p99.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p100"></span> [Rom. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)<span id="v.LXIX-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[146:2100](2060080.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="v.LXIX-p100.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p101"></span> [Rev. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017)<span id="v.LXIX-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[146:2101](2060080.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="v.LXIX-p101.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p102"></span> [Rom.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="v.LXIX-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[146:2102](2060080.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="v.LXIX-p102.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p103"></span> [Col.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="v.LXIX-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[147:2103](2060080.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="v.LXIX-p104.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p105"></span> Doctor Gentium.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[147:2104](2060080.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="v.LXIX-p105.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p106"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span id="v.LXIX-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[147:2105](2060080.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="v.LXIX-p106.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p107"></span> [Tit. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)<span id="v.LXIX-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[147:2106](2060080.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="v.LXIX-p107.3"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p108"></span> A.V. ‘sober.’

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[147:2107](2060080.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="v.LXIX-p108.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p109"></span> [Lev. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009)<span id="v.LXIX-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[147:2108](2060080.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="v.LXIX-p109.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p110"></span> Cic. de Or. i. 29.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[147:2109](2060080.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="v.LXIX-p110.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p111"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#014)<span id="v.LXIX-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[147:2110](2060080.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="v.LXIX-p111.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p112"></span> Cf. [Deut. xvii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009)<span id="v.LXIX-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[147:2111](2060080.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="v.LXIX-p112.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p113"></span> [Tit. i.
9-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009)<span id="v.LXIX-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[147:2112](2060080.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="v.LXIX-p114.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p115"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="v.LXIX-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[147:2113](2060080.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="v.LXIX-p115.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p116"></span> [Gen.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021)<span id="v.LXIX-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[147:2114](2060080.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="v.LXIX-p116.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p117"></span> [Gen. xix.
30-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#030)<span id="v.LXIX-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[147:2115](2060080.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="v.LXIX-p117.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p118"></span> [Isa. l.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span id="v.LXIX-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[147:2116](2060080.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="v.LXIX-p118.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p119"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)<span id="v.LXIX-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[147:2117](2060080.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="v.LXIX-p119.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p120"></span> A.V. ‘patient.’

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[148:2118](2060080.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="v.LXIX-p120.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p121"></span> [1 Sam. xii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)<span id="v.LXIX-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[148:2119](2060080.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="v.LXIX-p121.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p122"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="v.LXIX-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[148:2120](2060080.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="v.LXIX-p122.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p123"></span> [Tit. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="v.LXIX-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[148:2121](2060080.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="v.LXIX-p123.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p124"></span> [1 Sam.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)<span id="v.LXIX-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[148:2122](2060080.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="v.LXIX-p124.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p125"></span> The case of Ambrose.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[148:2123](2060080.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="v.LXIX-p125.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p126"></span> A.V. ‘patient.’

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[148:2124](2060080.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="v.LXIX-p126.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p127"></span> Sacerdos: as usual a bishop is meant.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[148:2125](2060080.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="v.LXIX-p127.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p128"></span> Lit. ‘chair.’

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[148:2126](2060080.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="v.LXIX-p129.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p130"></span> [Jas. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span id="v.LXIX-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[148:2127](2060080.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="v.LXIX-p130.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p131"></span> [Jas. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)<span id="v.LXIX-p131.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXX](2060081)
