[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060170)  [Next](2060172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="vi.vii-Page_417"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Against Vigilantius.</span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vii-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span>Full details respecting Vigilantius, against
whom this treatise, the result of a single night’s labour, is directed,
may be found in a work on “Vigilantius and His Times,” published in 1844
by Dr. Gilly, canon of Durham. It will perhaps, however, assist the
reader if we briefly remark that he was born about 370, at Calagurris,
near Convenæ (Comminges), which was a station on the Roman road from
Aquitaine to Spain. His father was probably the keeper of the inn, and
Vigilantius appears to have been brought up to his father’s business. He
was of a studious character, and Sulpicius Severus, the ecclesiastical
historian, who had estates in those parts, took him into his service,
and, possibly, made him manager of his estates. Having been ordained he
was introduced to Jerome (then living at Bethlehem, in 395) through
Paulinus of Nola, who was the friend of Sulpicius Severus. After staying
with Jerome for a considerable time he begged to be dismissed, and left
in great haste without giving any reason. Returning to Gaul, he settled
in his native country. Jerome hearing that he was spreading reports of
him as favouring the views of Origen, and in other ways defaming him and
his friends, wrote him a sharp letter of rebuke (Letter LXI.). The work
of Vigilantius which drew from Jerome the following treatise was written
in the year <span class="c17"><span id="vi.vii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>
406; not “hastily, under provocation such as he may have felt in leaving
Bethlehem.” but after the lapse of six or seven years. The points
against which he argued as being superstitious are: (1) the reverence
paid to the relics of holy men by carrying them round the church in
costly vessels or silken wrappings to be kissed, and the prayers offered
to the dead; (2) the late watchings at the basilicas of the martyrs,
with their attendant scandals, the burning of numerous tapers. alleged
miracles, etc.; (3) the sending of alms to Jerusalem, which, Vigilantius
urged, had better be spent among the poor in each separate diocese, and
the monkish vow of poverty; (4) the exaggerated estimate of virginity.

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span>The bishop of the diocese, Exsuperius of
Toulouse, was strongly in favour of the views of Vigilantius, and they
began to spread widely. Complaints having reached Jerome through the
presbyter Riparius, he at once expressed his indignation, and offered to
answer in detail if the work of Vigilantius were sent to him. In 406 he
received it through Sisinnius, who was bearing alms to the East. It has
been truly said that this treatise has less of reason and more of abuse
than any other which Jerome wrote. But in spite of this the author was
followed by the chief ecclesiastics of the day, and the practices
impugned by Vigilantius prevailed almost unchecked till the sixteenth
century.

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span>1. The world has given birth to many
monsters; in <span id="fr_4943"></span>[4944](#fn_4943) Isaiah we read
of centaurs and sirens, screech-owls and pelicans. Job, in mystic
language, describes Leviathan and Behemoth; Cerberus and the birds of
Stymphalus, the Erymanthian boar and the Nemean lion, the Chimæra and
the many-headed Hydra, are told of in poetic fables. Virgil describes
Cacus. Spain has produced Geryon, with his three bodies. Gaul alone has
had no monsters, but has ever been rich in men of courage and great
eloquence. All at once Vigilantius, or, more correctly, *Dormitantius*,
has arisen, animated by an unclean spirit, to fight against the Spirit
of Christ, and to deny that religious reverence is to be paid to the
tombs of the martyrs. Vigils, he says, are to be condemned; Alleluia
must never be sung except at Easter; continence is a heresy; chastity a
hot-bed of lust. And as Euphorbus is said to have been born again in the
person of Pythagoras, so in this fellow the corrupt mind of Jovinianus
has arisen; so that in him, no less than in his predecessor, we are
bound to meet the snares of the devil. The words may be justly applied
to him: <span id="fr_4944"></span>[4945](#fn_4944) “Seed of evil-doers,
prepare thy children for the slaughter because of the sins of thy
father.” Jovinianus, condemned by the authority of the Church of Rome,
amidst pheasants and swine’s flesh, breathed out, or rather belched out
his spirit. And now this tavern-keeper of Calagurris, who, according to
the name of his <span id="fr_4945"></span>[4946](#fn_4945) native
village is a Quintilian, only dumb instead of eloquent, is <span
id="fr_4946"></span>[4947](#fn_4946) mixing water with the wine.
According to the trick which he knows of old, he is trying to blend his
perfidious poison with the Catholic faith; he assails virginity and
hates chastity; he revels with worldlings and declaims against the fasts
of the saints; he plays the philosopher over his cups, and soothes
himself with the sweet strains of psalmody, while he smacks his lips
over his cheese-cakes; nor could he deign to listen to the songs of
David and Jeduthun, and Asaph and the sons of Core, except at the
banqueting table. This I have poured forth with more grief than
amusement, for I cannot restrain myself and turn a deaf ear to the
wrongs inflicted on apostles and martyrs.

<span id="vi.vii-p11"></span>2. Shameful to relate, there are bishops
who are said to be associated with him in his wickedness—if at least
they are to be called bishops—who ordain no deacons but such as have
been previously married; who credit no celibate with chastity—nay,
rather, who show <span id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span
id="vi.vii-Page_418"></span>clearly what measure of holiness of life
they can claim by indulging in evil suspicions of all men, and, unless
the candidates for ordination appear before them with pregnant wives,
and infants wailing in the arms of their mothers, will not administer to
them Christ’s ordinance. What are the Churches of the East to do? What
is to become of the Egyptian Churches and those belonging to the
Apostolic Seat, which accept for the ministry only men who are virgins,
or those who practice continency, or, if married, abandon their conjugal
rights? Such is the teaching of Dormitantius, who throws the reins upon
the neck of lust, and by his encouragement doubles the natural heat of
the flesh, which in youth is mostly at boiling point, or rather slakes
it by intercourse with women; so that there is nothing to separate us
from swine, nothing wherein we differ from the brute creation, or from
horses, respecting which it is written: <span
id="fr_4947"></span>[4948](#fn_4947) “They were toward women like raging
horses; everyone neighed after his neighbour’s wife.” This is that which
the Holy Spirit says by the mouth of David: <span
id="fr_4948"></span>[4949](#fn_4948) “Be ye not like horse and mule
which have no understanding.” And again respecting Dormitantius and his
friends: <span id="fr_4949"></span>[4950](#fn_4949) “Bind the jaws of
them who draw not near unto thee with bit and bridle.”

<span id="vi.vii-p15"></span>3. But it is now time for us to adduce his
own words and answer him in detail. For, possibly, in his malice, he may
choose once more to misrepresent me, and say that I have trumped up a
case for the sake of showing off my rhetorical and declamatory powers in
combating it, like the letter <span id="fr_4950"></span>[4951](#fn_4950)
which I wrote to Gaul, relating to a mother and daughter who were at
variance. This little treatise, which I now dictate, is due to the
reverend presbyters Riparius and Desiderius, who write that their
parishes have been defiled by being in his neighbourhood, and have sent
me, by our brother Sisinnius, the books which he vomited forth in a
drunken fit. They also declare that some persons are found who, from
their inclination to his vices, assent to his blasphemies. He is a
barbarian both in speech and knowledge. His style is rude. He cannot
defend even the truth; but, for the sake of laymen, and poor women,
laden with sins, ever learning and never coming to a knowledge of the
truth, I will spend upon his melancholy trifles a single night’s labour,
otherwise I shall seem to have treated with contempt the letters of the
reverend persons who have entreated me to undertake the task.

<span id="vi.vii-p17"></span>4. He certainly well represents his race.
Sprung from a set of brigands and persons collected together from all
quarters (I mean those whom Cn. Pompey, after the conquest of Spain,
when he was hastening to return for his triumph, brought down from the
Pyrenees and gathered together into one town, whence the name of the
city Convenæ <span id="fr_4951"></span>[4952](#fn_4951) ), he has
carried on their brigand practices by his attack upon the Church of God.
Like his ancestors the Vectones, the Arrabaci, and the Celtiberians, he
makes his raids upon the churches of Gaul, not carrying the standard of
the cross, but, on the contrary, the ensign of the devil. Pompey did
just the same in the East. After overcoming the Cilician and Isaurian
pirates and brigands, he founded a city, bearing his own name, between
Cilicia and Isauria. That city, however, to this day, observes the
ordinances of its ancestors, and no Dormitantius has arisen in it; but
Gaul supports a native foe, and sees seated in the Church a man who has
lost his head and who ought to be put in the strait-jacket which
Hippocrates recommended. Among other blasphemies, he may be heard to
say, “What need is there for you not only to pay such honour, not to say
adoration, to the thing, whatever it may be, which you carry about in a
little vessel and worship?” And again, in the same book, “Why do you
kiss and adore a bit of powder wrapped up in a cloth?” And again, in the
same book, “Under the cloak of religion we see what is all but a heathen
ceremony introduced into the churches: while the sun is still shining,
heaps of tapers are lighted, and everywhere a paltry bit of powder,
wrapped up in a costly cloth, is kissed and worshipped. Great honour do
men of this sort pay to the blessed martyrs, who, they think, are to be
made glorious by trumpery tapers, when the Lamb who is in the midst of
the throne, with all the brightness of His majesty, gives them light?”

<span id="vi.vii-p19"></span>5. Madman, who in the world ever adored the
martyrs? who ever thought man was God? Did not <span
id="fr_4952"></span>[4953](#fn_4952) Paul and Barnabas, when the people
of Lycaonia thought them to be Jupiter and Mercury, and would have
offered sacrifices to them, rend their clothes and declare they were
men? Not that they were not better than Jupiter and Mercury, who were
but men long ago dead, but because, under the mistaken ideas of the
Gentiles, the honour due to God was being paid to them. And we read the
same respecting Peter, who, when Cornelius wished to adore him, raised
him by the hand, and said, <span id="fr_4953"></span>[4954](#fn_4953)
“Stand up, for I also am a man.” And have you the audacity to speak of
“the mysterious something or other which you <span id="page_419">p.
419</span> <span id="vi.vii-Page_419"></span>carry about in a little
vessel and worship?” I want to know what it is that you call “something
or other.” Tell us more clearly (that there may be no restraint on your
blasphemy) what you mean by the phrase “a bit of powder wrapped up in a
costly cloth in a tiny vessel.” It is nothing less than the relics of
the martyrs which he is vexed to see covered with a costly veil, and not
bound up with rags or hair-cloth, or thrown on the midden, so that
Vigilantius alone in his drunken slumber may be worshipped. Are we,
therefore guilty of sacrilege when we enter the basilicas of the
Apostles? Was the Emperor Constantius I. guilty of sacrilege when he
transferred the sacred relics of Andrew, Luke, and Timothy to
Constantinople? In their presence the demons cry out, and the devils who
dwell in Vigilantius confess that they feel the influence of the saints.
And at the present day is the Emperor Arcadius guilty of sacrilege, who
after so long a time has conveyed the bones of the blessed Samuel from
Judea to Thrace? Are all the bishops to be considered not only
sacrilegious, but silly into the bargain, because they carried that most
worthless thing, dust and ashes, wrapped in silk in golden vessel? Are
the people of all the Churches fools, because they went to meet the
sacred relics, and welcomed them with as much joy as if they beheld a
living prophet in the midst of them, so that there was one great swarm
of people from Palestine to Chalcedon with one voice re-echoing the
praises of Christ? They were forsooth, adoring Samuel and not Christ,
whose Levite and prophet Samuel was. You show mistrust because you think
only of the dead body, and therefore blaspheme. Read the Gospel— <span
id="fr_4954"></span>[4955](#fn_4954) “The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Jacob: He is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.” If then they are alive, they are not, to use your expression,
kept in honourable confinement.

<span id="vi.vii-p23"></span>6. For you say that the souls of Apostles
and martyrs have their abode either in the bosom of Abraham, or in the
place of refreshment, or under the altar of God, and that they cannot
leave their own tombs, and be present where they will. They are, it
seems, of senatorial rank, and are not subjected to the worst kind of
prison and the society of murderers, but are kept apart in liberal and
honourable custody in the isles of the blessed and the Elysian fields.
Will you lay down the law for God? Will you put the Apostles into
chains? So that to the day of judgment they are to be kept in
confinement, and are not with their Lord, although it is written
concerning them, <span id="fr_4955"></span>[4956](#fn_4955) “They follow
the Lamb, whithersoever he goeth.” If the Lamb is present everywhere,
the same must be believed respecting those who are with the Lamb. And
while the devil and the demons wander through the whole world, and with
only too great speed present themselves everywhere; are martyrs, after
the shedding of their blood, to be kept out of sight shut up in a <span
id="fr_4956"></span>[4957](#fn_4956) coffin, from whence they cannot
escape? You say, in your pamphlet, that so long as we are alive we can
pray for one another; but once we die, the prayer of no person for
another can be heard, and all the more because the martyrs, though
they <span id="fr_4957"></span>[4958](#fn_4957) cry for the avenging of
their blood, have never been able to obtain their request. If Apostles
and martyrs while still in the body can pray for others, when they ought
still to be anxious for themselves, how much more must they do so when
once they have won their crowns, overcome, and triumphed? A single man,
Moses, oft <span id="fr_4958"></span>[4959](#fn_4958) wins pardon from
God for six hundred thousand armed men; and <span
id="fr_4959"></span>[4960](#fn_4959) Stephen, the follower of his Lord
and the first Christian martyr, entreats pardon for his persecutors; and
when once they have entered on their life with Christ, shall they have
less power than before? The Apostle Paul <span
id="fr_4960"></span>[4961](#fn_4960) says that two hundred and
seventy-six souls were given to him in the ship; and when, after his
dissolution, he has begun to be with Christ, must he shut his mouth, and
be unable to say a word for those who throughout the whole world have
believed in his Gospel? Shall Vigilantius the live dog be better than
Paul the dead lion? I should be right in saying so after <span
id="fr_4961"></span>[4962](#fn_4961) Ecclesiastes, if I admitted that
Paul is dead in spirit. The truth is that the saints are not called
dead, but are said to be asleep. Wherefore <span
id="fr_4962"></span>[4963](#fn_4962) Lazarus, who was about to rise
again, is said to have slept. And the Apostle <span
id="fr_4963"></span>[4964](#fn_4963) forbids the Thessalonians to be
sorry for those who were asleep. As for you, when wide awake you are
asleep, and asleep when you write, and you bring before me an apocryphal
book which, under the name of Esdras, is read by you and those of your
feather, and in this book it is <span
id="fr_4964"></span>[4965](#fn_4964) written that after death no one
dares pray for others. I have never read the book: for what need is
there to take up what the Church does not receive? It can hardly be your
intention to confront me with Balsamus, and Barbelus, and the Thesaurus
of Manichæus, and the ludicrous name of Leusiboras; though possibly
because you live at the foot of the Pyrenees, and border on Iberia, you
<span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="vi.vii-Page_420"></span>follow the incredible marvels of the ancient
heretic <span id="fr_4965"></span>[4966](#fn_4965) Basilides and his
so-called knowledge, which is mere ignorance, and set forth what is
condemned by the authority of the whole world. I say this because in
your short treatise you quote Solomon as if he were on your side, though
Solomon never wrote the words in question at all; so that, as you have a
second Esdras you may have a second Solomon. And, if you like, you may
read the imaginary revelations of all the patriarchs and prophets, and,
when you have learned them, you may sing them among the women in their
weaving-shops, or rather order them to be read in your taverns, the more
easily by these melancholy ditties to stimulate the ignorant mob to
replenish their cups.

<span id="vi.vii-p35"></span>7. As to the question of tapers, however,
we do not, as you in vain misrepresent us, light them in the daytime,
but by their solace we would cheer the darkness of the night, and watch
for the dawn, lest we should be blind like you and sleep in darkness.
And if some persons, being ignorant and simple minded laymen, or, at all
events, religious women—of whom we can truly say, <span
id="fr_4966"></span>[4967](#fn_4966) “I allow that they have a zeal for
God, but not according to knowledge”—adopt the practice in honour of the
martyrs, what harm is thereby done to you? Once upon a time even the
Apostles <span id="fr_4967"></span>[4968](#fn_4967) pleaded that the
ointment was wasted, but they were rebuked by the voice of the Lord.
Christ did not need the ointment, nor do martyrs need the light of
tapers; and yet that woman poured out the ointment in honour of Christ,
and her heart’s devotion was accepted. All those who light these tapers
have their reward according to their faith, as the Apostle says: <span
id="fr_4968"></span>[4969](#fn_4968) “Let every one abound in his own
meaning.” Do you call men of this sort idolaters? I do not deny, that
all of us who believe in Christ have passed from the error of idolatry.
For we are not born Christians, but become Christians by being born
again. And because we formerly worshipped idols, does it follow that we
ought not now to worship God lest we seem to pay like honour to Him and
to idols? In the one case respect was paid to idols, and therefore the
ceremony is to be abhorred; in the other the martyrs are venerated, and
the same ceremony is therefore to be allowed. Throughout the whole
Eastern Church, even when there are no relics of the martyrs, whenever
the Gospel is to be read the candles are lighted, although the dawn may
be reddening the sky, not of course to scatter the darkness, but by way
of evidencing our joy. <span id="fr_4969"></span>[4970](#fn_4969) And
accordingly the virgins in the Gospel always have their lamps lighted.
And the Apostles are <span id="fr_4970"></span>[4971](#fn_4970) told to
have their loins girded, and their lamps burning in their hands. And of
John Baptist we read, <span id="fr_4971"></span>[4972](#fn_4971) “He was
the lamp that burneth and shineth”; so that, under the figure of
corporeal light, that light is represented of which we read in the
Psalter, <span id="fr_4972"></span>[4973](#fn_4972) “Thy word is a lamp
unto my feet, O Lord, and a light unto my paths.”

<span id="vi.vii-p43"></span>8. Does the bishop of Rome do wrong when he
offers sacrifices to the Lord over the venerable bones of the dead men
Peter and Paul, as we should say, but according to you, over a worthless
bit of dust, and judges their tombs worthy to be Christ’s altars? And
not only is the bishop of one city in error, but the bishops of the
whole world, who, despite the tavern-keeper Vigilantius, enter the
basilicas of the dead, in which “a worthless bit of dust and ashes lies
wrapped up in a cloth,” defiled and defiling all else. Thus, according
to you, the sacred buildings are like the sepulchres of the Pharisees,
whitened without, while within they have filthy remains, and are full of
foul smells and uncleanliness. And then he dares to expectorate his
filth upon the subject and to say: “Is it the case that the souls of the
martyrs love their ashes, and hover round them, and are always present,
lest haply if any one come to pray and they were absent, they could not
hear?” Oh, monster, who ought to be banished to the ends of the earth!
do you laugh at the relics of the martyrs, and in company with Eunomius,
the father of this heresy, slander the Churches of Christ? Are you not
afraid of being in such company, and of speaking against us the same
things which he utters against the Church? For all his followers refuse
to enter the basilicas of Apostles and martyrs, so that, forsooth, they
may worship the dead Eunomius, whose books they consider are of more
authority than the Gospels; and they believe that the light of truth was
in him just as other heretics maintain that the Paraclete came into
Montanus, and say that Manichæus himself was the Paraclete. You cannot
find an occasion of boasting even in supposing that you are the inventor
of a new kind of wickedness, for your heresy long ago broke out against
the Church. It found, however, an opponent in Tertullian, a very learned
man, who wrote a famous treatise which he called most correctly
*Scorpiacum*, <span id="fr_4973"></span>[4974](#fn_4973) because, as the
scorpion bends itself like a bow to inflict its wound, so what was
formerly called the heresy of Cain pours poison into the body of the
Church; it has <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="vi.vii-Page_421"></span>slept or rather been buried for a long time,
but has been now awakened by Dormitantius. I am surprised you do not
tell us that there must upon no account be martyrdoms, inasmuch as God,
who does not ask for the blood of goats and bulls, much less requires
the blood of men. This is what you say, or rather, even if you do not
say it, you are taken as meaning to assert it. For in maintaining that
the relics of the martyrs are to be trodden under foot, you forbid the
shedding of their blood as being worthy of no honour.

<span id="vi.vii-p45"></span>9. Respecting vigils and the frequent
keeping of night-watches in the basilicas of the martyrs, I have given a
brief reply in another letter <span id="fr_4974"></span>[4975](#fn_4974)
which, about two years ago, I wrote to the reverend presbyter Riparius.
You argue that they ought to be abjured, lest we seem to be often
keeping Easter, and appear not to observe the customary yearly vigils.
If so, then sacrifices should not be offered to Christ on the Lord’s day
lest we frequently keep the Easter of our Lord’s Resurrection, and
introduce the custom of having many Easters instead of one. We must not,
however, impute to pious men the faults and errors of youths and
worthless women such as are often detected at night. It is true that,
even at the Easter vigils, something of the kind usually comes to light;
but the faults of a few form no argument against religion in general,
and such persons, without keeping vigil, can go wrong either in their
own houses or in those of other people. The treachery of Judas did not
annul the loyalty of the Apostles. And if others keep vigil badly, our
vigils are not thereby to be stopped; nay, rather let those who sleep to
gratify their lust be compelled to watch that they may preserve their
chastity. For if a thing once done be good, it cannot be bad if often
done; and if there is some fault to be avoided, the blame lies not in
its being done often, but in its being done at all. And so we should not
watch at Easter-tide for fear that adulterers may satisfy their long
pent-up desires, or that the wife may find an opportunity for sinning
without having the key turned against her by her husband. The occasions
which seldom recur are those which are most eagerly longed for.

<span id="vi.vii-p47"></span>10. I cannot traverse all the topics
embraced in the letters of the reverend presbyters; I will adduce a few
points from the tracts of Vigilantius. He argues against the signs and
miracles which are wrought in the basilicas of the martyrs, and says
that they are of service to the unbelieving, not to believers, as though
the question now were for whose advantage they occur, not by what power.
Granted that signs belong to the faithless, who, because they would not
obey the word and doctrine, are brought to believe by means of signs.
Even our Lord wrought signs for the unbelieving, and yet our Lord’s
signs are not on that account to be impugned, because those people were
faithless, but must be worthy of greater admiration because they were so
powerful that they subdued even the hardest hearts, and compelled men to
believe. And so I will not have you tell me that signs are for the
unbelieving; but answer my question—how is it that poor worthless dust
and ashes are associated with this wondrous power of signs and miracles?
I see, I see, most unfortunate of mortals, why you are so sad and what
causes your fear. That unclean spirit who forces you to write these
things has often been tortured by this worthless dust, aye, and is being
tortured at this moment, and though in your case he conceals his wounds,
in others he makes confession. You will hardly follow the heathen and
impious Porphyry and Eunomius, and pretend that these are the tricks of
the demons, and that they do not really cry out, but feign their
torments. Let me give you my advice: go to the basilicas of the martyrs,
and some day you will be cleansed; you will find there many in like case
with yourself, and will be set on fire, not by the martyrs’ tapers which
offend you, but by invisible flames; and you will then confess what you
now deny, and will freely proclaim your name—that you who speak in the
person of Vigilantius are really either Mercury, for greedy of gain was
he; or Nocturnus, who, according to Plautus’s “Amphitryon,” slept while
Jupiter, two nights together, had his adulterous connection with
Alcmena, and thus begat the mighty Hercules; or at all events Father
Bacchus, of drunken fame, with the tankard hanging from his shoulder,
with his ever ruby face, foaming lips, and unbridled brawling.

<span id="vi.vii-p48"></span>11. Once, when a sudden earthquake in this
province in the middle of the night awoke us all out of our sleep, you,
the most prudent and the wisest of men, began to pray without putting
your clothes on, and recalled to our minds the story of Adam and Eve in
Paradise; they, indeed, when their eyes were opened were ashamed, for
they saw that they were naked, and covered their shame with the leaves
of trees; but you, who were stripped alike of your shirt and of your
faith, in the sudden terror which overwhelmed you, and with the fumes of
your last night’s booze still hanging about you, showed your wisdom by
exposing your nakedness in only too evident a manner to the eyes of the
brethren. Such <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="vi.vii-Page_422"></span>are the adversaries of the Church; these are
the leaders who fight against the blood of the martyrs; here is a
specimen of the orators who thunder against the Apostles, or, rather,
such are the mad dogs which bark at the disciples of Christ.

<span id="vi.vii-p49"></span>12. I confess my own fear, for possibly it
may be thought to spring from superstition. When I have been angry, or
have had evil thoughts in my mind, or some phantom of the night has
beguiled me, I do not dare to enter the basilicas of the martyrs, I
shudder all over in body and soul. You may smile, perhaps, and deride
this as on a level with the wild fancies of weak women. If it be so, I
am not ashamed of having a faith like that of those who were the first
to see the risen Lord; who were sent to the Apostles; who, in the person
of the mother of our Lord and Saviour, were commended to the holy
Apostles. Belch out your shame, if you will, with men of the world, I
will fast with women; yea, with religious men whose looks witness to
their chastity, and who, with the cheek pale from prolonged abstinence,
show forth the chastity of Christ.

<span id="vi.vii-p50"></span>13. Something, also, appears to be
troubling you. You are afraid that, if continence, sobriety, and fasting
strike root among the people of Gaul, your taverns will not pay, and you
will be unable to keep up through the night your diabolical vigils and
drunken revels. Moreover, I have learnt from those same letters that, in
defiance of the authority of Paul, nay, rather of Peter, John, and
James, who gave the right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, and
commanded them to remember the poor, you forbid any pecuniary relief to
be sent to Jerusalem for the benefit of the saints. Now, if I reply to
this, you will immediately give tongue and cry out that I am pleading my
own cause. You, forsooth, were so generous to the whole community that
if you had not come to Jerusalem, and lavished your own money or that of
your patrons, we should all be on the verge of starvation. I say what
the blessed Apostle Paul says in nearly all his Epistles; and he makes
it a rule for the Churches of the Gentiles that, on the first day of the
week, that is, on the Lord’s day, contributions should be made by every
one which should be sent up to Jerusalem for the relief of the saints,
and that either by his own disciples, or by those whom they should
themselves approve; and if it were thought fit, he would himself either
send, or take what was collected. Also in the Acts of the Apostles, when
speaking to the governor Felix, he says, <span
id="fr_4975"></span>[4976](#fn_4975) “After many years I went up to
Jerusalem to bring alms to my nation and offerings, and to perform my
vows, amidst which they found me purified in the temple.” Might he not
have distributed in some other part of the world, and in the infant
Churches which he was training in his own faith, the gifts he had
received from others? But he longed to give to the poor of the holy
places who, abandoning their own little possessions for the sake of
Christ, turned with their whole heart to the service of the Lord. It
would take too long now if I purposed to repeat all the passages from
the whole range of his Epistles in which he advocates and urges with all
his heart that money be sent to Jerusalem and to the holy places for the
faithful; not to gratify avarice, but to give relief; not to accumulate
wealth, but to support the weakness of the poor body, and to stave off
cold and hunger. And this custom continues in Judea to the present day,
not only among us, but also among the Hebrews, so that they who <span
id="fr_4976"></span>[4977](#fn_4976) meditate in the law of the Lord,
day and night, and have <span id="fr_4977"></span>[4978](#fn_4977) no
father upon earth except the Lord alone, may be cherished by the aid of
the synagogues and of the whole world; that there may be <span
id="fr_4978"></span>[4979](#fn_4978) equality—not that some may be
refreshed while others are in distress, but that the abundance of some
may support the need of others.

<span id="vi.vii-p55"></span>14. You will reply that every one can do
this in his own country, and that there will never be wanting poor who
ought to be supported with the resources of the Church. And we do not
deny that doles should be distributed to all poor people, even to Jews
and Samaritans, if the means will allow. But the Apostle teaches that
alms should be given to all, indeed, <span
id="fr_4979"></span>[4980](#fn_4979) especially, however, to those who
are of the household of faith. And respecting these the Saviour said in
the Gospel, <span id="fr_4980"></span>[4981](#fn_4980) “Make to
yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, who may receive you
into everlasting habitations.” What! Can those poor creatures, with
their rags and filth, lorded over, as they are, by raging lust, can they
who own nothing, now or hereafter, have eternal habitations? No doubt it
is not the poor simply, but the poor in spirit, who are called blessed;
those of whom it is written, <span id="fr_4981"></span>[4982](#fn_4981)
“Blessed is he who gives his mind to the poor and needy; the Lord shall
deliver him in the evil day.” But the fact is, in supporting the poor of
the common people, what is needed is not mind, but money. In the case of
the saintly poor the mind has blessed exercises, since you give to one
who receives with a blush, and when he has received is grieved, <span
id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span id="vi.vii-Page_423"></span>that while
sowing spiritual things he must reap your carnal things. As for his
argument that they who keep what they have, and distribute among the
poor, little by little, the increase of their property, act more wisely
than they who sell their possessions, and once for all give all away,
not I but the Lord shall make answer: <span
id="fr_4982"></span>[4983](#fn_4982) “If thou wilt be perfect, go sell
all that thou hast and give to the poor, and come, follow Me.” He speaks
to him who wishes to be perfect, who, with the Apostles, leaves father,
ship, and net. The man whom you approve stands in the second or third
rank; yet we welcome him provided it be understood that the first is to
be preferred to the second, and the second to the third.

<span id="vi.vii-p60"></span>15. Let me add that our monks are not to be
deterred from their resolution by you with your viper’s tongue and
savage bite. Your argument respecting them runs thus: If all men were to
seclude themselves and live in solitude, who is there to frequent the
churches? Who will remain to win those engaged in secular pursuits? Who
will be able to urge sinners to virtuous conduct? Similarly, if all were
as silly as you, who could be wise? And, to follow out your argument,
virginity would not deserve our approbation. For if all were virgins, we
should have no marriages; the race would perish; infants would not cry
in their cradles; midwives would lose their pay and turn beggars; and
Dormitantius, all alone and shrivelled up with cold, would lie awake in
his bed. The truth is, virtue is a rare thing and not eagerly sought
after by the many. Would that all were as the few of whom it is
said: <span id="fr_4983"></span>[4984](#fn_4983) “Many are called, few
are chosen.” The prison would be empty. But, indeed, a monk’s function
is not to teach, but to lament; to mourn either for himself or for the
world, and with terror to anticipate our Lord’s advent. Knowing his own
weakness and the frailty of the vessel which he carries, he is afraid of
stumbling, lest he strike against something, and it fall and be broken.
Hence he shuns the sight of women, and particularly of young women, and
so far chastens himself as to dread even what is safe.

<span id="vi.vii-p62"></span>16. Why, you will say, go to the desert?
The reason is plain: That I may not hear or see you; that I may not be
disturbed by your madness; that I may not be engaged in conflict with
you; that the eye of the harlot nay not lead me captive: that beauty may
not lead me to unlawful embraces. You will reply: “This is not to fight,
but to run away. Stand in line of battle, put on your armour and resist
your foes, so that, having overcome, you may wear the crown.” I confess
my weakness. I would not fight in the hope of victory, lest some time or
other I lose the victory. If I flee, I avoid the sword; if I stand, I
must either overcome or fall. But what need is there for me to let go
certainties and follow after uncertainties? Either with my shield or
with my feet I must shun death. You who fight may either be overcome or
may overcome. I who fly do not overcome, inasmuch as I fly; but I fly to
make sure that I may not be overcome. There is no safety in sleep with a
serpent beside you. Possibly he will not bite me, yet it is possible
that after a time he may bite me. We call women mothers who are no older
than sisters and daughters, <span id="fr_4984"></span>[4985](#fn_4984)
and we do not blush to cloak our vices with the names of piety. What
business has a monk in the women’s cells? What is the meaning of secret
conversation and looks which shun the presence of witnesses? Holy love
has no restless desire. Moreover, what we have said respecting lust we
must apply to avarice, and to all vices which are avoided by solitude.
We therefore keep clear of the crowded cities, that we may not be
compelled to do what we are urged to do, not so much by nature as by
choice.

<span id="vi.vii-p64"></span>17. At the request of the reverend
presbyters, as I have said, I have devoted to the dictation of these
remarks the labour of a single night, for my brother Sisinnius is
hastening his departure for Egypt, where he has relief to give to the
saints, and is impatient to be gone. If it were not so, however, the
subject itself was so openly blasphemous as to call for the indignation
of a writer rather than a multitude of proofs. But if Dormitantius wakes
up that he may again abuse me, and if he thinks fit to disparage me with
that same blasphemous mouth with which he pulls to pieces Apostles and
martyrs, I will spend upon him something more than this short
lucubration. I will keep vigil for a whole night in his behalf and in
behalf of his companions, whether they be disciples or masters, who
think no man to be worthy of Christ’s ministry unless he is married and
his wife is seen to be with child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4943"></span>[417:4944](2060171.htm#fr_4943) <span
id="vi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span> [Isa.
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022), [Isa.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)<span id="vi.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4944"></span>[417:4945](2060171.htm#fr_4944) <span
id="vi.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p8"></span> [Is. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#021)<span id="vi.vii-p8.1"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_4945"></span>[417:4946](2060171.htm#fr_4945) <span
id="vi.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p9"></span> Quintilian, the rhetorician, was born at
Calagurris, in Spain, but not the same as the birthplace of Vigilantius.

<span id="fn_4946"></span>[417:4947](2060171.htm#fr_4946) <span
id="vi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p10"></span> Combining the cheating tavern-keeper with
the heretic.

<span id="fn_4947"></span>[418:4948](2060171.htm#fr_4947) <span
id="vi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p12"></span> [Jerem. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span id="vi.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4948"></span>[418:4949](2060171.htm#fr_4948) <span
id="vi.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p13"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4949"></span>[418:4950](2060171.htm#fr_4949) <span
id="vi.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p14"></span> [Psa.
32.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4950"></span>[418:4951](2060171.htm#fr_4950) <span
id="vi.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p16"></span> Letter CXVII.

<span id="fn_4951"></span>[418:4952](2060171.htm#fr_4951) <span
id="vi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p18"></span> From *convenio,* to come together.

<span id="fn_4952"></span>[418:4953](2060171.htm#fr_4952) <span
id="vi.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p20"></span> [Acts xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)<span id="vi.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4953"></span>[418:4954](2060171.htm#fr_4953) <span
id="vi.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p21"></span> [Acts x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)<span id="vi.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4954"></span>[419:4955](2060171.htm#fr_4954) <span
id="vi.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p22"></span> [Matt. xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="vi.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4955"></span>[419:4956](2060171.htm#fr_4955) <span
id="vi.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p24"></span> [Rev.
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="vi.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4956"></span>[419:4957](2060171.htm#fr_4956) <span
id="vi.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p25"></span> Another reading is, “Shut up in the
altar.”

<span id="fn_4957"></span>[419:4958](2060171.htm#fr_4957) <span
id="vi.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p26"></span> [Rev.
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010)<span id="vi.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4958"></span>[419:4959](2060171.htm#fr_4958) <span
id="vi.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p27"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)<span id="vi.vii-p27.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_4959"></span>[419:4960](2060171.htm#fr_4959) <span
id="vi.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p28"></span> [Acts
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059),
[60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)<span id="vi.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4960"></span>[419:4961](2060171.htm#fr_4960) <span
id="vi.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p29"></span> [Acts xxvii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#037)<span id="vi.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4961"></span>[419:4962](2060171.htm#fr_4961) <span
id="vi.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p30"></span> [Eccles.
9.4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#004)<span id="vi.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4962"></span>[419:4963](2060171.htm#fr_4962) <span
id="vi.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p31"></span> [John xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)<span id="vi.vii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4963"></span>[419:4964](2060171.htm#fr_4963) <span
id="vi.vii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p32"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="vi.vii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4964"></span>[419:4965](2060171.htm#fr_4964) <span
id="vi.vii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p33"></span> <span id="vi.vii-p33.1"></span>vii. 35 sq.
The passage occurs in the Ethiopic and Arabic versions, not in the
Latin. It was probably rejected in later times for dogmatic reasons.

<span id="fn_4965"></span>[420:4966](2060171.htm#fr_4965) <span
id="vi.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p34"></span> The chief of the Egyptian Gnostics.

<span id="fn_4966"></span>[420:4967](2060171.htm#fr_4966) <span
id="vi.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p36"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4967"></span>[420:4968](2060171.htm#fr_4967) <span
id="vi.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p37"></span> [Matt.
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008), [Mark
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#004)<span id="vi.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4968"></span>[420:4969](2060171.htm#fr_4968) <span
id="vi.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p38"></span> [Rom. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span id="vi.vii-p38.1"></span>. Let
each man be fully assured in his own mind. R.V.

<span id="fn_4969"></span>[420:4970](2060171.htm#fr_4969) <span
id="vi.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p39"></span> [Matt. xxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="vi.vii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4970"></span>[420:4971](2060171.htm#fr_4970) <span
id="vi.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p40"></span> [Luke xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span id="vi.vii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4971"></span>[420:4972](2060171.htm#fr_4971) <span
id="vi.vii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p41"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="vi.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4972"></span>[420:4973](2060171.htm#fr_4972) <span
id="vi.vii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p42"></span> [Ps. cxix.
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span id="vi.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4973"></span>[420:4974](2060171.htm#fr_4973) <span
id="vi.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p44"></span> *i.e.* antidote to the scorpion’s bite.

<span id="fn_4974"></span>[421:4975](2060171.htm#fr_4974) <span
id="vi.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p46"></span> Letter CIX.

<span id="fn_4975"></span>[422:4976](2060171.htm#fr_4975) <span
id="vi.vii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p51"></span> [Acts
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018)<span id="vi.vii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4976"></span>[422:4977](2060171.htm#fr_4976) <span
id="vi.vii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p52"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4977"></span>[422:4978](2060171.htm#fr_4977) <span
id="vi.vii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p53"></span> [Deut. xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii-p53.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4978"></span>[422:4979](2060171.htm#fr_4978) <span
id="vi.vii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p54"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014)<span id="vi.vii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4979"></span>[422:4980](2060171.htm#fr_4979) <span
id="vi.vii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p56"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="vi.vii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4980"></span>[422:4981](2060171.htm#fr_4980) <span
id="vi.vii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p57"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4981"></span>[422:4982](2060171.htm#fr_4981) <span
id="vi.vii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p58"></span> [Ps. xli.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4982"></span>[423:4983](2060171.htm#fr_4982) <span
id="vi.vii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p59"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vi.vii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4983"></span>[423:4984](2060171.htm#fr_4983) <span
id="vi.vii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p61"></span> [Matt.
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016), [Matt.
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span id="vi.vii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4984"></span>[423:4985](2060171.htm#fr_4984) <span
id="vi.vii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p63"></span> He seems to mean that monks spoke of young
ladies as Mothers of the Convents, so as to be able to frequent their
society without reproach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Pammachius against John of Jerusalem.](2060172)
