[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060173)  [Next](2060175.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ix.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p1"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Against the Pelagians:</span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p2.1"></span>Dialogue Between Atticus, a Catholic, and
Critobulus, a Heretic.</span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.ix.i-p4"></span>The anti-Pelagian Dialogue is the last of
Jerome’s controversial works, having been written in the year 417,
within three years of his death. It shows no lack of his old vigour,
though perhaps something of the prolixity induced by old age. He looks
at the subject more calmly than those of the previous treatises, mainly
because it lay somewhat outside the track of his own thoughts. He was
induced to interest himself in it by his increasing regard for Augustin,
and by the coming of the young Spaniard, Orosius, in 414, from Augustin
to sit at his feet. Pelagius also had come to Palestine, and, after an
investigation of his tenets, at a small council at Jerusalem, in <span
id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span id="vi.ix.i-Page_448"></span>415,
presided over by Bishop John, and a second, at Diospolis in 416, had
been admitted to communion. Jerome appears to have taken no part in
these proceedings, and having been at peace with Bishop John for nearly
twenty years, was no doubt unwilling to act against him. But he had come
to look upon Pelagius as infected with the heretical “impiety,” which he
looked upon (i. 28) as far worse than moral evil; and connected him, as
we see from his letter to Ctesiphon (CXXXIII.), with Origenism and
Rufinus; and he brings his great knowledge of Scripture to bear upon the
controversy. He quotes a work of Pelagius, though giving only the
headings, and the numbers of the chapters, up to 100 (i. 26–32); and,
though at times his conviction appears weak, and there are passages (i.
5, ii. 6–30, iii. 1) which give occasion to the observation that he
really, if unconsciously, inclined to the views of Pelagius, and that he
is a “Synergist,” not, like Augustin, a thorough predestinarian, the
Dialogue, as a whole, is clear and forms a substantial contribution to
our knowledge. Although its tone is less violent than that of his
ascetic treatises, it appears to have stirred up the strongest animosity
against him. The adherents of Pelagius attacked and burned the
monasteries of Bethlehem, and Jerome himself only escaped by taking
refuge in a tower. His sufferings, and the interference of Pope
Innocentius in his behalf, may be seen by referring to Letters
CXXXV.–CXXXVII., with the introductory notes prefixed to them.

<span id="vi.ix.i-p5"></span>The following is a summary of the argument:
Atticus, the Augustinian, at once (c. 1) introduces the question: Do you
affirm that, as Pelagius affirms, men can live without sin? Yes, says
the Pelagian Critobulus, but I do not add, as is imputed to us, “without
the grace of God.” Indeed, the fact that we have a free will is from
grace. Yes, replies Atticus, but what is this grace? Is it only our
original nature, or is it needed in every act. In every act, is the
reply (2); yet one would hardly say that we cannot mend a pen without
grace (3), for, if so, where is our free will? But, says Atticus (5),
the Scriptures speak of our need of God’s aid in everything. In that
case, says Critobulus, the promised reward must be given not to us but
to God, Who works in us. Reverting then to the first point stated,
Atticus asks, does the possibility of sinlessness extend to single acts,
or to the whole life? Certainly to the whole as well as the part, is the
answer. But we wish, or will to be sinless; why then are we not actually
sinless? Because (8) we do not exert our will to the full. But (9) no
one has ever lived without sin. Still, says the Pelagian, God commands
us to be perfect, and he does not command impossibilities. Job,
Zacharias, and Elizabeth are represented as perfectly righteous. No, it
is answered (12), faults are attributed to each of them. John says, “He
that is born of God sinneth not” (13); yet, “If we say we have no sin we
deceive ourselves.” The Apostles, though told to be perfect (14) were
not perfect: and St. Paul says (14a), “I count not myself to have
apprehended.” Men are called just and perfect only in comparison of
others (16), or because of general subjection to the will of God (18),
or according to their special characteristics (19), as we may speak of a
bishop as excellent in his office, though he may not fulfil the ideal of
the pastoral epistles (22).

<span id="vi.ix.i-p6"></span>The discussion now turns to the words of
Pelagius’ book. “All are ruled by their own will” (27). No; for Christ
says, “I came not to do My own will.” “The wicked shall not be spared in
the judgment.” But we must distinguish between the impious or heretics
who will be destroyed (28) and Christian sinners who will be forgiven.
Some of his sayings contradict each other or are trifling (29, 30). “The
kingdom of heaven is promised in the Old Testament.” Yes, but more fully
in the New. Returning to the first thesis, “That a man can be without
sin if he wills it,” the Pelagian says, If things, like desires which
arise spontaneously and have no issue, are reckoned blamable, we charge
the sin on our Maker; to which it is only answered that, though we
cannot understand God’s ways, we must not arraign His justice. In the
rest of the book, Atticus alone speaks, going through the Old Testament,
and showing that each of the saints falls into some sin, which, though
done in ignorance or half-consciousness, yet brings condemnation with
it.

<span id="vi.ix.i-p7"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p7.1"></span>Prologue.</span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p8"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.ix.i-p9"></span>1. After writing the <span
id="fr_5127"></span>[5128](#fn_5127.md) letter to Ctesiphon, in which I
replied to the questions propounded, I received frequent expostulations
from the brethren, who wanted to know why I any longer delayed the
promised work in which I undertook to answer all the subtleties of the
preachers of Impassibility. <span id="fr_5128"></span>[5129](#fn_5128.md)
For every one knows what was the contention of the Stoics and
Peripatetics, that is, the old Academy, some of them asserted that the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ix.i-p11.4"></span>πάθη</span>, which
we may call *emotions,* such as sorrow, joy, hope, fear, can be
thoroughly eradicated from the minds of men; others that their power can
be broken, that they can be governed and restrained, as unmanageable
horses are held in check by peculiar kinds of bits. Their views have
been explained by Tully in the “Tusculan Disputations,” and Origen in
his “Stromata” endeavours to blend them with ecclesiastical truth. I
pass over Manichæus, <span id="fr_5129"></span>[5130](#fn_5129.md)
Priscillianus, <span id="fr_5130"></span>[5131](#fn_5130.md) Evagrius of
Ibora, Jovinianus, and the heretics found throughout almost the whole of
Syria, who, by a perversion of the import of their name, are commonly
called <span id="fr_5131"></span>[5132](#fn_5131.md) *Massalians,* in
Greek, *Euchites,* all of whom hold that it is possible for human virtue
and human knowledge to attain perfection, and arrive, I will not say
merely at a likeness to, but an equality <span id="page_449">p.
449</span> <span id="vi.ix.i-Page_449"></span>with God; and who go the
length of asserting that, when once they have reached the height of
perfection, even sins of thought and ignorance are impossible for them.
And although in my former letter addressed to Ctesiphon and aimed at
their errors, so far as time permitted, I touched upon a few points in
the book which I am now endeavouring to hammer out, I shall adhere to
the method of Socrates. What can be said on both sides shall be stated;
and the truth will thus be clear when both sides express their opinions.
Origen is peculiar in maintaining on the one hand that it is impossible
for human nature to pass through life without sin, and on the other,
that it is possible for a man, when he turns to better things, to become
so strong that he sins no more.

<span id="vi.ix.i-p15"></span>2. I shall add a few words in answer to
those who say that I am writing this work because I am inflamed with
envy. I have never spared heretics, and I have done my best to make the
enemies of the Church my own. <span id="fr_5132"></span>[5133](#fn_5132.md)
Helvidius wrote against the perpetual virginity of Saint Mary. Was it
envy that led me to answer him, whom I had never seen in the
flesh? <span id="fr_5133"></span>[5134](#fn_5133.md) Jovinianus, whose
heresy is now being fanned into flame, and who disturbed the faith of
Rome in my absence, was so devoid of gifts of utterance, and had such a
pestilent style that he was a fitter object for pity than for envy. So
far as I could, I answered him also. <span
id="fr_5134"></span>[5135](#fn_5134.md) Rufinus did all in his power to
circulate the blasphemies of Origen and the treatise “On First
Principles” (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ix.i-p18.1"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>), not in one city, but throughout the whole world. He even
published the first book of <span id="fr_5135"></span>[5136](#fn_5135.md)
Eusebius’ “Apology for Origen” under the name of <span
id="fr_5136"></span>[5137](#fn_5136.md) Pamphilus the martyr, and, as
though Origen had not said enough, <span
id="fr_5137"></span>[5138](#fn_5137.md) vomited forth a fresh volume on his
behalf. Am I to be accused of envy because I answered him? and was his
eloquence such a rushing torrent as to deter me through fear from
writing or dictating anything in reply? <span
id="fr_5138"></span>[5139](#fn_5138.md) Palladius, no better than a
villainous slave, tried to impart energy to the same heresy, and to
excite against me fresh prejudice on account of my translation of the
Hebrew. Was I <span id="fr_5139"></span>[5140](#fn_5139.md) envious of such
distinguished ability and nobility? Even now the <span
id="fr_5140"></span>[5141](#fn_5140.md) mystery of iniquity worketh, and
every one chatters about his views: yet I, it seems, am the only one who
is filled with envy at the glory of all the rest; I am so poor a
creature that I envy even those who do not deserve envy. And so, to
prove to all that I do not hate the men but their errors, and that I do
not wish to vilify any one, but rather lament the misfortune of men who
are deceived by knowledge falsely so-called, I have made use of the
names of Atticus and Critobulus in order to express our own views and
those of our opponents. The truth is that all we who hold the Catholic
faith, wish and long that, while the heresy is condemned, the men may be
reformed. At all events, if they will continue in error, the blame does
not attach to us who have written, but to them, since they have
preferred a lie to the truth. And one short answer to our calumniators,
whose curses fall upon their own heads, is this, that the Manichæan
doctrine condemns the nature of man, destroys free will, and does away
with the help of God. And again, that it is manifest madness for man to
speak of himself as being what God alone is. Let us so walk along the
royal road that we turn neither to the right hand nor to the left; and
let us always believe that the eagerness of our wills is governed by the
help of God. Should any one cry out that he is slandered and boast that
he thinks with us; he will then show that he assents to the true faith,
when he openly and sincerely condemns the opposite views. Otherwise his
case will be that described by the prophet: <span
id="fr_5141"></span>[5142](#fn_5141.md) “And yet for all this her
treacherous sister Judah hath not returned unto me with her whole heart,
but feignedly.” It is a smaller sin to follow evil which you think is
good, than not to venture to defend what you know for certain is good.
If we cannot endure threats, injustice, poverty, how shall we overcome
the flames of Babylon? Let us not lose by hollow peace what we have
preserved by war. I should be sorry to allow my fears to teach me
faithlessness, when Christ has put the true faith in the power of my
choice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5127"></span>[448:5128](2060174.htm#fr_5127.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p10"></span> Letter CXXXIII.

<span id="fn_5128"></span>[448:5129](2060174.htm#fr_5128.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p11.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p11.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ix.i-p11.3"></span>πάθεια</span>.

<span id="fn_5129"></span>[448:5130](2060174.htm#fr_5129.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p11.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p12"></span> Priscillian was a Spaniard, who began to
propagate his views, which were a mixture of various heresies, about the
year 370. See Robertson, p. 295 sq., and Note on Jerome, Letter CXXXIII.

<span id="fn_5130"></span>[448:5131](2060174.htm#fr_5130.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p13"></span> Evagrius Iberita. The name is taken
either from a town named Ibera or Ibora in Pontus, or from the province
of Iberia. Jerome, in the letter to which he refers, styles Evagrius
*Hyperborita,* but this is thought to be an error for *Hyborita.* It has
been suggested that Jerome was playing on the word *Iberita.* He was
born in 345. He wrote, amongst many other works, a treatise <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ix.i-p13.1"></span>Περὶ ἀπαθείας</span> (On
Impassibility), and no doubt Jerome refers to this a few lines above. He
was a zealous champion of Origen. See also Jerome, Letter CXXXIII. and
note.

<span id="fn_5131"></span>[448:5132](2060174.htm#fr_5131.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p14"></span> The Massalians or Euchites derived their
name from their habit of *continual* prayer. The words are etymological
equivalents (*Massalians,* from <span id="vi.ix.i-p14.1"></span>אלּצ to
pray). The perversity lay in the misinterpretation of such texts as
[Luke 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md), [1 Thess.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md)<span id="vi.ix.i-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_5132"></span>[449:5133](2060174.htm#fr_5132.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p16"></span> He was a Roman lawyer. His treatise was
written about <span class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.i-p16.1"></span>a.d.
383.</span> See Jerome’s treatise against him in this volume.

<span id="fn_5133"></span>[449:5134](2060174.htm#fr_5133.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p17"></span> See introduction to Jerome’s treatise
against Jovinianus in this volume.

<span id="fn_5134"></span>[449:5135](2060174.htm#fr_5134.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p18"></span> See Rufinus’ works, especially the
Prolegomena, and Jerome’s controversy with him in vol. iii. of this
series.

<span id="fn_5135"></span>[449:5136](2060174.htm#fr_5135.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p19"></span> That is, Eusebius of Cæsarea (<span
class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.i-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> 267–338), who
was called Pamphilus from his friendship with Pamphilus the martyr.

<span id="fn_5136"></span>[449:5137](2060174.htm#fr_5136.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p20"></span> Suffered martyrdom <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.i-p20.1"></span>a.d.</span> 309. He erected
a library at Cæsarea of 30,000 volumes. See Rufinus’ Preface to his
Apology in this series, vol. iii., with introductory note.

<span id="fn_5137"></span>[449:5138](2060174.htm#fr_5137.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p21"></span> See Rufinus on the adulteration of the
works of Origen, in this series, vol. iii. p. 421.

<span id="fn_5138"></span>[449:5139](2060174.htm#fr_5138.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p22"></span> Palladius, bishop of Hellenopolis, the
biographer and trusted friend of Chrysostom, was born about 367. He
visited Bethlehem about 387 and formed a very unfavourable opinion of
Jerome. He highly commended Rufinus. According to Epiphanius, as well as
Jerome, he was tainted with Origenism. Tillemont, however, thinks that
another Palladius may be referred to in these passages. His accounts of
Jerome and Rufinus are given in his “Historia Lausiaca,” c. 78 and 118.

<span id="fn_5139"></span>[449:5140](2060174.htm#fr_5139.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p23"></span> Jerome was accused of envy or ill-will by
Palladius. “Tanta fuit ejus invidia ut ab ea obrueretur virtus doctrinæ.
Cum ergo multis diebus cum eo versatus esset sanctus Posidonius, dicit
mihi in aurem, “Ingenua quidem Paula, quæ ejus curam gerit, præmorietur,
liberata ab ejus invidia. Ut autem arbitror, propter hunc virum non
habitabit vir sanctus in his locis, sed ejus pervadet invidia usque ad
proprium fratrem.”—Pallad. Hist. Laus., § 78, cf. § 82.

<span id="fn_5140"></span>[449:5141](2060174.htm#fr_5140.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p24"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007.md)<span id="vi.ix.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5141"></span>[449:5142](2060174.htm#fr_5141.md) <span
id="vi.ix.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.i-p25"></span> [Jer. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.ix.i-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](2060175.md)
