[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060221)  [Next](2060223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span
id="vii.iv.xii-Page_501"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Prefaces to the Commentaries on the Minor
Prophets.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p2"></span>For the order and date of writing of
these Commentaries see the Preface to Amos, Book iii., and the note
there.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>Hosea.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p4"></span>This Commentary was dedicated to
Pammachius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406 (sixth consulate of
Arcadius—Preface to Amos, Book iii. The Preface to Book i. is chiefly
taken up with a discussion on Hosea’s “wife of whoredoms.” He takes the
story as allegorical; it cannot be literal, for “God commands nothing
but what is honourable, nor does he, by bidding men do disgraceful
things, make that conduct honourable which is disgraceful.” Jerome then
describes, as in former Prefaces, the chief Greek commentators, of whom
Apollinaris and Origen had written very shortly on Hosea, Pierius at
great length, but to little purpose; and says that he had himself
obtained from Didymus of Alexandria that he should complete the
Commentary of Origen. He had himself often judged independently, though
with little knowledge of Hebrew, but he had been in earnest, while most
scholars were “more concerned for their bellies than their hearts, and
thought themselves learned if in the doctors’ waiting rooms they could
disparage other men’s works.”

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p5"></span>In the Preface to Book ii. Jerome
complains of his detractors, and appeals from the present favour of
high-placed men to the posthumous authority of sound ability.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p6"></span>In Book iii. he claims Pammachius as his
defender, though he fears the judgment of his great learning.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p7"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>Joel.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p8"></span>This Commentary also is addressed to
Pammachius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406. It is in one book. It gives
the order of the Twelve Prophets adopted by the LXX. and the Hebrew
respectively, the Hebrew order being that now in use. It also gives the
etymological meaning of their names.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p9"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p9.1"></span>Amos.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p10"></span>In three books, addressed also to
Pammachius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406 (Preface to Amos, Book
iii.). The Preface to Book i. merely gives a description of Tekoa, Amos’
birthplace. That to Book ii. speaks of old age, with its advantages for
self-control and its trials in various infirmities, such as phlegm, dim
eyesight, loosened teeth, colic, and gout. That to Book iii. contains
the passage several times referred to for the order of these
Commentaries, which is as follows:

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p11"></span>We have not discussed them in regular
sequence from the first to the ninth, as they are read, but as we have
been able, and in accordance with requests made to us. Nahum, Micah,
Zephaniah, Haggai, <span id="fr_5439"></span>[5440](#fn_5439.md) I first
addressed to Paula and Eustochium, her daughter, who are never weary; I
next dedicated two books on Habakkuk to Chromatius, bishop of Aquileia;
I then proceeded to explain, at your command, Pammachius, and after a
long interval of silence, Obadiah and Jonah. <span
id="fr_5440"></span>[5441](#fn_5440.md) In the <span
id="fr_5441"></span>[5442](#fn_5441.md) present year, which bears in the
calendar the name of the sixth consulate of Arcadius Augustus and
Anitius Probus, I interpreted Malachi for Exsuperius, bishop of
Toulouse, and Minervius and Alexander, monks of that city. Unable to
refuse your request I immediately went back to the beginning of the
volume, and expounded Hosea, Joel, and Amos. A severe sickness followed,
and I showed my rashness in resuming the dictation of this work too
hastily; and, whereas others hesitate to write and frequently correct
their work, I entrusted mine to the fortune which attends those who
employ a secretary, and hazarded my reputation for ability and
orthodoxy; for, as I have often testified, I cannot endure the toil of
writing with my own hand; and, in expounding the Holy Scriptures, what
we want is not a polished style and oratorical flourishes, but learning
and simple truth.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p15"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p15.1"></span>Obadiah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p16"></span>Addressed to Pammachius <span
class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span> 403. The
Preface records how in early youth (some thirty years before), he had
attempted an allegorical commentary of Obadiah, of which he was now
ashamed, though it has lately been praised by a youth of similar years.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p17"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>Jonah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p18"></span>This was addressed to Chromatius, <span
id="fr_5442"></span>[5443](#fn_5442.md) but belongs to the year 395. It is
said in the Preface to be three years after the commentary on Micah,
Nahum, etc. The Preface merely touches on the various places of
Scripture in which Jonah is named.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p20"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p20.1"></span>Micah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p21"></span>Addressed to Paula and Eustochium.
<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p21.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392. It
is in two books. In the Preface to Book ii., Jerome vindicates himself
against the charge of making mere compilations from Origen. He
confesses, however, his great admiration for him. “What they consider a
reproach,” he says, “I regard as the highest praise, since I desire to
imitate him who, I doubt not, is acceptable to all wise men, and to
you.”

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p22"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p22.1"></span>Nahum.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p23"></span>Also to Paula and Eustochium, <span
class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392. The
Preface contains little of importance. Jerome mentions that the village
of Elkosh, Nahum’s birthplace, was pointed out to him by a guide in
Galilee.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p24"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p24.1"></span>Habakkuk.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p25"></span>*Addressed to Chromatius, <span
class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p25.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392. The
commentary is in two books. The Preface to Book i. is long, but merely
describes the contents of the book. That to Book ii. mentions among his
adversaries, “The Serpent, and Sardanapalus, whose character is worse
than his* <span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="vii.iv.xii-Page_502"></span>*name”—expressions which have been
referred to Rufinus; but the enmity between Jerome and Rufinus had not
broken out in 392.*

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p26"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p26.1"></span>Zephaniah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p27"></span>Addressed to Paula and Eustochium,
<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p27.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392. In
the Preface Jerome defends himself for writing for women, bringing many
examples from Scripture and from classical writers to show the capacity
of women.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p28"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p28.1"></span>Haggai.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p29"></span>Also to Paula and Eustochium, <span
class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p29.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392. The
preface merely describes the occasion of the book, but says that
Haggai’s prophecy was contemporary with the reign of Tarquinius Superbus
(<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.xii-p29.2"></span>b.c.</span>
535–510).

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p30"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p30.1"></span>Zechariah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p31"></span>Addressed to Exsuperius, bishop of
Toulouse, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p31.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406, in three books, and sent,
“in the closing days of autumn, by the monk, Sisinnius, who had been
sent with presents for the poor saints at Jerusalem, and was hastening
to Egypt on a similar errand.” The Prefaces to the three books mention
these facts, but have nothing in them of note which has not been said
before.

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p32"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p32.1"></span>Malachi.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p33"></span>*Addressed, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p33.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406, to Minervius and
Alexander, presbyters of the diocese of Toulouse. The Jews, the Preface
says, believe Malachi to be a name for Ezra. Origen and his followers
believe that (according to his name) he was an angel. But we reject this
view altogether, lest we be compelled to accept the doctrine of the fall
of souls from heaven.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5439"></span>[501:5440](2060222.htm#fr_5439.md) <span
id="vii.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p12"></span> These four and Habakkuk are mentioned
in the De Vir. Ill. (<span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 492), and were written about
that date, Jonah three years after, but Obadiah probably not till 403.
The rest are fixed to the Sixth Consulate of Arcadius, 406.

<span id="fn_5440"></span>[501:5441](2060222.htm#fr_5440.md) <span
id="vii.iv.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p13"></span> But see Preface to Jonah, which is
addressed to Chromatius.

<span id="fn_5441"></span>[501:5442](2060222.htm#fr_5441.md) <span
id="vii.iv.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p14"></span> The year <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.xii-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406.

<span id="fn_5442"></span>[501:5443](2060222.htm#fr_5442.md) <span
id="vii.iv.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.xii-p19"></span> Chromatius is named in this Preface
distinctly. But see Preface to Amos, Book iii., which says that the
Commentaries to Obadiah and Jonah were written at the request of
Pammachius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](2060223.md)
