[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060178)  [Next](2060180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>Prefaces.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>The Prefaces to Jerome’s works have in many
cases a special value. This value is sometimes personal; they are the
free expressions of his feelings to those whom he trusts. Sometimes it
lies in the mention of particular events; sometimes in showing the
special difficulties he encountered as a translator, or the state of
mind of those for whom he wrote; sometimes in making us understand the
extent and limits of his own knowledge, and the views on points such as
the inspiration of Scripture which actuated him as a translator or
commentator; sometimes, again, in the particular interpretations which
he gives. These things gain a great importance from the fact that
Jerome’s influence and that of his Vulgate was preponderant in Western
Europe for more than a thousand years.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>We have had to make a selection, not only
from want of space, but also because the Prefaces are of very unequal
value, and sometimes are mere repetitions of previous statements. We
have therefore given specimens of each class of Preface; we have given
also all which bears on the better understanding of the life and views
of Jerome; but where a Preface repeats what has been said before, or
where it gives facts or interpretations which are well known or of no
particular value, we have contented ourselves with a short statement of
its contents.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>The Prefaces fall under three heads: 1st.
Those prefixed to Jerome’s early works bearing on Church history or
Scripture. 2d. The Prefaces to the Vulgate translation. 3d. Those
prefixed to the Commentaries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefaces to Jerome's Early Works.](2060180)
