[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060212)  [Next](2060214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Preface to Translation of Origen on St.
Luke.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.iii-p2"></span>Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, <span
class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 388.

<span id="vii.iv.iii-p3"></span>A few days ago you told me that you had
read some commentaries on Matthew and Luke, of which one was equally
dull in perception and expression, the other frivolous in expression,
sleepy in sense. Accordingly you requested me to translate, without
regarding such rubbish, our Adamantius’ thirty-nine “homilies” on Luke,
just as they are found in the original Greek; I replied that it was an
irksome task and a mental torment to write, as Cicero phrases it, with
another man’s heart <span id="fr_5417"></span>[5418](#fn_5417) not one’s
own; but yet I will undertake it, as your requests reach no higher than
this. The demand which the sainted Blesilla once made, at Rome, that I
should translate into our language his twenty-five volumes on Matthew,
five on Luke, and thirty-two on John is beyond my powers, my leisure,
and my energy. You see what weight your influence and wishes have with
me. I have laid aside for a time my books on Hebrew Questions because
you think my labour will not be in vain, and turn to the translation of
these commentaries, which, good or bad, are his work and not mine. I do
this all the more readily because I hear on the left of me the
raven—that ominous bird—croaking and mocking in all extraordinary way at
the colours of all the other birds, though he himself is nothing if not
a bird of gloom. And so, before he change his note, I confess that in
these treatises Origen is like a boy amusing himself with the dice-box;
there is a wide difference between his mature efforts and the serious
studies of his old age. If my proposal meet with your approbation, if I
am still able to undertake the task, and if the Lord grant me
opportunity to translate them into Latin after completing the work I
have now deferred, you will then be able to see—aye, and all who speak
Latin will learn through you—how much good they knew not, and how much
they have now begun to know. Besides this, I have arranged to send you
shortly the Commentaries of Hilary, that master of eloquence, and of the
blessed martyr Victorinus, on the Gospel of Matthew. Their style is
different, but the grace of the Spirit which wrought in them is one.
These will give you some idea of the study which our Latins also have,
in former days, bestowed upon the Holy Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5417"></span>[496:5418](2060213.htm#fr_5417) <span
id="vii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.iii-p4"></span> Alieno stomacho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians.](2060214)
