[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060211)  [Next](2060213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Matthew.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p2"></span>The Preface, addressed to Eusebius of
Cremona, was written <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398. Eusebius was at this time
starting for Rome, and he was charged to give a copy of this Commentary
to Principia, the friend of Marcella, for whom he had been unable
through sickness to write on the Song of Songs as he had wished. Jerome
begins by distinguishing the Canonical from the Apocryphal Gospels,
quoting the words of St. Luke, that many had taken in hand to write the
life of Christ. He gives his view of the origin of the Gospels as
follows:

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p3"></span>The first evangelist is Matthew, the
publican, who was surnamed Levi. He published his Gospel in Judæa in the
Hebrew language, chiefly for the sake of Jewish believers in Christ, who
adhered in vain to the shadow of the law, although the substance of the
Gospel had come. The second is Mark, the <span
id="fr_5415"></span>[5416](#fn_5415.md) amanuensis of the Apostle Peter,
and first bishop of the Church of Alexandria. He did not himself see our
Lord and Saviour, but he related the matter of his Master’s preaching
with more regard to minute detail than to historical sequence. The third
is Luke, the physician, by birth a native of Antioch, in Syria, whose
praise is in the Gospel. He was himself a disciple of the Apostle Paul,
and composed his book in Achaia and Bœotia. He thoroughly investigates
certain particulars and, as he himself confesses in the preface,
describes what he had heard rather than what he had seen. The last is
John, the Apostle and Evangelist, whom Jesus loved most, who, reclining
on the Lord’s bosom, drank the purest streams of doctrine, and was the
only one thought worthy of the words from the cross, “Behold! thy
mother.” When he was in Asia, at the time when the seeds of heresy were
springing up (I refer to Cerinthus, Ebion, and the rest who say that
Christ has not come in the flesh, whom he in his own epistle calls
Antichrists, and whom the Apostle Paul frequently assails), he was urged
by almost all the bishops of Asia then living, and by deputations from
many Churches, to write more profoundly concerning the divinity of the
Saviour, and to break through all obstacles so as to attain to the very
Word of God (if I may so speak) with a boldness as successful as it
appears audacious. Ecclesiastical history relates that, when he was
urged by the brethren to write, he replied that he would do so if a
general fast were proclaimed and all would offer up prayer to God; and
when the fast was over, the narrative goes on to say, being filled with
revelation, he burst into the heaven-sent Preface: “In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: this was in
the beginning with God.”

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p5"></span>Jerome then applies the four symbolical
figures of Ezekiel to the Gospels: the Man is Matthew, the Lion, Mark,
the Calf, Luke, “because he began with Zacharias the priest,” and the
Eagle, John. He then describes the works of his predecessors: Origen
with his twenty-five volumes, Theophilus of Antioch, Hippolytus the
martyr, Theodorus of Heraclea, Apollinaris of Laodicæa, Didymus of
Alexandria, and of the Latins, Hilary, Victorinus, and Fortunatianus;
from these last, he says, he had gained but little. He continues as
follows:

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p6"></span>But you urge me to finish the composition
in a fortnight, when Easter is now rapidly approaching, and the spring
breezes are blowing; you do not consider when the shorthand writers are
to take notes, when the sheets are to be written, when corrected, how
long it takes to make a really accurate copy; and this is the more
surprising, since you <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="vii.iv.ii-Page_496"></span>know that for the last three months I
have been so ill that I am now hardly beginning to walk; and I could not
adequately perform so great a task in so short a time. Therefore,
neglecting the authority of ancient writers, since I have no opportunity
of reading or following them, I have confined myself to the brief
exposition and translation of the narrative which you particularly
requested; and I have sometimes thrown in a few of the flowers of
the <span id="fr_5416"></span>[5417](#fn_5416.md) spiritual interpretation,
while I reserve the perfect work for a future day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5415"></span>[495:5416](2060212.htm#fr_5415.md) <span
id="vii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p4"></span> Interpres.

<span id="fn_5416"></span>[496:5417](2060212.htm#fr_5416.md) <span
id="vii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.ii-p7"></span> That is, the allegorical or mystical
sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to Translation of Origen on St....](2060213.md)
