[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060005)  [Next](2060007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III"></span>

<span id="iv.III-p1"></span> <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="iv.III-Page_xvi"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iv.III-p1.1"></span>III.—<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.III-p1.2"></span>Life of Jerome.</span></span>

<span id="iv.III-p2"></span>The figures in parentheses, when not
otherwise indicated, refer to the pages in this volume.

<span id="iv.III-p3"></span>For a full account of the Life, the
translator must refer to an article (<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.III-p3.1"></span>Hieronymus</span>) written by him in Smith and
Wace’s *Dictionary of Christian Biography*. A shorter statement may
suffice here, since the chief sources of information are contained in
this volume, and to these reference will be continually made.

<span id="iv.III-p4"></span>*Childhood and Youth*. A.D. 345. Jerome was
born at Stridon, near Aquileia, but in Pannonia, a place which was
partially destroyed in the Gothic invasion of 377 (On Illustrious Men,
135, Vol. iii. p. 304). Jerome’s own property, however, remained, though
in a ruinous state, in 397 (140). His father Eusebius (Ill. Men, as
above) and his mother were Catholic Christians (492), but he was not
baptised in infancy. The family was moderately wealthy, possessing
houses (140) and slaves (Apol. i. 30, Vol. iii. p. 498), and was
intimate with the richer family from which sprang Bonosus, Jerome’s
foster brother and friend (6). The parents were living in 373 when
Jerome first went to the East (35), but probably died at the destruction
of Stridon. He had a brother, Paulinian, twenty years his junior (140,
173), and we read of a sister (8, 9), and an aunt named Castorina (13).

<span id="iv.III-p5"></span>He received a good education, but declares
that he was an idle boy (Vol. iii. 498). He was at a grammar school when
the Emperor Julian died (Comm. on [Habakkuk iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014)<span id="iv.III-p5.1"></span>) and
soon after went to Rome with his friend Bonosus (6), where he studied
rhetoric (at that time the all-embracing pursuit) under Ælius Donatus
(Vol. iii. 491), and frequented 363 the law-courts (Comm. on Gal., ii.
13).

<span id="iv.III-p6"></span>363–66. He fell into sin (9, 15, 78), but
was drawn into the company of young Christians who on Sundays visited
the tombs of the martyrs in the Catacombs (Com. on Ezek., ch. 40, v. 5),
and is believed to have been baptised by the Pope Liberius in 366 (20).
He was already a keen student, though as yet having little knowledge of
Greek (Rufinus Apol. ii. 9, Vol. iii. p. 464), and had begun the
acquisition of a library (35).

<span id="iv.III-p7"></span>366–70. From Rome Jerome went with Bonosus
to Gaul, passing, however, through Northern Italy, where they made
acquaintance with Rufinus, probably at his native place, Concordia ([Ep.
v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="iv.III-p7.1"></span>,
comp. with iii. 3, pp. 7, 11). He stayed at Treves (7), and travelled in
its neighbourhood (394), and copied <span class="c17"><span
id="iv.III-p7.2"></span>mss</span>., and wrote a mystical Commentary on
Obadiah (401).

<span id="iv.III-p8"></span>*Aquileia*. Returning probably by Vercellæ
(1) to Italy he was for three years at Aquileia, where he entered
definitively upon the twin pursuits of his life, Scriptural study and
the fostering of asceticism.

<span id="iv.III-p9"></span>370–73. A society of congenial minds
gathered round him, comprising Rufinus, Bonosus, Heliodorus (afterwards
Bishop of Altinum), Chromatius (afterwards Bishop of Aquileia), and his
brother Eusebius, and the Archdeacon Jovinus, the monk Chrysogonus, the
sub-deacon Niceas, Innocentius, and Hylas, the freedman of the wealthy
but ascetic Roman lady, Melania, together with Evagrius (afterwards
Bishop of Antioch), who had come to Italy with Eusebius, Bishop of
Vercellæ, on his return from exile. For the mention of these in various
parts of Jerome’s works, the Index must be consulted. These ascetics did
not form a monastery. There were as yet no Orders or Rules. The vow was
merely a “purpose” (*propositum*) which each privately took on himself
and the terms of which each man freely prescribed. The Greek word
*Monachus* (Monk) was used, but only implied living a single or separate
life. Some were hermits (5, 9, 247), some lived in cities (121, 250).
Jovinian was a monk, though antiascetic (378); Heliodorus (91) and John
of Jerusalem (174) were monks, though Bishops. Some members of the
ascetic society at Aquileia may have resided in the same house; but
there was no cenobitic discipline. Jerome visited Stridon and the
neighbouring town of Æmona (12), and perhaps resided at his native place
for a time, but he complains of the worldliness of the people of his
native town and of the opposition of their Bishop, Lupicinus (8 n. 10).
The friends at Aquileia were united in the closest friendship.

<span id="iv.III-p10"></span>373. Rufinus’ baptism (7, Ruf. [Ap. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)<span id="iv.III-p10.1"></span>, Vol.
iii. 436) and the writing of Jerome's first letter on “the woman seven
times struck with the axe” are the only incidents which have come down
to us of this period. We only know that the society was broken up by
some event which Jerome speaks of as “a sudden storm,” and “a monstrous
rending asunder” (5).

<span id="iv.III-p11"></span>Jerome determined on going to the East with
Evagrius and Heliodorus; Innocentius, Niceas, and Hylas accompanied him
(1, 5, 6, 10). Chromatius, Eusebius, and Jovinus remained in Italy.
Bonosus retired to an island in the Adriatic, where he lived the life of
a hermit (5, 9). Rufinus went to Egypt and subsequently to Palestine in
the company of <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="iv.III-Page_xvii"></span>Melania (6, 7). Jerome and his companions
travelled through Thrace, Pontus, Bithynia, Galatia, at the capital of
which (Ancyra) he appears to have stayed (497), Cappadocia, and Cilicia,
to Antioch, their haven of rest (5). But they did not long remain
together. Heliodorus made a journey to Jerusalem, where he was the guest
of Florentius (6).

<span id="iv.III-p12"></span>374. Jerome was in ill health, and at
length, in the middle of Lent (36), fell into a fever of which he nearly
died. To this illness belongs his anti-Ciceronian dream (36, Apol. ii.
6, Vol. iii. 462), which finally determined him to abandon secular
learning and devote himself to sacred studies. The successive deaths of
Innocentius and Hylas left Jerome alone with Evagrius, at whose country
house he fell in with the ancient hermit Malchus (315), and was
encouraged by him in the ascetic tendency. He hoped to see Rufinus,
wrote to him through Florentius (4, 6), but he did not come; and he
determined to embrace the life of solitude. Heliodorus had some thought
of accompanying him, but, to Jerome’s great chagrin) felt the call to
pastoral work to be the stronger, and returned to Italy (8, 13, 123).

<span id="iv.III-p13"></span>*The Desert*. 374–379. Jerome spent the
next five years in the Desert of Chalcis, to the east of Antioch (7). It
was peopled by hermits who, though living apart for most purposes, were
under some kind of authority (4, 21). Jerome wrote to their head,
Theodosius, begging to be admitted into their company (4). His life
while in the desert was one of rigorous penance, of tears and groans
alternating with spiritual ecstasy, and of temptations from the haunting
memories of Roman life (24, 25); he lived in a cell or cavern; he earned
his daily bread, and was clad in sackcloth (21, 24), but he was not
wholly cut off from converse with men. He saw Evagrius frequently (7,
8); he wrote and received letters and books (7, 11); he learned Hebrew
from a converted Jew (Ep. xviii. 10<span id="iv.III-p13.1"></span>), and
copied and translated the Gospel according to the Hebrews (Ill. Men, 2,
3, Vol. iii. 362), and his brother solitaries he found only too
accessible (Ep. xvii. 3<span id="iv.III-p13.2"></span>). Towards the
close of his sojourn he became involved in the controversies then
agitating the Church at Antioch, where Arian Vitalis, the orthodox but
Arian-ordained Meletius, and the Western Paulinus disputed the
possession of the bishopric (20). Jerome found himself beset with
demands for a confession of faith in terms strange to his Western
education (19, 20). He appealed to Pope Damasus for advice (19, 20); but
he and his friends found his position intolerable. They would rather, he
says, live among wild beasts than among Christians such as those about
them. In the autumn of 378 he wrote to Marcus, then head of the eremite
community, to say that he only begged for the “hospitality of the
desert” for a few months: in the spring he would be gone (21).

<span id="iv.III-p14"></span>379. Accordingly, in the spring of 379 he
came to Antioch and attached himself to the party of Paulinus, the
Western and orthodox Bishop, who ordained him presbyter, though he then
and always afterwards declined the active ministry (446). He pursued his
studies under the celebrated Apollinarius of Laodicæa, though not
accepting his views (176), and wrote his “Dialogue against the
Luciferians” (319–334).

<span id="iv.III-p15"></span>*Constantinople*. 380. The next year Jerome
went, with his Bishop, Paulinus, to Constantinople, and was there during
the Second General Council, at which the views of his teacher,
Apollinarius, were condemned, and sentence was passed in the cause of
his Bishop. He placed himself under the teaching of Gregory Nazianzen
(80, 93, 357; Ill. Men, 117), and became acquainted with Gregory of
Nyssa (Ill. Men, 128); he translated the Chronicle of Eusebius and
dedicated it to Vincentius and Gallienus, the former of whom became
henceforward his companion (483, 444–446); he imbibed his admiration for
Origen, translating his Homilies on Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and writing to
Damasus on the meaning given by Origen to the Seraphim in [Is.
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000)<span id="iv.III-p15.1"></span>
(22).

<span id="iv.III-p16"></span>381. These literary labours were carried on
under the disadvantage of a weakness of the eyes, from which he
henceforward constantly suffered. But there is in his writings not a
single reference to the Council of Constantinople, and only cursory
references to that held the next year at Rome, in which he was certainly
called to take part (233; Ruf. Epil. to Pamph., Vol. iii. 426, 513).

<span id="iv.III-p17"></span>*Rome*. 382–5. He went to Rome with his
Bishop, Paulinus, and with Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis in Cyprus. At
the Council which was there held he was present as a learned man whose
help the Pope required. There is no ground for the notion that he became
his official secretary. But for the two main objects of Jerome’s life
his sojourn in Rome presented great opportunities. Damasus thoroughly
appreciated his eminence as a biblical scholar. He constantly sent him
questions, the replies to which form short exegetical treatises, such as
those reckoned among Jerome’s letters on the word Hosanna and the
Prodigal Son. It was also for Pope Damasus that he undertook a revised
<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="iv.III-Page_xviii"></span>version of the Psalms, a version which was
used in the Roman Church for more than eleven centuries (492, 494), and
also a revised version of the New Testament, the preface to which is of
much critical value (487, 488; see also p. 357, where a whole clause in
[1 Cor. vii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span
id="iv.III-p17.1"></span> is said to have been omitted in the old
version because of the difficulty of translation). He further began the
collation of the various texts of the LXX. and the other Greek versions
of the Old Testament, and began to form the convictions which afterwards
led to his translation direct from the Hebrew (484). These biblical
studies made him acquainted with the works of Origen, and he conceived a
great and almost passionate admiration for that “brazen-hearted”
(Chalchenterus) worker and teacher of the Church (46), and he permitted
himself to use expressions too indiscriminate in praise of him and too
contemptuous towards his adversaries, which were afterwards thrown in
his teeth (Ruf. [Ap. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.III-p17.2"></span>, Vol. iii. 467).

<span id="iv.III-p18"></span>For the promotion of asceticism he found in
Rome a congenial soil. Epiphanius, him- self the pupil of the hermits
Hesychias and Hilarion (Sozom. vi. 32, Vol. ii. 369, 370), was the guest
of the noble and wealthy lady Paula, the heiress of the Æmilian race
(196), who was already disposed to the ascetic life. To the circle of
her family and friends Jerome was soon admitted, and she became his
devoted disciple and friend during the remainder of her life (Letter
cviii.). Her son, Toxotius, and her daughters, Blesilla, the young widow
(47–49), Paulina, the wife of Jerome’s friend, the ascetic Senator
Pammachius (135), and Julia Eustochium (196), each in special ways
affected the life of Jerome. Her friends, Marcella and Principia (253),
Asella (42, 58), Lea (42), Furia and Titiana, Marcellina and Felicitas
(60) and Fabiola, all of them belonging to the highest Roman families,
formed a circle of renuntiants who sought refuge in the ascetic life
from the wastefulness and immorality of those of their own quality.
Marcella’s house on the Aventine was their meeting place (41, 58). There
they prayed and sang psalms in the Hebrew, which they had learned for
the purpose (210), and read the Scriptures under the guidance of their
teacher (41, 255), who wrote for them many of his expository letters,
whose ascetic writings they committed to memory, and whose private
letters to them (Letters xxiii.–xlvi.) reveal the various phases of the
new Roman and Christian life. These are concentrated in the Treatise on
the Preservation of Virginity which he addressed to Eustochium (Letter
xxii.). This period also produced the first of Jerome’s controversial
treatises, that against Helvidius on the perpetual virginity of Mary
(334–346).

<span id="iv.III-p19"></span>384–5. This congenial scene of activity and
friendship was broken up by the death of Damasus. The new Pope,
Siricius, to whom many had thought of Jerome as a rival (59), was
without sympathy for him: he had offended almost every class of the
community by his unrestrained satire (Letters xxii., xl., liv., etc.):
he had awakened suspicion by his over praise of Origen (46); and at the
funeral of Blesilla, whose end was believed to have been hastened by the
hard life enjoined upon her, the fury of the people was excited against
Jerome and the cry was raised “The monks to the Tiber!” (53). He felt
that he was vainly trying to “sing the Lord’s song in a strange land”
(60) and he resolved to leave Rome for ever and to seek a retreat in
Palestine. His departure in August and the feelings excited by it are
described in a passage in his Apology against Rufinus ([Ap. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#022)<span id="iv.III-p19.1"></span>,
Vol. iii. 530) and in his letter to Asella (Letter xlv.) written at the
moment of his embarkation at Ostia.

<span id="iv.III-p20"></span>385–6. Jerome sailed with Vincentius and
with his brother Paulinian (Vol. iii. 530 as above) direct to Antioch.
Paula and Eustochium, leaving the other members of their family, went to
Cyprus to see Epiphanius; and the two parties united at Antioch (198).
Thence they passed through Palestine and Jerusalem, on to Egypt, where
they visited the abode of the monks of Nitria (202) and became
acquainted with Didymus, “the blind seer” of Alexandria (176): and they
returned to Palestine in the autumn of 386, and settled at Bethlehem for
the remainder of their lives.

<span id="iv.III-p21"></span>*Bethlehem, First Period*. Jerome’s life at
Bethlehem lasted thirty-four years. A monastery was built, of which he
was the head, and a convent for women over which Paula and Eustochium
successively presided (206), a church where all assembled (206, 292),
and a hospice for pilgrims who came to visit the holy places from all
parts of the world (140). These institutions were supported by the
wealth of Paula until, through the profusion of her charities, she was
so impoverished that she rather depended on Jerome and his brother, who
sold the remains of their family property for their support (140). He
lived in a cell, surrounded by his library, to which he constantly made
additions (Ruf. [Ap. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.III-p21.1"></span> (2), Vol. iii. 464). He lived on bread and
vegetables (165), and speaks of his life as one of repentance and prayer
(446), but no special austerities are mentioned in his writings, and he
did not think piety increased by the absence of cleanliness (33, 34). He
never offici<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span
id="iv.III-Page_xix"></span>ated in the services (83), but was much
absorbed in the cares (140) and discipline (Letter cxlvii.) of the
monastery, and by the crowds of monks who came from all parts of the
world (64, 65, 500). Sulpicius Severus (Dial. i. 8) tells us that when
he was with him towards the close of his life, he had the charge of the
parish of Bethlehem; and the presbyters associated with him certainly
prepared candidates for baptism (446); but his call, as he often
confesses, was not to the pastorate, but to the study (Letter cxii.). He
had youths to whom he taught Latin classics (Ruf. Apol. ii. 8 (2), Vol.
iii. 465); and he expounded the Scriptures daily to the brethren in the
monastery (Apol. ii. 124, Vol. iii. 515). Sulpicius speaks of him as
always reading or writing, never resting day or night. Translations,
commentaries, controversial works, letters dealing with important
subjects, flowed constantly from his pen, while the notes passing
between him and Paula and Eustochium were without number (Ill. Men, 135,
Vol. iii. 384), and every thing that he wrote was caught up by friends
or by enemies and published (79). He worked amidst great distractions,
not merely from the cares of the monasteries and the hospice, but from
the need of entertaining persons of distinction, like Fabiola (161),
from all parts of the world (153, 287, 161); from the need of replying
to the letters brought by messengers from the most distant countries for
those who sought advice of the renowned teacher (Letters cxvi.–cxxx.);
from prolonged illnesses (188, 215); at times from poverty; from the
panic of barbarian invasions (161, 252), and from the attacks of his
enemies, who in the year 417 burned his monasteries (281, 282).

<span id="iv.III-p22"></span>He spared no pains nor expense in the
production of his works. He perfected his knowledge of Hebrew by the aid
of a Jew who came to him like Nicodemus by night (176); he also learned
Chaldee (493); and for special parts of his Bible work he obtained
special aid from a distance (491, 494), obtaining funds, when his own
had failed, from his old friends Chromatius and Heliodorus (492).

<span id="iv.III-p23"></span>386–92. The list of his works during the
first six years of his residence at Bethlehem comprises the completion
of the Commentary on Ecclesiastes, and the translation of Didymus on the
Holy Spirit; the Commentaries on Ephesians and Galatians, Titus and
Philemon (498); a revision of the version of the New Testament begun in
Rome; a Treatise on [Psalms x.](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000)<span
id="iv.III-p23.1"></span>–xvi., and Translation of Origen on St. Luke
and the Psalms; the Book on the Names of Hebrew Places, mainly
translated from Eusebius; the Book of Hebrew Proper Names and that of
Hebrew Questions on Genesis; the revision of his translation of the
LXX., involving a comparison of Origen’s Hexapla; a considerable part of
the Vulgate; the Lives of the hermits Malchus and Hilarion; and the
Catalogue of Illustrious Church Writers. The only letter preserved to us
of this period is that written in the name of Paula and Eustochium to
invite Marcella to come to Palestine (60).

<span id="iv.III-p24"></span>*Bethlehem, Second Period*. 392–405. The
second period of Jerome’s stay at Bethlehem is the period of his most
conspicuous activity, which was partly employed in the salutary work of
finishing the Vulgate and in writing letters which rank among the finest
of his compositions, but largely also in controversies, in which the
worst parts of his character and influence are brought into prominence.

<span id="iv.III-p25"></span>395, 398 and 404–5, 394–97. There were also
great external hindrances to his work: the panic arising from the
invasion of the Huns, on account of which the inmates of the monasteries
had to leave their homes and prepare to embark at Joppa (161); there
were long periods of ill health; and there was the quarrel with the
Bishop of Jerusalem which led to a kind of excommunication of the monks
of Bethlehem (446, 447).

<span id="iv.III-p26"></span>The letters of this second period are those
numbered 47 to 116. They comprise those to Nepotianus, nephew of
Heliodorus, on the duties of the pastorate (89–96); that to Heliodorus,
on the death of his nephew (123–131); that to Paulinus, the Roman
Senator, afterwards Bishop of Nola, on his poem in praise of Theodosius,
and on the study of Scripture (96–102); that to Furia, on the
maintenance of widowhood (102–109); that to the Spanish noble Lucinius,
who had sent scribes to copy Jerome’s works (151–154), and to his widow
Theodora (154, 155); those to Abigaus, a blind Spanish presbyter (156,
157), and to Salvina, widow of Nebridius, and closely connected with the
Emperor Theodosius (163–168); that to Amandus, the Roman presbyter, on a
difficult case of conscience (149–151); the letter to Oceanus, defending
the second marriage of a Spanish Bishop (141–146); the letter to Læta,
wife of Toxotius, son of Paula, on the education of her infant daughter
(189–195); and those gems of his writings, the sketches of the lives
(Epitaphia) of Fabiola (157–163) and of Paula (195–212).

<span id="iv.III-p27"></span>*The Vulgate*. 391–403. The work of
Jerome’s life, the Vulgate version of the Scriptures, was completed in
this period. The version which bore the name of Vulgate, the popular or
vernacular version, in his day (44, 487–488) was a loose translation of
<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span id="iv.III-Page_xx"></span>the
LXX., of which almost every copy varied from every other. His first
effort, therefore, was to translate, or to revise the existing
translations, from a correct version of the LXX. And this revised
version he used in his familiar expositions, in the monastery (Apol. ii.
24, Vol. iii. 515), though a great part of it was lost even in his
lifetime (280), and all that now remains of it is Job, the Psalms, and
the Preface to the Books of Solomon (494). But even the most correct
text of the LXX., as he saw at once, was insufficient. In Origen’s
Hexapla the versions of Theodotion, Aquila, and Symmachus were given,
together with two others called Quinta and Sexta, in parallel columns
with the LXX. These constantly differed; and the only mode of deciding
between them was by going back to the Hebrew—“Hebraica Veritas,” as he
constantly terms it (80, 486, 494).

<span id="iv.III-p28"></span>392. Accordingly, he set himself at once,
in his settlement at Bethlehem, to the preliminary labours required for
this task; and in the sketch of his works in the Catalogue (Vol. iii.
384; On Ill. Men, 135) he says: The New Testament I have restored
according to the Greek original; the Old I have translated in accordance
with the Hebrew.”

<span id="iv.III-p29"></span>393. But no portion was as yet published.
In the following year he published the prophets (80) and sent other
portions of his Old Testament version to Marcella at Rome, keeping the
rest shut up in his closet (80), and awaiting the judgment of his
friends on the portions submitted to them. He purposed from the first to
publish the whole, as we see from what he calls his “helmeted preface”
to the Books of Samuel and of Kings (489). But it was published in
fragments, according as he had leisure to give it a final revision, or
according as other circumstances were favourable. The series of Prefaces
(487–494) shows that some parts were written or revised in great haste
(492, 494), some parts extorted from him by the importunity of his
friends (488; see Apol. ii. 25, in Vol. iii. 515); that he was subjected
to severe censures and misunderstanding, as to which he was extremely
sensitive; that at times he so shrank from publicity that he wished his
friends only to read it privately; that he was often, especially in the
later portions, dependent on his friends for the provision of the
copyists (492, 494). The order of publication can be traced. The Books
of Samuel and of the Kings came first, then Job and the Prophets, Ezra
and Nehemiah, and the Book of Genesis. Thus far he had proceeded in the
year 393 when a break of three years occurred through external
hindrances, of which the panic of the invasion of the Huns was the
chief.

<span id="iv.III-p30"></span>395. He then, at the entreaty of Chromatius
and Heliodorus (492), completed the Books of Solomon, intending to
proceed systematically to the end.

<span id="iv.III-p31"></span>398. But illness intervened, after which he
states that the first eight books were still wanting in the copies made
for the Spaniard Lucinius (153);

<span id="iv.III-p32"></span>403. nor was the publication resumed till
five years later, when the remaining books from Exodus to Ruth and the
Book of Esther were brought out (489, 491).

<span id="iv.III-p33"></span>404. The whole was then collected, by
others rather than by himself, and gradually superseded all other Latin
versions, and, coupled with the version of the New Testament previously
made, became the received, or Vulgate, edition of the Bible.

<span id="iv.III-p34"></span>393–404. The second period of Jerome’s stay
at Bethlehem is the period of his great controversies. These are no less
than six in number. (1) That with Jovinian on ascetic practices. (2)
That with the Origenists, in which he worked with Theophilus of
Alexandria and the Western Bishops. (3) That with John, Bishop of
Jerusalem. (4) That with Rufinus. (5) That with Vigilantius. (6) That
with Augustin. These may be described somewhat cursorily, the reader
being referred for a more detailed statement of them to the Letters and
Treatises themselves and to the notices prefixed to them.

<span id="iv.III-p35"></span>(1) *Jovinian*. Jovinian was a Roman monk
or, rather, solitary (for many took private monastic vows without
entering any order or monastery) who had perceived the danger of
degrading the ordinary Christian life which lurked in the profession of
asceticism. He was not, to judge by Jerome’s quotations from him (347),
a man of superior ability; but there are no apparent grounds for the
imputations which Jerome throws upon his character. He put off the
monastic dress, and lived like other men; and, though he refused to
marry, maintained his right as a Christian to do so. He argued that the
conditions of virginity, marriage, and widowhood were equal in God’s
sight, provided men lived in faith and piety; and that eating and
fasting were indifferent if men gave God thanks. He seems to have had
some influence, and it is stated that some who had made vows of
virginity were led through his teaching marry. Certainly his views were
condemned by the Pope Siricius, by Ambrose, and by Augustin.

<span id="iv.III-p36"></span>393. He published a book in Rome,
maintaining these opinions, and others of a more speculative character,
which was sent to Jerome, and was at once answered by him in his
treatise “Against Jovinian” (346–416). The more speculative matters he
deals with calmly; but the anti-ascetic views he treats with violence
and contempt. “These are the hissings of the old serpent; by these the
dragon expelled man <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="iv.III-Page_xxi"></span>from Paradise.” His intemperateness, which
threw contempt upon marriage, was severely blamed by his friends at
Rome, who tried to stop the publication (79; see also Ruf. Apol. ii. 44,
Vol. iii. 480); but he only replied by renewed expressions of derision,
and, several years later, when he has occasion to refer to Jovinian, he
says, “This man, after being condemned by the authority of the Roman
Church, amidst his feasts of pheasants and swine’s flesh, I will not say
gave up, but belched out, his life” (417).

<span id="iv.III-p37"></span>(2) *Origenism*. 393–403. The second great
controversy in which Jerome was engaged at this period relates to
Origenism, about which a great controversy had arisen at Alexandria,
leading to its condemnation by the Bishops of Palestine and Cyprus in
the East, and by the Pope and the Bishop of Milan and others in the
West.

<span id="iv.III-p38"></span>The great church teacher of Alexandria in
the third century was but little known in the West. Anastasius the Pope,
in the year 399, declared that he neither knew who he was nor what he
had written (Vol. iii. 433). Jerome, who had made acquaintance with his
writings during his first sojourn in the East, conceived a strong
admiration for him; he did not, indeed, accept all his views, as may be
seen from the first letter in which he alludes to him (22); but on his
coming to Rome he did all in his power to make him known. He was invited
by Damasus to translate some of his works (485); and when he found
ignorant condemnations passed upon him he praised him with his usual
vehemence and without discrimination, even eulogizing the Πεπὶ ᾽Αρχῶν on
which the subsequent controversy mainly turned (46; Ruf. [Ap. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013)<span id="iv.III-p38.1"></span>,
Vol. iii. 467). He had also quoted without blame in his Commentary on
the Ephesians statements such as those relating to the pre-existence of
human souls and possible restoration of Satan (Ruf. Apol. i. 448, 454).
But it was rather a literary enthusiasm and an admiration of original
genius than an express consent to Origen’s system. His calm judgment in
later years was, that his literary services to the Church were
inestimable, but that his doctrinal views were to be read with the
greatest caution, and that those specially impugned were heretical (176,
177, 238, 244). It must be allowed, however, that he appears in his
earlier stage as the vehement panegyrist of Origen (46, 48), and in his
later stage as his equally vehement condemner; and also that this change
seems less the effect of conviction than of a fear of the imputation of
heresy (Apol. iii. 33, Vol. iii. 535).

<span id="iv.III-p39"></span>The monks in the deserts near Alexandria
were divided, some holding Origenistic views, and some those of an
opposite tendency and verging upon Anthropomorphism. Theophilus, the
Bishop of Alexandria, at first sided with the Origenists, but afterwards
turned against them, and became their relentless persecutor. During his
former phase he was appealed to by John, Bishop of Jerusalem, in his
controversy with Epiphanius and Jerome (427), and took his part so
vehemently that he sent his confidant Isidore to Jerusalem, nominally to
inquire, but really to crush out all opposition, as he stated in a
letter to John (444). This letter fell into the hands of Jerome and his
friends, and the intentions of Theophilus were frustrated. A period of
suspicious silence followed (134); but when Theophilus had undergone his
change he found a ready instrument in Jerome, who threw himself eagerly
into the conflict (182–184), translated the encyclicals of Theophilus
(185, 186, 189) which led to the condemnation of Origen in the East, and
even his diatribe against St. John Chrysostom for receiving Isidore and
his brethren, whom Theophilus now treated as his enemies (214). Jerome
also, through his friends Pammachius, Marcella, and Eusebius (186, 256),
procured the condemnation of Origen in the West.

<span id="iv.III-p40"></span>(3) *John of Jerusalem*. The controversy
with John of Jerusalem forms an episode in the more general controversy.
John had been trained among the Origenistic ascetics, Epiphanius among
the anti-Origenists. Jerome appears to have undergone no change in his
sentiments as to Origen during the first period of his stay at Bethlehem
\[see his Preface to the Book of Hebrew Questions (486, 487) written in
388\], and was on good terms with the Bishop of Jerusalem and with
Rufinus, who was then living on the Mount of Olives.

<span id="iv.III-p41"></span>393. But at the beginning of the second
period a certain Aterbius came to Jerusalem and spread suspicion and
alarm of heresy. Jerome, perhaps weakly, “gave him satisfaction” as to
his faith (Apol. iii. 33, Vol. iii. 535), while by John and Rufinus he
was treated as a busybody (*id*.). This produced the first estrangement,
which was greatly increased by the visit of Epiphanius in the following
year. The scenes which followed may be read in Jerome’s treatise,
“Against John of Jerusalem” (430) and in Epiphanius’ letter translated
by Jerome (83–85). Epiphanius was popular at Jerusalem, and after a
scene in the church, in which he preached against Origenism and John
against Anthropomorphism, a breach was made between the two prelates.
Epiphanius came to stay at Bethlehem, and spoke of John as well nigh a
heretic. John spoke of Epiphanius as “that old tard” (430). The monks of
Bethlehem took part with Epiphanius; and he, to prevent their <span
id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> <span id="iv.III-Page_xxii"></span>being
deprived of clerical ministration by Bishop John, ordained Jerome’s
brother Paulinian at his monastery of Ad in the diocese of
Eleutheropolis. He was then only thirty years old, and was ordained
against his will, and with the employment of force and even gagging
(83). Epiphanius, returning to Cyprus, wrote to John a letter explaining
his conduct (83–89) which was translated by Jerome, but which did little
to allay the strife. John placed the monasteries, at least partially,
under an interdict (446–447), and appealed to Rome and to Alexandria,
and afterwards to Rufinus, the Pretorian Prefect at Constantinople (174,
447). Theophilus at first took John’s side vehemently; but the mission
of his confidant Isidore miscarried (444, 445), and after some time his
views of the situation changed and he made peace with Jerome and his
friends.

<span id="iv.III-p42"></span>397 or 398. John also was appeased; and
Jerome, who had written a long and bitter account of the controversy in
his treatise to Pammachius “Against John of Jerusalem” (424–447), seems
suddenly to have let the whole matter drop; the treatise was not
finished and was not published, and we read of the strife no more.

<span id="iv.III-p43"></span>(4) Rufinus. 398–404. The quarrel with
Jerome’s early friend Rufinus did not, like that with John pass away.
Jerome had deeply loved Rufinus (4) and highly respected Melania in
early days (5, 7, 53). He had spoken of Rufinus in his Chronicle for the
year 378 as “insignis monachus” (Ruf. [Rev.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026)<span id="iv.III-p43.1"></span>,
Vol. iii. 471); we do not read of any estrangement till some years after
his return to Palestine.

<span id="iv.III-p44"></span>392. We do not, indeed, find the warm
affection which we should expect in two intimate friends who meet after
a long separation; and it is possible that Jerome’s omission of Rufinus’
name from his Catalogue of Church Writers may indicate a coolness on one
side which was resented on the other. But they admit that their
friendship remained (Ruf. [Ap. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)<span id="iv.III-p44.1"></span> (2),
vol. iii. 465), and that there was frequent intercourse between the
monks of Bethlehem and those of the Mount of Olives (*id*.).

<span id="iv.III-p45"></span>393–394. The visit of Aterbius ([Ap. iii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#033)<span id="iv.III-p45.1"></span>,
Vol. iii. 535) and that of Epiphanius mark the time of estrangement.
Rufinus was with Bishop John in the scenes in the Church of the
Resurrection, and is mentioned in Epiphanius’ letter as a presbyter as
to whose views he is paternally anxious (84-87). In the quarrel between
John and Jerome Rufinus took decidedly the Bishop’s side (84, 430,
compared with 250). Jerome’s mind grew full of suspicion, so that he
even imputed to him that he had bribed some one in the monastery at
Bethlehem to steal from the lodgings of Fabiola his translation of the
letter of Epiphanius to John ([Ap. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)<span id="iv.III-p45.2"></span>, Vol.
iii. 521).

<span id="iv.III-p46"></span>397. But when Rufinus was leaving
Palestine, friendship was restored. They partook together of the
Eucharist, and joined hands ([Ap. iii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#033)<span id="iv.III-p46.1"></span>,
Vol. iii. 535), and Jerome accompanied his friend some way upon his
journey; but the reconciliation was short-lived. When in Rome, Rufinus
prefixed to a translation of Origen’s Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν a preface (168–170)
which referred in laudatory terms to Jerome as his forerunner in this
work, thus seeming to expose Jerome to the suspicions and condemnation
which might be expected to fall on one who undertook such a work. This
work was sent to Jerome by his friends Pammachius and Oceanus (175),
together with a Preface written by Rufinus to a translation of the
Apology for Origen by Pamphilus the Martyr. They spoke of the alarm
excited at Rome by the translation of the Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν, and their
suspicions that the translation was so made as to veil the heresies
contained in the original work; they begged that Jerome would translate
the work as it stood in the original, and pointed out that his own
reputation for orthodoxy was at stake (175). Jerome at once complied. He
sent to them a literal translation of Origen’s work together with a
letter describing the relation in which he had stood and still stood to
Origen: he admired him as a biblical scholar, but had never accepted him
as a dogmatic teacher (176, 177). He at the same time wrote a letter to
Rufinus, couched in friendly terms, but remonstrating with him for the
use he had made of his name (170). This letter, having been sent to
Jerome’s friends at Rome, was kept back by them ([Ap. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012)<span id="iv.III-p46.2"></span>,
Vol. iii. 489) and not delivered to Rufinus, and thus the quarrel, which
might have been allayed, became irreparable.

<span id="iv.III-p47"></span>401–404. The further progress of the
dispute is described in the notice prefixed to the Apologies of Jerome
and Rufinus (Vol. iii. 434–5, 482, 518). It may suffice here to say that
this disgraceful and unseemly wrangle between two well-known Christian
teachers, conducted publicly before the whole Church, and breeding a
hatred which Jerome continued to express even after Rufinus’ death (498,
500) has only one redeeming feature to the historian, namely, that it
brings to our knowledge many instructive facts which would otherwise
have lain hid.

<span id="iv.III-p48"></span>396. (5) *Vigilantius*. The controversy
with Vigilantius consists only of Jerome’s letter to him (131–133) and
the treatise “against Vigilantius” (417–423). He had been originally
introduced to Jerome by Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, who spoke of him <span
id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span> <span id="iv.III-Page_xxiii"></span>in
high terms (123). No questions arose between them during his stay at
Bethlehem. He even spoke of Jerome at times with extravagant praise
(132). But he appears to have had some connection with Rufinus ([Ap.
iii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.III-p48.1"></span>, Vol. iii. 529), and Jerome accused him
afterwards of having conveyed some <span class="c17"><span
id="iv.III-p48.2"></span>mss</span>. into the monastery at Bethlehem,
probably from that on the Mount of Olives (Apol. iii. 5, 19, Vol. iii.
521, 529). Jerome afterwards heard a report that Vigilantius had written
and spoken against him in various places (131), and had accused him of
Origenism. To this his letter is a reply. The anti-ascetic writings of
Vigilantius to which Jerome’s treatise is a reply have not come down to
us. Gennadius (de Script. Eccl. 35<span id="iv.III-p48.3"></span>) says
that he was an ignorant man, but polished in words. But, whatever his
ability or literary power, he was one of the few who were able to judge
rightly of the ascetic and superstitious practices by which Christianity
was being overlaid; and it is on this point that Jerome is most violent
and contemptuous in his treatment of him. The notices prefixed to the
Letter (131) and Treatise (417) will complete this statement.

<span id="iv.III-p49"></span>394–404. (6) *Augustin*. The remaining
controversy of this period is that with St. Augustin. The two men had at
an earlier time had some friendly relations, and Alypius, Augustin’s
friend, had stayed with Jerome at Bethlehem. But Augustin, then
coadjutor Bishop of Hippo, in a letter to Jerome (112), found fault with
some of his statements in his Commentary on the Galatians, to which, no
doubt, his attention had been called by Alypius. Jerome had maintained
that the scene in [Gal. ii.](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span
id="iv.III-p49.1"></span> in which St. Paul rebukes St. Peter for
inconsistent compliances with Judaism, was a merely feigned dispute,
arranged between the two Apostles in order to make the truth clear to
the members of the Church. Augustin objects that this is practically
imputing falsehood to the Apostles. He touched upon other points, such
as the translation of Scripture and the doctrine of marriage, in a
manner savouring of assumption, considering the high position of Jerome,
who was also eight years his senior. Through a strange series of
misadventures, which illustrate the difficulty of communications at that
epoch, this letter was never delivered to Jerome till nine years after
it was written. It fell into the hands of persons who copied it, and
became known in the West. Jerome heard casually that it had been seen
among his works in an island in the Adriatic. It appeared as if Augustin
had wished to gain credit by attacking a well-known man behind his back.
And this suspicion was hardly allayed by a second letter from Augustin,
which partially explained what had occurred (140), or by a third, in
which, in answer to a letter from Jerome sending some of his works and
warning his correspondent that, if it came to blows, the result might be
like that described in Virgil, where the old Entellus strikes down young
Dares, Augustin criticises both severely and ignorantly Jerome’s great
work of translating the Hebrew Scriptures. Jerome’s patience begins to
fail (189). “Send me your original letter,” he says, “signed by your own
hand, or else cease to attack me.” And he comments in his turn somewhat
sharply on some of Augustin’s interpretations of the Psalms. It was only
on the receipt of Augustin’s reply to this letter (214), couched in
terms of deep respect, and deprecating any ill feeling between Christian
friends, such as had arisen in the case of Rufinus, that Jerome finally
answered the original letter, written ten years before, and received a
letter which completely restored friendship. Henceforward they are at
one. Letters pass freely between them; Augustin consults Jerome on the
difficult question of the origin of souls (272, 283), and foregoes the
expression of Traducianism, to which he is inclined, in deference to
Jerome’s objections; and he consults him on the Pelagian question, and
sends Orosius to sit at his feet. Jerome recognises that each has his
proper gift, and gives a plenary adherence to all that Augustin teaches.
Alypius, their original link, is joined with Augustin in the address of
Jerome’s last letter to him (282); Paula, the grand-daughter of Jerome’s
chief friend, is called by him the granddaughter of Augustin; and
through this unity the families of Paula and Melania, which had been
severed by the adherence of the one to Jerome and the other to Rufinus,
are reunited by the coming of Pinianus and his wife, the younger
Melania, from the church of Hippo to the convent at Bethlehem. The
letters from which this episode is drawn are incorporated into the
volume containing works of Augustin, and are not reprinted here. But no
life of Jerome, however limited or unpretending, would be satisfactory
without some account of the relations of the two great doctors of Latin
Christianity.

<span id="iv.III-p50"></span>*Bethlehem, Third Period*. 405–420. The
last period of Jerome’s life was passed in the midst of privations, the
loss of friends, and frequent illnesses. Paula had died. Jerome was poor
(500, 214, 215) and often weak (498, 500). His eyesight failed (*id*.).
He had enemies around him (261, 262) and in the high places of the
Empire (237, 499). The barbarians were sweeping across the Empire (237,
500), some, like the Isaurians, threatening the North of Palestine (214)
and even penetrating at one time to Southern Syria <span
id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> <span id="iv.III-Page_xxiv"></span>and
Egypt (*id*.), while the main stream, after devastating Jerome’s native
Dalmatia, passed on under Alaric to the sack of Rome.

<span id="iv.III-p51"></span>410. Fugitives from Rome and Italy crowded
to Bethlehem, adding greatly to Jerome’s labours (499, 500). It seemed
as the end of the world were at hand (260). In the sack of Rome
Pammachius and Marcella died (257, 500). Eustochium followed them eight
years later. The controversy with the Pelagians led to the burning of
the monasteries at Bethlehem, probably also to renewed estrangement of
his Bishop, John of Jerusalem, and his successor Praylus.

<span id="iv.III-p52"></span>417. But he continued his work with no
abatement of ardour or vigour, as may be seen from the Prefaces to his
later Commentaries (500, 501). He had still friends about him, Pinianus,
Albina, Melania, and the younger Paula (Ep. cxliii.<span
id="iv.III-p52.1"></span>); a few survivors even in Rome, Oceanus and
the younger Fabiola (252, 253); and men in many lands who honoured and
consulted him, as is seen by his letters; and, above all, the friendship
of Augustin. The letters of this period take a wider range than those
going before, Jerome’s fame being now world-wide; their addresses
embrace Dalmatia (220), Gaul (215), Rome (252, 253), and Africa (260,
261). Their contents will be best estimated from the notices prefixed to
them; but we may mark as specially important the ascetic letter to
Rusticus, on the solitary life (244), to Ageruchia, and those on
perseverance in widowhood (230), and to Demetrias on the preservation of
virginity (260–272), which contain vivid pictures of the life (233) and
events (236, 237) of the time, and of the sack of Rome (237, 257); the
Memoir, addressed to Principia, of Marcella, who died from her ill
treatment in that great day of doom (253); the letter to Evangelus (288)
containing Jerome’s view of the origin and mutual relations of the three
orders of the Ministry; and that to Sabinianus, the lapsed Deacon, who
had introduced disorder into the monasteries at Bethlehem (289–295).

<span id="iv.III-p53"></span>*Pelagianism*. The only great controversy
of this period is the Pelagian, in which Jerome seems to have engaged
rather at the instance of others than on his own initiative. He shows
some mildness in dealing with the Pelagians, and wishes more to win than
to condemn them (449, 499); his temperament was not such as to incline
him, like Augustin, to take an attitude of vehement hostility to the
Pelagian tenets.

<span id="iv.III-p54"></span>414–418. But Orosius came from North
Africa, where the Council of Carthage had lately been held; and when,
the next year, Pelagius and Cælestius came to Palestine, and Councils
were held, first at Jerusalem under Bishop John, who was favourable to
the reception of Pelagius, and subsequently at Diospolis, Palestine
became the centre of the controversy.

<span id="iv.III-p55"></span>416. Augustin from Africa and Ctesiphon
from Rome appealed to him (272, 280); both Orosius and Pelagius quoted
his words as making for them; and at length Jerome himself felt
compelled to take the pen. He resorted in this his last controversial
work, as in his first against the Luciferians, to the form of dialogue.
The argument must be praised for its moderation, though it must be
confessed that this is gained at the expense of liveliness; it was
impossible for Jerome, as a “Synergist,” or believer in the co-operation
of the human will with the divine, to throw himself into the fray with
the eagerness of a convinced Predestinarian. But he does not scruple to
brand Pelagius as a heretic; and to a heretic he would show no mercy
(449). His treatise, notwithstanding its fine drawn argument, made him
at once the leader of the orthodox party in the East, and the target for
the enmity of their adversaries.

<span id="iv.III-p56"></span>416–7. A crowd of Pelagian monks attacked
the monasteries, slew some of their inmates, and burned or threw down
the buildings, the tower in which Jerome had taken refuge alone escaping
(Aug. de Gestis Pelag. 66). This violence, however, was checked by a
strong letter from Pope Innocentius (280, 281) to Bishop John, who died
soon after; and Jerome, to whom the Pope wrote at the same time (280),
speaks of Augustin’s cause as triumphant (282), and of Pelagius, like
another Catiline, having left the country, though Jerusalem remains in
the hands of some hostile power which he speaks of under the name of
Nebuchadnezzar (282). It cannot be said, however, that Jerome’s
arguments produced much effect in the East. He was withstood by Theodore
of Mopsuestia (see Migne’s Jerome, ii. 807–14) as “saying that men sin
by nature, not by will”; and from the West also a treatise opposing his
views was sent to him (282) by Annianus, a deacon of Celeda, to which he
was never able to reply.

<span id="iv.III-p57"></span>His Bible work during these last fifteen
years consisted entirely of Commentaries on the Prophets. Those on the
Minor Prophets were finished in 406; that on Daniel in 407; that on
Isaiah in 408–10; that on Ezekiel in 410–14. That on Jeremiah up to ch.
xxxii. occupied the remaining years. The Prefaces to these Commentaries
(499–501) are full of interest, recording the sack of Rome (499, 500),
the death of Rufinus (498, 500), and the rise of Pelagianism, while the
Commentary on Ezekiel itself (Book ix.) speaks of the occupation of Rome
<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> <span id="iv.III-Page_xxv"></span>by
Heraclian. His failing health and eyesight (498, 500), the Pelagian
Controversy, the other trials above mentioned (499) and the care of the
monasteries and pilgrims (500, 501), increased by the death of
Eustochium in 418, shortened his time for work, and his Commentary on
Jeremiah was cut short at ch. xxxii. by his last illness. Yet his last
work is full of energy and of his old controversial vigour.

<span id="iv.III-p58"></span>The last year of his life is believed to
have been occupied by a long illness, in which he was tended by the
younger Paula and Melania. The Chronicle of Prosper of Aquitaine gives
September 20, 420, as the day of his death. Many legends sprung up
around his memory. His remains are said to have been transferred from
the place where they were buried beside those of Paula and Eustochium,
near the grotto of the Nativity, to the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore
at Rome, and miracles to have been wrought at his tomb. His descriptions
of hermit life in the desert no doubt gave rise to the tradition that he
was always attended by a lion, as represented in painting and sculpture,
especially in the well-known painting of Albert Dürer. With such
traditions a historical work must not be burdened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2060007)
