[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060011)  [Next](2060013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.I"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="v.I-Page_1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p1"></span><span class="c25"><span
id="v.I-p1.1"></span>The Letters of St. Jerome.</span>

<span id="v.I-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.I-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="v.I-p3.1"></span>Letter I. To Innocent.</span>

<span id="v.I-p4"></span>Not only the first of the letters but probably
the earliest extant composition of Jerome (c. 370 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.I-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>). Innocent, to whom
it is addressed, was one of the little band of enthusiasts whom Jerome
gathered round him in Aquileia. He followed his friend to Syria, where
he died in 374 <span class="c17"><span id="v.I-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span>
(See Letter III., 3.)

<span id="v.I-p5"></span>1. You have frequently asked me, dearest
Innocent, not to pass over in silence the marvellous event which has
happened in our own day. I have declined the task from modesty and, as I
now feel, with justice, believing myself to be incapable of it, at once
because human language is inadequate to the divine praise, and because
inactivity, acting like rust upon the intellect, has dried up any little
power of expression that I have ever had. You in reply urge that in the
things of God we must look not at the work which we are able to
accomplish, but at the spirit in which it is undertaken, and that he can
never be at a loss for words who has believed on the Word.

<span id="v.I-p6"></span>2. What, then, must I do? The task is beyond
me, and yet I dare not decline it. I am a mere unskilled passenger, and
I find myself placed in charge of a freighted ship. I have not so much
as handled a rowboat on a lake, and now I have to trust myself to the
noise and turmoil of the Euxine. I see the shores sinking beneath the
horizon, “sky and sea on every side”; <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)
darkness lowers over the water, the clouds are black as night, the waves
only are white with foam. You urge me to hoist the swelling sails, to
loosen the sheets, and to take the helm. At last I obey your commands,
and as charity can do all things, I will trust in the Holy Ghost to
guide my course, and I shall console myself, whatever the event. For, if
our ship is wafted by the surf into the wished-for haven, I shall be
content to be told that the pilotage was poor. But, if through my
unpolished diction we run aground amid the rough cross-currents of
language, you may blame my lack of power, but you will at least
recognize my good intentions.

<span id="v.I-p8"></span>3. To begin, then: Vercellæ is a Ligurian town,
situated not far from the base of the Alps, once important, but now
sparsely peopled and fallen into decay. When the consular <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) was holding his visitation there, a poor
woman and her paramour were brought before him—the charge of adultery
had been fastened upon them by the husband—and were both consigned to
the penal horrors of a prison. Shortly after an attempt was made to
elicit the truth by torture, and when the blood-stained hook smote the
young man’s livid flesh and tore furrows in his side, the unhappy wretch
sought to avoid prolonged pain by a speedy death. Falsely accusing his
own passions, he involved another in the charge; and it appeared that he
was of all men the most miserable, and that his execution was just
inasmuch as he had left to an innocent woman no means of self-defence.
But the woman, stronger in virtue if weaker in sex, though her frame was
stretched upon the rack, and though her hands, stained with the filth of
the prison, were tied behind her, looked up to heaven with her eyes,
which alone the torturer had been unable to bind, and while the tears
rolled down her face, said: “Thou art witness, Lord Jesus, to whom
nothing is hid, who triest the reins and the heart. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) Thou art witness that it is not to save my
life that I deny this charge. I refuse to lie because to lie is sin. And
as for you, unhappy man, if you are bent on hastening your death, why
must you destroy not one innocent person, but two? I also, myself,
desire to die. I desire to put off this hated body, but not as an
adulteress. I offer my neck; I welcome the shining sword without fear;
yet I will take my innocence with me. <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>
<span id="v.I-Page_2"></span>He does not die who is slain while
purposing so to live.”

<span id="v.I-p11"></span>4. The consular, who had been feasting his
eyes upon the bloody spectacle, now, like a wild beast, which after once
tasting blood always thirsts for it, ordered the torture to be doubled,
and cruelly gnashing his teeth, threatened the executioner with like
punishment if he failed to extort from the weaker sex a confession which
a man’s strength had not been able to keep back.

<span id="v.I-p12"></span>5. Send help, Lord Jesus. For this one
creature of Thine every species of torture is devised. She is bound by
the hair to a stake, her whole body is fixed more firmly than ever on
the rack; fire is brought and applied to her feet; her sides quiver
beneath the executioner’s probe; even her breasts do not escape. Still
the woman remains unshaken; and, triumphing in spirit over the pain of
the body, enjoys the happiness of a good conscience, round which the
tortures rage in vain. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) The cruel judge
rises, overcome with passion. She still prays to God. Her limbs are
wrenched from their sockets; she only turns her eyes to heaven. Another
confesses what is thought their common guilt. She, for the confessor’s
sake, denies the confession, and, in peril of her own life, clears one
who is in peril of his.

<span id="v.I-p14"></span>6. Meantime she has but one thing to say:
“Beat me, burn me, tear me, if you will; I have not done it. If you will
not believe my words, a day will come when this charge shall be
carefully sifted. I have One who will judge me.” Wearied out at last,
the torturer sighed in response to her groans; nor could he find a spot
on which to inflict a fresh wound. His cruelty overcome, he shuddered to
see the body he had torn. Immediately the consular cried, in a fit of
passion, “Why does it surprise you, bystanders, that a woman prefers
torture to death? It takes two people, most assuredly, to commit
adultery; and I think it more credible that a guilty woman should deny a
sin than that an innocent young man should confess one.”

<span id="v.I-p15"></span>7. Like sentence, accordingly, was passed on
both, and the condemned pair were dragged to execution. The entire
people poured out to see the sight; indeed, so closely were the gates
thronged by the out-rushing crowd, that you might have fancied the city
itself to be migrating. At the very first stroke of the sword the head
of the hapless youth was cut off, and the headless trunk rolled over in
its blood. Then came the woman’s turn. She knelt down upon the ground,
and the shining sword was lifted over her quivering neck. But though the
headsman summoned all his strength into his bared arm, the moment it
touched her flesh the fatal blade stopped short, and, lightly glancing
over the skin, merely grazed it sufficiently to draw blood. The striker
saw, with terror, his hand unnerved, and, amazed at his defeated skill
and at his drooping sword, he whirled it aloft for another stroke. Again
the blade fell forceless on the woman, sinking harmlessly on her neck,
as though the steel feared to touch her. The enraged and panting
officer, who had thrown open his cloak at the neck to give his full
strength to the blow, shook to the ground the brooch which clasped the
edges of his mantle, and not noticing this, began to poise his sword for
a fresh stroke. “See,” cried the woman, “a jewel has fallen from your
shoulder. Pick up what you have earned by hard toil, that you may not
lose it.”

<span id="v.I-p16"></span>8. What, I ask, is the secret of such
confidence as this? Death draws near, but it has no terrors for her.
When smitten she exults, and the executioner turns pale. Her eyes see
the brooch, they fail to see the sword. And, as if intrepidity in the
presence of death were not enough, she confers a favor upon her cruel
foe. And now the mysterious Power of the Trinity rendered even a third
blow vain. The terrified soldier, no longer trusting the blade,
proceeded to apply the point to her throat, in the idea that though it
might not cut, the pressure of his hand might plunge it into her flesh.
Marvel unheard of through all the ages! The sword bent back to the hilt,
and in its defeat looked to its master, as if confessing its inability
to slay.

<span id="v.I-p17"></span>9. Let me call to my aid the example of the
three children, <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) who, amid the cool,
encircling fire, sang hymns, <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) instead
of weeping, and around whose turbans and holy hair the flames played
harmlessly. Let me recall, too, the story of the blessed Daniel, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) in whose presence, though he was their
natural prey, the lions crouched, with fawning tails and frightened
mouths. Let Susannah also rise in the nobility of her faith before the
thoughts of all; who, after she had been condemned by an unjust
sentence, was saved through a youth inspired by the Holy Ghost. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) In both cases the Lord’s mercy was alike
shewn; for while Susannah was set free by <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>
<span id="v.I-Page_3"></span>the judge, so as not to die by the sword,
this woman, though condemned by the judge, was acquitted by the sword.

<span id="v.I-p22"></span>10. Now at length the populace rise in arms to
defend the woman. Men and women of every age join in driving away the
executioner, shouting round him in a surging crowd. Hardly a man dares
trust his own eyes. The disquieting news reaches the city close at hand,
and the entire force of constables is mustered. The officer who is
responsible for the execution of criminals bursts from among his men,
and

<span id="v.I-p23"></span>Staining his hoary hair with soiling
dust, <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="v.I-p25"></span>exclaims: “What! citizens, do you mean to seek
my life? Do you intend to make me a substitute for her? However much
your minds are set on mercy, and however much you wish to save a
condemned woman, yet assuredly I—I who am innocent—ought not to perish.”
His tearful appeal tells upon the crowd, they are all benumbed by the
influence of sorrow, and an extraordinary change of feeling is
manifested. Before it had seemed a duty to plead for the woman’s life,
now it seemed a duty to allow her to be executed.

<span id="v.I-p26"></span>11. Accordingly a new sword is fetched, a new
headsman appointed. The victim takes her place, once more strengthened
only with the favor of Christ. The first blow makes her quiver, beneath
the second she sways to and fro, by the third she falls wounded to the
ground. Oh, majesty of the divine power highly to be extolled! She who
previously had received four strokes without injury, now, a few moments
later, seems to die that an innocent man may not perish in her stead.

<span id="v.I-p27"></span>12. Those of the clergy whose duty it is to
wrap the blood-stained corpse in a winding-sheet, dig out the earth and,
heaping together stones, form the customary tomb. The sunset comes on
quickly, and by God’s mercy the night of nature arrives more swiftly
than is its wont. Suddenly the woman’s bosom heaves, her eyes seek the
light, her body is quickened into new life. A moment after she sighs,
she looks round, she gets up and speaks. At last she is able to cry:
“The Lord is on my side; I will not fear. What can man do unto
me?” <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="v.I-p29"></span>13. Meantime an aged woman, supported out of
the funds of the church, gave back her spirit to heaven from which it
came. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) It seemed as if the course of
events had been thus purposely ordered, for her body took the place of
the other beneath the mound. In the gray dawn the devil comes on the
scene in the form of a constable, <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)
asks for the corpse of her who had been slain, and desires to have her
grave pointed out to him. Surprised that she could have died, he fancies
her to be still alive. The clergy show him the fresh turf, and meet his
demands by pointing to the earth lately heaped up, taunting him with
such words as these: “Yes, of course, tear up the bones which have been
buried! Declare war anew against the tomb, and if even that does not
satisfy you, pluck her limb from limb for birds and beasts to mangle!
Mere dying is too good for one whom it took seven strokes to kill.”

<span id="v.I-p32"></span>14. Before such opprobrious words the
executioner retires in confusion, while the woman is secretly revived at
home. Then, lest the frequency of the doctor’s visits to the church
might give occasion for suspicion, they cut her hair short and send her
in the company of some virgins to a sequestered country house. There she
changes her dress for that of a man, and scars form over her wounds. Yet
even after the great miracles worked on her behalf, the laws still rage
against her. So true is it that, where there is most law, there, there
is also most injustice. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="v.I-p34"></span>15. But now see whither the progress of my
story has brought me; we come upon the name of our friend
Evagrius. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) So great have his
exertions been in the cause of Christ that, were I to suppose it
possible adequately to describe them, I should only show my own folly;
and were I minded deliberately to pass them by, I still could not
prevent my voice from breaking out into cries of joy. Who can fittingly
praise the vigilance which enabled him to bury, if I may so say, before
his death Auxentius <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) of Milan, that
curse brooding over the church? Or who can sufficiently extol the
discretion with which he rescued the Roman bishop <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) from the toils of the net in which he was
fairly entangled, and showed him the means at once of overcoming his
opponents and of sparing them in their discomfiture? But

<span id="v.I-p38"></span>Such topics I must leave to other bards,

<span id="v.I-p39"></span>Shut out by envious straits of time and
space. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="v.I-p41"></span>I am satisfied now to record the conclusion of
<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="v.I-Page_4"></span>my tale.
Evagrius seeks a special audience of the Emperor; <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) importunes him with his entreaties, wins
his favor by his services, and finally gains his cause through his
earnestness. The Emperor restored to liberty the woman whom God had
restored to life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](2060012.htm#fr_1) <span
id="v.I-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p7"></span> Virg. A. iii. 193.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](2060012.htm#fr_2) <span
id="v.I-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p9"></span> *I.e.* the governor of the province.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:4](2060012.htm#fr_3) <span
id="v.I-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p10"></span> [Ps. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)<span id="v.I-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:5](2060012.htm#fr_4) <span
id="v.I-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p13"></span> Text corrupt.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:6](2060012.htm#fr_5) <span
id="v.I-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p18"></span> Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:7](2060012.htm#fr_6) <span
id="v.I-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p19"></span> <span id="v.I-p19.1"></span>Song of the Three
Holy Children.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[2:8](2060012.htm#fr_7) <span
id="v.I-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.I-p20"></span> [Dan.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#000)<span id="v.I-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[2:9](2060012.htm#fr_8) <span
id="v.I-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.I-p21"></span> <span id="v.I-p21.1"></span>Susannah 45; the
youth spoken of is Daniel.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:10](2060012.htm#fr_9) <span
id="v.I-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p24"></span> Virg. A. xii. 611.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:11](2060012.htm#fr_10) <span
id="v.I-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p28"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006)<span id="v.I-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[3:12](2060012.htm#fr_11) <span
id="v.I-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p30"></span> Cf. [Eccles. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)<span id="v.I-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[3:13](2060012.htm#fr_12) <span
id="v.I-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.I-p31"></span> Lictor.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[3:14](2060012.htm#fr_13) <span
id="v.I-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p33"></span> An allusion to the well-known proverb, summum
jus, summa injuria.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[3:15](2060012.htm#fr_14) <span
id="v.I-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p35"></span> A presbyter of Antioch and bishop, 388 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.I-p35.1"></span>a.d.</span> He is mentioned
again in Letters III., IV., V., XV. See Jerome De Vir. iii. 125.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[3:16](2060012.htm#fr_15) <span
id="v.I-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.I-p36"></span> The predecessor of Ambrose and an Arian. He
was still living when Jerome wrote, but died 374.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[3:17](2060012.htm#fr_16) <span
id="v.I-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p37"></span> Damasus, who having successfully made good
his claim to the papacy, in 369 condemned Auxentius in a council held at
Rome.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[3:18](2060012.htm#fr_17) <span
id="v.I-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p40"></span> Virg. G. iv. 147, 148.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[4:19](2060012.htm#fr_18) <span
id="v.I-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.I-p42"></span> Valentinian I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter II](2060013)
