[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060214)  [Next](2060216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Ephesians.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.v-p2"></span>*This Commentary was specially prized by
Jerome as exhibiting his true views (Letter LXXXIV. 2), and they became
in consequence one of the chief subjects of controversy between him and
Rufinus, who traced in them, not unjustly, the influence of Origen. It
was written immediately after that on the Epistle to the Galatians, in
<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387, and,
like that, addressed to Paula and Eustochium. In the Preface to Book i.
Jerome defends himself against various accusations. He declares that he
has been, in the main, his own instructor, but yet that he has
constantly consulted others as to Scriptural difficulties, and that he
had, not long before, been to Alexandria to consult Didymus. “I
questioned him about everything which was not clear to me in the whole
range of Scripture.” As to his indebtedness to Origen, he speaks as
follows, certainly not blaming his doctrines: “I remark in the Prefaces,
for your information, that Origen composed three volumes on this
Epistle, and I have partly followed him. Apollinaris and Didymus also
published some commentaries, and, though we have gleaned a few things
from them, we have added or omitted such as we thought fit. The studious
reader will, therefore, understand at the outset that this work is
partly my own, and that I am in part indebted to others.” The Preface to
Books ii. and iii. is short. It speaks in praise of Marcella, who had
invited him to his task, and declares that he in his monastery could not
accomplish as much as that noble woman amidst the cares of her
household. “I beseech you,” he says, “to bear in mind that the language
of this publication has not been long thought over or highly polished.
In revealing the mysteries of Scripture I use almost the language of the
street, and sometimes get through a thousand lines a day, in order that
the explanation of the Apostle which I have begun may be completed with
the aid of the prayers of Paul himself, whose Epistles I am endeavouring
to explain.”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon.](2060216)
