[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060068)  [Next](2060070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LVIII"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter LVIII. To Paulinus.</span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p2"></span>In this his second letter to Paulinus of
Nola Jerome dissuades him from making a pilgrimage to the Holy Places,
and describes Jerusalem not as it ought to be but as it is. He then
gives his friend counsels for his life similar to those which he has
previously addressed to Nepotian, praises Paulinus for his Panegyric
(now no longer extant) on the Emperor Theodosius, compares his style
with those of the great writers of the Latin Church, and concludes with
a commendation of his messenger, that Vigilantius who was soon to become
the object of his bitterest contempt. Written about the year 395 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.LVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p3"></span>1. “A good man out of the good treasure of
the heart bringeth forth good things,” <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) and “every tree is known by his
fruit.” <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) You measure me by the
scale of your own virtues and because of your own greatness magnify my
littleness. You take the lowest room at the banquet that the goodman of
the house may bid you to go up higher. <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) For what is there in me or what
qualities do I possess that I should merit praise from a man of
learning? that I, small and lowly as I am, should be eulogized by lips
which have pleaded on behalf of our most religious sovereign? Do not, my
dearest brother, estimate my worth by the number of my years. Gray hairs
are not wisdom; it is wisdom which is as good as gray hairs. At least
that is what Solomon says: “wisdom is the gray hair unto men.” <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) Moses too in choosing the seventy
elders is told to take those whom he knows to be elders indeed, and to
select them not for their years but for their discretion. <span
id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) And, as a boy, Daniel judges old
men and in the flower of youth condemns the incontinence of age. <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) Do not, I repeat, weigh faith by
years, nor suppose me better than yourself merely because I have
enlisted under Christ’s banner earlier than you. The apostle Paul, that
chosen vessel framed out of a persecutor, <span
id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) though last in the apostolic order
is first in merit. For though last he has laboured more than they
all. <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) To Judas it was once
said: thou art a man who didst take sweet food with me, my guide and
mine acquaintance; we walked in the house of God with company:” <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) yet the Saviour accuses him of
betraying his friend and master. A line of Virgil well describes his
end:

<span id="v.LVIII-p13"></span>From a high beam he knots a hideous
death. <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740)

<span id="v.LVIII-p15"></span>The dying robber, on the contrary,
exchanges the cross for paradise and turns to martyrdom the penalty of
murder. How many there are nowadays who have lived so long that they
bear corpses rather than bodies and are like whited sepulchres filled
with dead men’s bones! <span id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) A
newly kindled heat is more effective than a long continued lukewarmness.

<span id="v.LVIII-p17"></span>2. As for you, when you hear the Saviour’s
counsel: “if thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give
to the poor, and come follow me,” <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) you translate his words into
action; and baring yourself to follow the bare cross <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) you mount Jacob’s ladder the easier
for carrying nothing. Your dress changes with the change in your
convictions, and you aim at no showy shabbiness which leaves your purse
as full as before. No, with pure hands and a clear conscience you make
it your glory that you are poor both in spirit and in deed. There is
nothing great in wearing a sad or a disfigured face, in simulating and
in showing off fasts, or in wearing a cheap cloak while you retain a
large income. When Crates the Theban—a millionaire of days gone by—was
on his way to Athens to study philosophy, he cast away untold gold in
the belief that wealth could not be compatible with virtue. What a
contrast he offers to us, the disciples of a poor Christ, who cram our
pockets with gold and cling under pretext of almsgiving to our old
riches. How can we faithfully distribute what belongs to another when we
thus timidly keep back what is our own? <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) When the stomach is full, it is
easy to talk of fasting. What is praiseworthy is not to have been at
Jerusalem but to have lived a good life while there. <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) The city which we are to praise and
to seek is not that which has slain the prophets <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) and shed the blood of Christ, but
that which is made glad by the streams of the river, <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) which is set upon a mountain and so
cannot be hid, <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) which the
apostle declares to be a mother of the saints, <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) and in which he rejoices to have
his citizenship with the righteous. <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750)

<span id="v.LVIII-p27"></span><span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="v.LVIII-Page_120"></span>3. In speaking thus I am not laying myself
open to a charge of inconsistency or condemning the course which I have
myself taken. It is not, I believe, for nothing that I, like Abraham,
have left my home and people. But I do not presume to limit God’s
omnipotence or to restrict to a narrow strip of earth Him whom the
heaven cannot contain. Each believer is judged not by his residence in
this place or in that but according to the deserts of his faith. The
true worshippers worship the Father neither at Jerusalem nor on mount
Gerizim; for “God is a spirit, and they that worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth.” <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751)
“Now the spirit bloweth where it listeth,” <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) and “the earth is the Lord’s and
the fulness thereof.” <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) When
the fleece of Judæa was made dry although the whole world was wet with
the dew of heaven, <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) and when
many came from the East and from the West <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) and sat in Abraham’s bosom: <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) then God ceased to be known in
Judah only and His name to be great in Israel alone; <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) the sound of the apostles went out
into all the earth and their words into the ends of the world. <span
id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) The Saviour Himself speaking to His
disciples in the temple <span id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) said:
“arise, let us go hence,” <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) and
to the Jews: “your house is left unto you desolate.” <span
id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) If heaven and earth must pass
away, <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) obviously all things
that are earthly must pass away also. Therefore the spots which
witnessed the crucifixion and the resurrection profit those only who
bear their several crosses, who day by day rise again with Christ, and
who thus shew themselves worthy of an abode so holy. Those who say “the
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,” <span
id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) should give ear to the words of the
apostle: “ye are the temple of the Lord,” <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) and the Holy Ghost “dwelleth in
you.” <span id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) Access to the courts of
heaven is as easy from Britain as it is from Jerusalem; for “the kingdom
of God is within you.” <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) Antony
and the hosts of monks who are in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Pontus,
Cappadocia, and Armenia, have never seen Jerusalem: and the door of
Paradise is opened for them at a distance from it. The blessed Hilarion,
though a native of and a dweller in Palestine, only set eyes on
Jerusalem for a single day, not wishing on the one hand when he was so
near to neglect the holy places, nor yet on the other to appear to
confine God within local limits. From the time of Hadrian to the reign
of Constantine—a period of about one hundred and eighty years <span
id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) —the spot which had witnessed the
resurrection was occupied by a figure of Jupiter; while on the rock
where the cross had stood, a marble statue of Venus was set up by the
heathen and became an object of worship. The original persecutors,
indeed, supposed that by polluting our holy places they would deprive us
of our faith in the passion and in the resurrection. Even my own
Bethlehem, as it now is, that most venerable spot in the whole world of
which the psalmist sings: “the truth hath sprung out of the
earth,” <span id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) was overshadowed by a
grove of Tammuz, <span id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769) that is of
Adonis; and in the very cave <span id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770)
where the infant Christ had uttered His earliest cry lamentation was
made for the paramour of Venus. <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771)

<span id="v.LVIII-p49"></span>4. Why, you will say, do I make these
remote allusions? To assure you that nothing is lacking to your faith
although you have not seen Jerusalem and that I am none the better for
living where I do. Be assured that, whether you dwell here or elsewhere,
a like recompense is in store for your good works with our Lord. Indeed,
if I am frankly to express my own feelings, when I take into
consideration your vows and the earnestness with which you have
renounced the world, I hold that as long as you live in the country one
place is as good as another. Forsake cities and their crowds, live on a
small patch of ground, seek Christ in solitude, pray on the mount alone
with Jesus, <span id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) keep near to holy
places: keep out of cities, I say, and you will never lose your
vocation. My advice concerns not bishops, presbyters, or the clergy, for
these have a different duty. I am speaking only to a monk who having
been a man of note in the world has laid the price of his possessions at
the apostles’ feet, <span id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773) to shew
men that they must trample on their money, and has resolved to live a
life of loneliness and seclusion and always to continue to reject what
he has once rejected. Had the scenes of the Passion and of the
Resurrection been elsewhere than in a populous city with court and
garrison, with prostitutes, playactors, and buffoons, and with the
medley of persons usually found in such centres; or had the crowds which
thronged it been composed of monks; then a city would be a desirable
abode for those who have embraced the monastic life. But, as things are,
it would be the height of folly first to renounce the world, to <span
id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="v.LVIII-Page_121"></span>forswear
one’s country, to forsake cities, to profess one’s self a monk; and then
to live among still greater numbers the same kind of life that you would
have lived in your own country. Men rush here from all quarters of the
world, the city is filled with people of every race, and so great is the
throng of men and women that here you will have to tolerate in its full
dimensions an evil from which you desired to flee when you found it
partially developed elsewhere.

<span id="v.LVIII-p52"></span>5. Since you ask me as a brother in what
path you should walk, I will be open with you. If you wish to take duty
as a presbyter, and are attracted by the work or dignity which falls to
the lot of a bishop, live in cities and walled towns, <span
id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) and by so doing turn the salvation
of others into the profit of your own soul. But if you desire to be in
deed what you are in name—a monk, <span
id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775) that is, one who lives alone, what
have you to do with cities which are the homes not of solitaries but of
crowds? Every mode of life has its own exponents. For instance, let
Roman generals imitate men like Camillus, Fabricius, Regulus, and
Scipio. Let philosophers take for models Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato,
and Aristotle. Let poets strive to rival Homer, Virgil, Menander, and
Terence. Let writers of history follow Thucydides, Sallust, Herodotus
and Livy. Let orators find masters in Lysias, the Gracchi, Demosthenes,
and Tully. And, to come to our own case, let bishops and presbyters take
for their examples the apostles or their companions; and as they hold
the rank which these once held, let them endeavour to exhibit the same
excellence. And last of all let us monks take as the patterns which we
are to follow the lives of Paul, of Antony, of Julian, of Hilarion, of
the Macarii. And to go back to the authority of scripture, we have our
masters in Elijah and Elisha, and our leaders in the sons of the
prophets; who lived in fields and solitary places and made themselves
tents by the waters of Jordan. <span
id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) The sons of Rechab too are of the
number who drank neither wine nor strong drink and who abode in tents;
men whom God’s voice praises through Jeremiah, <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) and to whom a promise is made that
there shall never be wanting a man of their stock to stand before
God. <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) This is probably what is
meant by the title of the seventy-first psalm: “of the sons of Jonadab
and of those who were first led into captivity.” <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) The person intended is Jonadab the
son of Rechab who is described in the book of Kings <span
id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) as having gone up into the chariot
of Jehu. His sons having always lived in tents until at last (owing to
the inroads made by the Chaldean army) they were forced to come into
Jerusalem, are described <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) as
being the first to undergo captivity; because after the freedom of their
lonely life they found confinement in a city as bad as imprisonment.

<span id="v.LVIII-p61"></span>6. Since you are not wholly independent
but are bound to a wife who is your sister in the Lord, I entreat
you—whether here or there—that you will avoid large gatherings, visits
official and complimentary, and social parties, indulgences all of which
tend to enchain the soul. Let your food be coarse—say cabbage and
pulse—and do not take it until evening. Sometimes as a great delicacy
you may have some small fish. He who longs for Christ and feeds upon the
true bread cares little for dainties which must be transmuted into
ordure. Food that you cannot taste when once it has passed your gullet
might as well be—so far as you are concerned—bread and pulse. You have
my books against Jovinian which speak yet more largely of despising the
appetite and the palate. Let some holy volume be ever in your hand. Pray
constantly, and bowing down your body lift up your mind to the Lord.
Keep frequent vigils and sleep often on an empty stomach. Avoid
tittle-tattle and all self-laudation. Flee from wheedling flatterers as
from open enemies. Distribute with your own hand provisions to alleviate
the miseries of the poor and of the brethren. With your own hands, I
say, for good faith is rare among men. You do not believe what I say?
Think of Judas and his bag. Seek not a lowly garb for a swelling soul.
Avoid the society of men of the world, especially if they are in power.
Why need you look again on things contempt for which has made you a
monk? Above all let your sister <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) hold aloof from married ladies.
And, if women round her wear silk dresses and gems while she is meanly
attired, let her neither fret nor congratulate herself. For by so doing
she will either regret her resolution or sow the seeds of pride. If you
are already famed as a faithful steward of your own substance, do not
take other people’s money to give away. You understand what I mean, for
the Lord has given you understanding in all things. Be simple as a dove
and lay snares for no man: but be cunning as a serpent and let no man
lay snares for you. <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) For a
Christian who allows others to deceive him is almost at much at fault as
one who tries to deceive others. If a man talks to you always or nearly
always about money (except it be about alms-giving, a topic which is
open to all) treat him as a broker rather than a monk. Besides food and
clothing and things manifestly neces<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>
<span id="v.LVIII-Page_122"></span>sary give no man anything; for dogs
must not eat the children’s bread. <span
id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784)

<span id="v.LVIII-p65"></span>7. The true temple of Christ is the
believer’s soul; adorn this, clothe it, offer gifts to it, welcome
Christ in it. What use are walls blazing with jewels when Christ in His
poor <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) is in danger of
perishing from hunger? Your possessions are no longer your own but a
stewardship is entrusted to you. Remember Ananias and Sapphira who from
fear of the future kept what was their own, and be careful for your part
not rashly to squander what is Christ’s. Do not, that is, by an error of
judgment give the property of the poor to those who are not poor; lest,
as a wise man has told us, <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786)
charity prove the death of charity. Look not upon

<span id="v.LVIII-p68"></span>Gay trappings or a Cato’s empty
name. <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787)

<span id="v.LVIII-p70"></span>In the words of Persius, God says:—

<span id="v.LVIII-p71"></span>I know thy thoughts and read thine inmost
soul. <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788)

<span id="v.LVIII-p73"></span>To be a Christian is the great thing, not
merely to seem one. And somehow or other those please the world most who
please Christ least. In speaking thus I am not like the sow lecturing
Minerva; but, as a friend warns a friend, so I warn you before you
embark on your new course. I would rather fail in ability than in will
to serve you; for my wish is that where I have fallen you may keep your
footing.

<span id="v.LVIII-p74"></span>8. It is with much pleasure that I have
read the book which you have sent to me containing your wise and
eloquent defence of the emperor Theodosius; and your arrangement of the
subject has particularly pleased me. While in the earlier chapters you
surpass others, in the latter you surpass yourself. Your style is terse
and neat; it has all the purity of Tully, and yet it is packed with
meaning. For, as someone has said, <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) that speech is a failure of which
men only praise the diction. You have been successful in preserving both
sequence of subjects and logical connexion. Whatever sentence one takes,
it is always a conclusion to what goes before or an introduction to what
follows. Theodosius is fortunate in having a Christian orator like you
to plead his cause. You have made his purple illustrious and have
consecrated for future ages his useful laws. Go on and prosper, for, if
such be your first ventures in the field, what will you not do when you
become a trained soldier? Oh! that it were mine to conduct a genius like
you, not (as the poets sing) through the Aonian mountains and the peaks
of Helicon but through Zion and Tabor and the high places of Sinai. If I
might teach you what I have learned myself and might pass on to you the
mystic rolls of the prophets, then might we give birth to something such
as Greece with all her learning could not shew.

<span id="v.LVIII-p76"></span>9. Hear me, therefore, my fellow-servant,
my friend, my brother; give ear for a moment that I may tell you how you
are to walk in the holy scriptures. All that we read in the divine
books, while glistening and shining without, is yet far sweeter within.
“He who desires to eat the kernel must first break the nut.” <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) “Open thou mine eyes,” says David,
“that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.” <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) Now, if so great a prophet
confesses that he is in the darkness of ignorance; how deep, think you,
must be the night of misapprehension with which we, mere babes and
unweaned infants, are enveloped! Now this veil rests not only on the
face of Moses, <span id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) but on the
evangelists and the apostles as well. <span
id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) To the multitudes the Saviour spoke
only in parables and, to make it clear that His words had a mystical
meaning, said:—“he that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” <span
id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) Unless all things that are written
are opened by Him “who hath the key of David, who openeth and no man
shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth,” <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) no one can undo the lock or set
them before you. If only you had the foundation which He alone can give;
nay, if even His fingers were but passed over your work; there would be
nothing finer than your volumes, nothing more learned, nothing more
attractive, nothing more Latin.

<span id="v.LVIII-p83"></span>10. Tertullian is packed with meaning but
his style is rugged and uncouth. The blessed Cyprian like a fountain of
pure water flows softly and sweetly but, as he is taken up with
exhortations to virtue and with the troubles consequent on persecution,
he has nowhere discussed the divine scriptures. Victorinus, although he
has the glory of a martyr’s crown, yet cannot express what he knows.
Lactantius has a flow of eloquence worthy of Tully: would that he had
been as ready to teach our doctrines as he was to pull down those of
others! Arnobius is lengthy and unequal, and often confused from not
making a proper division of his subject. That reverend man Hilary gains
in height from his Gallic buskin; yet, adorned as he is with the flowers
of Greek rhetoric, he sometimes entangles himself in long periods and
offers by no means easy reading to the less learned brethren. I say
<span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="v.LVIII-Page_123"></span>nothing of other writers whether dead or
living; others will hereafter judge them both for good and for
evil. <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796)

<span id="v.LVIII-p85"></span>11. I will come to yourself, my
fellow-mystic, my companion, and my friend; my friend, I say, though not
yet personally known: and I will ask you not to suspect a flatterer in
one so intimate. Better that you should think me mistaken or led astray
by affection than that you should hold me capable of fawning on a
friend. You have a great intellect and an inexhaustible store of
language, your diction is fluent and pure, your fluency and purity are
mingled with wisdom. Your head is clear and all your senses keen. Were
you to add to this wisdom and eloquence a careful study and knowledge of
scripture, I should soon see you holding our citadel against all comers;
you would go up with Joab upon the roof of Zion, <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) and sing upon the housetops what
you had learned in the secret chambers. <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) Gird up, I pray you, gird up your
loins. As Horace says:—

<span id="v.LVIII-p88"></span>Life hath no gifts for men except they
toil. <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799)

<span id="v.LVIII-p90"></span>Shew yourself as much a man of note in the
church, as you were before in the senate. Provide for yourself riches
which you may spend daily yet they will not fail. Provide them while you
are still strong and while as yet your head has no gray hairs: before,
in the words of Virgil,

<span id="v.LVIII-p91"></span>Diseases creep on you, and gloomy age,

<span id="v.LVIII-p92"></span>And pain, and cruel death’s
inclemency. <span id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800)

<span id="v.LVIII-p94"></span>I am not content with mediocrity for you:
I desire all that you do to be of the highest excellence.

<span id="v.LVIII-p95"></span>How heartily I have welcomed the reverend
presbyter Vigilantius, <span id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) his
own lips will tell you better than this letter. Why he has so soon left
us and started afresh I cannot say; and, indeed, I do not wish to hurt
anyone’s feelings. <span id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) Still,
mere passer-by as he was, in haste to continue his journey, I managed to
keep him back until I had given him a taste of my friendship for you.
Thus you can learn from him what you want to know about me. Kindly
salute your reverend sister <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803)
and fellow-servant, who with you fights the good fight in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[119:1732](2060069.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="v.LVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p4"></span> [Matt. xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035)<span id="v.LVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[119:1733](2060069.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="v.LVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p5"></span> [Luke vi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#044)<span id="v.LVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[119:1734](2060069.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="v.LVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p6"></span> [Luke xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010)<span id="v.LVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[119:1735](2060069.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="v.LVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p7"></span> [Wisd. iv.
9](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#009)<span id="v.LVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[119:1736](2060069.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="v.LVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p8"></span> [Nu. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016)<span id="v.LVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[119:1737](2060069.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="v.LVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p9"></span> Story of Susannah.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[119:1738](2060069.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="v.LVIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p10"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="v.LVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[119:1739](2060069.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="v.LVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="v.LVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[119:1740](2060069.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="v.LVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p12"></span> [Ps. lv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#013)<span id="v.LVIII-p12.1"></span>:
*Consessu* substituted for *consensu* of the Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[119:1741](2060069.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="v.LVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p14"></span> Virgil, Æn. xii. 603.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[119:1742](2060069.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="v.LVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p16"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)<span id="v.LVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[119:1743](2060069.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="v.LVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p18"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="v.LVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[119:1744](2060069.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="v.LVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p19"></span> Compare Letter LII. § 5.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[119:1745](2060069.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="v.LVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p20"></span> Cf. [Luke xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#012)<span id="v.LVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[119:1746](2060069.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="v.LVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p21"></span> Cicero, pro Murena, V.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[119:1747](2060069.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="v.LVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p22"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="v.LVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[119:1748](2060069.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="v.LVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p23"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="v.LVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[119:1749](2060069.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="v.LVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p24"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="v.LVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[119:1750](2060069.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="v.LVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p25"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="v.LVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[119:1751](2060069.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="v.LVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p26"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.LVIII-p26.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[120:1752](2060069.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="v.LVIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p28"></span> [Joh. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="v.LVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[120:1753](2060069.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="v.LVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p29"></span> [Joh. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="v.LVIII-p29.1"></span>,
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[120:1754](2060069.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="v.LVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p30"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span id="v.LVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[120:1755](2060069.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="v.LVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p31"></span> [Judg. vi.
36-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#036)<span id="v.LVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[120:1756](2060069.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="v.LVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p32"></span> [Luke xiii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#029)<span id="v.LVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[120:1757](2060069.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="v.LVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p33"></span> [Luke xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span id="v.LVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[120:1758](2060069.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="v.LVIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p34"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)<span id="v.LVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[120:1759](2060069.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="v.LVIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p35"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="v.LVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[120:1760](2060069.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="v.LVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p36"></span> Only the second sentence was spoken in
the temple: the first was uttered in the chamber of the last supper.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[120:1761](2060069.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="v.LVIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p37"></span> [Joh. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)<span id="v.LVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[120:1762](2060069.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="v.LVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p38"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)<span id="v.LVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[120:1763](2060069.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="v.LVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p39"></span> [Luke xxi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033)<span id="v.LVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[120:1764](2060069.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="v.LVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p40"></span> [Jer. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="v.LVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[120:1765](2060069.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="v.LVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p41"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span id="v.LVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[120:1766](2060069.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="v.LVIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p42"></span> [Rom. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span id="v.LVIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[120:1767](2060069.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="v.LVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p43"></span> [Luke xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span id="v.LVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[120:1768](2060069.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="v.LVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p44"></span> Hadrian died in 138 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.LVIII-p44.1"></span>a.d.</span>; Constantine
became Emperor in 306 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LVIII-p44.2"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[120:1769](2060069.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="v.LVIII-p44.3"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p45"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span id="v.LVIII-p45.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[120:1770](2060069.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="v.LVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p46"></span> [Ezek. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#014)<span id="v.LVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[120:1771](2060069.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="v.LVIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p47"></span> For the tradition that Christ was born in
a cave Justin Martyr is the earliest authority (dial. c. Try. 78).

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[120:1772](2060069.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="v.LVIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p48"></span> Adonis, killed by a boar and spending
half his time in the upper, half in the lower world, is a type of summer
overcoming and overcome by winter.

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[120:1773](2060069.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="v.LVIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p50"></span> Cf. [Luke
vi](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#000)<span id="v.LVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[120:1774](2060069.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="v.LVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p51"></span> [Acts iv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037)<span id="v.LVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[121:1775](2060069.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="v.LVIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p53"></span> Castella.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[121:1776](2060069.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="v.LVIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p54"></span> Monachus, lit. “a solitary.” Men
frequently at this time made vows, especially those of celibacy, without
entering a monastery.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[121:1777](2060069.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="v.LVIII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p55"></span> [2 Kings
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#002)<span id="v.LVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[121:1778](2060069.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="v.LVIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p56"></span> [Jer.
xxxv](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#000)<span id="v.LVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[121:1779](2060069.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="v.LVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p57"></span> [Jer. xxxv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#019)<span id="v.LVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[121:1780](2060069.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="v.LVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p58"></span> This title occurs only in the LXX.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[121:1781](2060069.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="v.LVIII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p59"></span> [2 Kings
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#016)<span id="v.LVIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[121:1782](2060069.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="v.LVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p60"></span> [Jer. xxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#011)<span id="v.LVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[121:1783](2060069.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="v.LVIII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p62"></span> Therasia, the wife of Paulinus is meant.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[121:1784](2060069.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="v.LVIII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p63"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="v.LVIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[122:1785](2060069.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="v.LVIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p64"></span> [Matt. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026)<span id="v.LVIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[122:1786](2060069.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="v.LVIII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p66"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="v.LVIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[122:1787](2060069.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="v.LVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p67"></span> Cicero, de Off. II. xv.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[122:1788](2060069.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="v.LVIII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p69"></span> Probably a quotation from memory
incorrectly made up from Lucan’s ‘Nomina vana Catonis’ (i. 313).

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[122:1789](2060069.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="v.LVIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p72"></span> Persius, iii. 30.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[122:1790](2060069.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="v.LVIII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p75"></span> Quintilian, Inst. Or. viii. Proem.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[122:1791](2060069.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="v.LVIII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p77"></span> Plautus, Curc. I. i. 55.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[122:1792](2060069.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="v.LVIII-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p78"></span> [Ps. cxix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#018)<span id="v.LVIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[122:1793](2060069.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="v.LVIII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p79"></span> [2 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="v.LVIII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[122:1794](2060069.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="v.LVIII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p80"></span> *i.e.,* the new testament as well as the
old may have its true meaning concealed from some.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[122:1795](2060069.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="v.LVIII-p80.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p81"></span> [Luke
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010)<span id="v.LVIII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[122:1796](2060069.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="v.LVIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p82"></span> [Rev. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)<span id="v.LVIII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[123:1797](2060069.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="v.LVIII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p84"></span> Cf. Letter LXX. 5.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[123:1798](2060069.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="v.LVIII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p86"></span> [1 Chr.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#006)<span id="v.LVIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[123:1799](2060069.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="v.LVIII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p87"></span> Cf. [Luke xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#003)<span id="v.LVIII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[123:1800](2060069.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="v.LVIII-p88.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p89"></span> Horace, Sat. I. ix. 59, 60.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[123:1801](2060069.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="v.LVIII-p92.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p93"></span> Virgil, Georg. iii. 67, 68.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[123:1802](2060069.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="v.LVIII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p96"></span> Afterwards noted as an assailant of
Jerome’s ascetic doctrines. See the introduction to Letter LXI.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[123:1803](2060069.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="v.LVIII-p96.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p97"></span> The allusion seems to be to the behaviour
of Vigilantius during an earthquake which occurred when he was at
Bethlehem. His fright on the occasion exposed him to the ridicule of the
community there. (Against Vig., i. 11.)

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[123:1804](2060069.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="v.LVIII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVIII-p98"></span> As before, Therasia, the wife of Paulinus
is meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LIX](2060070)
