[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060032)  [Next](2060034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXII"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.XXII-p1.1"></span>Letter XXII. To Eustochium.</span>

<span id="v.XXII-p2"></span>Perhaps the most famous of all the letters.
In it Jerome lays down at great length (1) the motives which ought to
actuate those who devote themselves to a life of virginity, and (2) the
rules by which they ought to regulate their daily conduct. The letter
contains a vivid picture of Roman society as it then was—the luxury,
profligacy, and hypocrisy prevalent among both men and women, besides
some graphic autobiographical details (§§7, 30), and concludes with a
full account of the three kinds of monasticism then practised in Egypt
(§§34–36). Thirty years later Jerome wrote a similar letter to Demetrias
(CXXX.), with which this ought to be compared. Written at Rome 384 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.XXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.XXII-p3"></span>1. “Hear, O daughter, and consider, and
incline thine ear; forget also thine own people and thy father’s house,
and the king shall desire thy beauty.” <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) In this forty-fourth <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) psalm God speaks to the human soul
that, following the example of Abraham, <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) it should go out from its own land and
from its kindred, and should leave the Chaldeans, that is the demons,
and should dwell in the country of the living, for which elsewhere the
prophet sighs: “I think to see the good things of the Lord in the land
of the living.” <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) But it is not
enough for you to go out from your own land unless you forget your
people and your father’s house; unless you scorn the flesh and cling to
the bridegroom in a close embrace. “Look not behind thee,” he says,
“neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain lest thou be
consumed.” <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) He who has grasped
the plough must not look behind him <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) or return home from the field, or
having Christ’s garment, descend from the roof to fetch other
raiment. <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) Truly a marvellous
thing, a father charges his daughter not to remember her father. “Ye are
of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father it is your will
to do.” <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) So it was said to the
Jews. And in another place, “He that committeth sin is of the
devil.” <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) Born, in the first
instance, of such parentage we are naturally black, and even when we
have repented, so long as we have not scaled the heights of virtue, we
may still say: “I am black but comely, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) But you will say to
me, “I have left the home of my childhood; I have forgotten my father, I
am born anew in Christ. What reward do I receive for this?” The context
shows—“The king shall desire thy beauty.” This, then, is the great
mystery. “For this cause shall <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_23"></span>a man leave his father and his mother and
shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be” not as is there
said, “of one flesh,” <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) but “of
one spirit.” Your bridegroom is not haughty or disdainful; He has
“married an Ethiopian woman.” <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)
When once you desire the wisdom of the true Solomon and come to Him, He
will avow all His knowledge to you; He will lead you into His chamber
with His royal hand; <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) He will
miraculously change your complexion so that it shall be said of you,
“Who is this that goeth up and hath been made white?” <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343)

<span id="v.XXII-p18"></span>2. I write to you thus, Lady Eustochium (I
am bound to call my Lord’s bride “lady”), to show you by my opening
words that my object is not to praise the virginity which you follow,
and of which you have proved the value, or yet to recount the drawbacks
of marriage, such as pregnancy, the crying of infants, the torture
caused by a rival, the cares of household management, and all those
fancied blessings which death at last cuts short. Not that married women
are as such outside the pale; they have their own place, the marriage
that is honorable and the bed undefiled. <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) My purpose is to show you that you are
fleeing from Sodom and should take warning by Lot’s wife. <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) There is no flattery, I can tell you,
in these pages. A flatterer’s words are fair, but for all that he is an
enemy. You need expect no rhetorical flourishes setting you among the
angels, and while they extol virginity as blessed, putting the world at
your feet.

<span id="v.XXII-p21"></span>3. I would have you draw from your monastic
vow not pride but fear. <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) You walk
laden with gold; you must keep out of the robber’s way. To us men this
life is a race-course: we contend here, we are crowned elsewhere. No man
can lay aside fear while serpents and scorpions beset his path. The Lord
says: “My sword hath drunk its fill in heaven,” <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) and do you expect to find peace on the
earth? No, the earth yields only thorns and thistles, and its dust is
food for the serpent. <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) “For our
wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the
principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers of this
darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly
places.” <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) We are hemmed in by
hosts of foes, our enemies are upon every side. The weak flesh will soon
be ashes: one against many, it fights against tremendous odds. Not till
it has been dissolved, not till the Prince of this world has come and
found no sin therein, <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) not till
then may you safely listen to the prophet’s words: “Thou shalt not be
afraid for the terror by night nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor
for the trouble which haunteth thee in darkness; nor for the demon and
his attacks at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side and ten
thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.” <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) When the hosts of the enemy distress
you, when your frame is fevered and your passions roused, when you say
in your heart, “What shall I do?” Elisha’s words shall give you your
answer, “Fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be
with them.” <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) He shall pray,
“Lord, open the eyes of thine handmaid that she may see.” And then when
your eyes have been opened you shall see a fiery chariot like Elijah’s
waiting to carry you to heaven, <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)
and shall joyfully sing: “Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare
of the fowlers: the snare is broken and we are escaped.” <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354)

<span id="v.XXII-p31"></span>4. So long as we are held down by this
frail body, so long as we have our treasure in earthen vessels; <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) so long as the flesh lusteth against
the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) there can be no sure victory. “Our
adversary the devil goeth about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour.” <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) “Thou makest darkness,”
David says, “and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do
creep forth. The young lions roar after their prey and seek their meat
from God.” <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) The devil looks not
for unbelievers, for those who are without, whose flesh the Assyrian
king roasted in the furnace. <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) It
is the church of Christ that he “makes haste to spoil.” <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) According to Habakkuk, “His food is of
the choicest.” <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) A Job is the
victim of his machinations, and after devouring Judas he seeks power to
sift the \[other\] apostles. <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) The
Saviour came not to send peace upon the earth but a sword. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) Lucifer fell, Lucifer who used to rise
at dawn; <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) and he who was bred up
in a paradise of delight had the well-earned sentence passed upon him,
“Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest
among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) For he had said in his heart, “I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God,” and “I will be like the Most
High.” <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) Wherefore God says <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_24"></span>every day to
the angels, as they descend the ladder that Jacob saw in his
dream, <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) “I have said ye are Gods
and all of you are children of the Most High. But ye shall die like men
and fall like one of the princes.” <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) The devil fell first, and since “God
standeth in the congregation of the Gods and judgeth among the
Gods,” <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) the apostle writes to
those who are ceasing to be Gods—“Whereas there is among you envying and
strife, are ye not carnal and walk as men?” <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)

<span id="v.XXII-p48"></span>5. If, then, the apostle, who was a chosen
vessel <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) separated unto the gospel
of Christ, <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) by reason of the
pricks of the flesh and the allurements of vice keeps under his body and
brings it into subjection, lest when he has preached to others he may
himself be a castaway; <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) and yet,
for all that, sees another law in his members warring against the law of
his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the law of sin; <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) if after nakedness, fasting, hunger,
imprisonment, scourging and other torments, he turns back to himself and
cries “Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?” <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) do you fancy that
you ought to lay aside apprehension? See to it that God say not some day
of you: “The virgin of Israel is fallen and there is none to raise her
up.” <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) I will say it boldly,
though God can do all things He cannot raise up a virgin when once she
has fallen. He may indeed relieve one who is defiled from the penalty of
her sin, but He will not give her a crown. Let us fear lest in us also
the prophecy be fulfilled, “Good virgins shall faint.” <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) Notice that it is good virgins who are
spoken of, for there are bad ones as well. “Whosoever looketh on a
woman,” the Lord says, “to lust after her hath committed adultery with
her already in his heart.” <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) So
that virginity may be lost even by a thought. Such are evil virgins,
virgins in the flesh, not in the spirit; foolish virgins, who, having no
oil, are shut out by the Bridegroom. <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379)

<span id="v.XXII-p58"></span>6. But if even real virgins, when they have
other failings, are not saved by their physical virginity, what shall
become of those who have prostituted the members of Christ, and have
changed the temple of the Holy Ghost into a brothel? Straightway shall
they hear the words: “Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter
of Babylon, sit on the ground; there is no throne, O daughter of the
Chaldæans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate. Take
the millstone and grind meal; uncover thy locks, make bare the legs,
pass over the rivers; thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame
shall be seen.” <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) And shall she
come to this after the bridal-chamber of God the Son, after the kisses
of Him who is to her both kinsman and spouse? <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) Yes, she of whom the prophetic
utterance once sang, “Upon thy right hand did stand the queen in a
vesture of gold wrought about with divers colours,” <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) shall be made naked, and her skirts
shall be discovered upon her face. <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) She shall sit by the waters of
loneliness, her pitcher laid aside; and shall open her feet to every one
that passeth by, and shall be polluted to the crown of her head. <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) Better had it been for her to have
submitted to the yoke of marriage, to have walked in level places, than
thus, aspiring to loftier heights, to fall into the deep of hell. I pray
you, let not Zion the faithful city become a harlot: <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) let it not be that where the Trinity
has been entertained, there demons shall dance and owls make their
nests, and jackals build. <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) Let us
not loose the belt that binds the breast. When lust tickles the sense
and the soft fire of sensual pleasure sheds over us its pleasing glow,
let us immediately break forth and cry: “The Lord is on my side: I will
not fear what the flesh can do unto me.” <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) When the inner man shows signs for a
time of wavering between vice and virtue, say: “Why art thou cast down,
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for
I shall yet praise Him who is the health of my countenance and my
God.” <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) You must never let
suggestions of evil grow on you, or a babel of disorder win strength in
your breast. Slay the enemy while he is small; and, that you may not
have a crop of tares, nip the evil in the bud. Bear in mind the warning
words of the Psalmist: “Hapless daughter of Babylon, happy shall he be
that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. Happy shall he be that
taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.” <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) Because natural heat inevitably
kindles in a man sensual passion, he is praised and accounted happy who,
when foul suggestions arise in his mind, gives them no quarter, but
dashes them instantly against the rock. “Now the Rock is Christ.” <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)

<span id="v.XXII-p70"></span>7. How often, when I was living in the
desert, in the vast solitude which gives to hermits a savage
dwelling-place, parched by a burning sun, how often did I fancy myself
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_25"></span>among
the pleasures of Rome! I used to sit alone because I was filled with
bitterness. Sackcloth disfigured my unshapely limbs and my skin from
long neglect had become as black as an Ethiopian’s. Tears and groans
were every day my portion; and if drowsiness chanced to overcome my
struggles against it, my bare bones, which hardly held together, clashed
against the ground. Of my food and drink I say nothing: for, even in
sickness, the solitaries have nothing but cold water, and to eat one’s
food cooked is looked upon as self-indulgence. Now, although in my fear
of hell I had consigned myself to this prison, where I had no companions
but scorpions and wild beasts, I often found myself amid bevies of
girls. My face was pale and my frame chilled with fasting; yet my mind
was burning with desire, and the fires of lust kept bubbling up before
me when my flesh was as good as dead. Helpless, I cast myself at the
feet of Jesus, I watered them with my tears, I wiped them with my hair:
and then I subdued my rebellious body with weeks of abstinence. I do not
blush to avow my abject misery; rather I lament that I am not now what
once I was. I remember how I often cried aloud all night till the break
of day and ceased not from beating my breast till tranquillity returned
at the chiding of the Lord. I used to dread my very cell as though it
knew my thoughts; and, stern and angry with myself, I used to make my
way alone into the desert. Wherever I saw hollow valleys, craggy
mountains, steep cliffs, there I made my oratory, there the house of
correction for my unhappy flesh. There, also—the Lord Himself is my
witness—when I had shed copious tears and had strained my eyes towards
heaven, I sometimes felt myself among angelic hosts, and for joy and
gladness sang: “because of the savour of thy good ointments we will run
after thee.” <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391)

<span id="v.XXII-p72"></span>8. Now, if such are the temptations of men
who, since their bodies are emaciated with fasting, have only evil
thoughts to fear, how must it fare with a girl whose surroundings are
those of luxury and ease? Surely, to use the apostle’s words, “She is
dead while she liveth.” <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392)
Therefore, if experience gives me a right to advise, or clothes my words
with credit, I would begin by urging you and warning you as Christ’s
spouse to avoid wine as you would avoid poison. For wine is the first
weapon used by demons against the young. Greed does not shake, nor pride
puff up, nor ambition infatuate so much as this. Other vices we easily
escape, but this enemy is shut up within us, and wherever we go we carry
him with us. Wine and youth between them kindle the fire of sensual
pleasure. Why do we throw oil on the flame—why do we add fresh fuel to a
miserable body which is already ablaze. Paul, it is true, says to
Timothy “drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach’s
sake, and for thine often infirmities.” <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) But notice the reasons for which the
permission is given, to cure an aching stomach and a frequent infirmity.
And lest we should indulge ourselves too much on the score of our
ailments, he commands that but little shall be taken; advising rather as
a physician than as an apostle (though, indeed, an apostle is a
spiritual physician). He evidently feared that Timothy might succumb to
weakness, and might prove unequal to the constant moving to and fro
involved in preaching the Gospel. Besides, he remembered that he had
spoken of “wine wherein is excess,” <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) and had said, “it is good neither to
eat flesh nor to drink wine.” <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395)
Noah drank wine and became intoxicated; but living as he did in the rude
age after the flood, when the vine was first planted, perhaps he did not
know its power of inebriation. And to let you see the hidden meaning of
Scripture in all its fulness (for the word of God is a pearl and may be
pierced on every side) after his drunkenness came the uncovering of his
body; self-indulgence culminated in lust. <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) First the belly is crammed; then the
other members are roused. Similarly, at a later period, “The people sat
down to eat and to drink and rose up to play.” <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) Lot also, God’s friend, whom He saved
upon the mountain, who was the only one found righteous out of so many
thousands, was intoxicated by his daughters. And, although they may have
acted as they did more from a desire of offspring than from love of
sinful pleasure—for the human race seemed in danger of extinction—yet
they were well aware that the righteous man would not abet their design
unless intoxicated. In fact he did not know what he was doing, and his
sin was not wilful. Still his error was a grave one, for it made him the
father of Moab and Ammon, <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)
Israel’s enemies, of whom it is said: “Even to the fourteenth generation
they shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord forever.” <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)

<span id="v.XXII-p81"></span>9. When Elijah, in his flight from Jezebel,
<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_26"></span>lay
weary and desolate beneath the oak, there came an angel who raised him
up and said, “Arise and eat.” And he looked, and behold there was a cake
and a cruse of water at his head. <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) Had God willed it, might He not have
sent His prophet spiced wines and dainty dishes and flesh basted into
tenderness? When Elisha invited the sons of the prophets to dinner, he
only gave them field-herbs to eat; and when all cried out with one
voice: “There is death in the pot,” the man of God did not storm at the
cooks (for he was not used to very sumptuous fare), but caused meal to
be brought, and casting it in, sweetened the bitter mess <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) with spiritual strength as Moses had
once sweetened the waters of Mara. <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) Again, when men were sent to arrest
the prophet, and were smitten with physical and mental blindness, that
he might bring them without their own knowledge to Samaria, notice the
food with which Elisha ordered them to be refreshed. “Set bread and
water,” he said, “before them, that they may eat and drink and go to
their master.” <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) And Daniel, who
might have had rich food from the king’s table, <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) preferred the mower’s breakfast,
brought to him by Habakkuk, <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405)
which must have been but country fare. He was called “a man of
desires,” <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) because he would not
eat the bread of desire or drink the wine of concupiscence.

<span id="v.XXII-p89"></span>10. There are, in the Scriptures, countless
divine answers condemning gluttony and approving simple food. But as
fasting is not my present theme and an adequate discussion of it would
require a treatise to itself, these few observations must suffice of the
many which the subject suggests. By them you will understand why the
first man, obeying his belly and not God, was cast down from paradise
into this vale of tears; <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) and why
Satan used hunger to tempt the Lord Himself in the wilderness; <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) and why the apostle cries: “Meats for
the belly and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and
them;” <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) and why he speaks of the
self-indulgent as men “whose God is their belly.” <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) For men invariably worship what they
like best. Care must be taken, therefore, that abstinence may bring back
to Paradise those whom satiety once drove out.

<span id="v.XXII-p94"></span>11. You will tell me, perhaps, that,
high-born as you are, reared in luxury and used to lie softly, you
cannot do without wine and dainties, and would find a stricter rule of
life unendurable. If so, I can only say: “Live, then, by your own rule,
since God’s rule is too hard for you.” Not that the Creator and Lord of
all takes pleasure in a rumbling and empty stomach, or in fevered lungs;
but that these are indispensable as means to the preservation of
chastity. Job was dear to God, perfect and upright before Him; <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) yet hear what he says of the devil:
“His strength is in the loins, and his force is in the navel.” <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412)

<span id="v.XXII-p97"></span>The terms are chosen for decency’s sake,
but the reproductive organs of the two sexes are meant. Thus, the
descendant of David, who, according to the promise is to sit upon his
throne, is said to come from his loins. <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) And the seventy-five souls descended
from Jacob who entered Egypt are said to come out of his thigh. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) So, also, when his thigh shrank after
the Lord had wrestled with him, <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415)
he ceased to beget children. The Israelites, again, are told to
celebrate the passover with loins girded and mortified. <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) God says to Job: “Gird up thy loins as
a man.” <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) John wears a leathern
girdle. <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) The apostles must gird
their loins to carry the lamps of the Gospel. <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) When Ezekiel tells us how Jerusalem is
found in the plain of wandering, covered with blood, he uses the words:
“Thy navel has not been cut.” <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) In
his assaults on men, therefore, the devil’s strength is in the loins; in
his attacks on women his force is in the navel.

<span id="v.XXII-p106"></span>12. Do you wish for proof of my
assertions? Take examples. Sampson was braver than a lion and tougher
than a rock; alone and unprotected he pursued a thousand armed men; and
yet, in Delilah’s embrace, his resolution melted away. David was a man
after God’s own heart, and his lips had often sung of the Holy One, the
future Christ; and yet as he walked upon his housetop he was fascinated
by Bathsheba’s nudity, and added murder to adultery. <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) Notice here how, even in his own
house, a man cannot use his eyes without danger. Then repenting, he says
to the Lord: “Against thee, thee only, have I sinned and done this evil
in Thy sight.” <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) Being a king he
feared no one else. So, too, with Solomon. Wisdom used him to sing her
praise, <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) and he treated of all
plants “from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that
springeth out of the wall;” <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) and
yet he went back from God because he was a lover of women. <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) And, as if to show that near
relationship is no safe<span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_27"></span>guard, Amnon burned with illicit passion for
his sister Tamar. <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426)

<span id="v.XXII-p113"></span>13. I cannot bring myself to speak of the
many virgins who daily fall and are lost to the bosom of the church,
their mother: stars over which the proud foe sets up his throne, <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) and rocks hollowed by the serpent that
he may dwell in their fissures. You may see many women widows before
wedded, who try to conceal their miserable fall by a lying garb. Unless
they are betrayed by swelling wombs or by the crying of their infants,
they walk abroad with tripping feet and heads in the air. Some go so far
as to take potions, that they may insure barrenness, and thus murder
human beings almost before their conception. Some, when they find
themselves with child through their sin, use drugs to procure abortion,
and when (as often happens) they die with their offspring, they enter
the lower world laden with the guilt not only of adultery against Christ
but also of suicide and child murder. Yet it is these who say: “‘Unto
the pure all things are pure;’ <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428)
my conscience is sufficient guide for me. A pure heart is what God looks
for. Why should I abstain from meats which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving?” <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) And
when they wish to appear agreeable and entertaining they first drench
themselves with wine, and then joining the grossest profanity to
intoxication, they say “Far be it from me to abstain from the blood of
Christ.” And when they see another pale or sad they call her “wretch” or
“manichæan;” <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) quite logically,
indeed, for on their principles fasting involves heresy. When they go
out they do their best to attract notice, and with nods and winks
encourage troops of young fellows to follow them. Of each and all of
these the prophet’s words are true: “Thou hast a whore’s forehead; thou
refusest to be ashamed.” <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) Their
robes have but a narrow purple stripe, <span
id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) it is true; and their head-dress is
somewhat loose, so as to leave the hair free. From their shoulders
flutters the lilac mantle which they call “ma-forte;” they have their
feet in cheap slippers and their arms tucked up tight-fitting sleeves.
Add to these marks of their profession an easy gait, and you have all
the virginity that they possess. Such may have eulogizers of their own,
and may fetch a higher price in the market of perdition, merely because
they are called virgins. But to such virgins as these I prefer to be
displeasing.

<span id="v.XXII-p120"></span>14. I blush to speak of it, it is so
shocking; yet though sad, it is true. How comes this plague of the
agapetæ <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) to be in the church?
Whence come these unwedded wives, these novel concubines, these harlots,
so I will call them, though they cling to a single partner? One house
holds them and one chamber. They often occupy the same bed, and yet they
call us suspicious if we fancy anything amiss. A brother leaves his
virgin sister; a virgin, slighting her unmarried brother, seeks a
brother in a stranger. Both alike profess to have but one object, to
find spiritual consolation from those not of their kin; but their real
aim is to indulge in sexual intercourse. It is on such that Solomon in
the book of proverbs heaps his scorn. “Can a man take fire in his
bosom,” he says, “and his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot
coals and his feet not be burned?” <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434)

<span id="v.XXII-p123"></span>15. We cast out, then, and banish from our
sight those who only wish to seem and not to be virgins. Henceforward I
may bring all my speech to bear upon you who, as it is your lot to be
the first virgin of noble birth in Rome, have to labor the more
diligently not to lose good things to come, as well as those that are
present. You have at least learned from a case in your own family the
troubles of wedded life and the uncertainties of marriage. Your sister,
Blæsilla, before you in age but behind you in declining the vow of
virginity, has become a widow but seven months after she has taken a
husband. Hapless plight of us mortals who know not what is before us!
She has lost, at once, the crown of virginity and the pleasures of
wedlock. And, although, as a widow, the second degree of chastity is
hers, still can you not imagine the continual crosses which she has to
bear, daily seeing in her sister what she has lost herself; and, while
she finds it hard to go without the pleasures of wedlock, having a less
reward for her present continence? Still she, too, may take heart and
rejoice. The fruit which is an hundredfold and that which is sixtyfold
both spring from one seed, and that seed is chastity. <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435)

<span id="v.XXII-p125"></span>16. Do not court the company of married
ladies or visit the houses of the high-born. Do not look too often on
the life which you despised to become a virgin. Women of the world, you
know, plume themselves because their husbands are on the bench or in
other <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_28"></span>high positions. And the wife of the emperor
always has an eager throng of visitors at her door. Why do you, then,
wrong your husband? Why do you, God’s bride, hasten to visit the wife of
a mere man? Learn in this respect a holy pride; know that you are better
than they. And not only must you avoid intercourse with those who are
puffed up by their husbands’ honors, who are hedged in with troops of
eunuchs, and who wear robes inwrought with threads of gold. You must
also shun those who are widows from necessity and not from choice. Not
that they ought to have desired the death of their husbands; but that
they have not welcomed the opportunity of continence when it has come.
As it is, they only change their garb; their old self-seeking remains
unchanged. To see them in their capacious litters, with red cloaks and
plump bodies, a row of eunuchs walking in front of them, you would fancy
them not to have lost husbands but to be seeking them. Their houses are
filled with flatterers and with guests. The very clergy, who ought to
inspire them with respect by their teaching and authority, kiss these
ladies on the forehead, and putting forth their hands (so that, if you
knew no better, you might suppose them in the act of blessing), take
wages for their visits. They, meanwhile, seeing that priests cannot do
without them, are lifted up into pride; and as, having had experience of
both, they prefer the license of widowhood to the restraints of
marriage, they call themselves chaste livers and nuns. After an
immoderate supper they retire to rest to dream of the apostles. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436)

<span id="v.XXII-p127"></span>17. Let your companions be women pale and
thin with fasting, and approved by their years and conduct; such as
daily sing in their hearts: “Tell me where thou feedest thy flock, where
thou makest it to rest at noon,” <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437)
and say, with true earnestness, “I have a desire to depart and to be
with Christ.” <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) Be subject to your
parents, imitating the example of your spouse. <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) Rarely go abroad, and if you wish to
seek the aid of the martyrs seek it in your own chamber. For you will
never need a pretext for going out if you always go out when there is
need. Take food in moderation, and never overload your stomach. For many
women, while temperate as regards wine, are intemperate in the use of
food. When you rise at night to pray, let your breath be that of an
empty and not that of an overfull stomach. Read often, learn all that
you can. Let sleep overcome you, the roll still in your hands; when your
head falls, let it be on the sacred page. Let your fasts be of daily
occurrence and your refreshment such as avoids satiety. It is idle to
carry an empty stomach if, in two or three days’ time, the fast is to be
made up for by repletion. When cloyed the mind immediately grows
sluggish, and when the ground is watered it puts forth the thorns of
lust. If ever you feel the outward man sighing for the flower of youth,
and if, as you lie on your couch after a meal, you are excited by the
alluring train of sensual desires; then seize the shield of faith, for
it alone can quench the fiery darts of the devil. <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) “They are all adulterers,” says the
prophet; “they have made ready their heart like an oven.” <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) But do you keep close to the footsteps
of Christ, and, intent upon His words, say: “Did not our heart burn
within us by the way while Jesus opened to us the Scriptures?” <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) and again: “Thy word is tried to the
uttermost, and thy servant loveth it.” <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) It is hard for the human soul to avoid
loving something, and our mind must of necessity give way to affection
of one kind or another. The love of the flesh is overcome by the love of
the spirit. Desire is quenched by desire. What is taken from the one
increases the other. Therefore, as you lie on your couch, say again and
again: “By night have I sought Him whom my soul loveth.” <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) “Mortify, therefore,” says the
apostle, “your members which are upon the earth.” <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) Because he himself did so, he could
afterwards say with confidence: “I live, yet not I, but Christ, liveth
in me.” <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) He who mortifies his
members, and feels that he is walking in a vain show, <span
id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) is not afraid to say: “I am become
like a bottle in the frost. <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448)
Whatever there was in me of the moisture of lust has been dried out of
me.” And again: “My knees are weak through fasting; I forget to eat my
bread. By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my
skin.” <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449)

<span id="v.XXII-p141"></span>18. Be like the grasshopper and make night
musical. Nightly wash your bed and water your couch with your
tears. <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) Watch and be like the
sparrow alone upon the housetop. <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451)
Sing with the spirit, but sing with the understanding also. <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) And let your song be that of the
psalmist: “Bless the <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_29"></span>Lord, O my soul; and forget not all his
benefits; who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy
diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction.” <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) Can we, any of us, honestly make his
words our own: “I have eaten ashes like bread and mingled my drink with
weeping?” <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) Yet, should we not
weep and groan when the serpent invites us, as he invited our first
parents, to eat forbidden fruit, and when after expelling us from the
paradise of virginity he desires to clothe us with mantles of skins such
as that which Elijah, on his return to paradise, left behind him on
earth? <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) Say to yourself: “What
have I to do with the pleasures of sense that so soon come to an end?
What have I to do with the song of the sirens so sweet and so fatal to
those who hear it?” I would not have you subject to that sentence
whereby condemnation has been passed upon mankind. When God says to Eve,
“In pain and in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children,” say to
yourself, “That is a law for a married woman, not for me.” And when He
continues, “Thy desire shall be to thy husband,” <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) say again: “Let her desire be to her
husband who has not Christ for her spouse.” And when, last of all, He
says, “Thou shalt surely die,” <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457)
once more, say, “Marriage indeed must end in death; but the life on
which I have resolved is independent of sex. Let those who are wives
keep the place and the time that properly belong to them. For me,
virginity is consecrated in the persons of Mary and of Christ.”

<span id="v.XXII-p150"></span>19. Some one may say, “Do you dare detract
from wedlock, which is a state blessed by God?” I do not detract from
wedlock when I set virginity before it. No one compares a bad thing with
a good. Wedded women may congratulate themselves that they come next to
virgins. “Be fruitful,” God says, “and multiply, and replenish the
earth.” <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) He who desires to
replenish the earth may increase and multiply if he will. But the train
to which you belong is not on earth, but in heaven. The command to
increase and multiply first finds fulfilment after the expulsion from
paradise, after the nakedness and the fig-leaves which speak of sexual
passion. Let them marry and be given in marriage who eat their bread in
the sweat of their brow; whose land brings forth to them thorns and
thistles, <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) and whose crops are
choked with briars. My seed produces fruit a hundredfold. <span
id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) “All men cannot receive God’s saying,
but they to whom it is given.”

<span id="v.XXII-p154"></span>Some people may be eunuchs from necessity;
I am one of free will. <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) “There is
a time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing. There is a time
to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together.” <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) Now that out of the hard stones of the
Gentiles God has raised up children unto Abraham, <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) they begin to be “holy stones rolling
upon the earth.” <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) They pass
through the whirlwinds of the world, and roll on in God’s chariot on
rapid wheels. Let those stitch coats to themselves who have lost the
coat woven from the top throughout; <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) who delight in the cries of infants
which, as soon as they see the light, lament that they are born. In
paradise Eve was a virgin, and it was only after the coats of skins that
she began her married life. Now paradise is your home too. Keep
therefore your birthright and say: “Return unto thy rest, O my
soul.” <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) To show that virginity is
natural while wedlock only follows guilt, what is born of wedlock is
virgin flesh, and it gives back in fruit what in root it has lost.
“There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a flower
shall grow out of his roots.” <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467)
The rod <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) is the mother of the
Lord—simple, pure, unsullied; drawing no germ of life from without but
fruitful in singleness like God Himself. The flower of the rod is
Christ, who says of Himself: “I am the rose of Sharon and the lily of
the valleys.” <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) In another place
He is foretold to be “a stone cut out of the mountain without
hands,” <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) a figure by which the
prophet signifies that He is to be born a virgin of a virgin. For the
hands are here a figure of wedlock as in the passage: “His left hand is
under my head and his right hand doth embrace me.” <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) It agrees, also, with this
interpretation that the unclean animals are led into Noah’s ark in
pairs, while of the clean an uneven number is taken. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) Similarly, when Moses and Joshua were
bidden to remove their shoes because the ground on which they stood was
holy, <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) the command had a mystical
meaning. So, too, when the disciples were appointed to preach the gospel
they were told to take with them neither shoe nor shoe-latchet; <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) and when the soldiers came to cast
lots for the garments of Jesus <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475)
they found no boots that they could take away. <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_30"></span>For the Lord could not
Himself possess what He had forbidden to His servants.

<span id="v.XXII-p170"></span>20. I praise wedlock, I praise marriage,
but it is because they give me virgins. I gather the rose from the
thorns, the gold from the earth, the pearl from the shell. “Doth the
plowman plow all day to sow?” <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476)
Shall he not also enjoy the fruit of his labor? Wedlock is the more
honored, the more what is born of it is loved. Why, mother, do you
grudge your daughter her virginity? She has been reared on your milk,
she has come from your womb, she has grown up in your bosom. Your
watchful affection has kept her a virgin. Are you angry with her because
she chooses to be a king’s wife and not a soldier’s? She has conferred
on you a high privilege; you are now the mother-in-law of God.
“Concerning virgins,” says the apostle, “I have no commandment of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) Why was this? Because his
own virginity was due, not to a command, but to his free choice. For
they are not to be heard who feign him to have had a wife; for, when he
is discussing continence and commending perpetual chastity, he uses the
words, “I would that all men were even as I myself.” And farther on, “I
say, therefore, to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they
abide even as I.” <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) And in another
place, “have we not power to lead about wives even as the rest of the
apostles?” <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) Why then has he no
commandment from the Lord concerning virginity? Because what is freely
offered is worth more than what is extorted by force, and to command
virginity would have been to abrogate wedlock. It would have been a hard
enactment to compel opposition to nature and to extort from men the
angelic life; and not only so, it would have been to condemn what is a
divine ordinance.

<span id="v.XXII-p175"></span>21. The old law had a different ideal of
blessedness, for therein it is said: “Blessed is he who hath seed in
Zion and a family in Jerusalem:” <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480)
and “Cursed is the barren who beareth not:” <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) and “Thy children shall be like
olive-plants round about thy table.” <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) Riches too are promised to the
faithful and we are told that “there was not one feeble person among
their tribes.” <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) But now even to
eunuchs it is said, “Say not, behold I am a dry tree,” <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) for instead of sons and daughters you
have a place forever in heaven. Now the poor are blessed, now Lazarus is
set before Dives in his purple. <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485)
Now he who is weak is counted strong. But in those days the world was
still unpeopled: accordingly, to pass over instances of childlessness
meant only to serve as types, those only were considered happy who could
boast of children. It was for this reason that Abraham in his old age
married Keturah; <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) that Leah hired
Jacob with her son’s mandrakes, <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487)
and that fair Rachel—a type of the church—complained of the closing of
her womb. <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) But gradually the crop
grew up and then the reaper was sent forth with his sickle. Elijah lived
a virgin life, so also did Elisha and many of the sons of the prophets.
To Jeremiah the command came: “Thou shalt not take thee a wife.” <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) He had been sanctified in his mother’s
womb, <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) and now he was forbidden
to take a wife because the captivity was near. The apostle gives the
same counsel in different words. “I think, therefore, that this is good
by reason of the present distress, namely that it is good for a man to
be as he is.” <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) What is this
distress which does away with the joys of wedlock? The apostle tells us,
in a later verse: “The time is short: it remaineth that those who have
wives be as though they had none.” <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) Nebuchadnezzar is hard at hand. The
lion is bestirring himself from his lair. What good will marriage be to
me if it is to end in slavery to the haughtiest of kings? What good will
little ones be to me if their lot is to be that which the prophet sadly
describes: “The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his
mouth for thirst; the young children ask for bread and no man breaketh
it unto them”? <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) In those days, as
I have said, the virtue of continence was found only in men: Eve still
continued to travail with children. But now that a virgin has
conceived <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) in the womb and has
borne to us a child of which the prophet says that “Government shall be
upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called the mighty God, the
everlasting Father,” <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) now the
chain of the curse is broken. Death came through Eve, but life has come
through Mary. And thus the gift of virginity has been bestowed most
richly upon women, seeing that it has had its beginning from a woman. As
soon as the Son of God set foot upon the earth, He formed for Himself a
new household there; that, as He was adored by angels in heaven, angels
might serve Him also on earth. Then chaste Judith once more cut off the
head of Holofernes. <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) Then
Haman—whose name means iniquity—was once <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>
<span id="v.XXII-Page_31"></span>more burned in fire of his own
kindling. <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) Then James and John
forsook father and net and ship and followed the Saviour: neither
kinship nor the world’s ties, nor the care of their home could hold them
back. Then were the words heard: “Whosoever will come after me, let him
deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.” <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) For no soldier goes with a wife to
battle. Even when a disciple would have buried his father, the Lord
forbade him, and said: “Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head.” <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) So you must not complain if you have
but scanty house-room. In the same strain, the apostle writes: “He that
is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may
please the Lord: but he that is married careth for the things that are
of the world how he may please his wife. There is difference also
between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things
of the Lord that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she
that is married careth for the things of the world how she may please
her husband.” <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500)

<span id="v.XXII-p197"></span>22. How great inconveniences are involved
in wedlock and how many anxieties encompass it I have, I think,
described shortly in my treatise—published against Helvidius <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) —on the perpetual virginity of the
blessed Mary. It would be tedious to go over the same ground now; and
any one who pleases may draw from that fountain. But lest I should seem
wholly to have passed over the matter, I will just say now that the
apostle bids us pray without ceasing, <span
id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) and that he who in the married state
renders his wife her due <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) cannot
so pray. Either we pray always and are virgins, or we cease to pray that
we may fulfil the claims of marriage. Still he says: “If a virgin marry
she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the
flesh.” <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) At the outset I promised
that I should say little or nothing of the embarrassments of wedlock,
and now I give you notice to the same effect. If you want to know from
how many vexations a virgin is free and by how many a wife is fettered
you should read Tertullian “to a philosophic friend,” <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) and his other treatises on virginity,
the blessed Cyprian’s noble volume, the writings of Pope Damasus <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) in prose and verse, and the treatises
recently written for his sister by our own Ambrose. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) In these he has poured forth his soul
with such a flood of eloquence that he has sought out, set forth, and
put in order all that bears on the praise of virgins.

<span id="v.XXII-p205"></span>23. We must proceed by a different path,
for our purpose is not the praise of virginity but its preservation. To
know that it is a good thing is not enough: when we have chosen it we
must guard it with jealous care. The first only requires judgment, and
we share it with many; the second calls for toil, and few compete with
us in it. “He that shall endure unto the end,” the Lord says, “the same
shall be saved,” <span id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) and “many are
called but few are chosen.” <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509)
Therefore I conjure you before God and Jesus Christ and His elect angels
to guard that which you have received, not readily exposing to the
public gaze the vessels of the Lord’s temple (which only the priests are
by right allowed to see), that no profane person may look upon God’s
sanctuary. Uzzah, when he touched the ark which it was not lawful to
touch, was struck down suddenly by death. <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) And assuredly no gold or silver vessel
was ever so dear to God as is the temple of a virgin’s body. The shadow
went before, but now the reality is come. You indeed may speak in all
simplicity, and from motives of amiability may treat with courtesy the
veriest strangers, but unchaste eyes see nothing aright. They fail to
appreciate the beauty of the soul, and only value that of the body.
Hezekiah showed God’s treasure to the Assyrians, <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) who ought never to have seen what they
were sure to covet. The consequence was that Judæa was torn by continual
wars, and that the very first things carried away to Babylon were these
vessels of the Lord. We find Belshazzar at his feast and among his
concubines (vice always glories in defiling what is noble) drinking out
of these sacred cups. <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)

<span id="v.XXII-p211"></span>24. Never incline your ear to words of
mischief. For men often say an improper word to make trial of a virgin’s
steadfastness, to see if she hears it with pleasure, and if she is ready
to unbend at every silly jest. Such persons applaud whatever you affirm
and deny whatever you deny; they speak of you as not only holy but
accomplished, and say that in you there is no guile. “Behold,” say they,
“a true hand-maid of Christ; behold entire singleness of heart. How
different from that rough, un<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_32"></span>sightly, countrified fright, who most likely
never married because she could never find a husband.” Our natural
weakness induces us readily to listen to such flatterers; but, though we
may blush and reply that such praise is more than our due, the soul
within us rejoices to hear itself praised.

<span id="v.XXII-p212"></span>Like the ark of the covenant Christ’s
spouse should be overlaid with gold within and without; <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) she should be the guardian of the law
of the Lord. Just as the ark contained nothing but the tables of the
covenant, <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) so in you there should
be no thought of anything that is outside. For it pleases the Lord to
sit in your mind as He once sat on the mercy-seat and the
cherubims. <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) As He sent His
disciples to loose Him the foal of an ass that he might ride on it, so
He sends them to release you from the cares of the world, that leaving
the bricks and straw of Egypt, you may follow Him, the true Moses,
through the wilderness and may enter the land of promise. Let no one
dare to forbid you, neither mother nor sister nor kinswoman nor brother:
“The Lord hath need of you.” <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516)
Should they seek to hinder you, let them fear the scourges that fell on
Pharaoh, who, because he would not let God’s people go that they might
serve Him, <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) suffered the plagues
described in Scripture. Jesus entering into the temple cast out those
things which belonged not to the temple. For God is jealous and will not
allow the father’s house to be made a den of robbers. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) Where money is counted, where doves
are sold, where simplicity is stifled where, that is, a virgin’s breast
glows with cares of this world; straightway the veil of the temple is
rent, <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) the bridegroom rises in
anger, he says: “Your house is left unto you desolate.” <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) Read the gospel and see how Mary
sitting at the feet of the Lord is set before the zealous Martha. In her
anxiety to be hospitable Martha was preparing a meal for the Lord and
His disciples; yet Jesus said to her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful
and troubled about many things. But few things are needful or one. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) And Mary hath chosen that good part
which shall not be taken away from her.” <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) Be then like Mary; prefer the food of
the soul to that of the body. Leave it to your sisters to run to and fro
and to seek how they may fitly welcome Christ. But do you, having once
for all cast away the burden of the world, sit at the Lord’s feet and
say: “I have found him whom my soul loveth; I will hold him, I will not
let him go.” <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) And He will answer:
“My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother,
she is the choice one of her that bare her.” <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) Now the mother of whom this is said is
the heavenly Jerusalem. <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525)

<span id="v.XXII-p226"></span>25. Ever let the privacy of your chamber
guard you; ever let the Bridegroom sport with you within. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) Do you pray? You speak to the
Bridegroom. Do you read? He speaks to you. When sleep overtakes you He
will come behind and put His hand through the hole of the door, and your
heart <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) shall be moved for Him;
and you will awake and rise up and say: “I am sick of love.” <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) Then He will reply: “A garden inclosed
is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.” <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529)

<span id="v.XXII-p231"></span>Go not from home nor visit the daughters
of a strange land, though you have patriarchs for brothers and Israel
for a father. Dinah went out and was seduced. <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) Do not seek the Bridegroom in the
streets; do not go round the corners of the city. For though you may
say: “I will rise now and go about the city: in the streets and in the
broad ways I will seek Him whom my soul loveth,” and though you may ask
the watchmen: “Saw ye Him whom my soul loveth?” <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) no one will deign to answer you. The
Bridegroom cannot be found in the streets: “Strait and narrow is the way
which leadeth unto life.” <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) So the
Song goes on: “I sought him but I could not find him: I called him but
he gave me no answer.” <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) And would
that failure to find Him were all. You will be wounded and stripped, you
will lament and say: “The watchmen that went about the city found me:
they smote me, they wounded me, they took away my veil from me.” <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) Now if one who could say: “I sleep but
my heart waketh,” <span id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) and “A bundle
of myrrh is my well beloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my
breasts”; <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) if one who could speak
thus suffered so much because she went abroad, what shall become of us
who are but young girls; of us who, when the bride goes in with the
Bridegroom, still remain without? Jesus is jealous. He does not choose
that your face should be seen of others. You may excuse yourself and
say: “I have drawn close my veil, I have covered my face and I have
sought Thee there and have said: ‘Tell me, O Thou whom my soul <span
id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_33"></span>loveth, where
Thou feedest Thy flock, where Thou makest it to rest at noon. For why
should I be as one that is veiled beside the flocks of Thy
companions?’” <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) Yet in spite of
your excuses He will be wroth, He will swell with anger and say: “If
thou know not thyself, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by
the footsteps of the flock and feed thy goats beside the shepherd’s
tents.” <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) You may be fair, and of
all faces yours may be the dearest to the Bridegroom; yet, unless you
know yourself, and keep your heart with all diligence, <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) unless also you avoid the eyes of the
young men, you will be turned out of My bride-chamber to feed the goats,
which shall be set on the left hand. <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540)

<span id="v.XXII-p243"></span>26. These things being so, my Eustochium,
daughter, lady, fellow-servant, sister—these names refer the first to
your age, the second to your rank, the third to your religious vocation,
the last to the place which you hold in my affection—hear the words of
Isaiah: “Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation” of the Lord “be overpast.” <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) Let foolish virgins stray abroad, but
for your part stay at home with the Bridegroom; for if you shut your
door, and, according to the precept of the Gospel, <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) pray to your Father in secret, He will
come and knock, saying: “Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any
man…open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me.” <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) Then straightway you
will eagerly reply: “It is the voice of my beloved that knocketh,
saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled.” It is
impossible that you should refuse, and say: “I have put off my coat; how
shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile
them?” <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) Arise forthwith and open.
Otherwise while you linger He may pass on and you may have mournfully to
say: “I opened to my beloved, but my beloved was gone.” <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) Why need the doors of your heart be
closed to the Bridegroom? Let them be open to Christ but closed to the
devil according to the saying: “If the spirit of him who hath power rise
up against thee, leave not thy place.” <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) Daniel, in that upper story to which
he withdrew when he could no longer continue below, had his windows open
toward Jerusalem. <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) Do you too
keep your windows open, but only on the side where light may enter and
whence you may see the eye of the Lord. Open not those other windows of
which the prophet says: “Death is come up into our windows.” <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548)

<span id="v.XXII-p252"></span>27. You must also be careful to avoid the
snare of a passion for vainglory. “How,” Jesus says, “can ye believe
which receive glory one from another?” <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) What an evil that must be the victim
of which cannot believe! Let us rather say: “Thou art my
glorying,” <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) and “He that
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord,” <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) and “If I yet pleased men I should not
be the servant of Christ,” <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) and
“Far be it from me to glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom the world hath been crucified unto me and I unto the
world;” <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553) and once more: “In God
we boast all the day long; my soul shall make her boast in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) When you do alms, let God
alone see you. When you fast, be of a cheerful countenance. <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) Let your dress be neither too neat nor
too slovenly; neither let it be so remarkable as to draw the attention
of passers-by, and to make men point their fingers at you. Is a brother
dead? Has the body of a sister to be carried to its burial? Take care
lest in too often performing such offices you die yourself. Do not wish
to seem very devout nor more humble than need be, lest you seek glory by
shunning it. For many, who screen from all men’s sight their poverty,
charity, and fasting, desire to excite admiration by their very disdain
of it, and strangely seek for praise while they profess to keep out of
its way. From the other disturbing influences which make men rejoice,
despond, hope, and fear I find many free; but this is a defect which few
are without, and he is best whose character, like a fair skin, is
disfigured by the fewest blemishes. I do not think it necessary to warn
you against boasting of your riches, or against priding yourself on your
birth, or against setting yourself up as superior to others. I know your
humility; I know that you can say with sincerity: “Lord, my heart is not
haughty nor mine eyes lofty;” <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) I
know that in your breast as in that of your mother the pride through
which the devil fell has no place. It would be time wasted to write to
you about it; for there is no greater folly than to teach a pupil what
he knows already. But now that you have despised the boastfulness of the
world, do not let the fact inspire you with new boastfulness. Harbor
<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_34"></span>not the
secret thought that having ceased to court attention in garments of gold
you may begin to do so in mean attire. And when you come into a room
full of brothers and sisters, do not sit in too low a place or plead
that you are unworthy of a footstool. Do not deliberately lower your
voice as though worn out with fasting; nor, leaning on the shoulder of
another, mimic the tottering gait of one who is faint. Some women, it is
true, disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to
fast. <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) As soon as they catch
sight of any one they groan, they look down; they cover up their faces,
all but one eye, which they keep free to see with. Their dress is
sombre, their girdles are of sackcloth, their hands and feet are dirty;
only their stomachs—which cannot be seen—are hot with food. Of these the
psalm is sung daily: “The Lord will scatter the bones of them that
please themselves.” <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) Others
change their garb and assume the mien of men, being ashamed of being
what they were born to be—women. They cut off their hair and are not
ashamed to look like eunuchs. Some clothe themselves in goat’s hair,
and, putting on hoods, think to become children again by making
themselves look like so many owls. <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559)

<span id="v.XXII-p264"></span>28. But I will not speak only of women.
Avoid men, also, when you see them loaded with chains and wearing their
hair long like women, contrary to the apostle’s precept, <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) not to speak of beards like those of
goats, black cloaks, and bare feet braving the cold. All these things
are tokens of the devil. Such an one Rome groaned over some time back in
Antimus; and Sophronius is a still more recent instance. Such persons,
when they have once gained admission to the houses of the high-born, and
have deceived “silly women laden with sins, ever learning and never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth,” <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) feign a sad mien and pretend to make
long fasts while at night they feast in secret. Shame forbids me to say
more, for my language might appear more like invective than admonition.
There are others—I speak of those of my own order—who seek the
presbyterate and the diaconate simply that they may be able to see women
with less restraint. Such men think of nothing but their dress; they use
perfumes freely, and see that there are no creases in their leather
shoes. Their curling hair shows traces of the tongs; their fingers
glisten with rings; they walk on tiptoe across a damp road, not to
splash their feet. When you see men acting in this way, think of them
rather as bridegrooms than as clergymen. Certain persons have devoted
the whole of their energies and life to the single object of knowing the
names, houses, and characters of married ladies. I will here briefly
describe the head of the profession, that from the master’s likeness you
may recognize the disciples. He rises and goes forth with the sun; he
has the order of his visits duly arranged; he takes the shortest road;
and, troublesome old man that he is, forces his way almost into the
bedchambers of ladies yet asleep. If he sees a pillow that takes his
fancy or an elegant table-cover—or indeed any article of household
furniture—he praises it, looks admiringly at it, takes it into his hand,
and, complaining that he has nothing of the kind, begs or rather extorts
it from the owner. All the women, in fact, fear to cross the
news-carrier of the town. Chastity and fasting are alike distasteful to
him. What he likes is a savory breakfast—say off a plump young crane
such as is commonly called a cheeper. In speech he is rude and forward,
and is always ready to bandy reproaches. Wherever you turn he is the
first man that you see before you. Whatever news is noised abroad he is
either the originator of the rumor or its magnifier. He changes his
horses every hour; and they are so sleek and spirited that you would
take him for a brother of the Thracian king. <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562)

<span id="v.XXII-p268"></span>29. Many are the stratagems which the wily
enemy employs against us. “The serpent,” we are told, “was more subtile
than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made.” <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) And the apostle says: “We are not
ignorant of his devices.” <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564)
Neither an affected shabbiness nor a stylish smartness becomes a
Christian. If there is anything of which you are ignorant, if you have
any doubt about Scripture, ask one whose life commends him, whose age
puts him above suspicion, whose reputation does not belie him; one who
may be able to say: “I have espoused you to one husband that I may
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” Or if there should be none
such able to explain, it is better to avoid danger at the price of
ignorance than to court it for the sake of learning. Remember that you
walk in the midst of snares, and that many veteran virgins, of a
chastity never called in question, have, on the very threshold of death,
let their crowns fall from their hands.

<span id="v.XXII-p271"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_35"></span>If any of your handmaids share your vocation,
do not lift up yourself against them or pride yourself because you are
their mistress. You have all chosen one Bridegroom; you all sing the
same psalms; together you receive the Body of Christ. Why then should
your thoughts be different? <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) You
must try to win others, and that you may attract the more readily you
must treat the virgins in your train with the greatest respect. If you
find one of them weak in the faith, be attentive to her, comfort her,
caress her, and make her chastity your treasure. But if a girl pretends
to have a vocation simply because she desires to escape from service,
read aloud to her the words of the apostle: “It is better to marry than
to burn.” <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566)

<span id="v.XXII-p274"></span>Idle persons and busybodies, whether
virgins or widows; such as go from house to house calling on married
women and displaying an unblushing effrontery greater than that of a
stage parasite, cast from you as you would the plague. For “evil
communications corrupt good manners,” <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) and women like these care for nothing
but their lowest appetites. They will often urge you, saying, “My dear
creature, make the best of your advantages, and live while life is
yours,” and “Surely you are not laying up money for your children.”
Given to wine and wantonness, they instill all manner of mischief into
people’s minds, and induce even the most austere to indulge in
enervating pleasures. And “when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ they will marry, having condemnation because they have rejected
their first faith.” <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568)

<span id="v.XXII-p277"></span>Do not seek to appear over-eloquent, nor
trifle with verse, nor make yourself gay with lyric songs. And do not,
out of affectation, follow the sickly taste <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) of married ladies who, now pressing
their teeth together, now keeping their lips wide apart, speak with a
lisp, and purposely clip their words, because they fancy that to
pronounce them naturally is a mark of country breeding. Accordingly they
find pleasure in what I may call an adultery of the tongue. For “what
communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with
Belial?” <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) How can Horace go with
the psalter, Virgil with the gospels, Cicero with the apostle? <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) Is not a brother made to stumble if he
sees you sitting at meat in an idol’s temple? <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) Although “unto the pure all things are
pure,” <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) and “nothing is to be
refused if it be received with thanksgiving,” <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) still we ought not to drink the cup of
Christ, and, at the same time, the cup of devils. <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) Let me relate to you the story of my
own miserable experience.

<span id="v.XXII-p285"></span>30. Many years ago, when for the kingdom
of heaven’s sake I had cut myself off from home, parents, sister,
relations, and—harder still—from the dainty food to which I had been
accustomed; and when I was on my way to Jerusalem to wage my warfare, I
still could not bring myself to forego the library which I had formed
for myself at Rome with great care and toil. And so, miserable man that
I was, I would fast only that I might afterwards read Cicero. After many
nights spent in vigil, after floods of tears called from my inmost
heart, after the recollection of my past sins, I would once more take up
Plautus. And when at times I returned to my right mind, and began to
read the prophets, their style seemed rude and repellent. I failed to
see the light with my blinded eyes; but I attributed the fault not to
them, but to the sun. While the old serpent was thus making me his
plaything, about the middle of Lent a deep-seated fever fell upon my
weakened body, and while it destroyed my rest completely—the story seems
hardly credible—it so wasted my unhappy frame that scarcely anything was
left of me but skin and bone. Meantime preparations for my funeral went
on; my body grew gradually colder, and the warmth of life lingered only
in my throbbing breast. Suddenly I was caught up in the spirit and
dragged before the judgment seat of the Judge; and here the light was so
bright, and those who stood around were so radiant, that I cast myself
upon the ground and did not dare to look up. Asked who and what I was I
replied: “I am a Christian.” But He who presided said: “Thou liest, thou
art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ. For ‘where thy treasure is,
there will thy heart be also.’” <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576)
Instantly I became dumb, and amid the strokes of the lash—for He had
ordered me to be scourged—I was tortured more severely still by the fire
of conscience, considering with myself that verse, “In the grave who
shall give thee thanks?” <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) Yet for
all that I began to cry and to bewail myself, saying: “Have mercy upon
me, O Lord: have mercy upon me.” Amid the sound of the scourges this cry
still made itself heard. At last the bystanders, falling <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_36"></span>down before
the knees of Him who presided, prayed that He would have pity on my
youth, and that He would give me space to repent of my error. He might
still, they urged, inflict torture on me, should I ever again read the
works of the Gentiles. Under the stress of that awful moment I should
have been ready to make even still larger promises than these.
Accordingly I made oath and called upon His name, saying: “Lord, if ever
again I possess worldly books, or if ever again I read such, I have
denied Thee.” Dismissed, then, on taking this oath, I returned to the
upper world, and, to the surprise of all, I opened upon them eyes so
drenched with tears that my distress served to convince even the
incredulous. And that this was no sleep nor idle dream, such as those by
which we are often mocked, I call to witness the tribunal before which I
lay, and the terrible judgment which I feared. May it never, hereafter,
be my lot to fall under such an inquisition! I profess that my shoulders
were black and blue, that I felt the bruises long after I awoke from my
sleep, and that thenceforth I read the books of God with a zeal greater
than I had previously given to the books of men.

<span id="v.XXII-p288"></span>31. You must also avoid the sin of
covetousness, and this not merely by refusing to seize upon what belongs
to others, for that is punished by the laws of the state, but also by
not keeping your own property, which has now become no longer yours. “If
have not been faithful,” the Lord says, “in that which is another man’s,
who shall give you that which is your own?” <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) “That which is another man’s” is a
quantity of gold or of silver, while “that which is our own” is the
spiritual heritage of which it is elsewhere said: “The ransom of a man’s
life is his riches.” <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) “No man can
serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other;
or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon.” <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) Riches, that
is; for in the heathen tongue of the Syrians riches are called mammon.
The “thorns” which choke our faith <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) are the taking thought for our
life. <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) Care for the things which
the Gentiles seek after <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) is the
root of covetousness.

<span id="v.XXII-p295"></span>But you will say: “I am a girl delicately
reared, and I cannot labor with my hands. Suppose that I live to old age
and then fall sick, who will take pity on me?” Hear Jesus speaking to
the apostles: “Take no thought what ye shall eat; nor yet for your body
what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they
reap nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth
them.” <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) Should clothing fail you,
set the lilies before your eyes. Should hunger seize you, think of the
words in which the poor and hungry are blessed. Should pain afflict you,
read “Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities,” and “There was given to
me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I
should be exalted above measure.” <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) Rejoice in all God’s judgments; for
does not the psalmist say: “The daughters of Judah rejoiced because of
thy judgments, O Lord”? <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) Let the
words be ever on your lips: “Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and
naked shall I return thither;” <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587)
and “We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out.” <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588)

<span id="v.XXII-p301"></span>32. To-day you may see women cramming
their wardrobes with dresses, changing their gowns from day to day, and
for all that unable to vanquish the moths. Now and then one more
scrupulous wears out a single dress; yet, while she appears in rags, her
boxes are full. Parchments are dyed purple, gold is melted into
lettering, manuscripts are decked with jewels, while Christ lies at the
door naked and dying. When they hold out a hand to the needy they sound
a trumpet; <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) when they invite to a
love-feast <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) they engage a crier.
I lately saw the noblest lady in Rome—I suppress her name, for I am no
satirist—with a band of eunuchs before her in the basilica of the
blessed Peter. She was giving money to the poor, a coin apiece; and this
with her own hand, that she might be accounted more religious. Hereupon
a by no means uncommon incident occurred. An old woman, “full of years
and rags,” <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) ran forward to get a
second coin, but when her turn came she received not a penny but a blow
hard enough to draw blood from her guilty veins.

<span id="v.XXII-p305"></span>“The love of money is the root of all
evil,” <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) and the apostle speaks of
covetousness as being idolatry. <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593)
“Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all these things shall be added
unto you.” <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) The Lord will never
allow a righteous soul to perish of hunger. <span id="page_37">p.
37</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_37"></span>“I have been young,” the
psalmist says, “and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken nor his seed begging bread.” <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) Elijah is fed by ministering
ravens. <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) The widow of Zarephath,
who with her sons expected to die the same night, went without food
herself that she might feed the prophet. He who had come to be fed then
turned feeder, for, by a miracle, he filled the empty barrel. <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) The apostle Peter says: “Silver and
gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee. In the name of Jesus
Christ rise up and walk.” <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) But
now many, while they do not say it in words, by their deeds declare:
“Faith and pity have I none; but such as I have, silver and gold, these
I will not give thee.” “Having food and raiment let us be therewith
content.” <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) Hear the prayer of
Jacob: “If God will be with me and will keep me in this way that I go,
and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, then shall the Lord
be my God.” <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) He prayed only for
things necessary; yet, twenty years afterwards, he returned to the land
of Canaan rich in substance and richer still in children. <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) Numberless are the instances in
Scripture which teach men to “Beware of covetousness.” <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602)

<span id="v.XXII-p317"></span>33. As I have been led to touch to the
subject—it shall have a treatise to itself if Christ permit—I will
relate what took place not very many years ago at Nitria. A brother,
more thrifty than covetous, and ignorant that the Lord had been sold for
thirty pieces of silver, <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) left
behind him at his death a hundred pieces of money which he had earned by
weaving linen. As there were about five thousand monks in the
neighborhood, living in as many separate cells, a council was held as to
what should be done. Some said that the coins should be distributed
among the poor; others that they should be given to the church, while
others were for sending them back to the relatives of the deceased.
However, Macarius, Pambo, Isidore and the rest of those called fathers,
speaking by the Spirit, decided that they should be interred with their
owner, with the words: “Thy money perish with thee.” <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) Nor was this too harsh a decision; for
so great fear has fallen upon all throughout Egypt, that it is now a
crime to leave after one a single shilling.

<span id="v.XXII-p320"></span>34. As I have mentioned the monks, and
know that you like to hear about holy things, lend an ear to me for a
few moments. There are in Egypt three classes of monks. First, there are
the cœnobites, <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) called in their
Gentile language Sauses, <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) or, as
we should say, men living in a community. <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) Secondly, there are the
anchorites, <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) who live in the
desert, each man by himself, and are so called because they have
withdrawn from human society. Thirdly, there is the class called
Remoboth, <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) a very inferior and
little regarded type, peculiar to my own province, <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) or, at least, originating there. These
live together in twos and threes, but seldom in larger numbers, and are
bound by no rule; but do exactly as they choose. A portion of their
earnings they contribute to a common fund, out of which food is provided
for all. In most cases they reside in cities and strongholds; and, as
though it were their workmanship which is holy, and not their life, all
that they sell is extremely dear. They often quarrel because they are
unwilling, while supplying their own food, to be subordinate to others.
It is true that they compete with each other in fasting; they make what
should be a private concern an occasion for a triumph. In everything
they study effect: their sleeves are loose, their boots bulge, their
garb is of the coarsest. They are always sighing, or visiting virgins,
or sneering at the clergy; yet when a holiday comes, they make
themselves sick—they eat so much.

<span id="v.XXII-p327"></span>35. Having then rid ourselves of these as
of so many plagues, let us come to that more numerous class who live
together, and who are, as we have said, called Cœnobites. Among these
the first principle of union is to obey superiors and to do whatever
they command. They are divided into bodies of ten and of a hundred, so
that each tenth man has authority over nine others, while the hundredth
has ten of these officers under him. They live apart from each other, in
separate cells. According to their rule, no monk may visit another
before the ninth hour; <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) except
the deans <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) above mentioned, whose
office is to comfort, with soothing words, those whose thoughts disquiet
them. After the ninth hour they meet together to sing psalms and read
the Scriptures according to usage. Then when the prayers have ended and
all have sat down, one called the <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_38"></span>father stands up among them and begins to
expound the portion of the day. While he is speaking the silence is
profound; no man ventures to look at his neighbor or to clear his
throat. The speaker’s praise is in the weeping of his hearers. <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) Silent tears roll down their cheeks,
but not a sob escapes from their lips. Yet when he begins to speak of
Christ’s kingdom, and of future bliss, and of the glory which is to
come, every one may be noticed saying to himself, with a gentle sigh and
uplifted eyes: “Oh, that I had wings like a dove! For then would I fly
away and be at rest.” <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) After this
the meeting breaks up and each company of ten goes with its father to
its own table. This they take in turns to serve each for a week at a
time. No noise is made over the food; no one talks while eating. Bread,
pulse and greens form their fare, and the only seasoning that they use
is salt. Wine is given only to the old, who with the children often have
a special meal prepared for them to repair the ravages of age and to
save the young from premature decay. When the meal is over they all rise
together, and, after singing a hymn, return to their dwellings. There
each one talks till evening with his comrade thus: “Have you noticed
so-and-so? What grace he has! How silent he is! How soberly he walks!”
If any one is weak they comfort him; or if he is fervent in love to God,
they encourage him to fresh earnestness. And because at night, besides
the public prayers, each man keeps vigil in his own chamber, they go
round all the cells one by one, and putting their ears to the doors,
carefully ascertain what their occupants are doing. If they find a monk
slothful, they do not scold him; but, dissembling what they know, they
visit him more frequently, and at first exhort rather than compel him to
pray more. Each day has its allotted task, and this being given in to
the dean, is by him brought to the steward. This latter, once a month,
gives a scrupulous account to their common father. He also tastes the
dishes when they are cooked, and, as no one is allowed to say, “I am
without a tunic or a cloak or a couch of rushes,” he so arranges that no
one need ask for or go without what he wants. In case a monk falls ill,
he is moved to a more spacious chamber, and there so attentively nursed
by the old men, that he misses neither the luxury of cities nor a
mother’s kindness. Every Lord’s day they spend their whole time in
prayer and reading; indeed, when they have finished their tasks, these
are their usual occupations. Every day they learn by heart a portion of
Scripture. They keep the same fasts all the year round, but in Lent they
are allowed to live more strictly. After Whitsuntide they exchange their
evening meal for a midday one; both to satisfy the tradition of the
church and to avoid overloading their stomachs with a double supply of
food.

<span id="v.XXII-p332"></span>A similar description is given of the
Essenes by Philo, <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) Plato’s
imitator; also by Josephus, <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) the
Greek Livy, in his narrative of the Jewish captivity.

<span id="v.XXII-p335"></span>36. As my present subject is virgins, I
have said rather too much about monks. I will pass on, therefore, to the
third class, called anchorites, who go from the monasteries into the
deserts, with nothing but bread and salt. Paul <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) introduced this way of life; Antony
made it famous, and—to go farther back still—John the Baptist set the
first example of it. The prophet Jeremiah describes one such in the
words: “It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. He
sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him. He
giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him, he is filled full with
reproach. For the Lord will not cast off forever.” <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) The struggle of the anchorites and
their life—in the flesh, yet not of the flesh—I will, if you wish,
explain to you at some other time. I must now return to the subject of
covetousness, which I left to speak of the monks. With them before your
eyes you will despise, not only gold and silver in general, but earth
itself and heaven. United to Christ, you will sing, “The Lord is my
portion.” <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)

<span id="v.XXII-p339"></span>37. Farther, although the apostle bids us
to “pray without ceasing,” <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) and
although to the saints their very sleep is a supplication, we ought to
have fixed hours of prayer, that if we are detained by work, the time
may remind us of our duty. Prayers, as every one knows, ought to be said
at the third, sixth and ninth hours, at dawn and at evening. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) No meal should be begun without
prayer, and before leaving table thanks should be returned to the
Creator. We should rise two or three times in the night, and go over the
parts of Scripture which we know by heart. When we leave the roof which
shelters us, prayer should be our armor; and <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_39"></span>when we return from the
street we should pray before we sit down, and not give the frail body
rest until the soul is fed. In every act we do, in every step we take,
let our hand trace the Lord’s cross. Speak against nobody, and do not
slander your mother’s son. <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) “Who
art thou that judgest the servant of another? To his own lord he
standeth or falleth; yea, he shall be made to stand, for the Lord hath
power to make him stand.” <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) If you
have fasted two or three days, do not think yourself better than others
who do not fast. You fast and are angry; another eats and wears a
smiling face. You work off your irritation and hunger in quarrels. He
uses food in moderation and gives God thanks. <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) Daily Isaiah cries: “Is it such a fast
that I have chosen, saith the Lord?” <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) and again: “In the day of your fast ye
find your own pleasure, and oppress all your laborers. Behold ye fast
for strife and contention, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. How
fast ye unto me?” <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) What kind of
fast can his be whose wrath is such that not only does the night go down
upon it, but that even the moon’s changes leave it unchanged?

<span id="v.XXII-p347"></span>38. Look to yourself and glory in your own
success and not in others’ failure. Some women care for the flesh and
reckon up their income and daily expenditure: such are no fit models for
you. Judas was a traitor, but the eleven apostles did not waver.
Phygellus and Alexander made shipwreck; but the rest continued to run
the race of faith. <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) Say not:
“So-and-so enjoys her own property, she is honored of men, her brothers
and sisters come to see her. Has she then ceased to be a virgin?” In the
first place, it is doubtful if she is a virgin. For “the Lord seeth not
as man seeth; for man looketh upon the outward appearance, but the Lord
looketh on the heart.” <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) Again,
she may be a virgin in body and not in spirit. According to the apostle,
a true virgin is “holy both in body and in spirit.” <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) Lastly, let her glory in her own way.
Let her override Paul’s opinion and live in the enjoyment of her good
things. But you and I must follow better examples.

<span id="v.XXII-p351"></span>Set before you the blessed Mary, whose
surpassing purity made her meet to be the mother of the Lord. When the
angel Gabriel came down to her, in the form of a man, and said: “Hail,
thou that art highly favored; the Lord is with thee,” <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) she was terror-stricken and unable to
reply, for she had never been saluted by a man before. But, on learning
who he was, she spoke, and one who had been afraid of a man conversed
fearlessly with an angel. Now you, too, may be the Lord’s mother. “Take
thee a great roll and write in it with a man’s pen
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.” <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) And when
you have gone to the prophetess, and have conceived in the womb, and
have brought forth a son, <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) say:
“Lord, we have been with child by thy fear, we have been in pain, we
have brought forth the spirit of thy salvation, which we have wrought
upon the earth.” <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) Then shall your
Son reply: “Behold my mother and my brethren.” <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) And He whose name you have so recently
inscribed upon the table of your heart, and have written with a pen upon
its renewed surface <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) —He, after
He has recovered the spoil from the enemy, and has spoiled
principalities and powers, nailing them to His cross <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) —having been miraculously conceived,
grows up to manhood; and, as He becomes older, regards you no longer as
His mother, but as His bride. To be as the martyrs, or as the apostles,
or as Christ, involves a hard struggle, but brings with it a great
reward.

<span id="v.XXII-p359"></span>All such efforts are only of use when they
are made within the church’s pale; <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) we must celebrate the passover in the
one house, <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) we must enter the ark
with Noah, <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) we must take refuge
from the fall of Jericho with the justified harlot, Rahab. <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) Such virgins as there are said to be
among the heretics and among the followers of the infamous Manes <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) must be considered, not virgins, but
prostitutes. For if—as they allege—the devil is the author of the body,
how can they honor that which is fashioned by their foe? No; it is
because they know that the name virgin brings glory with it, that they
go about as wolves in sheep’s clothing. <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) As antichrist pretends to be Christ,
such virgins assume an honorable name, that they may the better cloak a
discreditable life. Rejoice, my sister; rejoice, my daughter; rejoice,
my virgin; for you have resolved to be, in reality, that which others
insincerely feign.

<span id="v.XXII-p366"></span><span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_40"></span>39. The things that I have here set forth
will seem hard to her who loves not Christ. But one who has come to
regard all the splendor of the world as off-scourings, and to hold all
things under the sun as vain, that he may win Christ; <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) one who has died with his Lord and
risen again, and has crucified the flesh with its affections and
lusts; <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) he will boldly cry out:
“Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?”
and again: “I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord.” <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645)

<span id="v.XXII-p370"></span>For our salvation the Son of God is made
the Son of Man. <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) Nine months He
awaits His birth in the womb, undergoes the most revolting
conditions, <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) and comes forth
covered with blood, to be swathed in rags and covered with caresses. He
who shuts up the world in His fist <span
id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648) is contained in the narrow limits of a
manger. I say nothing of the thirty years during which he lives in
obscurity, satisfied with the poverty of his parents. <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649) When He is scourged He holds His
peace; when He is crucified, He prays for His crucifiers. “What shall I
render unto the Lord for all His benefits towards me? I will take the
cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.” <span
id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) The only fitting return that we can
make to Him is to give blood for blood; and, as we are redeemed by the
blood of Christ, gladly to lay down our lives for our Redeemer. What
saint has ever won his crown without first contending for it? Righteous
Abel is murdered. Abraham is in danger of losing his wife. And, as I
must not enlarge my book unduly, seek for yourself: you will find that
all holy men have suffered adversity. Solomon alone lived in luxury and
perhaps it was for this reason that he fell. For “whom the Lord loveth,
He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651) Which is best—for a short time to do
battle, to carry stakes for the palisades, to bear arms, to faint under
heavy bucklers, that ever afterwards we may rejoice as victors? or to
become slaves forever, just because we cannot endure for a single
hour? <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652)

<span id="v.XXII-p378"></span>40. Love finds nothing hard; no task is
difficult to the eager. Think of all that Jacob bore for Rachel, the
wife who had been promised to him. “Jacob,” the Scripture says, “served
seven years for Rachel. And they seemed unto him but a few days for the
love he had to her.” <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) Afterwards
he himself tells us what he had to undergo. “In the day the drought
consumed me and the frost by night.” <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) So we must love Christ and always seek
His embraces. Then everything difficult will seem easy; all things long
we shall account short; and smitten with His arrows, <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) we shall say every moment: “Woe is me
that I have prolonged my pilgrimage.” <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) For “the sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us.” <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) For
“tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope; and hope maketh not ashamed.” <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) When your lot seems hard to bear read
Paul’s second epistle to the Corinthians: “In labors more abundant; in
stripes above measure; in prisons more frequent; in deaths oft. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one; thrice was I beaten
with rods; once was I stoned; thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and a
day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters,
in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the
heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils
in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in weariness and
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings
often, in cold and nakedness.” <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659)
Which of us can claim the veriest fraction of the virtues here
enumerated? Yet it was these which afterwards made him bold to say: “I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid
up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day.” <span id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660)

<span id="v.XXII-p387"></span>But we, if our food is less appetizing
than usual, get sullen, and fancy that we do God a favor by drinking
watered wine. And if the water brought to us is a trifle too warm, we
break the cup and overturn the table and scourge the servant in fault
until blood comes. “The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and the
violent take it by force.” <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661)
Still, unless you use force you will never seize the kingdom of heaven.
Unless you knock importunately you will never receive the sacramental
bread. <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) Is it not truly violence,
<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_41"></span>think
you, when the flesh desires to be as God and ascends to the place whence
angels have fallen <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) to judge
angels?

<span id="v.XXII-p391"></span>41. Emerge, I pray you, for a while from
your prison-house, and paint before your eyes the reward of your present
toil, a reward which “eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it
entered into the heart of man.” <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664)
What will be the glory of that day when Mary, the mother of the Lord,
shall come to meet you, accompanied by her virgin choirs! When, the Red
Sea past and Pharaoh drowned with his host, Miriam, Aaron’s sister, her
timbrel in her hand, shall chant to the answering women: “Sing ye unto
the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath
he thrown into the sea.” <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) Then
shall Thecla <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) fly with joy to
embrace you. Then shall your Spouse himself come forward and say: “Rise
up, my love, my fair one, and come away, for lo! the winter is past, the
rain is over and gone.” <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) Then
shall the angels say with wonder: “Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun?” <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) “The daughters shall see you and bless
you; yea, the queens shall proclaim and the concubines shall praise
you.” <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) And, after these, yet
another company of chaste women will meet you. Sarah will come with the
wedded; Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, with the widows. In the one band
you will find your natural mother and in the other your spiritual. <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) The one will rejoice in having borne,
the other will exult in having taught you. Then truly will the Lord ride
upon his ass, <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) and thus enter the
heavenly Jerusalem. Then the little ones (of whom, in Isaiah, the
Saviour says: “Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given
me” <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) ) shall lift up palms of
victory and shall sing with one voice: “Hosanna in the highest, blessed
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, hosanna in the
highest.” <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) Then shall the
“hundred and forty and four thousand” hold their harps before the throne
and before the elders and shall sing the new song. And no man shall have
power to learn that song save those for whom it is appointed. “These are
they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are
they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.” <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) As often as this life’s idle show
tries to charm you; as often as you see in the world some vain pomp,
transport yourself in mind to Paradise, essay to be now what you will be
hereafter, and you will hear your Spouse say: “Set me as a sunshade in
thine heart and as a seal upon thine arm.” <span
id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) And then, strengthened in body as well
as in mind, you, too, will cry aloud and say: “Many waters cannot quench
love, neither can the floods drown it.” <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[22:331](2060033.htm#fr_330) <span
id="v.XXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p4"></span> [Ps.
45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[22:332](2060033.htm#fr_331) <span
id="v.XXII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p5"></span> According to the Vulgate.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[22:333](2060033.htm#fr_332) <span
id="v.XXII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p6"></span> [Gen.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031), [Gen.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[22:334](2060033.htm#fr_333) <span
id="v.XXII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p7"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[22:335](2060033.htm#fr_334) <span
id="v.XXII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p8"></span> [Gen. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[22:336](2060033.htm#fr_335) <span
id="v.XXII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p9"></span> [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="v.XXII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[22:337](2060033.htm#fr_336) <span
id="v.XXII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p10"></span> [Matt.
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[22:338](2060033.htm#fr_337) <span
id="v.XXII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p11"></span> [Joh. viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="v.XXII-p11.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[22:339](2060033.htm#fr_338) <span
id="v.XXII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p12"></span> [1 Joh. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[22:340](2060033.htm#fr_339) <span
id="v.XXII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p13"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[23:341](2060033.htm#fr_340) <span
id="v.XXII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p14"></span> [Eph.
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="v.XXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[23:342](2060033.htm#fr_341) <span
id="v.XXII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p15"></span> [Nu. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[23:343](2060033.htm#fr_342) <span
id="v.XXII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p16"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[23:344](2060033.htm#fr_343) <span
id="v.XXII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p17"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p17.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[23:345](2060033.htm#fr_344) <span
id="v.XXII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p19"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[23:346](2060033.htm#fr_345) <span
id="v.XXII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p20"></span> [Gen. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[23:347](2060033.htm#fr_346) <span
id="v.XXII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p22"></span> [Rom. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[23:348](2060033.htm#fr_347) <span
id="v.XXII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p23"></span> [Isa. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p23.1"></span>, R.V.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[23:349](2060033.htm#fr_348) <span
id="v.XXII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p24"></span> [Gen.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[23:350](2060033.htm#fr_349) <span
id="v.XXII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p25"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p25.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[23:351](2060033.htm#fr_350) <span
id="v.XXII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p26"></span> [Joh. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="v.XXII-p26.1"></span>. The
variant is difficult to explain and may be only a slip.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[23:352](2060033.htm#fr_351) <span
id="v.XXII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p27"></span> [Ps. xci.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p27.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[23:353](2060033.htm#fr_352) <span
id="v.XXII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p28"></span> [2 Kings vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[23:354](2060033.htm#fr_353) <span
id="v.XXII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p29"></span> [2 Kings
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011), [2 Kings
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[23:355](2060033.htm#fr_354) <span
id="v.XXII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p30"></span> [Ps. cxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[23:356](2060033.htm#fr_355) <span
id="v.XXII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p32"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[23:357](2060033.htm#fr_356) <span
id="v.XXII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p33"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[23:358](2060033.htm#fr_357) <span
id="v.XXII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p34"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[23:359](2060033.htm#fr_358) <span
id="v.XXII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p35"></span> [Ps.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[23:360](2060033.htm#fr_359) <span
id="v.XXII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p36"></span> [Jer. xxix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022)<span id="v.XXII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[23:361](2060033.htm#fr_360) <span
id="v.XXII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p37"></span> An allusion to “Maher-shalal-hash-baz,”
[Isa. viii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)<span
id="v.XXII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[23:362](2060033.htm#fr_361) <span
id="v.XXII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p38"></span> [Hab. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p38.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[23:363](2060033.htm#fr_362) <span
id="v.XXII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p39"></span> [Luke xxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)<span id="v.XXII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[23:364](2060033.htm#fr_363) <span
id="v.XXII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p40"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="v.XXII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[23:365](2060033.htm#fr_364) <span
id="v.XXII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p41"></span> [Isa. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[23:366](2060033.htm#fr_365) <span
id="v.XXII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p42"></span> [Obad.
4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[23:367](2060033.htm#fr_366) <span
id="v.XXII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p43"></span> [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[24:368](2060033.htm#fr_367) <span
id="v.XXII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p44"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[24:369](2060033.htm#fr_368) <span
id="v.XXII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p45"></span> [Ps.
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[24:370](2060033.htm#fr_369) <span
id="v.XXII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p46"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[24:371](2060033.htm#fr_370) <span
id="v.XXII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p47"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[24:372](2060033.htm#fr_371) <span
id="v.XXII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p49"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[24:373](2060033.htm#fr_372) <span
id="v.XXII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p50"></span> [Gal. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[24:374](2060033.htm#fr_373) <span
id="v.XXII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p51"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="v.XXII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[24:375](2060033.htm#fr_374) <span
id="v.XXII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p52"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[24:376](2060033.htm#fr_375) <span
id="v.XXII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p53"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[24:377](2060033.htm#fr_376) <span
id="v.XXII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p54"></span> [Am. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[24:378](2060033.htm#fr_377) <span
id="v.XXII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p55"></span> [Am. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[24:379](2060033.htm#fr_378) <span
id="v.XXII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p56"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="v.XXII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[24:380](2060033.htm#fr_379) <span
id="v.XXII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p57"></span> [Matt.
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#003),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[24:381](2060033.htm#fr_380) <span
id="v.XXII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p59"></span> [Isa. xlvii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[24:382](2060033.htm#fr_381) <span
id="v.XXII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p60"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p60.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[24:383](2060033.htm#fr_382) <span
id="v.XXII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p61"></span> [Ps. xlv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p61.1"></span>,
P.B.V.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[24:384](2060033.htm#fr_383) <span
id="v.XXII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p62"></span> [Jer. xiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[24:385](2060033.htm#fr_384) <span
id="v.XXII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p63"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[24:386](2060033.htm#fr_385) <span
id="v.XXII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p64"></span> [Isa. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[24:387](2060033.htm#fr_386) <span
id="v.XXII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p65"></span> [Isa.
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#015), [Isa.
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022)<span id="v.XXII-p65.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[24:388](2060033.htm#fr_387) <span
id="v.XXII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p66"></span> [Ps.
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006), [Ps.
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[24:389](2060033.htm#fr_388) <span
id="v.XXII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p67"></span> [Ps. xlii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[24:390](2060033.htm#fr_389) <span
id="v.XXII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p68"></span> [Ps. cxxxvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[24:391](2060033.htm#fr_390) <span
id="v.XXII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p69"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[25:392](2060033.htm#fr_391) <span
id="v.XXII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p71"></span> [Cant.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[25:393](2060033.htm#fr_392) <span
id="v.XXII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p73"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[25:394](2060033.htm#fr_393) <span
id="v.XXII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p74"></span> [1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[25:395](2060033.htm#fr_394) <span
id="v.XXII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p75"></span> [Eph. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[25:396](2060033.htm#fr_395) <span
id="v.XXII-p75.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p76"></span> [Rom. xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[25:397](2060033.htm#fr_396) <span
id="v.XXII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p77"></span> [Gen.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[25:398](2060033.htm#fr_397) <span
id="v.XXII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p78"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[25:399](2060033.htm#fr_398) <span
id="v.XXII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p79"></span> [Gen. xix.
30-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#030)<span id="v.XXII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[25:400](2060033.htm#fr_399) <span
id="v.XXII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p80"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p80.1"></span>:
Jerome substitutes “fourteenth” for “tenth.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[26:401](2060033.htm#fr_400) <span
id="v.XXII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p82"></span> [1 Kings xix.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[26:402](2060033.htm#fr_401) <span
id="v.XXII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p83"></span> [2 Kings iv.
38-41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038)<span id="v.XXII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[26:403](2060033.htm#fr_402) <span
id="v.XXII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p84"></span> [Exod. xv.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[26:404](2060033.htm#fr_403) <span
id="v.XXII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p85"></span> [2 Kings vi.
18-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[26:405](2060033.htm#fr_404) <span
id="v.XXII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p86"></span> [Dan. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[26:406](2060033.htm#fr_405) <span
id="v.XXII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p87"></span> [Bel.
33-39](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[26:407](2060033.htm#fr_406) <span
id="v.XXII-p87.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p88"></span> [Dan. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p88.1"></span>,
A.V. marg.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[26:408](2060033.htm#fr_407) <span
id="v.XXII-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p90"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p90.1"></span>, R.V.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[26:409](2060033.htm#fr_408) <span
id="v.XXII-p90.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p91"></span> [Matt.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[26:410](2060033.htm#fr_409) <span
id="v.XXII-p91.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p92"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[26:411](2060033.htm#fr_410) <span
id="v.XXII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p93"></span> [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="v.XXII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[26:412](2060033.htm#fr_411) <span
id="v.XXII-p94.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p95"></span> [Job ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[26:413](2060033.htm#fr_412) <span
id="v.XXII-p95.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p96"></span> [Job xl.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p96.1"></span>, of
behemoth.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[26:414](2060033.htm#fr_413) <span
id="v.XXII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p98"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[26:415](2060033.htm#fr_414) <span
id="v.XXII-p98.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p99"></span> [Gen. xlvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[26:416](2060033.htm#fr_415) <span
id="v.XXII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p100"></span> [Gen.
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[26:417](2060033.htm#fr_416) <span
id="v.XXII-p100.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p101"></span> [Exod. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[26:418](2060033.htm#fr_417) <span
id="v.XXII-p101.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p102"></span> [Job xxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[26:419](2060033.htm#fr_418) <span
id="v.XXII-p102.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p103"></span> [Matt. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[26:420](2060033.htm#fr_419) <span
id="v.XXII-p103.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p104"></span> [Luke xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span id="v.XXII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[26:421](2060033.htm#fr_420) <span
id="v.XXII-p104.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p105"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[26:422](2060033.htm#fr_421) <span
id="v.XXII-p106.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p107"></span> [2 Sam.
xi](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#000)<span id="v.XXII-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[26:423](2060033.htm#fr_422) <span
id="v.XXII-p107.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p108"></span> [Ps. li.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[26:424](2060033.htm#fr_423) <span
id="v.XXII-p108.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p109"></span> Solomon was the reputed author of the
Book of Wisdom.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[26:425](2060033.htm#fr_424) <span
id="v.XXII-p109.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p110"></span> [1 Kings iv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[26:426](2060033.htm#fr_425) <span
id="v.XXII-p110.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p111"></span> [1 Kings xi.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[27:427](2060033.htm#fr_426) <span
id="v.XXII-p111.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p112"></span> [2 Sam.
xiii](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#000)<span id="v.XXII-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[27:428](2060033.htm#fr_427) <span
id="v.XXII-p113.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p114"></span> [Isa. xiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[27:429](2060033.htm#fr_428) <span
id="v.XXII-p114.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p115"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[27:430](2060033.htm#fr_429) <span
id="v.XXII-p115.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p116"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[27:431](2060033.htm#fr_430) <span
id="v.XXII-p116.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p117"></span> The Manichæans believed evil to be
inseparable from matter. Hence they inculcated a rigid asceticism.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[27:432](2060033.htm#fr_431) <span
id="v.XXII-p117.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p118"></span> [Jer. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[27:433](2060033.htm#fr_432) <span
id="v.XXII-p118.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p119"></span> Plebeians wore a narrow stripe,
patricians a broad one.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[27:434](2060033.htm#fr_433) <span
id="v.XXII-p120.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p121"></span> Beloved ones, viz., women who lived with
the unmarried clergy professedly as spiritual sisters, but really (in
too many cases) as mistresses. The evil custom was widely prevalent and
called forth many protests. The councils of Elvira, Ancyra, and Nicæa
passed canons against it.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[27:435](2060033.htm#fr_434) <span
id="v.XXII-p121.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p122"></span> [Prov.
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#028)<span id="v.XXII-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[27:436](2060033.htm#fr_435) <span
id="v.XXII-p123.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p124"></span> [Matt. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[28:437](2060033.htm#fr_436) <span
id="v.XXII-p125.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p126"></span> Cena dubia. The allusion is to Terence,
Phormio, 342.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[28:438](2060033.htm#fr_437) <span
id="v.XXII-p127.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p128"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p128.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[28:439](2060033.htm#fr_438) <span
id="v.XXII-p128.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p129"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[28:440](2060033.htm#fr_439) <span
id="v.XXII-p129.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p130"></span> [Luke ii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)<span id="v.XXII-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[28:441](2060033.htm#fr_440) <span
id="v.XXII-p130.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p131"></span> [Eph. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[28:442](2060033.htm#fr_441) <span
id="v.XXII-p131.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p132"></span> [Hos.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p132.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[28:443](2060033.htm#fr_442) <span
id="v.XXII-p132.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p133"></span> [Luke xxiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032)<span id="v.XXII-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[28:444](2060033.htm#fr_443) <span
id="v.XXII-p133.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p134"></span> [Ps. cxix.
140](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#140)<span id="v.XXII-p134.1"></span>,
P.B.V.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[28:445](2060033.htm#fr_444) <span
id="v.XXII-p134.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p135"></span> [Song of Sol.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[28:446](2060033.htm#fr_445) <span
id="v.XXII-p135.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p136"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[28:447](2060033.htm#fr_446) <span
id="v.XXII-p136.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p137"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[28:448](2060033.htm#fr_447) <span
id="v.XXII-p137.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p138"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p138.1"></span>,
Vulg. That is, who knows that the world is vanity.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[28:449](2060033.htm#fr_448) <span
id="v.XXII-p138.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p139"></span> [Ps. cxix.
83](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#083)<span id="v.XXII-p139.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[28:450](2060033.htm#fr_449) <span
id="v.XXII-p139.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p140"></span> [Ps.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#024), [Ps.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[28:451](2060033.htm#fr_450) <span
id="v.XXII-p141.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p142"></span> [Ps. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p142.1"></span>,
P.B.V.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[28:452](2060033.htm#fr_451) <span
id="v.XXII-p142.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p143"></span> [Ps. cii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[28:453](2060033.htm#fr_452) <span
id="v.XXII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p144"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[29:454](2060033.htm#fr_453) <span
id="v.XXII-p144.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p145"></span> [Ps. ciii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[29:455](2060033.htm#fr_454) <span
id="v.XXII-p145.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p146"></span> [Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[29:456](2060033.htm#fr_455) <span
id="v.XXII-p146.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p147"></span> [2 Kings ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[29:457](2060033.htm#fr_456) <span
id="v.XXII-p147.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p148"></span> [Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[29:458](2060033.htm#fr_457) <span
id="v.XXII-p148.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p149"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[29:459](2060033.htm#fr_458) <span
id="v.XXII-p150.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p151"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="v.XXII-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[29:460](2060033.htm#fr_459) <span
id="v.XXII-p151.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p152"></span> [Gen.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="v.XXII-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[29:461](2060033.htm#fr_460) <span
id="v.XXII-p152.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p153"></span> See Letter XLVIII. §§ 2, 3.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[29:462](2060033.htm#fr_461) <span
id="v.XXII-p154.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p155"></span> [Matt.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[29:463](2060033.htm#fr_462) <span
id="v.XXII-p155.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p156"></span> [Eccles. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[29:464](2060033.htm#fr_463) <span
id="v.XXII-p156.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p157"></span> [Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[29:465](2060033.htm#fr_464) <span
id="v.XXII-p157.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p158"></span> [Zech. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p158.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[29:466](2060033.htm#fr_465) <span
id="v.XXII-p158.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p159"></span> [Joh. xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[29:467](2060033.htm#fr_466) <span
id="v.XXII-p159.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p160"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[29:468](2060033.htm#fr_467) <span
id="v.XXII-p160.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p161"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p161.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[29:469](2060033.htm#fr_468) <span
id="v.XXII-p161.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p162"></span> In the Latin there is a play on words
here between virga and virgo.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[29:470](2060033.htm#fr_469) <span
id="v.XXII-p162.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p163"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[29:471](2060033.htm#fr_470) <span
id="v.XXII-p163.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p164"></span> [Dan. ii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)<span id="v.XXII-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[29:472](2060033.htm#fr_471) <span
id="v.XXII-p164.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p165"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[29:473](2060033.htm#fr_472) <span
id="v.XXII-p165.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p166"></span> [Gen. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[29:474](2060033.htm#fr_473) <span
id="v.XXII-p166.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p167"></span> [Exod.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005), [Josh.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[29:475](2060033.htm#fr_474) <span
id="v.XXII-p167.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p168"></span> [Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p168.1"></span>.
According to Letter XXIII. § 4, these typify dead works.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[29:476](2060033.htm#fr_475) <span
id="v.XXII-p168.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p169"></span> [John
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[30:477](2060033.htm#fr_476) <span
id="v.XXII-p170.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p171"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[30:478](2060033.htm#fr_477) <span
id="v.XXII-p171.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p172"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[30:479](2060033.htm#fr_478) <span
id="v.XXII-p172.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p173"></span> [1 Cor.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[30:480](2060033.htm#fr_479) <span
id="v.XXII-p173.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p174"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[30:481](2060033.htm#fr_480) <span
id="v.XXII-p175.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p176"></span> [Isa. xxxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p176.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[30:482](2060033.htm#fr_481) <span
id="v.XXII-p176.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p177"></span> [Isa. liv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p177.1"></span>,
LXX. (?)

<span id="fn_482"></span>[30:483](2060033.htm#fr_482) <span
id="v.XXII-p177.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p178"></span> [Ps. cxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[30:484](2060033.htm#fr_483) <span
id="v.XXII-p178.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p179"></span> [Ps. cv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#037)<span id="v.XXII-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[30:485](2060033.htm#fr_484) <span
id="v.XXII-p179.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p180"></span> [Isa. lvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[30:486](2060033.htm#fr_485) <span
id="v.XXII-p180.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p181"></span> Cf. [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span id="v.XXII-p181.1"></span>
*sqq.*

<span id="fn_486"></span>[30:487](2060033.htm#fr_486) <span
id="v.XXII-p181.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p182"></span> [Gen. xxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[30:488](2060033.htm#fr_487) <span
id="v.XXII-p182.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p183"></span> [Gen. xxx.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[30:489](2060033.htm#fr_488) <span
id="v.XXII-p183.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p184"></span> [Gen.
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[30:490](2060033.htm#fr_489) <span
id="v.XXII-p184.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p185"></span> [Jer. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[30:491](2060033.htm#fr_490) <span
id="v.XXII-p185.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p186"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[30:492](2060033.htm#fr_491) <span
id="v.XXII-p186.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p187"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p187.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[30:493](2060033.htm#fr_492) <span
id="v.XXII-p187.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p188"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span id="v.XXII-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[30:494](2060033.htm#fr_493) <span
id="v.XXII-p188.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p189"></span> [Lam. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[30:495](2060033.htm#fr_494) <span
id="v.XXII-p189.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p190"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[30:496](2060033.htm#fr_495) <span
id="v.XXII-p190.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p191"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[30:497](2060033.htm#fr_496) <span
id="v.XXII-p191.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p192"></span> [Judith
xiii](../../../bib/apo/jdt013.htm#000)<span id="v.XXII-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[31:498](2060033.htm#fr_497) <span
id="v.XXII-p192.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p193"></span> [Esther vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[31:499](2060033.htm#fr_498) <span
id="v.XXII-p193.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p194"></span> [Mark viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034)<span id="v.XXII-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[31:500](2060033.htm#fr_499) <span
id="v.XXII-p194.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p195"></span> [Matt. viii.
20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[31:501](2060033.htm#fr_500) <span
id="v.XXII-p195.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p196"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
32-34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span id="v.XXII-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[31:502](2060033.htm#fr_501) <span
id="v.XXII-p197.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p198"></span> See the treatise “Against Helvidius,” in
this volume.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[31:503](2060033.htm#fr_502) <span
id="v.XXII-p198.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p199"></span> [1 Thess. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[31:504](2060033.htm#fr_503) <span
id="v.XXII-p199.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p200"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p200.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[31:505](2060033.htm#fr_504) <span
id="v.XXII-p200.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p201"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)<span id="v.XXII-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[31:506](2060033.htm#fr_505) <span
id="v.XXII-p201.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p202"></span> Not extant. Jerome alludes to it again in
his treatise against Jovinian.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[31:507](2060033.htm#fr_506) <span
id="v.XXII-p202.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p203"></span> See Migne’s “Patrologia,” xiii., col.
347–418.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[31:508](2060033.htm#fr_507) <span
id="v.XXII-p203.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p204"></span> Ambrose de Virg. Migne’s “Patrologia,”
xvi., col. 187.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[31:509](2060033.htm#fr_508) <span
id="v.XXII-p205.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p206"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[31:510](2060033.htm#fr_509) <span
id="v.XXII-p206.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p207"></span> [Matt.
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016), [Matt.
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[31:511](2060033.htm#fr_510) <span
id="v.XXII-p207.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p208"></span> [2 Sam.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[31:512](2060033.htm#fr_511) <span
id="v.XXII-p208.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p209"></span> [2 Kings
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[31:513](2060033.htm#fr_512) <span
id="v.XXII-p209.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p210"></span> [Dan. v.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[32:514](2060033.htm#fr_513) <span
id="v.XXII-p212.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p213"></span> [Ex. xxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[32:515](2060033.htm#fr_514) <span
id="v.XXII-p213.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p214"></span> [1 Kings viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[32:516](2060033.htm#fr_515) <span
id="v.XXII-p214.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p215"></span> [Ex. xxv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)<span id="v.XXII-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[32:517](2060033.htm#fr_516) <span
id="v.XXII-p215.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p216"></span> [Matt. xxi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[32:518](2060033.htm#fr_517) <span
id="v.XXII-p216.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p217"></span> [Ex. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[32:519](2060033.htm#fr_518) <span
id="v.XXII-p217.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p218"></span> [Matt.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p218.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[32:520](2060033.htm#fr_519) <span
id="v.XXII-p218.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p219"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span id="v.XXII-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[32:521](2060033.htm#fr_520) <span
id="v.XXII-p219.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p220"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)<span id="v.XXII-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[32:522](2060033.htm#fr_521) <span
id="v.XXII-p220.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p221"></span> R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[32:523](2060033.htm#fr_522) <span
id="v.XXII-p221.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p222"></span> [Luke
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)<span id="v.XXII-p222.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[32:524](2060033.htm#fr_523) <span
id="v.XXII-p222.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p223"></span> [Song of Sol.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[32:525](2060033.htm#fr_524) <span
id="v.XXII-p223.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p224"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[32:526](2060033.htm#fr_525) <span
id="v.XXII-p224.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p225"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[32:527](2060033.htm#fr_526) <span
id="v.XXII-p226.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p227"></span> Cf. [Gen. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[32:528](2060033.htm#fr_527) <span
id="v.XXII-p227.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p228"></span> R.V.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[32:529](2060033.htm#fr_528) <span
id="v.XXII-p228.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p229"></span> [Cant.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[32:530](2060033.htm#fr_529) <span
id="v.XXII-p229.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p230"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[32:531](2060033.htm#fr_530) <span
id="v.XXII-p231.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p232"></span> [Gen.
xxxiv](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#000)<span id="v.XXII-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[32:532](2060033.htm#fr_531) <span
id="v.XXII-p232.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p233"></span> [Cant.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[32:533](2060033.htm#fr_532) <span
id="v.XXII-p233.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p234"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[32:534](2060033.htm#fr_533) <span
id="v.XXII-p234.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p235"></span> [Cant.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002), [Cant.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[32:535](2060033.htm#fr_534) <span
id="v.XXII-p235.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p236"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[32:536](2060033.htm#fr_535) <span
id="v.XXII-p236.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p237"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[32:537](2060033.htm#fr_536) <span
id="v.XXII-p237.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p238"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[33:538](2060033.htm#fr_537) <span
id="v.XXII-p238.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p239"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p239.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[33:539](2060033.htm#fr_538) <span
id="v.XXII-p239.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p240"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p240.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[33:540](2060033.htm#fr_539) <span
id="v.XXII-p240.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p241"></span> [Prov. iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[33:541](2060033.htm#fr_540) <span
id="v.XXII-p241.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p242"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p242.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[33:542](2060033.htm#fr_541) <span
id="v.XXII-p243.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p244"></span> [Isa. xxvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[33:543](2060033.htm#fr_542) <span
id="v.XXII-p244.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p245"></span> [Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[33:544](2060033.htm#fr_543) <span
id="v.XXII-p245.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p246"></span> [Rev. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[33:545](2060033.htm#fr_544) <span
id="v.XXII-p246.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p247"></span> [Cant.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[33:546](2060033.htm#fr_545) <span
id="v.XXII-p247.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p248"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[33:547](2060033.htm#fr_546) <span
id="v.XXII-p248.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p249"></span> [Eccles. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p249.1"></span>,
A.V., “the spirit of the ruler.”

<span id="fn_547"></span>[33:548](2060033.htm#fr_547) <span
id="v.XXII-p249.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p250"></span> [Dan. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p250.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[33:549](2060033.htm#fr_548) <span
id="v.XXII-p250.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p251"></span> [Jer. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p251.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[33:550](2060033.htm#fr_549) <span
id="v.XXII-p252.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p253"></span> [Joh. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)<span id="v.XXII-p253.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[33:551](2060033.htm#fr_550) <span
id="v.XXII-p253.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p254"></span> [Jer. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[33:552](2060033.htm#fr_551) <span
id="v.XXII-p254.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p255"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="v.XXII-p255.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[33:553](2060033.htm#fr_552) <span
id="v.XXII-p255.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p256"></span> [Gal. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p256.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[33:554](2060033.htm#fr_553) <span
id="v.XXII-p256.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p257"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p257.1"></span>,
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[33:555](2060033.htm#fr_554) <span
id="v.XXII-p257.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p258"></span> [Ps.
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008), [Ps.
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p258.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[33:556](2060033.htm#fr_555) <span
id="v.XXII-p258.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p259"></span> [Matt.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p259.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[33:557](2060033.htm#fr_556) <span
id="v.XXII-p259.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p260"></span> [Ps. cxxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[34:558](2060033.htm#fr_557) <span
id="v.XXII-p260.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p261"></span> [Matt. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016)<span id="v.XXII-p261.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[34:559](2060033.htm#fr_558) <span
id="v.XXII-p261.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p262"></span> [Ps. liii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p262.1"></span>,
according to the Roman Psalter.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[34:560](2060033.htm#fr_559) <span
id="v.XXII-p262.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p263"></span> Cucullis fabrefactis, ut ad infantiam
redeant, imitantur noctuas et bubones.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[34:561](2060033.htm#fr_560) <span
id="v.XXII-p264.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p265"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)<span id="v.XXII-p265.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[34:562](2060033.htm#fr_561) <span
id="v.XXII-p265.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p266"></span> [2 Tim.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[34:563](2060033.htm#fr_562) <span
id="v.XXII-p266.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p267"></span> Diomede. See Lucretius, v. 31, and
Virgil, A. i. 752.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[34:564](2060033.htm#fr_563) <span
id="v.XXII-p268.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p269"></span> [Gen. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p269.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[34:565](2060033.htm#fr_564) <span
id="v.XXII-p269.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p270"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p270.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[35:566](2060033.htm#fr_565) <span
id="v.XXII-p271.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p272"></span> Cur mens diversa sit. The ordinary text
has “menda.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[35:567](2060033.htm#fr_566) <span
id="v.XXII-p272.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p273"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[35:568](2060033.htm#fr_567) <span
id="v.XXII-p274.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p275"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p275.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[35:569](2060033.htm#fr_568) <span
id="v.XXII-p275.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p276"></span> [1 Tim.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p276.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[35:570](2060033.htm#fr_569) <span
id="v.XXII-p277.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p278"></span> Persius i. 104.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[35:571](2060033.htm#fr_570) <span
id="v.XXII-p278.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p279"></span> [2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p279.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[35:572](2060033.htm#fr_571) <span
id="v.XXII-p279.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p280"></span> Viz., the epistles of St. Paul. In like
manner the Psalter was often called David.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[35:573](2060033.htm#fr_572) <span
id="v.XXII-p280.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p281"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p281.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[35:574](2060033.htm#fr_573) <span
id="v.XXII-p281.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p282"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p282.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[35:575](2060033.htm#fr_574) <span
id="v.XXII-p282.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p283"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p283.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[35:576](2060033.htm#fr_575) <span
id="v.XXII-p283.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p284"></span> [1 Cor. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p284.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[35:577](2060033.htm#fr_576) <span
id="v.XXII-p285.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p286"></span> [Matt. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p286.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[35:578](2060033.htm#fr_577) <span
id="v.XXII-p286.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p287"></span> [Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p287.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[36:579](2060033.htm#fr_578) <span
id="v.XXII-p288.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p289"></span> [Luke xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p289.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[36:580](2060033.htm#fr_579) <span
id="v.XXII-p289.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p290"></span> [Prov. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p290.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[36:581](2060033.htm#fr_580) <span
id="v.XXII-p290.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p291"></span> [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p291.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[36:582](2060033.htm#fr_581) <span
id="v.XXII-p291.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p292"></span> [Matt.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022)<span id="v.XXII-p292.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[36:583](2060033.htm#fr_582) <span
id="v.XXII-p292.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p293"></span> [Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p293.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[36:584](2060033.htm#fr_583) <span
id="v.XXII-p293.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p294"></span> [Matt. vi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)<span id="v.XXII-p294.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[36:585](2060033.htm#fr_584) <span
id="v.XXII-p295.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p296"></span> [Matt.
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="v.XXII-p296.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[36:586](2060033.htm#fr_585) <span
id="v.XXII-p296.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p297"></span> [2 Cor.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p297.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[36:587](2060033.htm#fr_586) <span
id="v.XXII-p297.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p298"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p298.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[36:588](2060033.htm#fr_587) <span
id="v.XXII-p298.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p299"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p299.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[36:589](2060033.htm#fr_588) <span
id="v.XXII-p299.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p300"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p300.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[36:590](2060033.htm#fr_589) <span
id="v.XXII-p301.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p302"></span> [Matt. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p302.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[36:591](2060033.htm#fr_590) <span
id="v.XXII-p302.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p303"></span> Terence, Eun. 236.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[36:592](2060033.htm#fr_591) <span
id="v.XXII-p303.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p304"></span> “The eucharist was at first preceded, but
at a later date was more usually followed, by the *agape* or love-feast.
The materials of this were contributed by the members of the
congregation, all of whatever station sat down to it as equals, and the
meal was concluded with psalmody and prayer.” (Robertson, C. H., i. p.
235.) Scandals arose in connection with the practice, and it gradually
fell into disuse, though even at a later date allusions to it are not
infrequent.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[36:593](2060033.htm#fr_592) <span
id="v.XXII-p305.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p306"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p306.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[36:594](2060033.htm#fr_593) <span
id="v.XXII-p306.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p307"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p307.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[36:595](2060033.htm#fr_594) <span
id="v.XXII-p307.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p308"></span> [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p308.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[37:596](2060033.htm#fr_595) <span
id="v.XXII-p308.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p309"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p309.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[37:597](2060033.htm#fr_596) <span
id="v.XXII-p309.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p310"></span> [1 Kings
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p310.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[37:598](2060033.htm#fr_597) <span
id="v.XXII-p310.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p311"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
9-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p311.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[37:599](2060033.htm#fr_598) <span
id="v.XXII-p311.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p312"></span> [Acts iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p312.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[37:600](2060033.htm#fr_599) <span
id="v.XXII-p312.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p313"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p313.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[37:601](2060033.htm#fr_600) <span
id="v.XXII-p313.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p314"></span> [Gen.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p314.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[37:602](2060033.htm#fr_601) <span
id="v.XXII-p314.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p315"></span> [Gen.
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#005),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p315.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[37:603](2060033.htm#fr_602) <span
id="v.XXII-p315.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p316"></span> [Luke xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p316.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[37:604](2060033.htm#fr_603) <span
id="v.XXII-p317.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p318"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p318.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[37:605](2060033.htm#fr_604) <span
id="v.XXII-p318.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p319"></span> [Acts viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p319.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[37:606](2060033.htm#fr_605) <span
id="v.XXII-p320.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p321"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.XXII-p321.1"></span>κοινὸς βίος</span> (koinos bios), a common
life.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[37:607](2060033.htm#fr_606) <span
id="v.XXII-p321.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p322"></span> Apparently an Egyptian word. It does not
occur elsewhere.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[37:608](2060033.htm#fr_607) <span
id="v.XXII-p322.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p323"></span> In commune viventes.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[37:609](2060033.htm#fr_608) <span
id="v.XXII-p323.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p324"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.XXII-p324.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.XXII-p324.2"></span>ναχωρεῖν</span> (anachorein), to withdraw.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[37:610](2060033.htm#fr_609) <span
id="v.XXII-p324.3"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p325"></span> These were monks who lived under no
settled rule, but collected in little groups of two and three, generally
in some populous place. They seem to have practised all the arts whereby
a reputation for sanctity may be won, while they disparaged those who
led more regular lives. Cassian (Collat. xviii. 7) draws an unfavorable
picture of them. See Bingham, Antiquities, vii. ii. 4, and Dict. Xt.
Ant., s.v. Sarabaitæ.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[37:611](2060033.htm#fr_610) <span
id="v.XXII-p325.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p326"></span> Pannonia, or possibly Syria.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[37:612](2060033.htm#fr_611) <span
id="v.XXII-p327.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p328"></span> *I.e.* three o’clock.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[37:613](2060033.htm#fr_612) <span
id="v.XXII-p328.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p329"></span> Decani, “leaders of ten.”

<span id="fn_613"></span>[38:614](2060033.htm#fr_613) <span
id="v.XXII-p329.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p330"></span> Cf. Letter LII.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[38:615](2060033.htm#fr_614) <span
id="v.XXII-p330.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p331"></span> [Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p331.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[38:616](2060033.htm#fr_615) <span
id="v.XXII-p332.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p333"></span> See Letter LXX. § 3, De Vir. Ill. xi.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[38:617](2060033.htm#fr_616) <span
id="v.XXII-p333.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p334"></span> Josephus, The Jewish War, ii. 8.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[38:618](2060033.htm#fr_617) <span
id="v.XXII-p335.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p336"></span> *I.e.* the hermit of that name. See his
Life in vol. iii. of this series.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[38:619](2060033.htm#fr_618) <span
id="v.XXII-p336.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p337"></span> [Lam.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031)<span id="v.XXII-p337.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[38:620](2060033.htm#fr_619) <span
id="v.XXII-p337.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p338"></span> [Lam. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p338.1"></span>

<span id="fn_620"></span>[38:621](2060033.htm#fr_620) <span
id="v.XXII-p339.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p340"></span> [1 Thess. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span id="v.XXII-p340.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[38:622](2060033.htm#fr_621) <span
id="v.XXII-p340.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p341"></span> In Jerome’s time the seven canonical
hours of prayer had not yet been finally fixed. He mentions, however,
six which correspond to the later, Mattins, Terce, Sext, None, Vespers,
and Nocturns. Cp. Letters CVII. § 9, CVIII. § 20, and CXXX § 15.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[39:623](2060033.htm#fr_622) <span
id="v.XXII-p341.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p342"></span> [Ps. l.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p342.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[39:624](2060033.htm#fr_623) <span
id="v.XXII-p342.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p343"></span> [Rom. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p343.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[39:625](2060033.htm#fr_624) <span
id="v.XXII-p343.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p344"></span> [Rom. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p344.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[39:626](2060033.htm#fr_625) <span
id="v.XXII-p344.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p345"></span> [Isa. lviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p345.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[39:627](2060033.htm#fr_626) <span
id="v.XXII-p345.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p346"></span> [Isa.
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)<span id="v.XXII-p346.1"></span>,
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[39:628](2060033.htm#fr_627) <span
id="v.XXII-p347.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p348"></span> [1 Tim.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020), [2 Tim.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p348.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[39:629](2060033.htm#fr_628) <span
id="v.XXII-p348.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p349"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p349.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[39:630](2060033.htm#fr_629) <span
id="v.XXII-p349.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p350"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)<span id="v.XXII-p350.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[39:631](2060033.htm#fr_630) <span
id="v.XXII-p351.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p352"></span> [Luke i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)<span id="v.XXII-p352.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[39:632](2060033.htm#fr_631) <span
id="v.XXII-p352.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p353"></span> [Isa. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p353.1"></span>,
*i.e.* “the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth;” or, in Jerome’s
rendering, “quickly carry away the spoils.”

<span id="fn_632"></span>[39:633](2060033.htm#fr_632) <span
id="v.XXII-p353.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p354"></span> [Isa. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p354.1"></span>.
Jerome should have substituted “prophet” for “prophetess.” As it stands
the quotation is meaningless.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[39:634](2060033.htm#fr_633) <span
id="v.XXII-p354.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p355"></span> [Isa. xxvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p355.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[39:635](2060033.htm#fr_634) <span
id="v.XXII-p355.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p356"></span> [Matt. xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#049)<span id="v.XXII-p356.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[39:636](2060033.htm#fr_635) <span
id="v.XXII-p356.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p357"></span> [Prov.
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003), [Jer.
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="v.XXII-p357.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[39:637](2060033.htm#fr_636) <span
id="v.XXII-p357.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p358"></span> [Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p358.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[39:638](2060033.htm#fr_637) <span
id="v.XXII-p359.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p360"></span> Cp. the maxim of Cyprian: Extra ecclesiam
nulla salus, “Outside the church there is no salvation.”

<span id="fn_638"></span>[39:639](2060033.htm#fr_638) <span
id="v.XXII-p360.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p361"></span> [Exod. xii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046)<span id="v.XXII-p361.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[39:640](2060033.htm#fr_639) <span
id="v.XXII-p361.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p362"></span> [1 Pet.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p362.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[39:641](2060033.htm#fr_640) <span
id="v.XXII-p362.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p363"></span> [James ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)<span id="v.XXII-p363.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[39:642](2060033.htm#fr_641) <span
id="v.XXII-p363.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p364"></span> Founder of the widely prevalent sect of
Manichæans, which at one time numbered Augustine among its adherents.
One of its leading tenets was that matter as such was essentially evil.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[39:643](2060033.htm#fr_642) <span
id="v.XXII-p364.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p365"></span> [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p365.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[40:644](2060033.htm#fr_643) <span
id="v.XXII-p366.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p367"></span> [Phil. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p367.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[40:645](2060033.htm#fr_644) <span
id="v.XXII-p367.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p368"></span> [Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), [Gal.
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)<span id="v.XXII-p368.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[40:646](2060033.htm#fr_645) <span
id="v.XXII-p368.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p369"></span> [Rom.
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039)<span id="v.XXII-p369.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[40:647](2060033.htm#fr_646) <span
id="v.XXII-p370.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p371"></span> An echo of the Nicene Creed.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[40:648](2060033.htm#fr_647) <span
id="v.XXII-p371.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p372"></span> Cp. Virgil, Ecl. iv. 61.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[40:649](2060033.htm#fr_648) <span
id="v.XXII-p372.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p373"></span> Cp. [Ps.
95:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005), [Isa.
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p373.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[40:650](2060033.htm#fr_649) <span
id="v.XXII-p373.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p374"></span> [Luke
2:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="v.XXII-p374.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[40:651](2060033.htm#fr_650) <span
id="v.XXII-p374.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p375"></span> [Ps.
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#013),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="v.XXII-p375.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[40:652](2060033.htm#fr_651) <span
id="v.XXII-p375.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p376"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p376.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[40:653](2060033.htm#fr_652) <span
id="v.XXII-p376.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p377"></span> Cp. [Matt. xxvi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#040)<span id="v.XXII-p377.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[40:654](2060033.htm#fr_653) <span
id="v.XXII-p378.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p379"></span> [Gen. xxix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#020)<span id="v.XXII-p379.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[40:655](2060033.htm#fr_654) <span
id="v.XXII-p379.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p380"></span> [Gen. xxxi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040)<span id="v.XXII-p380.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[40:656](2060033.htm#fr_655) <span
id="v.XXII-p380.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p381"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)<span id="v.XXII-p381.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[40:657](2060033.htm#fr_656) <span
id="v.XXII-p381.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p382"></span> [Ps. cxx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p382.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[40:658](2060033.htm#fr_657) <span
id="v.XXII-p382.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p383"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p383.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[40:659](2060033.htm#fr_658) <span
id="v.XXII-p383.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p384"></span> [Rom. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="v.XXII-p384.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[40:660](2060033.htm#fr_659) <span
id="v.XXII-p384.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p385"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
23-27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span id="v.XXII-p385.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[40:661](2060033.htm#fr_660) <span
id="v.XXII-p385.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p386"></span> [2 Tim.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="v.XXII-p386.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[40:662](2060033.htm#fr_661) <span
id="v.XXII-p387.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p388"></span> [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="v.XXII-p388.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[40:663](2060033.htm#fr_662) <span
id="v.XXII-p388.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p389"></span> [Luke xi.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span id="v.XXII-p389.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[41:664](2060033.htm#fr_663) <span
id="v.XXII-p389.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p390"></span> [Isa.
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span id="v.XXII-p390.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[41:665](2060033.htm#fr_664) <span
id="v.XXII-p391.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p392"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p392.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[41:666](2060033.htm#fr_665) <span
id="v.XXII-p392.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p393"></span> [Exod.
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021)<span id="v.XXII-p393.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[41:667](2060033.htm#fr_666) <span
id="v.XXII-p393.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p394"></span> A legendary virgin of Iconium said to
have been converted by Paul.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[41:668](2060033.htm#fr_667) <span
id="v.XXII-p394.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p395"></span> [Cant.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011)<span id="v.XXII-p395.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[41:669](2060033.htm#fr_668) <span
id="v.XXII-p395.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p396"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010)<span id="v.XXII-p396.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[41:670](2060033.htm#fr_669) <span
id="v.XXII-p396.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p397"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p397.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[41:671](2060033.htm#fr_670) <span
id="v.XXII-p397.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p398"></span> Viz. Paula, for whom see Letter CVIII.,
and Marcella, for whom see Letter CXXVII.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[41:672](2060033.htm#fr_671) <span
id="v.XXII-p398.1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p399"></span> [Matt. xxi.
1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p399.1"></span>,
literally “she-ass.”

<span id="fn_672"></span>[41:673](2060033.htm#fr_672) <span
id="v.XXII-p399.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p400"></span> [Isa. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span id="v.XXII-p400.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[41:674](2060033.htm#fr_673) <span
id="v.XXII-p400.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p401"></span> [Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span id="v.XXII-p401.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[41:675](2060033.htm#fr_674) <span
id="v.XXII-p401.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p402"></span> [Rev. xiv.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)<span id="v.XXII-p402.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[41:676](2060033.htm#fr_675) <span
id="v.XXII-p402.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p403"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)<span id="v.XXII-p403.1"></span>;
the variant is peculiar to Jerome.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[41:677](2060033.htm#fr_676) <span
id="v.XXII-p403.2"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p404"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007)<span id="v.XXII-p404.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIII](2060034)
