[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060067)  [Next](2060069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LVII"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LVII-p1.1"></span>Letter LVII. To Pammachius on the Best Method of
Translating.</span>

<span id="v.LVII-p2"></span>Written to Pammachius (for whom see Letter
LXVI.) in <span class="c17"><span id="v.LVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>
395. In the previous year Jerome had rendered into Latin Letter LI.
(from Epiphanius to John of Jerusalem) under circumstances which he here
describes (§2). His version soon became public and incurred severe
criticism from some person not named by Jerome but supposed by him to
have been instigated by Rufinus (§12). Charged with having falsified his
original he now repudiates the charge and defends his method of
translation (“to give sense for sense and not word for word” §5) by an
appeal to the practice of classical (§5), ecclesiastical (§6), and N.T.
(§§7–10) writers.

<span id="v.LVII-p3"></span>When at a subsequent period Rufinus gave to
the world what was in Jerome’s opinion a misleading version of Origen’s
*First Principles*, he appealed to this letter as giving him ample
warranty for what he had done. See Letters LXXX, and LXXXI, and Rufinus’
Preface to the περί ᾽Αεχῶν in Vol. iii. of this series.

<span id="v.LVII-p4"></span>1. The apostle Paul when he appeared before
King Agrippa to answer the charges which were brought against him,
wishing to use language intelligible to his hearers and confident of the
success of his cause, began by congratulating himself in these words: “I
think myself happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this
day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused by the
Jews: especially because thou art expert in all customs and questions
which are among the Jews.” <span id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) He
had read the saying of Jesus: <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649)
“Well is him that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear;” <span
id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) and he knew that a pleader only
succeeds in proportion as he impresses his judge. On this occasion I too
think myself happy that learned ears will hear my defence. For a rash
tongue charges me with ignorance or falsehood; it alleges that in
translating another man’s letter I have made mistakes through incapacity
or carelessness; it convicts me of either an involuntary error or a
deliberate offence. And lest it should happen that my accuser—encouraged
by a volubility which stops at nothing and by an impunity which
arrogates to itself an unlimited license—should accuse me as he has
already done our father (Pope) Epiphanius; I send this letter to inform
you—and through you others who think me worthy of their regard—of the
true order of the facts.

<span id="v.LVII-p8"></span>2. About two years ago the aforesaid Pope
Epiphanius sent a letter <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651) to
Bishop John, first finding fault with him as regarded some of his
opinions and then mildly calling him to penitence. Such was the repute
of the writer or else the elegance of the letter that all Palestine
fought for copies of it. Now there was in our monastery a man of no
small estimation in his country, Eusebius of Cremona, who, when he found
that this letter was in everybody’s mouth and that the ignorant and the
educated alike admired it for its teaching and for the purity of its
style, set to work to beg me to translate it for him into Latin and at
the same time to simplify the argument so that he might more readily
understand it; for he was himself altogether unacquainted with the Greek
language. I consented to his request and calling to my aid a secretary
speedily dictated my version, briefly marking on the side of the page
the contents of the several chapters. The fact is that he asked me to do
this merely for himself, and I requested of him in return to keep his
copy private and not too readily to circulate it. A year and six months
went by, and then the aforesaid translation found its way by a novel
stratagem from his desk to Jerusalem. For a pretended monk—either bribed
as there is much reason to believe or actuated by malice of his own as
his tempter vainly tries to convince us—shewed himself a second Judas by
robbing <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="v.LVII-Page_113"></span>Eusebius of his literary property and gave
to the adversary an occasion of railing <span
id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652) against me. They tell the unlearned
that I have falsified the original, that I have not rendered word for
word, that I have put ‘dear friend’ in place of ‘honourable sir,’ and
more shameful still! that I have cut down my translation by omitting the
words <span class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p10.2"></span>αἰδεσιμῶτατε
Πάππα</span>. <span id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653) These and
similar trifles form the substance of the charges brought against me.

<span id="v.LVII-p12"></span>3. At the outset before I defend my version
I wish to ask those persons who confound wisdom with cunning, some few
questions. Where did you get your copy of the letter? Who gave it to
you? How have you the effrontery to bring forward what you have procured
by fraud? What place of safety will be left us if we cannot conceal our
secrets even within our own walls and our own writing-desks? Were I to
press such a charge against you before a legal tribunal, I could make
you amenable to the laws which even in fiscal cases appoint penalties
for meddlesome informers and condemn the traitor even while they accept
his treachery. For though they welcome the profit which the information
gives them, they disapprove the motive which actuates the informer. A
little while ago a man of consular rank named Hesychius (against whom
the patriarch Gamaliel waged an implacable war) was condemned to death
by the emperor Theodosius simply because he had laid hold of imperial
papers through a secretary whom he had tempted. We read also in old
histories <span id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654) that the
schoolmaster who betrayed the children of the Faliscans was sent back to
his boys and handed over to them in bonds, the Roman people refusing to
accept a dishonourable victory. When Pyrrhus king of Epirus was lying in
his camp ill from the effects of a wound, his physician offered to
poison him, but Fabricius thinking it shame that the king should die by
treachery sent the traitor back in chains to his master, refusing to
sanction crime even when its victim was an enemy. <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) A principle which the laws uphold,
which is maintained by enemies, which warfare and the sword fail to
violate, has hitherto been held unquestioned among the monks and priests
of Christ. And can any one of them presume now, knitting his brow and
snapping his fingers, <span id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656) to
spend his breath in saying: “What if he did use bribes or other
inducements! he did what suited his purpose.” A strange plea truly to
defend a fraud as though robbers, thieves, and pirates did not do the
same. Certainly, when Annas and Caiaphas led hapless Judas astray, they
only did what they believed to be expedient for themselves.

<span id="v.LVII-p16"></span>4. Suppose that I wish to write down in my
note books this or that silly trifle, or to make comments upon the
scriptures, to retort upon my calumniators, to digest my wrath, to
practise myself in the use of commonplaces and to stow away sharp shafts
for the day of battle. So long as I do not publish my thoughts, they are
only unkind words not matter for a charge of libel; in fact they are not
even unkind words for the public ear never hears them. You <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657) may bribe my slaves and tamper with
my clients. You may, as the fable has it, penetrate by means of your
gold to the chamber of Danaë; <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658)
and then, dissembling what you have done, you may call me a falsifier;
but, if you do so, you will have to plead guilty yourself to a worse
charge than any that you can bring against me. One man inveighs against
you as a heretic, another as a perverter of doctrine. You are silent
yourself; you do not venture to answer; you assail the translator; you
cavil about syllables and you fancy your defence complete if your
calumnies provoke no reply. Suppose that I have made a mistake or an
omission in my rendering. Your whole case turns upon this; this is the
defence which you offer to your accusers. Are you no heretic because I
am a bad translator? Mind, I do not say that I know you to be a heretic;
I leave such knowledge to your accuser, to him who wrote the
letter: <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) what I do say is that
it is the height of folly for you when you are accused by one man to
attack another, and when you are covered with wounds yourself to seek
comfort by wounding one who is still quiescent and unaggressive.

<span id="v.LVII-p20"></span>5. In the above remarks I have assumed that
I have made alterations in the letter and that a simple translation may
contain errors though not wilful ones. As, however the letter itself
shews that no changes have been made in the sense, that nothing has been
added, and that no doctrine has been foisted into it, “obviously their
object is understanding to understand nothing;” <span
id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) and while they desire to arraign
another’s want of skill, they betray their own. For I myself not only
admit but freely proclaim that in translating from the Greek (except in
the case of the holy scriptures where even the order of the words is a
mystery) I render sense for sense and not word for word. For this course
I have the <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="v.LVII-Page_114"></span>authority of Tully who has so translated the
Protagoras of Plato, the Œconomicus of Xenophon, and the two beautiful
orations <span id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) which Æschines and
Demosthenes delivered one against the other. What omissions, additions,
and alterations he has made substituting the idioms of his own for those
of another tongue, this is not the time to say. I am satisfied to quote
the authority of the translator who has spoken as follows in a
prologue <span id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) prefixed to the
orations. “I have thought it right to embrace a labour which though not
necessary for myself will prove useful to those who study. I have
translated the noblest speeches of the two most eloquent of the Attic
orators, the speeches which Æschines and Demosthenes delivered one
against the other; but I have rendered them not as a translator but as
an orator, keeping the sense but altering the form by adapting both the
metaphors and the words to suit our own idiom. I have not deemed it
necessary to render word for word but I have reproduced the general
style and emphasis. I have not supposed myself bound to pay the words
out one by one to the reader but only to give him an equivalent in
value.” Again at the close of his task he says, “I shall be well
satisfied if my rendering is found, as I trust it will be, true to this
standard. In making it I have utilized all the excellences of the
originals, I mean the sentiments, the forms of expression and the
arrangement of the topics, while I have followed the actual wording only
so far as I could do so without offending our notions of taste. If all
that I have written is not to be found in the Greek, I have at any rate
striven to make it correspond with it.” Horace too, an acute and learned
writer, in his Art of Poetry gives the same advice to the skilled
translator:—

<span id="v.LVII-p24"></span>And care not thou with over anxious thought

<span id="v.LVII-p25"></span>To render word for word. <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663)

<span id="v.LVII-p27"></span>Terence has translated Menander; Plautus
and Cæcilius the old comic poets. <span
id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664) Do they ever stick at words? Do
they not rather in their versions think first of preserving the beauty
and charm of their originals? What men like you call fidelity in
transcription, the learned term pestilent minuteness. <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665) Such were my teachers about twenty
years ago; and even then <span id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666) I
was the victim of a similar error to that which is now imputed to me,
though indeed I never imagined that *you* would charge me with it. In
translating the Chronicle of Eusebius of Cæsarea into Latin, I made
among others the following prefatory observations: “It is difficult in
following lines laid down by others not sometimes to diverge from them,
and it is hard to preserve in a translation the charm of expressions
which in another language are most felicitous. Each particular word
conveys a meaning of its own, and possibly I have no equivalent by which
to render it, and if I make a circuit to reach my goal, I have to go
many miles to cover a short distance. <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667) To these difficulties must be added
the windings of hyperbata, differences in the use of cases, divergencies
of metaphor; and last of all the peculiar and if I may so call it,
inbred character of the language. If I render word for word, the result
will sound uncouth, and if compelled by necessity I alter anything in
the order or wording, I shall seem to have departed from the function of
a translator.” <span id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668) And after a
long discussion which it would be tedious to follow out here, I added
what follows:—“If any one imagines that translation does not impair the
charm of style, let him render Homer word for word into Latin, nay I
will go farther still and say, let him render it into Latin prose, and
the result will be that the order of the words will seem ridiculous and
the most eloquent of poets scarcely articulate.” <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669)

<span id="v.LVII-p34"></span>6. In quoting my own writings my only
object has been to prove that from my youth up I at least have always
aimed at rendering sense not words, but if such authority as they supply
is deemed insufficient, read and consider the short preface dealing with
this matter which occurs in a book narrating the life of the blessed
Antony. <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670) “A literal
translation from one language into another obscures the sense; the
exuberance of the growth lessens the yield. For while one’s diction is
enslaved to cases and metaphors, it has to explain by tedious
circumlocutions what a few words would otherwise have sufficed to make
plain. I have tried to avoid this error in the translation which at your
request I have made of the story of the blessed Antony. My version
always preserves the sense although it does not invariably keep the
words of the original. Leave others to catch at syllables and letters,
do you for your part look for the meaning.” Time would fail me were I to
unfold the testimonies of all who have translated only according to the
sense. It is sufficient for the present to name Hilary the
confessor <span id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) who has turned some
homilies on Job and several treatises on the Psalms from Greek into
Latin; yet has not bound himself to the drowsiness of the letter or
fettered himself by the <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="v.LVII-Page_115"></span>stale literalism of inadequate culture. Like
a conqueror he has led away captive into his own tongue the meaning of
his originals.

<span id="v.LVII-p37"></span>7. That secular and church writers should
have adopted this line need not surprise us when we consider that the
translators of the Septuagint, <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) the evangelists, and the apostles,
have done the same in dealing with the sacred writings. We read in
Mark <span id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) of the Lord saying
*Talitha cumi* and it is immediately added “which is interpreted,
Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.” The evangelist may be charged with
falsehood for having added the words “I say unto thee” for the Hebrew is
only “Damsel arise.” To emphasize this and to give the impression of one
calling and commanding he has added “I say unto thee.” Again in
Matthew <span id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) when the thirty
pieces of silver are returned by the traitor Judas and the potter’s
field is purchased with them, it is written:—“Then was fulfilled that
which was spoken of by Jeremy the prophet, saying, ‘And they took the
thirty pieces of silver the price of him that was valued which <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) they of the children of Israel did
value, and gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.’”
This passage is not found in Jeremiah at all but in Zechariah, in quite
different words and an altogether different order. In fact the Vulgate
renders it as follows:—“And I will say unto them, If it is good in your
sight, give ye me a price or refuse it: So they weighed for my price
thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me, Put them into the
melting furnace and consider if it is tried as I have been tried by
them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them into the
house of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) It is
evident that the rendering of the Septuagint differs widely from the
quotation of the evangelist. In the Hebrew also, though the sense is the
same, the words are quite different and differently arranged. It says:
“And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and, if not,
forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the
Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter; <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) a goodly price that I was priced at
of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them to the
potter in the house of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) They may accuse the apostle of
falsifying his version seeing that it agrees neither with the Hebrew nor
with the translators of the Septuagint: and worse than this, they may
say that he has mistaken the author’s name putting down Jeremiah when it
should be Zechariah. Far be it from us to speak thus of a follower <span
id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679) of Christ, who made it his care to
formulate dogmas rather than to hunt for words and syllables. To take
another instance from Zechariah, the evangelist John quotes from the
Hebrew, “They shall look on him whom they pierced,” <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680) for which we read in the
Septuagint, “And they shall look upon me because they have mocked me,”
and in the Latin version, “And they shall look upon me for the things
which they have mocked or insulted.” Here the evangelist, the
Septuagint, and our own version <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) all differ; yet the divergence of
language is atoned by oneness of spirit. In Matthew again we read of the
Lord preaching flight to the apostles and confirming His counsel with a
passage from Zechariah. “It is written,” he says, “I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.” <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) But in the Septuagint and in the
Hebrew it reads differently, for it is not God who speaks, as the
evangelist makes out, but the prophet who appeals to God the Father
saying:—“Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.” In this
instance according to my judgment—and I have some careful critics with
me—the evangelist is guilty of a fault in presuming to ascribe to God
what are the words of the prophet. Again the same evangelist writes that
at the warning of an angel Joseph took the young child and his mother
and went into Egypt and remained there till the death of Herod; “that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet saying,
Out of Egypt have I called my son.” <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) The Latin manuscripts do not so
give the passage, but in Hosea <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) the true Hebrew text has the
following:—“When Israel was a child then I loved him, and called my son
out of Egypt.” Which the Septuagint renders thus:—“When Israel was a
child then I loved him, and called his sons out of Egypt.” Are
they <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) altogether to be
rejected because they have given another turn to a passage which refers
primarily to the mystery of Christ? Or should we not rather pardon the
shortcomings of the translators on the score of their human frailty
according to the saying of James, “In many things we offend all. If any
man offend not in word the same is a perfect man and able also to bridle
the whole body.” <span id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686) Once more it
is written in the pages of the same evangelist, “And he came and dwelt
in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.” <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) Let these word fanciers and nice
critics of all composition tell us where they have read the words; <span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="v.LVII-Page_116"></span>and if
they cannot, let me tell them that they are in Isaiah. <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688) For in the place where we read and
translate, “There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his roots,” <span
id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) in the Hebrew idiom it is written
thus, “There shall come forth a rod out of the root of Jesse and a
Nazarene shall grow from his root.” How can the Septuagint leave out the
word ‘Nazarene,’ if it is unlawful to substitute one word for another?
It is sacrilege either to conceal or to set at naught a mystery.

<span id="v.LVII-p56"></span>8. Let us pass on to other passages, for
the brief limits of a letter do not suffer us to dwell too long on any
one point. The same Matthew says:—“Now all this was done that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet saying, Behold
a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a son and they shall
call his name Emmanuel.” <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) The
rendering of the Septuagint is, “Behold a virgin shall receive seed and
shall bring forth a son, and ye shall call his name Emmanuel.” If people
cavil at words, obviously ‘to receive seed’ is not the exact equivalent
of ‘to be with child,’ and ‘ye shall call’ differs from ‘they shall
call.’ Moreover in the Hebrew we read thus, “Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son and shall call his name Immanuel.” <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) Ahaz shall not call him so for he
was convicted of want of faith, nor the Jews for they were destined to
deny him, but she who is to conceive him, and bear him, the virgin
herself. In the same evangelist we read that Herod was troubled at the
coming of the Magi and that gathering together the scribes and the
priests he demanded of them where Christ should be born and that they
answered him, “In Bethlehem of Judæa: for thus it is written by the
prophet; And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the least among
the princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a governour that shall
rule my people Israel.” <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) In
the Vulgate <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) this passage
appears as follows:—“And thou Bethlehem, the house of Ephratah, art
small to be among the thousands of Judah, yet one shall come out of thee
for me to be a prince in Israel.” You will be more surprised still at
the difference in words and order between Matthew and the Septuagint if
you look at the Hebrew which runs thus:—“But thou Bethlehem Ephratah,
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel.” <span
id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) Consider one by one the words of
the evangelist:—“And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah.” For “the land
of Judah” the Hebrew has “Ephratah” while the Septuagint gives “the
house of Ephratah.” The evangelist writes, “art not the least among the
princes of Judah.” In the Septuagint this is, “art small to be among the
thousands of Judah,” while the Hebrew gives, “though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah.” There is a contradiction here—and that
not merely verbal—between the evangelist and the prophet; for in this
place at any rate both Septuagint and Hebrew agree. The evangelist says
that he is not little among the princes of Judah, while the passage from
which he queries says exactly the opposite of this, “Thou art small
indeed and little; but yet out of thee, small and little as thou art,
there shall come forth for me a leader in Israel,” a sentiment in
harmony with that of the apostle, “God hath chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the things which are mighty.” <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695) Moreover the last clause “to rule”
or “to feed my people Israel” clearly runs differently in the original.

<span id="v.LVII-p63"></span>9. I refer to these passages, not to
convict the evangelists of falsification—a charge worthy only of impious
men like Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian—but to bring home to my critics
their own want of knowledge, and to gain from them such consideration
that they may concede to me in the case of a simple letter what, whether
they like it or not, they will have to concede to the Apostles in the
Holy Scriptures. Mark, the disciple of Peter, begins his gospel
thus:—“The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in
the prophet Isaiah: Behold I send my messenger before thy face which
shall prepare thy way before thee. The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight.” <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) This quotation is
made up from two prophets, Malachi that is to say and Isaiah. For the
first part: “Behold I send my messenger before thy face which shall
prepare thy way before thee,” occurs at the close of Malachi. <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) But the second part: “The voice of
one crying, etc.,” we read in Isaiah. <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) On what grounds then has Mark in
the very beginning of his book set the words: “As it is written in the
prophet Isaiah, Behold I send my messenger,” when, as we have said, it
is not written in Isaiah at all, but in Malachi the last of the twelve
prophets? Let ignorant presumption solve this nice question if it can,
and I will ask pardon for being in the wrong. The same Mark brings
before us the Saviour thus addressing the Pharisees: “Have ye never read
what David did when he had need and was an <span id="page_117">p.
117</span> <span id="v.LVII-Page_117"></span>hungred, he and they that
were with him, how he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar
the highpriest, and did eat the shew-bread which is not lawful to eat
but for the priests?” <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) Now let
us turn to the books of Samuel, or, as they are commonly called, of
Kings, and we shall find there that the highpriest’s name was not
Abiathar but Ahimelech, <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) the
same that was afterwards put to death with the rest of the priests by
Doeg at the command of Saul. <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701)
Let us pass on now to the apostle Paul who writes thus to the
Corinthians: “For had they known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory. But, as it is written, Eye hath not seen nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him.” <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) Some writers on this passage betake
themselves to the ravings of the apocryphal books and assert that the
quotation comes from the Revelation of Elijah; <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) whereas the truth is that it is
found in Isaiah according to the Hebrew text: “Since the beginning of
the world men have not heard nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the
eye seen, O God, beside thee what thou hast prepared for them that wait
for thee.” <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) The Septuagint has
rendered the words quite differently: “Since the beginning of the world
we have not heard, neither have our eyes seen any God beside thee and
thy true works, and thou wilt shew mercy to them that wait for thee.” We
see then from what place the quotation is taken and yet the apostle has
not rendered his original word for word, but, using a paraphrase, he has
given the sense in different terms. In his epistle to the Romans the
same apostle quotes these words from Isaiah: “Behold I lay in Sion a
stumbling-stone and rock of offence,” <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) a rendering which is at variance
with the Greek version <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) yet
agrees with the original Hebrew. The Septuagint gives an opposite
meaning, “that you fall not on a stumblingstone nor on a rock of
offence.” The apostle Peter agrees with Paul and the Hebrew, writing:
“but to them that do not believe, a stone of stumbling and a rock of
offence.” <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) From all these
passages it is clear that the apostles and evangelists in translating
the old testament scriptures have sought to give the meaning rather than
the words, and that they have not greatly cared to preserve forms or
constructions, so long as they could make clear the subject to the
understanding.

<span id="v.LVII-p76"></span>10. Luke the evangelist and companion of
apostles describes Christ’s first martyr Stephen as relating what
follows in a Jewish assembly. “With threescore and fifteen souls Jacob
went down into Egypt, and died himself, and our fathers were carried
over <span id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) into Sychem, and laid in
the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of
Emmor <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) the father of
Sychem.” <span id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710) In Genesis this
passage is quite differently given, for it is Abraham that buys of
Ephron the Hittite, the son of Zohar, near Hebron, for four hundred
shekels <span id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711) of silver, a double
cave, <span id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) and the field that is
about it, and that buries in it Sarah his wife. And in the same book we
read that, after his return from Mesopotamia with his wives and his
sons, Jacob pitched his tent before Salem, a city of Shechem which is in
the land of Canaan, and that he dwelt there and “bought a parcel of a
field where he had spread his tent at the hand of Hamor, the father of
Sychem, for an hundred lambs,” <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) and that “he erected there an altar
and called there upon the God of Israel.” <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) Abraham does not buy the cave from
Hamor the father of Sychem, but from Ephron the son of Zohar, and he is
not buried in Sychem but in Hebron which is corruptly called Arboch.
Whereas the twelve patriarchs are not buried in Arboch but in Sychem, in
the field purchased not by Abraham but by Jacob. I postpone the solution
of this delicate problem to enable those who cavil at me to search and
see that in dealing with the scriptures it is the sense we have to look
to and not the words. In the Hebrew the twenty-second psalm begins with
the exact words which the Lord uttered on the cross: *Eli Eli lama
azabthani*, which means, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?” <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) Let my critics tell me
why the Septuagint introduces here the words “look thou upon me.” For
its rendering is as follows: “My God, my God, look thou upon me, why
hast thou forsaken me?” They will answer no doubt that no harm is done
to the sense by the addition of a couple of words. Let them acknowledge
then that, if in the haste of dictation I have omitted a few, I have not
by so doing endangered the position of the churches.

<span id="v.LVII-p85"></span>11. It would be tedious now to enumerate,
what great additions and omissions the Septuagint has made, and all the
passages which in church-copies are marked with daggers and asterisks.
The Jews generally laugh when they hear our version of this passage of
Isaiah, “Blessed is he that hath seed in Zion and servants in
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716) In Amos
also <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717) after a <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="v.LVII-Page_118"></span>description of self-indulgence <span
id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) there come these words: “They have
thought of these things as halting and not likely to fly,” a very
rhetorical sentence quite worthy of Tully. But how shall we deal with
the Hebrew originals in which these passages and others like them are
omitted, passages so numerous that to reproduce them all would require
books without number? The number of the omissions is shown alike by the
asterisks mentioned above and by my own version when compared by a
careful reader with the old translation. <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) Yet the Septuagint has rightly kept
its place in the churches, either because it is the first of all the
versions in time, made before the coming of Christ, or else because it
has been used by the apostles (only however in places where it does not
disagree with the Hebrew <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) ).
On the other hand we do right to reject Aquila, the proselyte and
controversial translator, who has striven to translate not words only
but their etymologies as well. Who could accept as renderings of “corn
and wine and oil” <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721) such words
as <span class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p91.2"></span>χεῖμα ὀπωρισμός
στιλπνότης</span> , or, as we might say, ‘pouring,’ and
‘fruitgathering,’ and ‘shining’? or, because Hebrew has in addition to
the article other prefixes <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) as
well, he must with an unhappy pedantry translate syllable by syllable
and letter by letter thus: <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LVII-p92.2"></span>σὺν τὸν ὀυρανὸν καὶ σὺν τὴν γήν</span>, a
construction which neither Greek nor Latin admits of, <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) as many passages in our own writers
shew. How many are the phrases charming in Greek which, if rendered word
for word, do not sound well in Latin, and again how many there are that
are pleasing to us in Latin, but which—assuming the order of the words
not to be altered—would not please in Greek.

<span id="v.LVII-p94"></span>12. But to pass by this limitless field of
discussion and to shew you, most Christian of nobles, and most noble of
Christians, what is the kind of falsification which is censured in my
translation, I will set before you the opening words of the letter in
the Greek original and as rendered by me, that from one count in the
indictment you may form an opinion of all. The letter begins <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.1"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.2"></span>Εδει ἡμᾶς, ἀγάπητε, μή τῇ
οἰ& 208·σει τῶν κλήρων φέρεσθαι</span> which I remember to have rendered
as follows: “Dearly beloved, we ought not to misuse our position as
ministers to gratify our pride.” See there, they cry, what a number of
falsehoods in a single line! In the first place <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.4"></span>γαπητός</span> means
‘loved,’ not ‘dearly beloved.’ Then <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LVII-p94.5"></span>οἴησις</span> means ‘estimate,’ not ‘pride,’
for this and not <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LVII-p94.6"></span>οἰδημα</span> is the word used. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.7"></span>Οιδῆμα</span> signifies ‘a
swelling’ but <span class="Greek"><span id="v.LVII-p94.8"></span>οἰ&
208·σις</span> means ‘judgment.’ All the rest, say they: “not to misuse
our position to gratify our pride” is your own. What is this you are
saying, O pillar of learning <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724)
and latter day Aristarchus, <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725)
who are so ready to pass judgment upon all writers? It is all for
nothing then that I have studied so long; that, as Juvenal says, <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) “I have so often withdrawn my hand
from the ferule.” The moment I leave the harbour I run aground. Well, to
err is human and to confess one’s error wise. Do you therefore, who are
so ready to criticise and to instruct me, set me right and give me a
word for word rendering of the passage. You tell me I should have said:
“Beloved, we ought not to be carried away by the estimation of the
clergy.” Here, indeed we have eloquence worthy of Plautus, here we have
Attic grace, the true style of the Muses. The common proverb is true of
me: “He who trains an ox for athletics loses both oil and money.” <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) Still he is not to blame who merely
puts on the mask and plays the tragedy for another: his teachers <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) are the real culprits; since they
for a great price have taught him—to know nothing. I do not think the
worse of any Christian because he lacks skill to express himself; and I
heartily wish that we could all say with Socrates “I know that I know
nothing;” <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) and carry out the
precept of another wise man, “Know thyself.” <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) I have always held in esteem a holy
simplicity but not a wordy rudeness. He who declares that he imitates
the style of apostles should first imitate the virtue of their lives;
the great holiness of which made up for much plainness of speech. They
confuted the syllogisms of Aristotle and the perverse ingenuities of
Chrysippus by raising the dead. Still it would be absurd for one of
us—living as we do amid the riches of Crœsus and the luxuries of
Sardanapalus—to make his boast of mere ignorance. We might as well say
that all robbers and criminals would be men of culture if they were to
hide their blood-stained swords in books of philosophy and not in trunks
of trees.

<span id="v.LVII-p102"></span>13. I have exceeded the limits of a
letter, but I have not exceeded in the expression of my chagrin. For,
though I am called a falsifier, and have my reputation torn to shreds,
wherever there are shuttles and looms and women to <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="v.LVII-Page_119"></span>work them;
I am content to repudiate the charge without retaliating in kind. I
leave everything to your discretion. You can read the letter of
Epiphanius both in Greek and in Latin; and, if you do so, you will see
at once the value of my accusers’ lamentations and insulting complaints.
For the rest, I am satisfied to have instructed one of my dearest
friends and am content simply to stay quiet in my cell and to wait for
the day of judgment. If it may be so, and if my enemies allow it, I hope
to write for you, not philippics like those of Demosthenes or Tully, but
commentaries upon the scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[112:1649](2060068.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="v.LVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p5"></span> [Acts
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#003)<span id="v.LVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[112:1650](2060068.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="v.LVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p6"></span> *i.e.,* the son of Sirach.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[112:1651](2060068.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="v.LVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p7"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
25.9](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#009)<span id="v.LVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[112:1652](2060068.htm#fr_1651) <span
id="v.LVII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p9"></span> Letter LI. to John Bp. of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[113:1653](2060068.htm#fr_1652) <span
id="v.LVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p10"></span> Cf. [Jude
9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009)<span id="v.LVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[113:1654](2060068.htm#fr_1653) <span
id="v.LVII-p10.3"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p11"></span> *i.e.,* ‘most reverend pope.’ This title
at first given to all bishops was in Jerome’s time becoming restricted
to metropolitans and patriarchs. Jerome, however, still uses it in the
wider sense. The omission of the title here may well have seemed
deliberate, as Jerome was known to entertain very bitter feelings
towards John of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[113:1655](2060068.htm#fr_1654) <span
id="v.LVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p13"></span> Livy v. 27.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[113:1656](2060068.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="v.LVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p14"></span> Plutarch, Life of Pyrrhus.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[113:1657](2060068.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="v.LVII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p15"></span> Jerome constantly speaks of Rufinus in
this way. See Letter CXXV. 18 and Apol. c. Ruf. I. 13, 32.

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[113:1658](2060068.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="v.LVII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p17"></span> Rufinus is meant.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[113:1659](2060068.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="v.LVII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p18"></span> Danaë, the daughter of Acrisius, was
confined by her father in a brazen tower to which Zeus obtained access
in the shape of a shower of gold.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[113:1660](2060068.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="v.LVII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p19"></span> Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[113:1661](2060068.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="v.LVII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p21"></span> Ter. And. prol. 17.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[114:1662](2060068.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="v.LVII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p22"></span> The two speeches on the Crown.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[114:1663](2060068.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="v.LVII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p23"></span> Only a small part of this is extant.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[114:1664](2060068.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="v.LVII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p26"></span> Hor. A. P. 133.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[114:1665](2060068.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="v.LVII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p28"></span> *i.e.* the poets of the so called New
Comedy.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[114:1666](2060068.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="v.LVII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LVII-p29.1"></span>κακοζηλίαν</span> .

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[114:1667](2060068.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="v.LVII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p30"></span> That is, five years later. Jerome
translated the Chronicle of Eusebius at Constantinople in 381–2.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[114:1668](2060068.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="v.LVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p31"></span> Vix brevis viæ spatia consummo.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[114:1669](2060068.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="v.LVII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p32"></span> Preface, translated in this Volume, § 1.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[114:1670](2060068.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="v.LVII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p33"></span> Preface §2.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[114:1671](2060068.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="v.LVII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p35"></span> This life long supposed to have been the
work of Athanasius was originally composed in Greek but had been
rendered into Latin by Evagrius bishop of Antioch.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[114:1672](2060068.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="v.LVII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p36"></span> *i.e.,* Hilary of Poitiers.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[115:1673](2060068.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="v.LVII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p38"></span> Lit. the seventy translators.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[115:1674](2060068.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="v.LVII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p39"></span> [Mark v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041)<span id="v.LVII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[115:1675](2060068.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="v.LVII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p40"></span> [Matt.
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010)<span id="v.LVII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[115:1676](2060068.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="v.LVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p41"></span> Quod. A.V. has ‘whom.’

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[115:1677](2060068.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="v.LVII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p42"></span> [Zech.
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)<span id="v.LVII-p42.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[115:1678](2060068.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="v.LVII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p43"></span> Statuarius.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[115:1679](2060068.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="v.LVII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p44"></span> [Zech.
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)<span id="v.LVII-p44.1"></span>,
A.V.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[115:1680](2060068.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="v.LVII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p45"></span> Pedissequus.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[115:1681](2060068.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="v.LVII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p46"></span> [John
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037), [Zech.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="v.LVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[115:1682](2060068.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="v.LVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p47"></span> *i.e.,* the Italic, for the Vulgate, which
was not then published, accurately represents the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[115:1683](2060068.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="v.LVII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p48"></span> [Matt.
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031), [Zech.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="v.LVII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[115:1684](2060068.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="v.LVII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p49"></span> [Matt. ii.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)<span id="v.LVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[115:1685](2060068.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="v.LVII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p50"></span> [Hos. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[115:1686](2060068.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="v.LVII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p51"></span> *i.e.,* the Septuagint and Vulgate
versions.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[115:1687](2060068.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="v.LVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p52"></span> [James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span id="v.LVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[115:1688](2060068.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="v.LVII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p53"></span> [Matt. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)<span id="v.LVII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[116:1689](2060068.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="v.LVII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p54"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[116:1690](2060068.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="v.LVII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p55"></span> So A.V. the Vulg. varies slightly.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[116:1691](2060068.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="v.LVII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p57"></span> [Matt.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023), [Isa.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="v.LVII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[116:1692](2060068.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="v.LVII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p58"></span> A.V.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[116:1693](2060068.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="v.LVII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p59"></span> [Matt.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)<span id="v.LVII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[116:1694](2060068.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="v.LVII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p60"></span> *i.e.* the Versio Itala which was vulgata
or ‘commonly used’ at this time as Jerome’s Version was afterwards.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[116:1695](2060068.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="v.LVII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p61"></span> [Mic. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="v.LVII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[116:1696](2060068.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="v.LVII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p62"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="v.LVII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[116:1697](2060068.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="v.LVII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p64"></span> [Mark i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p64.1"></span>;
see R.V.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[116:1698](2060068.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="v.LVII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p65"></span> [Mal. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[116:1699](2060068.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="v.LVII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p66"></span> [Isa. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="v.LVII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[117:1700](2060068.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="v.LVII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p67"></span> [Mark
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#026)<span id="v.LVII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[117:1701](2060068.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="v.LVII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p68"></span> [1 Sam. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[117:1702](2060068.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="v.LVII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p69"></span> [1 Sam. xxii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#016)<span id="v.LVII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[117:1703](2060068.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="v.LVII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p70"></span> [1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="v.LVII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[117:1704](2060068.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="v.LVII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p71"></span> This book is no longer extant. It belonged
to the same class as the Book of Enoch.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[117:1705](2060068.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="v.LVII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p72"></span> [Isa. lxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span id="v.LVII-p72.1"></span>, lxx.
A.V. has ‘what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.’

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[117:1706](2060068.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="v.LVII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p73"></span> [Rom. ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span id="v.LVII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[117:1707](2060068.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="v.LVII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p74"></span> Lit. ‘with the old version.’

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[117:1708](2060068.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="v.LVII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p75"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span id="v.LVII-p75.1"></span>. A.V.
is different.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[117:1709](2060068.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="v.LVII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p77"></span> So the Vulg.: A.V. punctuates differently.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[117:1710](2060068.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="v.LVII-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p78"></span> *i.e.* Hamor.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[117:1711](2060068.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="v.LVII-p78.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p79"></span> [Acts vii.
15-16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#015)<span id="v.LVII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[117:1712](2060068.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="v.LVII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p80"></span> Drachmæ.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[117:1713](2060068.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="v.LVII-p80.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p81"></span> Spelunca duplex.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[117:1714](2060068.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="v.LVII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p82"></span> A.V. marg.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[117:1715](2060068.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="v.LVII-p82.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p83"></span> [Gen. xxxiii.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)<span id="v.LVII-p83.1"></span>.
A.V. varies slightly.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[117:1716](2060068.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="v.LVII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p84"></span> [Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="v.LVII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[117:1717](2060068.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="v.LVII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p86"></span> [Isa. xxxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009)<span id="v.LVII-p86.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[117:1718](2060068.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="v.LVII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p87"></span> According to the LXX.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[118:1719](2060068.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="v.LVII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p88"></span> [Amos vi.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004)<span id="v.LVII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[118:1720](2060068.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="v.LVII-p88.2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p89"></span> Jerome’s Vulgate version supplied from the
Hebrew the omissions and removed the redundancies of the old Latin
version. These were due to the uncertain text of the LXX., on which
alone the old Latin version was founded.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[118:1721](2060068.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="v.LVII-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p90"></span> This statement is not borne out by the
facts.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[118:1722](2060068.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="v.LVII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p91"></span> Cf. [Deut. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#013)<span id="v.LVII-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[118:1723](2060068.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="v.LVII-p91.3"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p92"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LVII-p92.1"></span>πρόαρθρα</span>.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[118:1724](2060068.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="v.LVII-p92.3"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p93"></span> Lit. ‘with the heaven and with the earth’
([Gen. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span
id="v.LVII-p93.1"></span>). In Hebrew the preposition ‘with’ is
identical in form with the sign of the accus. Hence Aquila’s rendering.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[118:1725](2060068.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="v.LVII-p94.9"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p95"></span> Jerome apostrophises his critic.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[118:1726](2060068.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="v.LVII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p96"></span> The famous grammarian and critic of Homer.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[118:1727](2060068.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="v.LVII-p96.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p97"></span> Juv. i. 15.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[118:1728](2060068.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="v.LVII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p98"></span> Oleum perdit et impensas qui bovem mittit
ad ceroma.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[118:1729](2060068.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="v.LVII-p98.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p99"></span> Rufinus and Melania, who were believed by
Jerome to have instigated the theft. Their names are inserted in some
copies.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[118:1730](2060068.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="v.LVII-p99.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p100"></span> Plato, Apol. Soc. 21, 22.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[118:1731](2060068.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="v.LVII-p100.1"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p101"></span> This saying is variously attributed to
Chilon and others of the seven wise men of Greece.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LVIII](2060069)
