[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060007)  [Next](2060009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V"></span>

<span id="iv.V-p1"></span> <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> <span
id="iv.V-Page_xxviii"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iv.V-p1.1"></span>V.—<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.V-p1.2"></span>Estimate of the Scope and Value of Jerome’s
Writings.</span></span>

<span id="iv.V-p2"></span>*General*. The writings of Jerome must be
estimated not merely by their intrinsic merits, but by his historical
position and influence. It has already been pointed out that he stands
at the close of the old Græco-Roman civilisation: the last Roman poet of
any repute, Claudian, and the last Roman historian, Ammianus
Marcellinus, died before him. Augustin survived him, but the other great
Fathers, both in the East and in the West, had passed away before him.
The sack of Rome by Alaric (410) and its capture by Heraclian (413) took
place in his lifetime, and the Empire of the West fell in the next
thirty years. Communication between East and West had become rarer and
mutual knowledge less. Eusebius knew no Latin, Ambrose no Greek;
Rufinus, though a second-rate scholar, was welcomed in Italy on his
return from the East in 397 as capable of imparting to the Latins the
treasures of the Greek Church writers. The general enfeeblement of the
human mind, which remains one of the problems of history, had set in.
The new age of Christendom which was struggling to the birth was subject
to the influence of Jerome more than to that of any of the Fathers.

<span id="iv.V-p3"></span>*Secular Learning*. As regards general
learning, indeed, it was impossible that any legacy should descend from
him. He had systematically disparaged it (35-36, 498), though making use
and even a parade of it (101, 114, 149, 178); and had defended himself
by disingenuous pleas from the charge of acquiring it after his mature
convictions were formed (Apol. i. 30, 31, Vol. iii. 498–499). His
influence, therefore, would but increase the deep ignorance of
literature which now settled upon mankind till the times of the
Renaissance. His style indeed, is excellent, correct, and well balanced,
full of animation and of happy phrases (see Index—<span
class="c17"><span id="iv.V-p3.1"></span>Proverbs</span>), and passing
from one subject to another with great versatility. It is contrasted by
Erasmus with the barbarisms of the Schoolmen, as that of the Christian
Cicero. But it has also Cicero’s faults, especially his diffuseness. His
Latinity is remarkably pure, and with the exception of the frequent use
of the infinitive to express a purpose, and of a few words of late-Latin
like *confortare*, we are hardly aware in reading him that we are 400
years away from the Augustan Age. His mastery of style is the more
remarkable because he wrote nothing but a few letters and a very poor
Commentary till about his thirty-fifth year.

<span id="iv.V-p4"></span>*Letters*. His letters gain their special
charm from being so personal. He himself, his correspondents, and the
scenes in which they moved, are made to live before our eyes. See
especially his descriptions of Roman life in the Epistles to Eustochium
(Ep. xxii.<span id="iv.V-p4.1"></span>), to Paula on the death of
Blesilla (Ep. xxxix.<span id="iv.V-p4.2"></span>), to Læta (Ep.
cvii.<span id="iv.V-p4.3"></span>) on the education of her child, and
Ageruchia (Ep. cxxiii.<span id="iv.V-p4.4"></span>); his account of the
lives of Fabiola (Ep. lxxvii.<span id="iv.V-p4.5"></span>), of Paula
(Ep. cviii.<span id="iv.V-p4.6"></span>), and of Marcella (Ep.
cxxvii.<span id="iv.V-p4.7"></span>); his description of the clerical
life in his letter to Nepotian (Ep. lii.<span id="iv.V-p4.8"></span>),
and of the monastic life in his letters to Rusticus (Ep. cxxv.<span
id="iv.V-p4.9"></span>) and to Sabinian (Ep. cxlvii.<span
id="iv.V-p4.10"></span>); his letters of spiritual counsel to a mother
and daughter (Ep. cxvii.<span id="iv.V-p4.11"></span>), to Julianus (Ep.
cxviii.<span id="iv.V-p4.12"></span>), and to Rusticus (Ep. cxxii.<span
id="iv.V-p4.13"></span>), and of hermit life in his letter to Eustochium
(Ep. xxii.<span id="iv.V-p4.14"></span>, pp. 24–25); his satirical
description of Onasus (Ep. xl.<span id="iv.V-p4.15"></span>), Rufinus
(p. 250), and Vigilantius (p. 417); his enthusiastic delight in the Holy
Land in the letter written by him to Paula and Eustochium inviting
Marcella to join them (Ep. xlvi). Other characteristic and celebrated
letters are those to Asella (xlv.) on his leaving Rome; to Pammachius
(lvii.) on the best method of translation, which shows the liberties
taken by translators in his time; to Oceanus (lxix.) in defence of a
second marriage contracted by a Spanish Bishop, the first having been
before baptism; to Magnus (lxx.), indicating his use of secular
literature, and showing the great range of his knowledge; to Lucinius
(lxxi.) on the copying of his works; to Avitus (cxxiv.) on the book of
Origen, Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν; to Demetrias (cxxx.) on the maintenance of
virginity; to Ctesiphon (cxxxiii.) on the Pelagian controversy. (See
also Index, words <span class="c17"><span
id="iv.V-p4.16"></span>Stories</span> and <span class="c17"><span
id="iv.V-p4.17"></span>Pictures of Contemporary Life</span>.)

<span id="iv.V-p5"></span>*Publication*. Two circumstances conduced to
the vividness and importance of this series of letters. One of these is
the fact that no distinct line separated private documents from those
designed for publication. In the Catalogue of his works (De Vir. Ill.
135)1 he says: “Of the Letters to Paula and Eustochium, the number is
infinite: I write them every day.” And, when he became celebrated, he
says (79) that whatever he wrote was at once laid hold of and published,
alike by friends and enemies. We have therefore frequently his most
confidential utterances; while on the other hand his letters frequently
pass into treatises, and he turns to address others than those to whom
he is writing (59, 273, 274). But the process of publication was
precarious; so that between Letters xlvi. and xlvii. there is a gap of
seven years (386–93) without any letter. The other circumstance is the
difficulty of communication, which made letters rare and induced greater
care in their composition. Both these <span id="page_xxix">p.
xxix</span> <span id="iv.V-Page_xxix"></span>circumstances are well
illustrated by the early correspondence of Jerome with Augustin.
Augustin wrote from Hippo in Africa a long and important letter to
Jerome (Ep. lvi.<span id="iv.V-p5.1"></span>) in the year 394, which did
not reach Jerome at Bethlehem for nearly ten years. It was committed to
a presbyter named Profuturus to carry to Jerome; but he, being elected
to a bishopric before he started, turned back, and soon afterwards died.
The letter was neither forwarded to Jerome nor returned to Augustin; but
it was copied by others and became known in the West, while its somewhat
severe criticisms were unknown to Jerome himself. After a time Augustin
became aware by a short letter of introduction written by Jerome to a
friend that his first letter had miscarried, and he wrote a second (Ep.
lxvii.<span id="iv.V-p5.2"></span>) much in the same strain; but Paulus,
to whom it was entrusted, alleging his fear of the sea, failed to go to
Bethlehem; and a copy of the letter was found a year or two afterwards
by a friend of Jerome’s bound up with some of Augustin’s treatises in an
island of the Adriatic. Jerome on hearing of this was naturally
incensed; and it was not till the year 404 that he received an authentic
copy of both letters direct from Augustin, and was able to return an
answer. His answer, however, and a knowledge of his views are fuller
than they might have been had personal communication been easier.

<span id="iv.V-p6"></span>*Knowledge*. His knowledge was vast and
many-sided \[See especially the enumeration of Christian writers who
used Pagan literature (149–151), the curious stories about marriage
gathered from all ages (383–386), the descriptions of various kinds of
food and medicines (392–394) and the account of Pythagoras and his
doctrines (Apol. iii., 39, 40, in this Series, Vol. iii. 538)\], but it
was rather the curiosity of the monks of a later day than the temper of
the philosopher or the historian. He was well acquainted with the
history and literature of Rome and of Greece; he translated the
Chronicle of Eusebius; he speaks of the various routes to India (245),
of the Brahmans (97, 193, 397), of the custom of Suttee (381), and of
Buddha (380). But he is quite uncritical; he makes no correction of the
faults of the Chronicle, and his own additions to it reveal his
credulity. He was deeply affected by the sack of Rome, and recurs to it
again and again; but his reflections upon this and similar events hardly
go beyond those of a mediæval chronicler. He is a recluse, and has no
thought of the general interests of mankind.

<span id="iv.V-p7"></span>*Church History*. This lack of criticism and
of general interests combined with lack of time to prevent his making
any considerable contribution to church history. That he had some
faculties for this is shown by several passages in his Dialogue with a
Luciferian (328–331) and his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers (On
Illustrious Men, Vol. iii. 361–384). But his conception of church
history is shown by his declaration (315) that he intended the Lives of
Malchus and Hilarion as part of a series, which when completed would
have formed an ecclesiastical history. Such a history would have been
nothing more than a prolix edition of Rufinus’ History of the Monks.
Jerome’s value to the church historian is quite of another kind; it lies
in the illustration of contemporary life furnished by his own life and
letters and by the controversies in which he was engaged.

<span id="iv.V-p8"></span>*Theology*. These controversies bring us to
consider Jerome’s position as a theologian. Here he is admittedly weak.
He had no real interest in the subject. The first of his letters which
deals with theology, that written from the Desert to Pope Damasus,
points out clearly the difficulty raised by the difference of
phraseology of East and West, the Eastern speaking of one Essence and
three Substances, the Western, of one Substance and three Persons. But
he makes no attempt to grasp the reality lying behind these expressions,
and merely asks not to have the Eastern terms forced on his acceptance,
while he professes in the most absolute terms his submission to the
decision of the Bishop of Rome. This lack of genuine theological
interest best explains his conduct in relation to Origen, his
extravagant laudation of him at one time (46), his violent condemnation
at another (187). He was carried away by Origen’s genius and industry in
the department of biblical criticism and exegesis in which he was
himself absorbed, and though in his earlier discussion of the Vision of
Isaiah (22), which touched the doctrine of the Trinity, he had put aside
Origen’s view that the Seraphim were the Son and the Spirit as wrongly
expressing their relation to the Father, the doctrinal question was
feebly present to his thoughts, and he repeated Origen’s exposition
without blame as to the pre-existence of souls and the restoration of
Satan (Ruf. Apol. ii. 13, Vol. iii. 467). When the subject of Origen’s
orthodoxy was raised at a later time, he was unaware of any
inconsistency when he fell in with the general condemnation of his
doctrine. So with regard to Eusebius of Cæsarea. In the Preface to the
translation of his Book on the Site and Names of Hebrew Places (485), he
is “vir admirabilis”; in his controversy with Rufinus, Eusebius is
nothing but a heretic. In his controversy with Augustin as to the
quarrel between St. Peter and St. Paul in [Gal.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.V-p8.1"></span>., which
he interpreted as fictitious and pre-arranged with a view <span
id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span> <span id="iv.V-Page_xxx"></span>to bring out
St. Paul’s solution of the question about the Gentile converts, he was
manifestly in the wrong, and eventually seems to have felt this, yet as
one who was silenced rather than convinced. At a later period he says to
Augustin (Ep. cxxxiv.<span id="iv.V-p8.2"></span>), “If the heretics see
that we hold divergent opinions they will say calumniously that this is
a result of hatred, whereas it is my firm resolution to love you, to
look up to you, to defer to you with admiration, and to defend your
opinions as my own.” His dread of heresy may be gathered from passage in
the Anti-Pelagian Dialogue (i. 28) in which he expressly declares that,
while sin can be forgiven, heresy, as being impiety, is subject to the
threat: “They that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.” It is true that
in his Catalogue he shows wider sympathies, and defends himself in
writing to Augustin for the admission into it of men like Philo Judæus
and Seneca. But this, though it might have led him to the larger views
of the heathen world held by Origen and Clement, did not prevent his
condemning to eternal torments even the most virtuous of the heathen. He
tells Marcella, a Roman lady (41–42), that one object he has in writing
to her is to instruct her that the consul-elect Vettius Agorius
Prætextatus, who was known as a model of public and domestic virtue, and
who had then recently died, is in Tartarus, while their friend Lea, who
had died the same day, is in heaven.

<span id="iv.V-p9"></span>The lack of deep theological conviction is
shown in his Dialogue against the Pelagians, where it is evident that he
is far from that original and deep view of human corruption which
Augustin maintained; indeed, he appears at times to be arguing against
his own side, when he says (471) that, “Till the end we are subject to
sin; not,” (as the opponent falsely imputes to him) “through the fault
of our nature and constitution, but through frailty and the mutability
of the human will, which varies from moment to moment”—a sentence which
might be taken as expressing the doctrine of Pelagius himself. It is
evident that in these cases he is swayed not so much by the force of
truth as by the authority of certain powerful Bishops and the wish to
maintain his orthodox reputation. In his other controversies, with
Helvidius, Jovinian, John, Bishop of Jerusalem, Vigilantius, and
Rufinus, his method is take for granted the opinion current among the
Christians of his day, and to support it by copious (sometimes
excessive) quotations from Scripture, and by arguments sometimes well
chosen and acutely maintained, as in the book against Helvidius (339),
sometimes of the most frivolous character, as in that against
Vigilantius (422). In the three last of these controversies the
opposition is embittered by personal feeling, and Jerome hardly places
any restraint on the contempt and hatred which it engenders.

<span id="iv.V-p10"></span>In his criticisms on Scripture, however, he
has a freer judgment, as when he says (337): Whether you think that
Moses wrote the Pentateuch, or that Ezra re-edited it, in either case I
make no objection;” or (349) that it was the Book of Deuteronomy which
was found in the Temple in the reign of Josiah; or contrasts “the
flickering flame of the Apostles” with the brightness of the lamp of
Christ” (468). There are three points especially on which Jerome reached
an independent conviction, and maintained it courageously. (1) He made a
clear distinction between the Old Testament Canon and the Apocrypha
(194, 491, 492, 493) and this although he records the fact that the
Nicene Council had placed the Book of Judith in the Canon (494). For
this he is justly commemorated in the Articles of the Church of England
(Art. 6). (2) He maintains the essential identity of Bishops and
Presbyters (288) and the development of the Episcopal out of the
Presbyteral office (288, 289), in the face of the rapid tendency to the
extreme exaltation of the Episcopate (92). (3) In the great work of his
life, the composition of the Vulgate, he showed a clear and matured
conviction, and a noble tenacity, unshaken either by popular clamour
(490) or authority like that Augustin (189).

<span id="iv.V-p11"></span>A few words may here be said on the
asceticism which Jerome so eagerly promoted. If we ask how it was that
he embraced it so fervently as to read it into almost every line of the
Scriptures, we can only answer that it was part of the spirit of the
time. Jerome had not the elevation of mind which might have enabled him
to exercise a judgment upon the current which was bearing him away, or
the higher critical power which would distinguish between what was in
the Scriptures and what he brought to them. His habit of mind was to
accept his general principles from some kind of church authority, which
was partly that of the Bishops, partly the general drift of the
sentiment of the Christians of his day; and having accepted them, to
advocate them vehemently and without discrimination. Jerome could indeed
exercise a certain moderation, even in matters of asceticism (246, 267).
But his general attitude is that which disdained the common joys of
life, which thought of eating, drinking, clothing or lodging, and most
of all marriage, as physical indulgences which should suppressed as far
as possible, rather than as the means of a noble social intercourse; and
dread of impurity haunts him to such an extent as to entirely vitiate
his view of society, and <span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span> <span
id="iv.V-Page_xxxi"></span>to cause him to disparage, and all but
forbid, the married relation (29, 384, etc.). His view of monasticism in
its inner principles is seen in his treatises against Helvidius,
Jovinian, and Vigilantius. The reader may be specially referred to a
passage in the last-named treatise, p. 423. If we ask the further
question, how the tendency arose which so completely swayed him, we can
only attribute it to the state of Roman society in the fourth and fifth
centuries, which laid earnest men open to influences already working in
other parts of the world. Jerome knew of the Brahmans and the
Gymnosophists of India (97, 193, 397), and he several times mentions
Buddha (380) as an example of asceticism. But students of Buddhism have
failed to trace any direct filiation between the asceticism of the East
and the West. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) The existence of Essenes
in Palestine and the Therapeutæ in Egypt, and the unquestionable fact
that Christian asceticism originated in Egypt, make some connection with
the East probable; and the system of Manes, though at once repudiated,
may have exerted some subtle influence. Certain states of the human mind
seem all-pervasive, like the causes of diseases which spring up at once
in many different places; and principles like those of asceticism maybe
communicated through chance conversations or commercial intercourse when
the soil is prepared for their reception.

<span id="iv.V-p13"></span>But it seems better to look to the social and
political state of the world as the predisposing cause of monasticism.
Even in the East it is thought that the miserable conditions of
practical life have been the main cause of a religion of despair; and
the decline and fall of the Roman Empire in the fourth and fifth
centuries offered similar causes in abundance. The grace which is
completely absent from the great Christian writers of that epoch is
hope. Such hope as is found even in the Civitas Dei of Augustin is
entirely that of the world to come. The world before them seemed
hopelessly corrupt. The descriptions of private morals given by Jerome
are borne out by Ammianus Marcellinus; the failure of public spirit and
military valour was equally conspicuous; and Gratian and Stilicho appear
on the scene only to be murdered. When the crash of Alaric’s sack of
Rome shook the existing world, no one realised that a new Christian
world was coming, and the flight which Jerome witnessed of thousands of
citizens from the sinking city to the mountains of Palestine was but one
symptom of the despair which made them, to use Jerome's words, “quit the
most frequented cities that in the fields and solitude they might mourn
for sin and draw down on themselves the compassion of Christ” (446).

<span id="iv.V-p14"></span>As an illustrator of Scripture, Jerome did
much, and in some respects excellent work. The Book of Hebrew Names was
no doubt of much use in the ages in which men were ignorant of Hebrew,
although it has the clumsy arrangement of a separate glossary for each
book of the Bible; it is very faulty and uncritical; there is no
explanation, for instance, of Lehi in Judges, or of Engedi or Ichabod in
1 Samuel, or of Bethabara or Bethany in John, and the meanings given to
words are extremely uncritical and sometimes absurd. Cherubim is said to
mean a multitude of knowledge; Jezebel, “flowing with blood, a litter, a
dung heap”; and Laodicæa, “the tribe beloved of the Lord, or, they have
been in vomiting.” It is worthless now except as showing the state of
knowledge of the fourth century A.D., and that of the author of the
Vulgate.

<span id="iv.V-p15"></span>The Book of the Site and Names of Hebrew
Places belongs rather to Eusebius than to Jerome, being translated from
Eusebius, though with some additions. An account of it is given in the
Prolegomena to Eusebius. The arrangement of this book is, like the
former, very inconvenient, the names under each letter being placed in
separate groups in the order of the books of Scripture in which they
occur: for instance, under the letter A we have first the names in
Genesis, then those in Exodus, and so on. But there is less room here
for what is fanciful, and the testimony of men who lived in Palestine in
the fourth and fifth centuries is of great value still to the student of
sacred topography. When the places are outside the writer’s knowledge,
credulity is apt to creep in, as when the author tells us that in Ararat
portions of the ark are still to be found.

<span id="iv.V-p16"></span>The Book of Hebrew Questions on Genesis is
simply a set of notes on passages where the reference to the Hebrew text
gives a different reading from that of the LXX., which was received as
authoritative up to Jerome’s day. For instance, in [Gen. xlvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.V-p16.1"></span>, the
LXX. says that Joseph’s descendants born in Egypt were nine, the Hebrew,
two. Jerome accounts for the discrepancy by the supposition that the
LXX. added in the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh, who were subsequently
born in Egypt, and who in the LXX. are enumerated just before. Jerome
states in the preface his intention to compose a similar set of notes to
each <span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span> <span
id="iv.V-Page_xxxii"></span>book of the Old Testament, but he was never
able to go beyond Genesis. What he gives us is of considerable interest
and value, so that it is a matter of regret that he could not go
further.

<span id="iv.V-p17"></span>As a commentator, Jerome’s fault is a lack of
independence; his merit lies in giving fully the opinions of others
which we might otherwise not have known. This he considers, as seen in
his controversy with Rufinus, the principal task of a commentator (Apol.
i. 16, Vol. iii. 491). In the passages there at issue, he states the
most incongruous interpretations without criticising them, and Rufinus
can hardly be blamed for suggesting that he is sometimes expressing his
own opinion under that of “another.” In matters of ordinary
interpretation his judgment is good. But fanciful ideas are apt to
intrude, as when, in the Commentary on Ecclesiastes, the city delivered
by the poor wise man is made to mean the individual delivered from Satan
by the better man within him, or the Church delivered from the hosts of
darkness by Christ. When an occasion for the introduction of asceticism
occurs, Jerome never hesitates at any process, however absurd, which
will draw the passage to a sanction of his peculiar views (Against
Jovin. i. 30, p. 368). We should have been glad, had space permitted, to
have given a specimen of his better style of exposition, but it was
found necessary to suppress this.

<span id="iv.V-p18"></span>It is as a translator of Scripture that
Jerome is best known. His Vulgate was made at the right moment and by
the right man. The Latin language was still living, although Latin
civilisation was dying; and Jerome was a master of it. It is only to be
regretted that he did not give fuller scope to his literary power in his
translation of Scripture. In his letter to Pammachius on the best method
of translation (114), he advocates great freedom of treatment, even such
as amounts to paraphrase, and even to the insertion of sentences
congruous to the sense of the author. He takes the fact that the
quotations in the New Testament from the Old often present discrepancies
in words and sense as justifying similar discrepancies in a translation.
He does not, however, appear in dealing with ordinary books to have used
this license in any extreme way; and his translations, without departing
from correctness, read as good literary composition. But from the
operation of his rules of translation he expressly excepts the
Scriptures. “In other books,” he says (113), “my effort is not to
express word by word, but meaning by meaning; but in the Holy Scriptures
even the order of the words has a secret meaning” (et ordo verborum
mysterium est). He even says (80): “A version made for the use of the
Church, even though it may possess a literary charm, ought to disguise
and avoid it as far as possible.” This belief in a secret meaning in the
words and their order as apart from the sense goes far to injure the
Vulgate translation. His principles, indeed, are excellent, namely, (1)
never to swerve needlessly from the original; (2) to avoid solecisms;
(3) even by the admission of solecisms, to give the true sense. But it
is evident that they must be vitiated by the supposition of a hidden
sense in the arrangement of the words; and the result is a style which
frequently deprives a passage of its proper elegance, and the pleasure
which it should give to the reader, and a too frequent introduction of
solecisms and abandonment of the attempt to make sense of a passage. It
also gives an air of saintly unreality to many parts of the Scriptures
and thus to produce confusion. The merits of the translation are also
very various, as was the time which Jerome bestowed on the different
parts. The Books of Solomon, for instance, he translated very rapidly
(492), the Book of Tobit in a single day (494). For some parts he
trusted to his own knowledge, for others he obtained aid at great cost
of money and trouble (Preface to Job and to Tobit, 491, 494). But, while
we thus go behind the scenes, we must not fail to look at the completed
work as a whole. It was wrought out with noble perseverance and
unflinching purpose amidst many discouragements. It was highly prized
even in Jerome’s lifetime, so that he is able to record that a large
part of the Old Testament was translated into Greek from his version by
his friend Sophronius, and was read in the Eastern Churches (492). After
his death it won its way to become the Vulgate or common version of
Western Christendom; it was the Bible of the Middle Ages; and in the
year 1546 (eleven centuries after its author’s death) was pronounced by
the Council of Trent to be the only true version, and alone authorised
to be printed.

<span id="iv.V-p19"></span>A few personal details must be given to
illustrate his method of composition and his surroundings. Nothing is
known of his personal appearance. His health was weak, and he had
several long illnesses, especially in the years 398, 404, and in the
last year of his life. His eyes began to fail during his stay at
Constantinople in 380–382, and he usually employed an amanuensis; but he
still wrote at times, and what he wrote was more polished than what he
dictated. “In the one case I constantly turn the stylus; in the other,
whatever words come into my mouth I heap together in my rapid utterance”
(Ep. lxxiv. 6<span id="iv.V-p19.1"></span>). He composed with great
rapidity, and dictated at times as much as one thousand lines in a day
(Comm. on Ephes., Book ii. Preface). He often, especially when in weak
health, lay on a couch (Ep. lxxiv. 6<span id="iv.V-p19.2"></span>),
taking <span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span> <span
id="iv.V-Page_xxxiii"></span>down one volume after another to aid in the
composition of his Commentaries. And he often sat late into the night
\[his book against Vigilantius was “the lucubration of a single night”
(423)\], the days being occupied in business of various kinds, as stated
above—the monasteries, the entertainment of strangers, the teaching of
boys, the exposition of Scripture to his brethren in the monastery, and,
according to Sulpicius Severus, the charge of the parish of Bethlehem.
As has been mentioned above, he was interrupted again and again by
illness, and on several occasions was in alarm from the threatened
invasions of the Huns and Isaurians, and at the end of his life from the
violent adherents of Pelagius. He also suffered from poverty, and his
friends one by one were taken from him. But he persevered against all
obstacles; and his latest works, the Anti-Pelagian Dialogue and the
Commentary on Jeremiah, show little if any diminution of power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xxxi:1](2060008.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="iv.V-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V-p12"></span> See a remarkable article on “The New
Testament and Buddhism,” by Professor Estlin Carpenter, in the
*Nineteenth Century* for July, 1879.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2060009.md)
