[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060001)  [Next](2060003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="iii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="iii-p1.1"></span>Translator’s Preface.</span>

<span id="iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii-p3.1"></span>The</span> grounds on which certain works of Jerome
have been selected, as most important, for translation in this edition,
while others have been omitted, are given in the Prolegomena (p.
xvii–xviii).

<span id="iii-p4"></span>The first draught of the translation was
prepared by my coadjutors and former pupils, Mr. G. Lewis and Mr. W. G.
Martley, who also added most of the notes; but I have gone minutely
through every part, correcting, adding, and at times re-writing, both in
the <span class="c17"><span id="iii-p4.1"></span>ms</span>. and in the
proof, and I have composed the Prolegomena and Indices.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>I have endeavoured to make the work useful not
to the theologian alone, but also to the historical student. The general
reader will find interest and even entertainment in the parts of the
work referred to in the Index under such headings as “Pictures of
Contemporary Life,” “Proverbs,” “Stories” and “Quotations,” or by
looking at the Letters to which special attention is called in the
Prolegomena at p. xviii. The Table of Contents also, in which a short
description is given of the purport of each Letter, will help each class
of readers to select the parts suitable to them. Finally, the Life of
Jerome included in the Prolegomena, though closely compressed, has been
furnished with copious references, which will make it a key to the whole
work. It is only to be regretted that, through the impossibility of
including Jerome’s work on Illustrious Men and his controversy with
Rufinus in the present volume, it is necessary to send the reader for a
few of the most important facts to Vol. iii of this Series.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>I can hardly expect that, in a work which has
been carried through amidst many pressing engagements, which has been
printed two thousand miles away, and of which I have had only a single
proof to correct, I have been able to avoid all mistakes. But I hope
that no inaccuracies have crept in of sufficient magnitude to mar the
usefulness of the work. I have felt the responsibility of making the
first translation of Jerome into English, especially as a translation
once made acts as a hindrance to those who might wish to attempt the
same task. But I trust that the present work may be found to be not
altogether an unworthy presentment of the great Latin church-writer to
the English-speaking world.

<span id="iii-p7"></span><span class="c10"><span id="iii-p7.1"></span>W.
H. Fremantle.</span>

<span id="iii-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii-p8.1"></span>Canterbury</span>, *November*, 1892.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prolegomena to Jerome.](2060003.md)
