[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060094)  [Next](2060096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXXXIV"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXIV. To Pammachius and
Oceanus.</span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p2"></span>A calm letter in which Jerome defines and
justifies his own attitude towards Origen, but unduly minimizes his
early enthusiasm for him. He admires him in the same way that Cyprian
admired Tertullian but does not in any way adopt his errors. He then
describes his own studies and recounts his obligations to Apollinaris,
Didymus, and a Jew named Bar-anina. The rest of the letter deals with
the errors of Origen, the state of the text of his writings, and the
eulogy of him composed by the martyr Pamphilus (the authenticity of
which Jerome assails without any sufficient reason). The date of the
letter is 400 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p3"></span>Jerome to the brothers Pammachius and
Oceanus, with all good wishes.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p4"></span>1. The sheets that you send me <span
id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) cover me at once with compliments
and confusion; for, while they praise my ability, they take away my
sincerity in the faith. But as both at Alexandria and at Rome and, I may
say, throughout the whole world good men have made it a habit to take
the same liberties with my name, esteeming me only so far that they
cannot bear to be heretics without having me of the number, I will leave
aside personalities and only answer specific charges. For it is of no
benefit to a cause to <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="v.LXXXIV-Page_176"></span>encounter railing with railing and to
retaliate for attacks upon oneself by attacks upon one’s opponents. We
are commanded not to return evil for evil <span
id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) but to overcome evil with
good, <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549) to take our fill of
insults, and to turn the other cheek to the smiter. <span
id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550)

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p9"></span>2. It is charged against me that I have
sometimes praised Origen. If I am not mistaken I have only done so in
two places, in the short preface (addressed to Damasus) to his homilies
on the Song of Songs and in the prologue to my book of Hebrew Names. In
these passages do the dogmas of the church come into question? Is
anything said of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? or of the
resurrection of the flesh? or of the condition and material of the soul?
I have merely praised the simplicity of his rendering and commentary and
neither the faith nor the dogmas of the Church come in at all. Ethics
only are dealt with and the mist of allegory is dispelled by a clear
explanation. I have praised the commentator but not the theologian, the
man of intellect but not the believer, the philosopher but not the
apostle. But if men wish to know my real judgement upon Origen; let them
read my commentaries upon Ecclesiastes, let them go through my three
books upon the epistle to the Ephesians: they will then see that I have
always opposed his doctrines. How foolish it would be to eulogize a
system so far as to endorse its blasphemy! The blessed Cyprian takes
Tertullian for his master, as his writings prove; yet, delighted as he
is with the ability of this learned and zealous writer he does not join
him in following Montanus and Maximilla. <span
id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551) Apollinaris is the author of a most
weighty book against Porphyry, and Eusebius has composed a fine history
of the Church; yet of these the former has mutilated Christ’s incarnate
humanity, <span id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552) while the latter is
the most open champion of the Arian impiety. <span
id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) “Woe,” says Isaiah, “unto them that
call evil good and good evil; that put bitter for sweet and sweet for
bitter.” <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554) We must not detract
from the virtues of our opponents—if they have any praiseworthy
qualities—but neither must we praise the defects of our friends. Each
several case must be judged on its own merits and not by a reference to
the persons concerned. While Lucilius is rightly assailed by
Horace <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555) for the unevenness of
his verses, he is equally rightly praised for his wit and his charming
style.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p15"></span>3. In my younger days I was carried away
with a great passion for learning, yet I was not like some presumptuous
enough to teach myself. At Antioch I frequently listened to Apollinaris
of Laodicea, and attended his lectures; yet, although he instructed me
in the holy scriptures, I never embraced his disputable doctrine as to
their meaning. At length my head became sprinkled with gray hairs so
that I looked more like a master than a disciple. Yet I went on to
Alexandria and heard Didymus. <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556)
And I have much to thank him for: for what I did not know I learned from
him, and what I knew already I did not forget. So excellent was his
teaching. Men fancied that I had now made an end of learning. Yet once
more I came to Jerusalem and to Bethlehem. What trouble and expense it
cost me to get Baraninas <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) to
teach me under cover of night. For by his fear of the Jews he presented
to me in his own person a second edition of Nicodemus. <span
id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) Of all of these I have frequently
made mention in my works. The doctrines of Apollinaris and of Didymus
are mutually contradictory. The squadrons of the two leaders must drag
me in different directions, for I acknowledge both as my masters. If it
is expedient to hate any men and to loath any race, I have a strange
dislike to those of the circumcision. For up to the present day they
persecute our Lord Jesus Christ in the synagogues of Satan. <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) Yet can anyone find fault with me
for having had a Jew as a teacher? Does a certain person dare to bring
forward against me the letter I wrote to Didymus calling him my master?
It is a great crime, it would seem, for me a disciple to give to one
both old and learned the name of master. And yet when I ask leave to
look at the letter which has been held over so long to discredit me at
last, there is nothing in it but courteous language and a few words of
greeting. Such charges are both foolish and frivolous. It would be more
to the point to exhibit a passage in which I have defended heresy or
praised some wicked doctrine of Origen. In the portion of Isaiah which
describes the crying of the two seraphim <span
id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) he explains these to be the Son and
the Holy Ghost; but have not I altered this hateful explanation into a
reference to the two testaments? <span
id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) <span id="page_177">p. 177</span>
<span id="v.LXXXIV-Page_177"></span>I have the book in my hand as it was
published twenty years ago. In numbers of my works and especially in my
commentaries I have, as occasion has offered, mangled this heathen
school. And if my opponents allege that I have done more than anyone
else to form a collection of Origen’s books, I answer that I only wish I
could have the works of all theological writers that by diligent study
of them, I might make up for the slowness of my own wits. I have made a
collection of his books, I admit; but because I know everything that he
has written I do not follow his errors. I speak as a Christian to
Christians: believe one who has tried him. His doctrines are poisonous,
they are unknown to the Holy Scriptures, nay more, they do them
violence. I have read Origen, I repeat, I have read him; and if it is a
crime to read him, I admit my guilt: indeed, these Alexandrian writings
have emptied my purse. If you will believe me, I have never been an
Origenist: if you will not believe me, I have now ceased to be one. But
if even this fails to convince you, you will compel me in self-defence
to write against your favourite, so that, if you will not believe me
when I disclaim him, you will have to believe me when I attack him. But
I find readier credence when I go wrong than when I shew amendment. And
this is not surprising, for my would-be friends suppose me a
fellow-disciple with them in the arcana of their system. I am loath,
they fancy, to profess esoteric doctrines before persons who according
to them are brute-like and made of clay. For it is an axiom with them
that pearls ought not to be lightly cast before swine, nor that which is
holy given to the dogs. <span id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) They
agree with David when he says: “Thy word have I hid in mine heart that I
might not sin against thee;” <span id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563)
and when in another place he describes the righteous man as one “who
speaketh truth with his neighbour,” <span
id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564) that is with those who “are of the
household of faith.” <span id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) From
these passages they conclude that those of us who as yet are uninitiated
ought to be told falsehoods, lest, being still unweaned babes, we should
be choked by too solid food. Now that perjury and lying enter into their
mysteries and form a bond between them appears most clearly from the
sixth book of Origen’s Miscellanies, <span
id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) in which he harmonizes the
Christian doctrine <span id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) with the
conceptions of Plato.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p28"></span>4. What must I do then? deny that I am of
Origen’s opinion? They will not believe me. Swear that I am not? They
will laugh and say that I deal in lies. I will do the one thing which
they dread. I will bring forward their sacred rites and mysteries, and
will expose the cunning whereby they delude simple folk like myself.
Perhaps, although they refuse credence to my voice when I deny, they may
believe my pen when I accuse. Of one thing they are particularly
apprehensive, and that is that their writings may some day be taken as
evidence against their master. They are ready to make statements on oath
and to disclaim them afterwards with an oath as false as the first. When
asked for their signatures they use shifts and seek excuses. One says:
“I cannot condemn what no one else has condemned.” Another says: “No
decision was arrived at on the point by the Fathers.” <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) It is thus that they appeal to the
judgment of the world to put off the necessity of assenting to a
condemnation. Another says with yet more assurance: “how am I to condemn
men whom the council of Nicæa has left untouched? For the council which
condemned Arius would surely have condemned Origen too, had it
disapproved of his doctrines.” They were bound in other words to cure
all the diseases of the church at once and with one remedy; and by
parity of reasoning we must deny the majesty of the Holy Ghost because
nothing was said of his nature in that council. But the question was of
Arius, not of Origen; of the Son, not of the Holy Ghost. The bishops at
the council proclaimed their adherence to a dogma which was at the time
denied; they said nothing about a difficulty which no one had raised.
And yet they covertly struck at Origen as the source of the Arian
heresy: for, in condemning those who deny the Son to be of the substance
of the Father, they have condemned Origen as much as Arius. On the
ground taken by these persons we have no right to condemn
Valentine, <span id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) Marcion, <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) or the Cataphrygians, <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) or Manichæus, none of whom are
named by the council of Nicæa, and yet there is no doubt that in time
they were prior to it. But when they find themselves pressed either to
subscribe or to leave the Church, you may see some strange twisting.
They qualify their words, they arrange them anew, they use vague
expressions; so as, if possible, to hold both our confession and that of
our opponents, to be called indifferently heretics and Catholics. As if
it were not in the same spirit that the Delphian Apollo (or, as he is
sometimes called, Loxias) gave his oracles <span id="page_178">p.
178</span> <span id="v.LXXXIV-Page_178"></span>to Crœsus and to Pyrrhus;
cheating with a similar device two men widely separated in time. <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) To make my meaning clear I will
give a few examples.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p34"></span>5. We believe, say they, in the
resurrection of the body. This confession, if only it be sincere, is
free from objection. But as there are bodies celestial and bodies
terrestrial <span id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) and as thin air
and the æther are both according to their natures called bodies, they
use the word body instead of the word flesh in order that an orthodox
person hearing them say body may take them to mean flesh while a heretic
will understand that they mean spirit. This is their first piece of
craft, and if this is found out, they devise fresh wiles, and,
pretending innocence themselves, accuse us of malice. As though they
were frank believers they say, “We believe in the resurrection of the
flesh.” Now when they have said this, the ignorant crowd thinks it ought
to be satisfied, particularly because these exact words are found in the
creed. <span id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574) If you go on to
question them farther, a buzz of disapproval is heard in the ring and
their backers cry out: “You have heard them say that they believe in the
resurrection of the flesh; what more do you want?” the popular favour is
transferred from our side to theirs, and while they are called honest,
we are looked on as false accusers. But if you set your face steadily
and keeping a firm hold of their admission about the flesh, proceed to
press them as to whether they assert the resurrection of that flesh
which is visible and tangible, which walks and speaks, they first laugh
and then signify their assent. And when we inquire whether the
resurrection will exhibit anew the hair and the teeth, the chest and the
stomach, the hands and the feet, and all the other members of the body,
then no longer able to contain their mirth they burst out laughing and
tell us that in that case we shall need barbers, and cakes, and doctors,
and cobblers. Do we, they ask us in turn, believe that after the
resurrection men’s cheeks will still be rough and those of women smooth,
and that sex will differentiate their bodies as it does at present? Then
if we admit this, they at once deduce from our admission conclusions
involving the grossest materialism. Thus, while they maintain the
resurrection of the body as a whole, they deny the resurrection of its
separate members.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p37"></span>6. The present is not a time to speak
rhetorically against a perverse doctrine. Neither the rich vocabulary of
Cicero nor the fervid eloquence of Demosthenes could adequately convey
the warmth of my feeling, were I to attempt to expose the quibbles by
which these heretics, while verbally professing a belief in the
resurrection, in their hearts deny it. For their women finger their
breasts, slap their chests, pinch their legs and arms, and say, “What
will a resurrection profit us if these frail bodies are to rise again?
No, if we are to be like angels, <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) we shall have the bodies of
angels.” That is to say they scorn to rise again with the flesh and
bones wherewith even Christ rose. <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) Now suppose for a moment that in my
youth I went astray and that, trained as I was in the schools of heathen
philosophy, I was ignorant, in the beginning of my faith, of the dogmas
of Christianity, and fancied that what I had read in Pythagoras and
Plato and Empedocles was also contained in the writings of the apostle:
Supposing, I say, that I believed all this, why do you yet follow the
error of a mere babe and sucking child in Christ? Why do you learn
irreligion of one who as yet knew not religion? After shipwreck one has
still a plank to cling to; <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577)
and one may atone for sin by a frank confession. You have followed me
when I have gone astray; follow me also now that I have been brought
back. In youth we have wandered; now that we are old let us mend our
ways. Let us unite our tears and our groans; let us weep together, and
return to the Lord our Maker. <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578)
Let us not wait for the repentance of the devil; for this is a vain
anticipation and one that will drag us into the deep of hell. Life must
be sought or lost here. If I have never followed Origen, it is in vain
that you seek to discredit me: if I have been his disciple, imitate my
penitence. You have believed my confession; credit also my denial.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p42"></span>7. But it will be said, “If you knew
these things, why did you praise him in your works?” I should praise him
today but that you and men like you praise his errors. I should still
find his talent attractive, but that some people have been attracted by
his impiety. “Read <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) all
things,” says the apostle, “hold fast that which is good.” <span
id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) Lactantius in his books and
particularly in his letters to Demetrian altogether denies the
subsistence of the Holy Spirit, and following the error of the Jews says
that the passages in which he is spoken of refer to the Father or to the
Son and that the words ‘holy spirit’ merely prove <span id="page_179">p.
179</span> <span id="v.LXXXIV-Page_179"></span>the holiness of these two
persons in the Godhead. But who can forbid me to read his
*Institutes*—in which he has written against the Gentiles with much
ability—simply because this opinion of his is to be abhorred?
Apollinaris <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) has written
excellent treatises against Porphyry, and I approve of his labours,
although I despise his doctrine in many points because of its
foolishness. If you too for your parts will but admit that Origen errs
in certain things I will not say another syllable. Acknowledge that he
thought amiss concerning the Son, and still more amiss concerning the
Holy Spirit, point out the impiety of which he has been guilty in
speaking of men’s souls as having fallen from heaven, and shew that,
while in word he asserts the resurrection of the flesh, he destroys the
force of this language by other assertions. As, for instance, that,
after many ages and one “restitution of all things,” <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) it will be the same for Gabriel as
for the devil, for Paul as for Caiaphas, for virgins as for prostitutes.
When once you have rejected these misstatements and have parted them
with your censor’s wand from the faith of the Church, I may read what is
left with safety, and having first taken the antidote need no longer
dread the poison. For instance it will do me no harm to say as I have
said, “Whereas in his other books Origen has surpassed all other
writers, in commenting on the Song of Songs he has surpassed himself”;
nor will I fear to face the words with which formerly in my younger days
I spoke of him as a doctor of the churches. <span
id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583) Will it be pretended, that I was
bound to accuse a man whose works I was translating by special request?
that I was bound to say in my preface, “This writer whose books I
translate is a heretic: beware of him, reader, read him not, flee from
the viper: or, if you are bent on reading him, know that the treatises
which I have translated have been garbled by heretics and wicked men;
yet you need not fear, for I have corrected all the places which they
have corrupted,” that in other words I ought to have said: “the writer
that I translate is a heretic, but I, his translator, am a Catholic.”
The fact is that you and your party in your anxiety to be
straightforward, ingenuous, and honest, have paid too little regard to
the precepts of rhetoric and to the devices of oratory. For in admitting
that his books *On First Principles* are heretical and in trying to lay
the blame of this upon others, you raise difficulties for your readers;
you induce them to examine the whole life of the author and to form a
judgment on the question from the remainder of his writings. I on the
other hand have been wise enough to emend silently what I wished to
emend: thus by ignoring the crime I have averted prejudice from the
criminal. Doctors tell us that serious maladies ought not to be
subjected to treatment, but should be left to nature, lest the remedies
applied should intensify the disease. It is now almost one hundred and
fifty years since Origen died at Tyre. <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) Yet what Latin writer has ever
ventured to translate his books *On the Resurrection* and *On First
Principles*, his *Miscellanies* <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) and his *Commentaries* or as he
himself calls them his *Tomes?* <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) Who has ever cared by so infamous a
work to cover himself with infamy? I am not more eloquent than Hilary or
truer to the faith than Victorinus who both have rendered his
*Homilies* <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) not in exact
versions but in independent paraphrases. Recently also Ambrose
appropriated his *Six Days’ Work*, <span
id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) but in such a way that it expressed
the views of Hippolytus and Basil rather than of Origen. You profess to
take me for your model, and blind as moles in relation to others you
scan me with the eyes of gazelles. Well, had I been ill-disposed towards
Origen, I might have translated these very books so as to make his worst
writings known to Latin readers; but this I have never done; and, though
many have asked me, I have always refused. For it has never been my
habit to crow over the mistakes of men whose talents I admire. Origen
himself, were he still alive, would soon fall out with you his would-be
patrons and would say with Jacob: “Ye have troubled me to make me to
stink among the inhabitants of the land.” <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589)

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p54"></span>8. Does any one wish to praise Origen?
Let him praise him as I do. From his childhood he was a great man, and
truly a martyr’s son. <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) At
Alexandria he presided over the school of the church, succeeding a man
of great learning the presbyter Clement. So greatly did he abhor
sensuality that, out of a zeal for God but yet one not according to
knowledge, <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591) he castrated
himself with a knife. Covetousness he trampled under foot. He knew the
scriptures by heart and laboured hard day and night to explain their
meaning. He delivered in church more than a thousand sermons, and
published innumerable commentaries which he called tomes. These I now
pass over, for it is not my purpose to catalogue his writings. Which of
us can read all that he has written? and who can fail to ad<span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="v.LXXXIV-Page_180"></span>mire his
enthusiasm for the scriptures? If some one in the spirit of Judas the
Zealot <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) brings up to me his
mistakes, he shall have his answer in the words of Horace:

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p58"></span>’Tis true that sometimes Homer sleeps,
but then

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p59"></span>He’s not without excuse:

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p60"></span>The fault is venial, for his work is
long. <span id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593)

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p62"></span>Let us not imitate the faults of one
whose virtues we cannot equal. Other men have erred concerning the
faith, both Greeks and Latins, but I must not mention their names lest I
should be supposed to defend Origen not by his own merits but by the
errors of others. This, you will say, is to accuse them and not to
excuse him. You would be right, if I had declared him not to have erred,
or if I had professed a belief that the apostle Paul or an angel from
heaven <span id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594) ought to be listened
to in a depravation of the faith. But as it is seeing I frankly admit
him to be wrong, I may read him on the same terms as I read others,
because if he is wrong so also are they. But you may say, If error is
common to many, why do you assail him alone? I answer, because he alone
is praised by you as an apostle. Take away your exaggerated love for
him, and I am ready to take away the greatness of my dislike. While you
gather other men’s faulty statements out of their books merely to defend
Origen in his error, you extol this latter to the sky and will not allow
that he has erred at all. Whosoever you are who are thus preaching new
doctrines, I beseech you, spare the ears of the Romans, spare the faith
of a church which an apostle has praised. <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595) Why after four hundred years do you
try to teach us Romans doctrines of which until now we have known
nothing? Why do you publicly proclaim opinions which Peter and
Paul <span id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596) refused to profess?
Until now no such teaching has been heard of, and yet the world has
become christian. For my part I will hold fast in my old age the faith
wherein I was born again in my boyhood. <span
id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597) They speak of us as
claytowners, <span id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598) made out of
dirt, brutish and carnal, because, say they, we refuse to receive the
things of the spirit; but of course they themselves are citizens of
Jerusalem and their mother is in heaven. <span
id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) I do not despise the flesh in which
Christ was born and rose again, or scorn the mud which, baked into a
clean vessel, reigns in heaven. And yet I wonder why they who detract
from the flesh live after the flesh, <span
id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) and cherish and delicately nurture
that which is their enemy. Perhaps indeed they wish to fulfil the words
of scripture: “love your enemies and bless them that persecute
you.” <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601) I love the flesh, but I
love it only when it is chaste, when it is virginal, when it is
mortified by fasting: I love not its works but itself, that flesh which
knows that it must be judged, and therefore dies as a martyr for Christ,
which is scourged and torn asunder and burned with fire.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p71"></span>9. The folly also of their contention
that certain heretics and ill-disposed persons have tampered with
Origen’s writings may be shewn thus. Could any person be more wise, more
learned, or more eloquent than were Eusebius and Didymus, Origen’s
supporters? Of these the former in the six volumes of his
*Apology* <span id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) asserts that Origen
is of the same mind with himself; while the latter, though he tries to
excuse his errors, admits that he has made them. Not being able to deny
what he finds written, he endeavours to explain it away. It is one thing
to say that additions have been made by heretics, but another to
maintain that heretical statements are commendable. Origen’s case would
be unique if his writings were falsified all over the world and if in
one day by an edict like that of Mithridates <span
id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603) all the truth were shorn from his
volumes. Even supposing that some one treatise of his has been tampered
with, can it be possible that all his works, published as they were at
different times and places, have been corrupted? Origen himself in a
letter written to Fabian, bishop of Rome, <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) expresses penitence for having made
erroneous statements, and charges Ambrose <span
id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605) with over haste in making public
what was meant only for private circulation. And yet to this day his
disciples search for shifts to prove that all that excites
disapprobation in his writings is due not to him but to others.

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p76"></span>10. Moreover, when they speak of
Pamphilus as one who praised Origen, I am personally much obliged to
them for accounting me worthy to be calumniated with that martyr. For
if, sirs, you tell me that Origen’s books have been tampered with by his
enemies to bring them into discredit; why may not I in my turn allege
that his friends and followers have attributed to Pamphilus a volume
composed by themselves to vindicate their master from disrepute by the
testimony of a martyr? Lo and behold, you yourselves <span
id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span id="v.LXXXIV-Page_181"></span>correct
in Origen’s books passages which (according to you) he never wrote: and
yet you are surprised if a man is said to have published a book which as
a matter of fact he did not publish. But while your statements can
easily be brought to the test by an appeal to Origen’s published works;
as Pamphilus has published nothing else, it is easier for calumny to fix
a book upon him. For shew me any other work of Pamphilus; you will
nowhere find any, this is his only one. How then can I know that it is
by Pamphilus? You will tell me, that the style and tone ought to inform
me. Well, I shall never believe that a man so learned has dedicated the
first fruits of his talent to defend doubtful and discredited positions.
The very name of an apology which the treatise bears implies a previous
charge made; for nothing is defended that is not first attacked. I will
now bring forward but a single argument, one, however, the force of
which only folly and effrontery can deny. The treatise attributed to
Pamphilus contains nearly the first thousand lines of Eusebius’s sixth
book in defence of Origen. <span id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606)
Yet in the remaining parts of his work the writer brings forward
passages by which he seeks to prove that Origen was a Catholic. Now
Eusebius and Pamphilus were in such thorough harmony with each other
that they seemed to have but one soul between them, and one even went so
far as to adopt the other’s name. <span
id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607) How then could they have disagreed
so fundamentally on this point, Eusebius in all his works proving Origen
to be an Arian, and Pamphilus describing him as a supporter of the
Nicene council, which had not yet been held? It is evident from this
consideration that the book belongs not to Pamphilus but to Didymus or
somebody else, who having cut off the head of Eusebius’s sixth book
supplied the other members himself. But I am willing to be generous and
to allow that the book is written by Pamphilus, only by Pamphilus not
yet a martyr. For he must have written the book before he underwent
martyrdom. And why, you will say, was he accounted worthy of martyrdom?
Surely that he might efface his error by a martyr’s death, and wash away
his one fault by shedding his blood. How many martyrs there have been
all the world over who before their deaths have been the slaves of sins!
Are we then to palliate the sins because those who committed them have
afterwards become martyrs?

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p79"></span>11. This reply to your letter, my most
loving brothers, I have dictated in all haste; and, overcoming my
scruples, I have taken up my pen against a man whose ability I once
eulogized. I would sooner, indeed, risk my reputation than my faith. My
friends have placed me in the awkward dilemma that if I say nothing I
shall be held guilty, and if I offer a defence I shall be accounted an
enemy. Both alternatives are hard; but of the two I will choose that
which is the least so. A quarrel can be made up, but blasphemy can find
no forgiveness. I leave to your judgment to discover how much labour I
have expended in translating the books *On First Principles*; for on the
one hand if one alters anything from the Greek the work becomes less a
version than a perversion; and on the other hand a literal adherence to
the original by no means tends to preserve the charm of its eloquence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[175:2548](2060095.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p5"></span> *i.e.* Rufinus’s version of Origen’s
treatise, *On First Principles,* with the Preface, translated in vol.
iii. of this series. See also Letters LXXX. and LXXXI.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[176:2549](2060095.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p6"></span> [1 Thess. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[176:2550](2060095.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p7"></span> [Rom. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[176:2551](2060095.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[176:2552](2060095.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p10"></span> Of these the two founders of Montanism
the first was a Phrygian of the second century who professed to be the
special organ of the Holy Ghost while the second was a female disciple
who claimed to exercise the gift of prophecy in furtherance of his aims.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[176:2553](2060095.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p11"></span> Dimidiatam Christi introduxit œconomiam.
Apollinaris taught that in Christ the divine personality supplied the
place of a human soul. In his view, therefore, Christ ceased to be “very
man.”

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[176:2554](2060095.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p12"></span> Eusebius, although he sided with the
Arians, always claimed to be orthodox. However, as Newman says, “his
acts are his confession.”

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[176:2555](2060095.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p13"></span> [Isa. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[176:2556](2060095.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p14"></span> Hor. S. 1. x. 1–4.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[176:2557](2060095.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p16"></span> See Letter L. § 2.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[176:2558](2060095.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p17"></span> From this Jew Jerome took lessons in
Hebrew during the earlier years of his life at Bethlehem. From time to
time he also consulted other Jewish scholars.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[176:2559](2060095.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p18"></span> [Joh. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[176:2560](2060095.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p19"></span> Cf. [Rev. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[176:2561](2060095.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p20"></span> [Isa. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[176:2562](2060095.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p21"></span> Cf. Letter XVIII. § 14.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[177:2563](2060095.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p22"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[177:2564](2060095.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p23"></span> [Ps. cxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[177:2565](2060095.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p24"></span> [Ps.
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p24.1"></span>
from memory.

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[177:2566](2060095.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p25"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[177:2567](2060095.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p26.1"></span>στρωματεις</span> , lit. = ‘tapestries.’ See
note on Letter LXX. § 4.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[177:2568](2060095.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p27"></span> The doctrine alluded to is probably that
of the Trinity.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[177:2569](2060095.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p29"></span> *i.e.* the Bishops present at Nicæa.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[177:2570](2060095.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p30"></span> The founder of a Gnostic sect in the
second century. He taught first in Egypt and afterwards in Rome.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[177:2571](2060095.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p31"></span> See note on Letter XLVIII. § 2.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[177:2572](2060095.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p32"></span> The Montanists were so called because
the headquarters of their sect were at Pepuza a small village in
Phrygia.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[178:2573](2060095.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p33"></span> Crœsus when he asked whether he should
resist Cyrus was told that, if he did so, he would overthrow a mighty
kingdom, a prophecy fulfilled in his own destruction; while Pyrrhus long
afterwards received an equally evasive answer in the words, “Pyrrhus the
Sons of Rome may well defeat.”

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[178:2574](2060095.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p35"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#040)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[178:2575](2060095.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p36"></span> Article XI. of the Apostles’ Creed
speaks in the original forms of the resurrection not of “the body” but
of “the flesh:” and it is still found in this shape in the Anglican
office for the visitation of the sick.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[178:2576](2060095.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p38"></span> Cf. [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[178:2577](2060095.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p39"></span> Cf. [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[178:2578](2060095.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p40"></span> A favourite metaphor with Jerome to
describe the nature of Christian penitence.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[178:2579](2060095.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p41"></span> [Ps. xcv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p41.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[178:2580](2060095.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p43"></span> A.V. ‘prove.’

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[178:2581](2060095.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p44"></span> [1 Thess. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[179:2582](2060095.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p45"></span> See note on § 2 above.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[179:2583](2060095.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p46"></span> [Acts iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[179:2584](2060095.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p47"></span> See Jerome’s preface to his version of
Origen’s Homilies on Ezekiel: and his preface to his own Treatise on
Hebrew Names. See also Letter XXXIII.

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[179:2585](2060095.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p48"></span> Origen died at Tyre about the year 255
<span class="c17"><span id="v.LXXXIV-p48.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[179:2586](2060095.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p49"></span> See note on Letter LXX. § 4.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[179:2587](2060095.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p50.1"></span>τόμοι</span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[179:2588](2060095.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p51"></span> Tractatus.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[179:2589](2060095.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p52"></span> Hexaëmeron: an account of the creation
is meant.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[179:2590](2060095.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p53"></span> [Gen. xxxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[179:2591](2060095.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p55"></span> His father Leonides suffered martyrdom
in the persecution of Severus.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[179:2592](2060095.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p56"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[180:2593](2060095.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p57"></span> *i.e.* Judas the Gaulonite whose
fanatical rising against the Romans is mentioned in [Acts v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[180:2594](2060095.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p61"></span> Hor. A. P. 359, 360.

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[180:2595](2060095.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p63"></span> Cf. [Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[180:2596](2060095.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p64"></span> [Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[180:2597](2060095.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p65"></span> The (traditional) founders of the Roman
Church.

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[180:2598](2060095.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p66"></span> Jerome was baptized at Rome about the
year 367 <span class="c17"><span id="v.LXXXIV-p66.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[180:2599](2060095.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p67"></span> Pelusiotæ, men of Pelusium, supposed to
be derived from <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p67.1"></span>πηλός</span>, “clay.” See Jerome’s Comm. on
[Jer. xxix. 14-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014)<span
id="v.LXXXIV-p67.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[180:2600](2060095.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p67.3"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p68"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[180:2601](2060095.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p68.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p69"></span> See the description of Rufinus in Letter
CXXV. 18.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[180:2602](2060095.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p69.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p70"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="v.LXXXIV-p70.1"></span>
from memory.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[180:2603](2060095.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p72"></span> This treatise the joint work of Eusebius
and his friend Pamphilus has perished. Part of the Latin version of
Rufinus still remains. Jerome at this time erroneously supposed that the
two friends had written separate works in defence of Origen. (See De VV.
Ill. c. 75, 81, in vol. iii. of this series.)

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[180:2604](2060095.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p73"></span> In accordance with this edict
(promulgated in 88 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.LXXXIV-p73.1"></span>b.c.</span>) all the Romans in Pontus were
massacred in one day.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[180:2605](2060095.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p74"></span> This letter is no longer extant.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[180:2606](2060095.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p75"></span> A wealthy Alexandrian, who employed
shorthand writers to take down Origen’s lectures. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. B.
vi. c. 23.

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[181:2607](2060095.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p77"></span> If the text is sound here Jerome is
again misled by supposing that Eusebius and Pamphilus had written
separate books in defence of Origen.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[181:2608](2060095.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="v.LXXXIV-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXIV-p78"></span> Eusebius calls himself Eusebius
Pamphili, that is, ‘the friend of Pamphilus.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXV](2060096)
