[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060187)  [Next](2060189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>The Four Gospels.</span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p2"></span>*Addressed to Pope* <span
id="fr_5385"></span>[5386](#fn_5385) *Damasus, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 383.*

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p4"></span>You urge me to revise the old Latin
version, and, as it were, to sit in judgment on the copies of the
Scriptures which are now scattered throughout the whole world; and,
inasmuch as they differ from one another, you would have me decide which
of them agree with the Greek original. The labour is one of love, but at
the same time both perilous and presumptuous; for in judging others I
must be content to be judged by all; and how can I dare to change the
language of the world in its hoary old age, and carry it back to the
early days of its infancy? Is there a man, learned or unlearned, who
will not, when he <span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="vii.ii.viii-Page_488"></span>takes the volume into his hands, and
perceives that what he reads does not suit his settled tastes, break out
immediately into violent language, and call me a forger and a profane
person for having the audacity to add anything to the ancient books, or
to make any changes or corrections therein? Now there are two consoling
reflections which enable me to bear the odium—in the first place, the
command is given by you who are the supreme bishop; and secondly, even
on the showing of those who revile us, readings at variance with the
early copies cannot be right. For if we are to pin our faith to the
Latin texts, it is for our opponents to tell us *which;* for there are
almost as many forms of texts as there are copies. If, on the other
hand, we are to glean the truth from a comparison of *many,* why not go
back to the original Greek and correct the mistakes introduced by
inaccurate translators, and the blundering alterations of confident but
ignorant critics, and, further, all that has been inserted or changed by
copyists more asleep than awake? I am not discussing the Old Testament,
which was turned into Greek by the Seventy elders, and <span
id="fr_5386"></span>[5387](#fn_5386) has reached us by a descent of
three steps. I do not ask what <span
id="fr_5387"></span>[5388](#fn_5387) Aquila and <span
id="fr_5388"></span>[5389](#fn_5388) Symmachus think, or why <span
id="fr_5389"></span>[5390](#fn_5389) Theodotion takes a middle course
between the ancients and the moderns. I am willing to let that be the
true translation which had apostolic approval. I am now speaking of the
New Testament. This was undoubtedly composed in Greek, with the
exception of the work of Matthew the Apostle, who was the first to
commit to writing the Gospel of Christ, and who published his work in
Judæa in Hebrew characters. We must confess that as we have it in our
language it is marked by discrepancies, and now that the stream is
distributed into different channels we must go back to the fountainhead.
I pass over those manuscripts which are associated with the names
of <span id="fr_5390"></span>[5391](#fn_5390) Lucian and Hesychius, and
the authority of which is perversely maintained by a handful of
disputatious persons. It is obvious that these writers could not amend
anything in the Old Testament after the labours of the Seventy; and it
was useless to correct the New, for versions of Scripture which already
exist in the languages of many nations show that their additions are
false. I therefore promise in this short Preface the four Gospels only,
which are to be taken in the following order, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John,
as they have been revised by a comparison of the Greek manuscripts. Only
early ones have been used. But to avoid any great divergences from the
Latin which we are accustomed to read, I have used my pen with some
restraint, and while I have corrected only such passages as seemed to
convey a different meaning, I have allowed the rest to remain as they
are.

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p10"></span>The Preface concludes with a
description of lists of words made by Eusebius and translated by Jerome,
designed to show what passages occur in two or more of the Gospels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5385"></span>[487:5386](2060188.htm#fr_5385) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p3"></span> Made pope 366, died 384. Jerome had
been his secretary at the Council held at Rome in 382, and continued is
literary services till the pope’s death, in 385.

<span id="fn_5386"></span>[488:5387](2060188.htm#fr_5386) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p5"></span> That is, after being translated from
Hebrew into Greek, and from Greek into Latin.

<span id="fn_5387"></span>[488:5388](2060188.htm#fr_5387) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p6"></span> Aquila belonged to the second century,
but whether to the first half, or to the early part of the second half,
cannot be determined. He was a Jewish proselyte, of Sinope in Pontus,
and is supposed to have translated the books of the Old Testament into
Greek in order to assist the Hellenistic Jews in their controversies
with Christians. Jerome’s estimate of him varied from time to time. In
his commentary on [Hos. ii.](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#000)<span
id="vii.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>, [Is.
xlix.](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#000)<span
id="vii.ii.viii-p6.2"></span>, and Letter XXVIII., etc., he treats him
as worthy of credit. On the other hand, in the letter to Pammachius, *De
Opt. Gen. Interp.* (LVII. 11), he describes him as *contentiosus;* but
in Letter XXXVI. 12, he denies that he is such. In the preface to Job he
speaks of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion as “Judaising heretics, who
by their deceitful translation have concealed many mysteries of
salvation.” The second edition of Aquila’s version, which was extremely
literal, was highly esteemed by the Jews, and was called by them *the
Hebrew verity.* See Davidson’s “Biblical Criticism,” p. 215, etc.

<span id="fn_5388"></span>[488:5389](2060188.htm#fr_5388) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p7"></span> Symmachus was the author of the third
Greek version. He is said to have been a Samaritan by birth. The date of
his version cannot be accurately fixed; but, apparently, it appeared
after Theodotion’s. “He does not adhere to the text so closely as to
render it verbatim into Greek; but chooses to express the same in
perspicuous and intelligible language.”—Davidson.

<span id="fn_5389"></span>[488:5390](2060188.htm#fr_5389) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p8"></span> Theodotion, the author of the second
Greek version, was a native of Ephesus. His version is thought to have
been made before 160. “The mode of translation adopted by him holds an
intermediate place between the scrupulous literality of Aquila and the
free interpretation of Symmachus,” and his work was more highly valued
by Christians than that of either Aquila or Symmachus. Daniel was read
in his version in the churches (Pref. to Joshua).

<span id="fn_5390"></span>[488:5391](2060188.htm#fr_5390) <span
id="vii.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.viii-p9"></span> Lucian in Syria and Hesychius in Egypt
attempted their recensions about the middle of the third century, the
time when Origen also began to labour in the same direction. Lucian’s
recension, also called the Constantinopolitan, and to which the
Slavonian and Gothic versions belong, spread over Asia Minor and Thrace.
See the Preface to the Chronicles. It was decreed by a council held
under Pope Gelasius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vii.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 494, that “the Gospels which
Lucian and Hesychius falsified are apocryphal.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefaces to the Books of the Vulgate...](2060189)
