[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060060)  [Next](2060062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.L"></span>

<span id="v.L-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.L-p1.1"></span>Letter L. To Domnio.</span>

<span id="v.L-p2"></span>Domnio, a Roman (called in Letter XLV. “the Lot
of our time”), had written to Jerome to tell him that an ignorant monk
had been traducing his books “against Jovinian.” Jerome, in reply,
sharply rebukes the folly of his critic and comments on the want of
straightforwardness in his conduct. He concludes the letter with an
emphatic restatement of his original position. Written in 394 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.L-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.L-p3"></span>1. Your letter is full at once of affection and
of complaining. The affection is your own, which prompts you unceasingly
to warn me of impending danger, and which makes you on my behalf

<span id="v.L-p4"></span>Of safest things distrustful and afraid. <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211.md)

<span id="v.L-p6"></span>The complaining is of those who have no love
for me, and seek an occasion against me in my sins. They speak against
their brother, they slander their own mother’s son. <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212.md) You write to me of these—nay, of
one in particular—a lounger who is to be seen in the streets, at
crossings, and in public places; a monk who is a noisy news-monger,
clever only in detraction, and eager, in spite of the beam in his own
eye, to remove the mote in his neighbor’s. <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213.md) And you tell me that he preaches
publicly against me, gnawing, rending, and tearing asunder with his
fangs the books that I have written against Jovinian. You inform me,
moreover, that this home-grown dialectician, this mainstay of the
Plautine company, has read neither the “Categories” of Aristotle nor his
treatise “On Interpretation,” nor his “Analytics,” nor yet the “Topics”
of Cicero, but that, moving as he does only in uneducated circles, and
frequenting no society but that of weak women, he ventures to construct
illogical syllogisms and to unravel by subtle arguments what he is
pleased to call my sophisms. How foolish I have been to suppose that
without philosophy there can be no knowledge of these subjects; and to
account it a more important part of composition to erase than to write!
In vain have I perused the commentaries of Alexander; to no purpose has
a skilled teacher used the “Introduction” of Porphyry to instruct me in
logic; and—to make light of human learning—I have gained nothing at all
by having Gregory of Nazianzum and Didymus as my catechists in the Holy
Scriptures. My acquisition of Hebrew has been wasted labor; and so also
has been the daily study which from my youth I have bestowed upon the
Law and the Prophets, the Gospels and the Apostles.

<span id="v.L-p9"></span>2. Here we have a man who has reached
perfection without a teacher, so as to be a vehicle of the spirit and a
self-taught genius. He surpasses Cicero in eloquence, Aristotle in
argument, Plato in discretion, Aristarchus <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> <span id="v.L-Page_81"></span>in learning, Didymus, that man
of brass, in the number of his books; and not only Didymus, but all the
writers of his time in his knowledge of the Scriptures. It is reported
that you have only to give him a theme and he is always ready—like
Carneades <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md) —to argue on this
side or on that, for justice or against it. The world escaped a great
danger, and civil actions and suits concerning succession were saved
from a yawning gulf on the day when, despising the bar, he transferred
himself to the Church. For, had he been unwilling, who could ever have
been proved innocent? And, if he once began to reckon the points of the
case upon his fingers, and to spread his syllogistic nets, what criminal
would his pleading have failed to save? Had he but stamped his foot, or
fixed his eyes, or knitted his brow, or moved his hand, or twirled his
beard, he would at once have thrown dust in the eyes of the jury. No
wonder that such a complete Latinist and so profound a master of
eloquence overcomes poor me, who—as I have been some time <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) away (from Rome.md), and without
opportunities for speaking Latin—am half a Greek if not altogether a
barbarian. No wonder, I say, that he overcomes me when his eloquence has
crushed Jovinian in person. Good Jesus! what! even Jovinian that great
and clever man! So clever, indeed, that no one can understand his
writings, and that when he sings it is only for himself—and for the
muses!

<span id="v.L-p12"></span>3. Pray, my dear father, warn this man not to
hold language contrary to his profession, and not to undo with his words
the chastity which he professes by his garb. Whether he elects to be a
virgin or a married celibate—and the choice must rest with himself—he
must not compare wives with virgins, for that would be to have striven
in vain against Jovinian’s eloquence. He likes, I am told, to visit the
cells of widows and virgins, and to lecture them with his brows knit on
sacred literature. What is it that he teaches these poor women in the
privacy of their own chambers? Is it to feel assured that virgins are no
better than wives? Is it to make the most of the flower of their age, to
eat and drink, to frequent the baths, to live in luxury, and not to
disdain the use of perfumes? Or does he preach to them chastity,
fasting, and neglect of their persons? No doubt the precepts that he
inculcates are full of virtue. But if so, let him admit publicly what he
says privately. Or, if his private teaching is the same as his public,
he should keep aloof altogether from the society of girls. He is a young
man—a monk, and in his own eyes an eloquent one (do not pearls fall from
his lips, and are not his elegant phrases sprinkled with comic salt and
humor?)—I am surprised, therefore, that he can without a blush frequent
noblemen’s houses, pay constant visits to married ladies, make our
religion a subject of contention, distort the faith of Christ by
misapplying words, and—in addition to all this—detract from one who is
his brother in the Lord. He may, however, have supposed me to be in
error (for “in many things we offend all,” and “if any man offend not in
word he is a perfect man” <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) .md).
In that case he should have written to convict me or to question me, the
course taken by Pammachius, a man of high attainments and position. To
this latter I defended myself as best I could, and in a lengthy letter
explained the exact sense of my words. He might at least have copied the
diffidence which led you to extract and arrange such passages as seemed
to give offence; asking me for corrections or explanations, and not
supposing me so mad that in one and the same book I should write for
marriage and against it.

<span id="v.L-p14"></span>4. Let him spare himself, let him spare me,
let him spare the Christian name. Let him realize his position as a
monk, not by talking and arguing, but by holding his peace and sitting
still. Let him read the words of Jeremiah: “It is good for a man that he
bear the yoke in his youth. He sitteth alone and keepeth silence,
because he hath borne it upon him.” <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md) Or if he has really the right to
apply the censor’s rod to all writers, and fancies himself a man of
learning because he alone understands Jovinian (you know the proverb:
Balbus best knows what Balbus means); yet, as Atilius <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md) reminds us, “we are not all
writers.” Jovinian himself—an unlettered man of letters if ever there
was one—will with most justice proclaim the fact to him. “That the
bishops condemn me,” he says, “is not reason but treason. I want no
answers from nobodies, who, while they have authority to put me down,
have not the wit to teach me. Let one write against me who has a tongue
that I can understand, and whom to vanquish will be to vanquish all.

<span id="v.L-p17"></span><span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="v.L-Page_82"></span>“‘I know full well: believe me, I have felt

<span id="v.L-p18"></span>The hero’s force when rising o’er his shield

<span id="v.L-p19"></span>He hurls his whizzing spear.’ <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md)

<span id="v.L-p21"></span>He is strong in argument, intricate and
tenacious, one to fight with his head down. Often has he cried out
against me in the streets from late one night till early the next. He is
a well-built man, and his thews are those of an athlete. Secretly I
believe him to be a follower of my teaching. He never blushes or stops
to weigh his words: his only aim is to speak as loud as possible. So
famous is he for his eloquence that his sayings are held up as models to
our curly-headed youngsters. <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md)
How often, when I have met him at meetings, has he aroused my wrath and
put me into a passion! How often has he spat upon me, and then departed
spat upon! But these are vulgar methods, and any of my followers can use
them. I appeal to books, to those memorials which must be handed down to
posterity. Let us speak by our writings, that the silent reader may
judge between us; and that, as I have a flock of disciples, he may have
one also—flatterers and parasites worthy of the Gnatho and Phormio <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) who is their master.”

<span id="v.L-p24"></span>5. It is no difficult matter, my dear Domnio,
to chatter at street corners or in apothecaries’ shops and to pass
judgment on the world. “So-and-so has made a good speech, so-and-so a
bad one; this man knows the Scriptures, that one is crazy; this man
talks glibly, that never says a word at all.” But who considers him
worthy thus to judge every one? To make an outcry against a man in every
street, and to heap, not definite charges, but vague imputations, on his
head, is nothing. Any buffoon or litigiously disposed person can do as
much. Let him put forth his hand, put pen to paper, and bestir himself;
let him write books and prove in them all he can. Let him give me a
chance of replying to his eloquence. I can return bite for bite, if I
like; when hurt myself, I can fix my teeth in my opponent. I too have
had a liberal education. As Juvenal says, “I also have often withdrawn
my hand from the ferule.” <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) Of
me, too, it may be said in the words of Horace, “Flee from him; he has
hay on his horn.” <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) But I
prefer to be a disciple of Him who says, “I gave my back to the
smiters…I hid not my face from shame and spitting.” <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) When He was reviled He reviled not
again. <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md) After the buffeting,
the cross, the scourge, the blasphemies, at the very last He prayed for
His crucifiers, saying, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do.” <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226.md) I, too, pardon the
error of a brother. He has been deceived, I feel sure, by the art of the
devil. Among the women he was held clever and eloquent; but, when my
poor writings reached Rome, dreading me as a rival, he tried to rob me
of my laurels. No man on earth, he resolved, should please his eloquent
self, unless such as commanded respect rather than sought it, and showed
themselves men to be feared more than favored. A man of consummate
address, he desired, like an old soldier, with one stroke of the sword
to strike down both his enemies, <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md) and to make clear to every one
that, whatever view he might take, Scripture was always with him. Well,
he must condescend to send me his account of the matter, and to correct
my indiscreet language, not by censure but by instruction. If he tries
to do this, he will find that what seems forcible on a lounge is not
equally forcible in court; and that it is one thing to discuss the
doctrines of the divine law amid the spindles and work-baskets of girls
and another to argue concerning them among men of education. As it is,
without hesitation or shame, he raises again and again the noisy shout,
“Jerome condemns marriage,” and, whilst he constantly moves among women
with child, crying infants, and marriage-beds, he suppresses the words
of the apostle just to cover me—poor me—with odium. However, when he
comes by and by to write books and to grapple with me at close quarters,
then he will feel it, then he will stick fast; Epicurus and
Aristippus <span id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228.md) will not be near
him then; the swineherds <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229.md) will
not come to his aid; the prolific sow <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230.md) will not so much as grunt. For I
also may say, with Turnus:

<span id="v.L-p34"></span>Father, I too can launch a forceful spear,

<span id="v.L-p35"></span>And when I strike blood follows from the
wound. <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231.md)

<span id="v.L-p37"></span>But if he refuses to write, and fancies that
abuse is as effective as criticism, then, in spite of all the lands and
seas and peoples which lie between us, he must hear at least the echo of
my cry, “I do not condemn marriage,” “I do not condemn wedlock.”
Indeed—and this I say to make my meaning quite clear to him—I should
like every one to take a wife who, because they get frightened in the
night, cannot manage to sleep alone. <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[80:1212](2060061.htm#fr_1211.md) <span
id="v.L-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p5"></span> Virg. A. iv. 298.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[80:1213](2060061.htm#fr_1212.md) <span
id="v.L-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p7"></span> [Ps. l.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020.md)<span id="v.L-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[80:1214](2060061.htm#fr_1213.md) <span
id="v.L-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.L-p8"></span> [Matt. vii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003.md)<span id="v.L-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[81:1215](2060061.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="v.L-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p10"></span> A philosopher of the Academy noted for his
opposition to stoicism.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[81:1216](2060061.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="v.L-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p11"></span> Eight years.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[81:1217](2060061.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="v.L-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p13"></span> [Jas. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span id="v.L-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[81:1218](2060061.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="v.L-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p15"></span> [Lam. 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028.md)<span id="v.L-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[81:1219](2060061.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="v.L-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.L-p16"></span> An early Roman dramatist of whose works only
a few fragments remain. He is said to have translated the Electra of
Sophocles, but for the most part to have preferred comedy to tragedy.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[82:1220](2060061.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="v.L-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p20"></span> Virgil, Æn. xi. 283, 284.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[82:1221](2060061.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="v.L-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p22"></span> Persius i. 29.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[82:1222](2060061.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="v.L-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p23"></span> Characters in the Eunuchus and Phormio of
Terence.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[82:1223](2060061.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="v.L-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p25"></span> Juv. i. 15.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[82:1224](2060061.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="v.L-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p26"></span> Hor. S. i. iv. 34.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[82:1225](2060061.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="v.L-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p27"></span> [Isa. l.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006.md)<span id="v.L-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[82:1226](2060061.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="v.L-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.L-p28"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023.md)<span id="v.L-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[82:1227](2060061.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="v.L-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.L-p29"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span id="v.L-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[82:1228](2060061.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="v.L-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.L-p30"></span> Viz. Jerome and Jovinian.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[82:1229](2060061.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="v.L-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p31"></span> According to both these philosophers pleasure
is the highest good.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[82:1230](2060061.htm#fr_1229.md) <span
id="v.L-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p32"></span> The followers of Jovinian.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[82:1231](2060061.htm#fr_1230.md) <span
id="v.L-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p33"></span> Jovinian himself.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[82:1232](2060061.htm#fr_1231.md) <span
id="v.L-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p36"></span> Virg. A. xii. 50, 51.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[82:1233](2060061.htm#fr_1232.md) <span
id="v.L-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.L-p38"></span> Cic. pro Cælio xv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LI](2060062.md)
