[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060157)  [Next](2060159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.CXLVII"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.CXLVII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXLVII. To Sabinianus.</span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p2"></span>Jerome writes in severe but moderate
language to Sabinianus, a deacon, calling on him to repent of his sins.
Of these he recounts at length the two most serious, an act of adultery
at Rome and an attempt to seduce a nun at Bethlehem. The date of the
letter is uncertain.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p3"></span>1. Of old, when it had repented the Lord
that he had anointed Saul to be king over Israel, <span
id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) we are told that Samuel mourned for
him; and again, when Paul heard that there was fornication among the
Corinthians and such fornication as was not so much as named among the
gentiles, <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949) he besought them to
repent with these tearful words: “lest, when I come again, my God will
humble me among you and that I shall bewail many which have sinned
already and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and
lasciviousness which they have committed.” <span
id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950) If an apostle or a prophet,
themselves immaculate, could speak thus with a clemency embracing all,
how much more earnestly should a sinner like me plead with a sinner like
you. You have fallen and refuse to rise; you do not so much as lift your
eyes to heaven; having wasted your father’s substance you take pleasure
in the husks that the swine eat; <span
id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951) and climbing the precipice of pride
you fall headlong into the deep. You make your belly your God instead of
Christ; you are a slave to lust; your glory is in your shame; <span
id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) you fatten yourself like a victim
for the slaughter, and imitate the lives of the wicked, careless of
their doom. “Thou knowest not that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
repentance. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart thou treasurest
up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath.” <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953) Or is it that your heart is
hardened, as Pharaoh’s was, because your punishment is deferred and you
are not smitten at the moment? The ten plagues were sent upon Pharaoh
not as by an <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="v.CXLVII-Page_290"></span>angry God but as by a warning father, and
his day of grace was prolonged until he repented of his repentance. Yet
doom overtook him when he pursued through the wilderness the people whom
he had previously let go and presumed to enter the very sea in the
eagerness of his pursuit. For only in this one way could he learn the
lesson that He is to be dreaded whom even the elements obey. He had
said: “I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go;” <span
id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) and you imitate him when you say:
“The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth
of the times that are far off.” <span
id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955) Yet the same prophet confutes you
with these words: “Thus saith the Lord God, There shall none of my words
be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done.”
David too says of the godless (and of godlessness you have proved
yourself not a slight but an eminent example), that in this world they
rejoice in good fortune and say: “How doth God know? And is there
knowledge in the Most High? Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in
the world; they increase in riches.” <span
id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956) Then almost losing his footing and
staggering where he stands he complains, saying “Verily I have cleansed
my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency.” <span
id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957) For he had previously said: “I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. For
they have no regard for death, <span
id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) but their strength is firm. They
are not in trouble as other men are; neither are they plagued like other
men. Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth
them as a garment. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more
than heart could wish. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning
oppression: they speak loftily. They set their mouth against the
heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.” <span
id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959)

<span id="v.CXLVII-p16"></span>2. Does not this whole psalm seem to you
to be written of yourself? Certainly you are hale and strong; and like a
new apostle of Antichrist, when you are found out in one city, you pass
to another. <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960) You are in no
need of money, no crushing blow strikes you down, neither are you
plagued as other men who are not like you mere brute beasts. Therefore
you are lifted up into pride, and lust covers you as a garment. Out of
your fat and bloated carcass you breathe out words fraught with death.
You never consider that you must some day die, nor feel the slightest
repentance when you have satisfied your lust. You have more than heart
can wish; and, not to be alone in your wrongdoing, you invent scandals
concerning those who are God’s servants. Though you know it not, it is
against the most High that you are speaking iniquity and against the
heavens that you are setting your mouth. It is no wonder that God’s
servants small and great are blasphemed by you, when your fathers did
not scruple to call even the master of the house Beelzebub. “The
disciple is not above his master nor the servant above his lord.” <span
id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961) If they did this with the green
tree, what will you do with me, the dry? <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) Much in the same way also the
offended believers in the book of Malachi gave expression to feelings
like yours; for they said, “It is vain to serve God: and what profit is
it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully
before the Lord of Hosts? And now we call the proud happy; yea, they
that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even
delivered.” Yet the Lord afterwards threatens them with a day of
judgment; and announcing beforehand the distinction that shall then be
made between the righteous and the unrighteous, speaks to them thus:
“Return ye, <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) and discern
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and
him that serveth him not.” <span id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964)

<span id="v.CXLVII-p22"></span>3. All this may perhaps seem to you
matter for jesting, seeing that you take so much pleasure in comedies
and lyrics and mimes like those of Lentulus; <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) although so blunted is your wit
that I am not disposed to allow that you can understand even language so
simple. You may treat the words of prophets with contempt, but Amos will
still make answer to you: “Thus saith the Lord, For three transgressions
and for four shall I not turn away from him?” <span
id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) For inasmuch as Damascus, Gaza,
Tyre, Edom, the Ammonites and the Moabites, the Jews also and the
children of Israel, although God had often prophesied to them to turn
and to repent, had refused to hear His voice, the Lord wishing to shew
that He had most just cause for the wrath that he was going to bring
upon them used the words already quoted, “For three transgressions and
for four shall I not turn away from them?” It is wicked, God says, to
harbour evil thoughts; yet I have allowed them to do so. It is still
more wicked to carry them out; yet in My mercy and kindness I have
permitted even this. But should the sinful thought have become the
sinful deed? Should men in their pride have trampled thus on my
tenderness? <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="v.CXLVII-Page_291"></span>Nevertheless “I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live;” <span id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) and as it is not they
that are whole who need a physician but they that are sick, <span
id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) even after his sin I hold out a
hand to the prostrate sinner and exhort him, polluted as he is in his
own blood, <span id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) to wash away his
stains with tears of penitence. But if even then he shews himself
unwilling to repent, and if, after he has suffered shipwreck, he refuses
to clutch the plank which alone can save him, I am compelled at last to
say: “Thus saith the Lord, For three transgressions and for four shall I
not turn away from him?” For this “turning away” God accounts a
punishment, inasmuch as the sinner is left to his own devices. It is
thus that he visits the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation; <span id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970)
not punishing those who sin immediately but pardoning their first
offences and only passing sentence on them for their last. For if it
were otherwise and if God were to stand forth on the moment as the
avenger of iniquity, the church would lose many of its saints; and
certainly would be deprived of the apostle Paul. The prophet Ezekiel,
from whom we have quoted above, repeating God’s words spoken to himself
speaks thus: “Open thy mouth and eat what I shall give thee. And
behold,” he says, “an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book
was therein; and he spread it before me; and it was written within and
without: and there was written therein lamentations, and a song, and
woe.” <span id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971) The first of these
three belongs to you if you prove willing, as a sinner, to repent of
your sins. The second belongs to those who are holy, who are called upon
to sing praises to God; for praise does not become a sinner’s mouth. And
the third belongs to persons like you who in despair have given
themselves over to uncleanness, to fornication, to the belly, and to the
lowest lusts; men who suppose that death ends all and that there is
nothing beyond it; who say: “When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through it shall not come unto us.” <span
id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972) The book which the prophet eats is
the whole series of the Scriptures, which in turn bewail the penitent,
celebrate the righteous, and curse the desperate. For nothing is so
displeasing to God as an impenitent heart. Impenitence is the one sin
for which there is no forgiveness. For if one who ceases to sin is
pardoned even after he has sinned, and if prayer has power to bend the
judge; it follows that every impenitent sinner must provoke his judge to
wrath. Thus despair is the one sin for which there is no remedy. By
obstinate rejection of God’s grace men turn His mercy into sternness and
severity. Yet, that you may know that God does every day call sinners to
repentance, hear Isaiah’s words: “In that day,” he says, “did the Lord
God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning and to baldness and to
girding with sackcloth: and behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and
killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; let us eat and drink,
for to-morrow we shall die.” After these words filled with the
recklessness of despair the Scripture goes on to say: “And it was
revealed in my ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not
be purged from you till ye die.” <span
id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) Only when they become dead to sin,
will their sin be forgiven them. For, so long as they live in sin, it
cannot be put away.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p32"></span>4. Have mercy I beseech you upon your
soul. Consider that God’s judgment will one day overtake you. Remember
by what a bishop you were ordained. The holy man was mistaken in his
choice; but this he might well be. For even God repented that he had
anointed Saul to be king. <span id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974)
Even among the twelve apostles Judas was found a traitor. And Nicolas of
Antioch—a deacon like yourself <span
id="fr_3975"></span>[3976](#fn_3975) —disseminated the Nicolaitan heresy
and all manner of uncleanness. <span
id="fr_3976"></span>[3977](#fn_3976) I do not now bring up to you the
many virgins whom you are said to have seduced, or the noble matrons who
have suffered death <span id="fr_3977"></span>[3978](#fn_3977) because
violated by you, or the greedy profligacy with which you have hied
through dens of sin. For grave and serious as such sins are in
themselves, they are trivial indeed when compared with those which I
have now to narrate. How great must be the sin beside which seduction
and adultery are insignificant? Miserable wretch that you are! when you
enter the cave wherein the Son of God was born, where truth sprang out
of the earth and the land did yield her increase, <span
id="fr_3978"></span>[3979](#fn_3978) it is to make an assignation. Have
you no fear that the babe will cry from the manger, that the newly
delivered virgin will see you, that the mother of the Lord will behold
you? The angels cry aloud, the shepherds run, the star shines down from
heaven, the wise men worship, Herod is terrified, Jerusalem is in
confusion, and meantime you creep into a virgin’s cell to seduce the
virgin to whom it belongs. I am filled with consternation and a shiver
runs through me, soul and body, when I try to set before your eyes the
deed that you have done. The whole church was keeping vigil by night and
proclaiming Christ as its Lord; in one spirit though in different
tongues the <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="v.CXLVII-Page_292"></span>praises of God were being sung. Yet you
were squeezing your love-notes into the openings of what is now the
altar, as it was once the manger, of the Lord, choosing this place in
order that your unhappy victim might find and read them when she came to
kneel and worship there. Then you took your place among the singers, and
with impudent nods communicated your passion to her.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p38"></span>5. Oh! crying shame! I can go no farther.
For sobs anticipate my words, and indignation and grief choke me in the
act of utterance. Oh! for the sea of Tully’s eloquence! Oh! for the
impetuous current of the invective of Demosthenes! Yet in this case I am
sure you would both be dumb; your eloquence would fail you. A deed has
been disclosed which no rhetoric can explain; a crime has been
discovered which no mime can represent, nor jester play, nor comedian
describe. <span id="fr_3979"></span>[3980](#fn_3979)

<span id="v.CXLVII-p40"></span>It is usual in the monasteries of Egypt
and Syria for virgins and widows who have vowed themselves to God and
have renounced the world and have trodden under foot its pleasures, to
ask the mothers of their communities to cut their hair; not that
afterwards they go about with heads uncovered in defiance of the
apostle’s command, <span id="fr_3980"></span>[3981](#fn_3980) for they
wear a close-fitting cap and a veil. No one knows of this in any single
case except the shearers and the shorn, but as the practice is
universal, it is almost universally known. The custom has in fact become
a second nature. It is designed to save those who take no baths and
whose heads and faces are strangers to all unguents, from accumulated
dirt and from the tiny creatures which are sometimes generated about the
roots of the hair.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p42"></span>6. Let us see then, my good friend, how
you acted in these surroundings. You promised to marry your unhappy
victim; and then in that venerable cave you took from her, either as
securities for her fidelity or as a pledge of the engagement, some locks
of hair, some handkerchiefs, and a girdle, swearing at the same time
that you would never love another as you loved her. Then you ran to the
place where the shepherds were watching their flocks when they heard the
angels singing over head, and there again you plighted your troth. I say
no more; I do not accuse you of kissing her or of embracing her.
Although I believe that there is nothing of which you are not capable,
still the sacred character of stable and field forbids me to suppose you
guilty except in will and determination. Unhappy man! When you first
stood beside the virgin in the cave, surely a mist must have dimmed your
eyes, your tongue must have been paralysed, your arms must have fallen
to your sides, your chest must have heaved, your gait must have become
unsteady. She had assumed the bridal-veil of Christ in the basilica of
the apostle Peter and had vowed to live henceforth in the monastery, in
the spots consecrated by the Lord’s Cross, His Resurrection, and His
Ascension; and yet after all this you dared to accept that hair, which
at Christ’s command she had cut off in the cave of His birth, as a token
of her readiness to sleep with you. Again you used to sit beneath her
window from the evening till the morning; and because owing to its
height you could not come to close quarters with her, you conveyed
things to her and she in her turn to you by the aid of a cord. How
careful the lady superior must have been is shewn by the fact that you
never saw the virgin except in church; and that, although both of you
had the same inclination, you could find no means of conversing with
each other except at a window under cover of night. As I was afterwards
told you used to be quite sorry when the sun rose. Your face looked
bloodless, shrunken, and pale; and to remove all suspicion, you used to
be for ever reading Christ’s gospel as if you were a deacon
indeed. <span id="fr_3981"></span>[3982](#fn_3981) I and others used to
attribute your paleness to fasting, and to admire your bloodless lips—so
unlike the brilliant colour which they generally shewed—in the belief
that they were caused by frequent vigils. You were already preparing
ladders to fetch the unhappy virgin from her cell; you had already
arranged your route, ordered vessels, settled a day, and thought out the
details of your flight, when, behold, the angel who kept the door of
Mary’s chamber, who watched over the cradle of the Lord and who bore in
his arms the infant Christ, in whose presence you had committed these
great sins, himself and none other, betrayed you.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p44"></span>7. Oh! my unlucky eyes! Oh! day worthy of
the most solemn curse, on which with utter consternation I read your
letters, the contents of which I am forced to remember still! What
obscenities they contained! What blandishments! What exultant triumph in
the prospect of the virgin’s dishonour. A deacon should not have even
known such things, much less should he have spoken of them. Unhappy man!
where can you have learned them, you who used to boast that you had been
reared in the church. It is true, however, that in these letters you
swear that you have never led a chaste life and that you are not really
a deacon. If you try to disown them your own handwriting will convict
you, and the very <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="v.CXLVII-Page_293"></span>letters will cry out against you. But
meantime you may make what you can of your sin, for what you have
written is so foul that I cannot bring it up as evidence against you.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p45"></span>8. You threw yourself down at my knees,
you prostrated yourself, you begged me—I use your own words—to spare
“your half-pint of blood.” Oh! miserable wretch! you thought nothing of
God’s judgment, and feared no vengeance but mine. I forgave you, I
admit; what else being a Christian could I do? I urged you to repent, to
wear sackcloth, to roll in ashes, to seek seclusion, to live in a
monastery, to implore God’s mercy with constant tears. You however
showed yourself a pillar of confidence, and excited as you were by the
viper’s sting you became to me a deceitful bow; you shot at me arrows of
reviling. I am become your enemy because I tell you the truth. <span
id="fr_3982"></span>[3983](#fn_3982) I do not complain of your
calumnies; everyone knows that you only praise men as infamous as
yourself. What I lament is that you do not lament yourself, that you do
not realize that you are dead, that, like a gladiator ready for
Libitina, <span id="fr_3983"></span>[3984](#fn_3983) you deck yourself
out for your own funeral. You wear not sackcloth but linen, you load
your fingers with rings, you use toothpowder for your teeth, you arrange
the stray hairs on your brown skull to the best advantage. Your bull’s
neck bulges out with fat and droops no whit because it has given way to
lust. Moreover you are redolent of perfume, you go from one bath to
another, you wage war <span id="fr_3984"></span>[3985](#fn_3984) against
the hair that grows in spite of you, you walk through the forum and the
streets a spruce and smooth-faced rake. Your face has become the face of
a harlot: you know not how to blush. <span
id="fr_3985"></span>[3986](#fn_3985) Return, unhappy man, to the Lord,
and He will return to you. <span id="fr_3986"></span>[3987](#fn_3986)
Repent, and He will repent of the evil that He has purposed to bring
upon you.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p51"></span>9. Why is it that you disregard your own
scars and try to defame others? Why is it that when I give you the best
advice you attack me like a madman? It may be that I am as infamous as
you publicly proclaim; in that case you can at least repent as heartily
as I do. It may be that I am as great a sinner as you make me out; if
so, you can at least imitate a sinner’s tears. Are my sins your virtues?
Or does it alleviate your misery that many are in the same plight as
yourself? Let a few tears fall on the silk and fine linen which make you
so resplendent. Realize that you are naked, torn, unclean, a
beggar. <span id="fr_3987"></span>[3988](#fn_3987) It is never too late
to repent. <span id="fr_3988"></span>[3989](#fn_3988) You may have gone
down from Jerusalem and may have been wounded on the way; yet the
Samaritan will set you upon his beast, and will bring you to the inn and
will take care of you. <span id="fr_3989"></span>[3990](#fn_3989) Even
if you are lying in your grave, the Lord will raise you though your
flesh may stink. <span id="fr_3990"></span>[3991](#fn_3990) At least
imitate those blind men for whose sake the Saviour left His home and
heritage and came to Jericho. They were sitting in darkness and in the
shadow of death when the light shone upon them. <span
id="fr_3991"></span>[3992](#fn_3991) For when they learned that it was
the Lord who was passing by they began to cry out saying: “Thou Son of
David, have mercy on us.” <span id="fr_3992"></span>[3993](#fn_3992) You
too will have your sight restored; if you cry to Him, and cast away your
filthy garments at His call. <span id="fr_3993"></span>[3994](#fn_3993)
“When thou shalt turn and bewail thyself then shalt thou be saved, and
then shalt thou know where thou hast hitherto been.” <span
id="fr_3994"></span>[3995](#fn_3994) Let Him but touch your scars and
pass his hands over your eyeballs; and although you may have been born
blind from the womb and although your mother may have conceived you in
sin, he will purge you with hyssop and you shall be clean, he will wash
you and you shall be whiter than snow. <span
id="fr_3995"></span>[3996](#fn_3995) Why is it that you are bowed
together and bent down to the ground, why is it that you are still
prostrate in the mire? She whom Satan had bound for eighteen years came
to the Saviour; and being cured by Him was made straight so that she
could once more look up towards heaven. <span
id="fr_3996"></span>[3997](#fn_3996) God says to you what He said to
Cain: “Thou hast sinned: hold thy peace.” <span
id="fr_3997"></span>[3998](#fn_3997) Why do you flee from the face of
God and dwell in the land of Nod? Why do you struggle in the waves <span
id="fr_3998"></span>[3999](#fn_3998) when you can plant your feet upon
the rock? See to it that Phinehas does not thrust you through with his
spear while you are committing fornication with the Midianitish
woman. <span id="fr_3999"></span>[4000](#fn_3999) Amnon did not spare
Tamar, <span id="fr_4000"></span>[4001](#fn_4000) and you her brother
and kinsman in the faith have had no mercy upon this virgin. But why is
it that when you have defiled her you change into an Absalom and desire
to kill a David who mourns over your rebellion and spiritual death? The
blood of Naboth <span id="fr_4001"></span>[4002](#fn_4001) cries out
against you. The vineyard also of <span id="page_294">p. 294</span>
<span id="v.CXLVII-Page_294"></span>Jezreel, that is, of God’s seed,
demands due vengeance upon you, seeing that you have turned it into a
garden of pleasures and made it a seed-bed of lust. God sends you an
Elijah to tell you of torment and of death. Bow yourself down therefore
and put on sackcloth for a little while; then perhaps the Lord will say
of you what He said of Ahab: “Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself
before me? Because he humbleth himself before me, <span
id="fr_4002"></span>[4003](#fn_4002) I will not bring the evil in his
days.”

<span id="v.CXLVII-p68"></span>10. But possibly you flatter yourself
that since the bishop who has made you a deacon is a holy man, his
merits will atone for your transgressions. I have already told you that
the father is not punished for the son nor the son for the father. “The
soul that sinneth it shall die.” <span
id="fr_4003"></span>[4004](#fn_4003) Samuel too had sons who forsook the
fear of the Lord and “turned aside after lucre” and iniquity. <span
id="fr_4004"></span>[4005](#fn_4004) Eli also was a holy priest, but he
had sons of whom we read in the Hebrew that they lay with the women that
assembled at the door of the tabernacle of God, and that like you they
shamelessly claimed for themselves the right to minister in His
sanctuary. <span id="fr_4005"></span>[4006](#fn_4005) Wherefore the
tabernacle itself was overthrown and the holy place made desolate by
reason of the sins of those who were God’s priests. And even Eli himself
offended God by shewing too great leniency to his sons; therefore, so
far from the righteousness of your bishop being able to deliver you, it
is rather to be feared that your wickedness may hurl him from his seat
and that falling on his back like Eli he may perish irretrievably. <span
id="fr_4006"></span>[4007](#fn_4006) If the Levite Uzzah was smitten
merely because he tried to hold up from falling the ark which it was his
special province to carry; <span id="fr_4007"></span>[4008](#fn_4007)
what punishment, think you, will be inflicted upon you who have tried to
overthrow the Lord’s ark when standing firm? The more estimable the
bishop is who ordained you, the more detestable are you who have
disappointed the expectations of so good a man. His long ignorance of
your misdoings is indeed easy to account for; as it generally happens
that we are the last to know the scandals which affect our homes, and
are ignorant of the sins of our children and wives even when our
neighbors talk of nothing else. At all events all Italy was aware of
your evil life; and it was everywhere a subject of lamentation that you
should still stand before the altar of Christ. For you had neither the
cunning nor the forethought to conceal your vices. So hot were you, so
lecherous, and so wanton, so entirely under the sway of this and that
caprice of self-indulgence, that, not content with satisfying your
passions, you gloried in each intrigue as a triumph and emerged from it
bearing palms of victory.

<span id="v.CXLVII-p74"></span>11. Once more the fire of unchastity
seized you, this time among savage swords and in the quarters of a
married barbarian of great influence and power. You were not afraid to
commit adultery in a house where the injured husband might have punished
you without calling in a judge’s aid. You found yourself attracted and
drawn to suburban parks and gardens; and, in the husband’s absence
behaved as boldly and madly as if you supposed your companion to be not
your paramour but your wife. She was at last captured, but you escaped
through an underground passage and secretly made your way to Rome. There
you hid yourself among some Samnite robbers; and on the first hint that
the aggrieved husband was coming down from the Alps like a new Hannibal
in search of you, you did not think yourself safe till you had taken
refuge on shipboard. So hasty indeed was your flight that you chose to
face a tempest at sea rather than take the consequences of remaining on
shore. Somehow or other you reached Syria, and on arriving there
professed a wish to go on to Jerusalem and there to serve the Lord. Who
could refuse to welcome one who declared himself to be a monk;
especially if he were ignorant of your tragical career and had read the
letters of commendation which your bishop had addressed to other
prelates? <span id="fr_4008"></span>[4009](#fn_4008) Unhappy man! you
transformed yourself into an angel of light; <span
id="fr_4009"></span>[4010](#fn_4009) and while you were in reality a
minister of Satan, you pretended to be a minister of righteousness. You
were only a wolf in sheep’s clothing; <span
id="fr_4010"></span>[4011](#fn_4010) and having played the adulterer
once towards the wife of a man, you desired now to play the adulterer to
the spouse of Christ. <span id="fr_4011"></span>[4012](#fn_4011)

<span id="v.CXLVII-p79"></span>12. My design in recounting these events
has been to sketch for you the picture of your evil life and to set your
misdeeds plainly before your eyes. I have wished to prevent you from
making God’s mercy and His abundant tenderness an excuse for committing
new sins and to save you from crucifying to yourself the son of God
afresh and putting Him to an open shame. For you may do these things if
you do not read the words which follow the passage to which I have
alluded. They are these: “The earth which drinketh in the rain that
cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="v.CXLVII-Page_295"></span>receiveth blessings from God: but that
which beareth thorns and briers is rejected and is nigh unto cursing;
whose end is to be burned.” <span id="fr_4012"></span>[4013](#fn_4012)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[289:3949](2060158.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p4"></span> [1 Sam.
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#017)<span id="v.CXLVII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[289:3950](2060158.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p5"></span> [1 Cor. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)<span id="v.CXLVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[289:3951](2060158.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p6"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="v.CXLVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[289:3952](2060158.htm#fr_3951) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p7"></span> [Luke
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span id="v.CXLVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[289:3953](2060158.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p8"></span> [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="v.CXLVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[289:3954](2060158.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p9"></span> [Rom.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="v.CXLVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[290:3955](2060158.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p10"></span> [Ex. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002)<span id="v.CXLVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[290:3956](2060158.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p11"></span> [Ezek.
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028)<span id="v.CXLVII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[290:3957](2060158.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p12"></span> [Ps.
73:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012)<span id="v.CXLVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[290:3958](2060158.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p13"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013)<span id="v.CXLVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[290:3959](2060158.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p14"></span> So the Vulgate, from which Jerome
quotes.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[290:3960](2060158.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p15"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003)<span id="v.CXLVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[290:3961](2060158.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p17"></span> Cf. [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="v.CXLVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[290:3962](2060158.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p18"></span> [Matt.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)<span id="v.CXLVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[290:3963](2060158.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p19"></span> [Luke xxiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)<span id="v.CXLVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[290:3964](2060158.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p20"></span> So the Latin.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[290:3965](2060158.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p21"></span> [Mal.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#018)<span id="v.CXLVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[290:3966](2060158.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p23"></span> A writer and actor of mimes, probably in
the first century of the Empire.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[290:3967](2060158.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p24"></span> [Am. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)<span id="v.CXLVII-p24.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[291:3968](2060158.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p25"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span id="v.CXLVII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[291:3969](2060158.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p26"></span> [Luke v.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#031)<span id="v.CXLVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[291:3970](2060158.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p27"></span> Cf. [Ezek. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)<span id="v.CXLVII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[291:3971](2060158.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p28"></span> [Ex. xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="v.CXLVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[291:3972](2060158.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p29"></span>[Ezek.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001), [Ezek.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010)<span id="v.CXLVII-p29.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[291:3973](2060158.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p30"></span> [Is. xxviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="v.CXLVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[291:3974](2060158.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p31"></span> [Isa. xxii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012)<span
id="v.CXLVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[291:3975](2060158.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p33"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011)<span id="v.CXLVII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3975"></span>[291:3976](2060158.htm#fr_3975) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p34"></span> [Acts vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005)<span id="v.CXLVII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3976"></span>[291:3977](2060158.htm#fr_3976) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p35"></span> [Rev.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)<span id="v.CXLVII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3977"></span>[291:3978](2060158.htm#fr_3977) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p36"></span> Women guilty of adultery were legally
punishable with death until the time of Justinian.

<span id="fn_3978"></span>[291:3979](2060158.htm#fr_3978) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p37"></span> [Ps.
85:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span id="v.CXLVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3979"></span>[292:3980](2060158.htm#fr_3979) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p39"></span> Mimus, scurra, atellanus.

<span id="fn_3980"></span>[292:3981](2060158.htm#fr_3980) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p41"></span> [1 Cor.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)<span id="v.CXLVII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3981"></span>[292:3982](2060158.htm#fr_3981) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p43"></span> At the Eucharistic service the gospel
was commonly though not exclusively read by a deacon. (See Const. Apost.
II. 57, 5, and Sozomen, H. C. VII. 19.)

<span id="fn_3982"></span>[293:3983](2060158.htm#fr_3982) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p46"></span> [Gal. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016)<span id="v.CXLVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3983"></span>[293:3984](2060158.htm#fr_3983) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p47"></span> The goddess who in the Roman pantheon
presided over funerals. The gladiators meant are the so-called bustuarii
who were engaged to fight at the funeral pile (bustum) in honour of the
dead.

<span id="fn_3984"></span>[293:3985](2060158.htm#fr_3984) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p48"></span> *i.e.* by the use of depilatories.

<span id="fn_3985"></span>[293:3986](2060158.htm#fr_3985) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p49"></span> [Jer. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)<span id="v.CXLVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3986"></span>[293:3987](2060158.htm#fr_3986) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p50"></span> [Mal. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007)<span id="v.CXLVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3987"></span>[293:3988](2060158.htm#fr_3987) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p52"></span> [Rev. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)<span id="v.CXLVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3988"></span>[293:3989](2060158.htm#fr_3988) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p53"></span> Cf. Cyprian, Epist. ad Demet. xxv.

<span id="fn_3989"></span>[293:3990](2060158.htm#fr_3989) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p54"></span> [Luke x.
30-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span
id="v.CXLVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3990"></span>[293:3991](2060158.htm#fr_3990) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p55"></span> [John
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="v.CXLVII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3991"></span>[293:3992](2060158.htm#fr_3991) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p56"></span> [Luke i.
79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079)<span id="v.CXLVII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3992"></span>[293:3993](2060158.htm#fr_3992) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p57"></span> [Matt.
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027), [Luke
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)<span
id="v.CXLVII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3993"></span>[293:3994](2060158.htm#fr_3993) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p58"></span> [Mark x.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050)<span id="v.CXLVII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3994"></span>[293:3995](2060158.htm#fr_3994) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p59"></span> [Isa. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span id="v.CXLVII-p59.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3995"></span>[293:3996](2060158.htm#fr_3995) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p60"></span> [Ps.
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="v.CXLVII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3996"></span>[293:3997](2060158.htm#fr_3996) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p61"></span> [Luke xiii.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011)<span
id="v.CXLVII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3997"></span>[293:3998](2060158.htm#fr_3997) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p62"></span> [Gen. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)<span id="v.CXLVII-p62.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3998"></span>[293:3999](2060158.htm#fr_3998) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p63"></span> An etymological allusion. Nod = ‘ebb and
flow.’

<span id="fn_3999"></span>[293:4000](2060158.htm#fr_3999) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p64"></span> [Num. xxv.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006)<span id="v.CXLVII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4000"></span>[293:4001](2060158.htm#fr_4000) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p65"></span> [2 Sam. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#014)<span id="v.CXLVII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4001"></span>[293:4002](2060158.htm#fr_4001) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p66"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#013)<span id="v.CXLVII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4002"></span>[294:4003](2060158.htm#fr_4002) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p67"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="v.CXLVII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4003"></span>[294:4004](2060158.htm#fr_4003) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p69"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span id="v.CXLVII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4004"></span>[294:4005](2060158.htm#fr_4004) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p70"></span> [1 Sam. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#003)<span id="v.CXLVII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4005"></span>[294:4006](2060158.htm#fr_4005) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p71"></span> [1 Sam.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)<span id="v.CXLVII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4006"></span>[294:4007](2060158.htm#fr_4006) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p71.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p72"></span> [1 Sam. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)<span id="v.CXLVII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4007"></span>[294:4008](2060158.htm#fr_4007) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p73"></span> [2 Sam.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007)<span id="v.CXLVII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4008"></span>[294:4009](2060158.htm#fr_4008) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p75"></span> Sacerdotes, lit. priests.

<span id="fn_4009"></span>[294:4010](2060158.htm#fr_4009) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p76"></span> [2 Cor.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015)<span id="v.CXLVII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4010"></span>[294:4011](2060158.htm#fr_4010) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p77"></span> [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="v.CXLVII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4011"></span>[294:4012](2060158.htm#fr_4011) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p78"></span> *i.e.* to the church at large
represented by individual virgins.

<span id="fn_4012"></span>[295:4013](2060158.htm#fr_4012) <span
id="v.CXLVII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXLVII-p80"></span> [Heb.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#007)<span id="v.CXLVII-p80.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLVIII](2060159)
