[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060143)  [Next](2060145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.CXXXIII"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXIII. To Ctesiphon.</span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p2"></span>Ctesiphon had written to Jerome for his
opinion on two points in the teaching of Pelagius, (1) his quietism and
(2) his denial of original sin. Jerome now refutes these two doctrines
and points out that Pelagius has drawn them partly from the philosophers
and partly from the heretics. He censures Rufinus, who had died 5 years
before, for attributing to Sixtus bishop of Rome a book which is really
the work of Xystus a Pythagorean, and for passing off as the composition
of the martyr Pamphilus a panegyric of Origen really due to his friend
Eusebius. In both these assertions, however, Jerome is more wrong than
right. (See Prolegomena to the works of Rufinus.) The letter concludes
with a promise to deal more fully with the heresy of Pelagius at some
future time, a promise afterwards redeemed by the publication of a
‘dialogue against the Pelagians.’ The date of the letter is 415 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.CXXXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p3"></span>1. In acquainting me with the new
controversy which has taken the place of the old you are wrong in
thinking that you have acted rashly, for your conduct has been prompted
by zeal and friendship. Already before the arrival of your letter many
in the East have been deceived into a pride which apes humility and have
said with the devil: “I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God; I will be like the Most High.” <span
id="fr_3771"></span>[3772](#fn_3771) Can there be greater presumption
than to claim not likeness to God but equality with Him, and so to
compress into a few words the poisonous doctrines of all the heretics
which in their turn flow from the statements of the philosophers,
particularly of Pythagoras and Zeno the founder of the Stoic school? For
those states of feeling which the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p4.2"></span>πάθη</span> and which we may describe as
“passions,” relating to the present or the future such as vexation and
gladness, hope and fear,—these, they tell us, it is possible to root out
of our minds; in fact all vice may be destroyed root and branch in man
by meditation on virtue and constant practice of it. The position which
they thus take up is vehemently assailed by the Peripatetics who trace
themselves to Aristotle, and by the new Academics of whom Cicero is a
disciple; and these overthrow not the facts of their opponents—for they
have no facts—but the shadows and wishes which do duty for them. To
maintain such a doctrine is to take man’s nature from him, to forget
that he is constituted of body as well as soul, to substitute mere
wishes for sound teaching. <span id="fr_3772"></span>[3773](#fn_3772)
For the apostle says:—“O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?” <span id="fr_3773"></span>[3774](#fn_3773)
But as I cannot say all that I wish in a short letter I will briefly
touch on the points that you must avoid. Virgil writes:—

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p7"></span>Thus mortals fear and hope, rejoice and
grieve,

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p8"></span>And shut in darkness have no sight of
heaven. <span id="fr_3774"></span>[3775](#fn_3774)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p10"></span>For who can escape these feelings? Must
we not all clap our hands when we are joyful, and shrink at the approach
of sorrow? Must not hope always animate us and fear put us in terror? So
in one of his Satires the poet Horace, whose words are so weighty,
writes:

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p11"></span>From faults no mortal is completely
free;

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p12"></span>He that has fewest is the perfect
man. <span id="fr_3775"></span>[3776](#fn_3775)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p14"></span>2. Well does one of our own
writers <span id="fr_3776"></span>[3777](#fn_3776) say: “the
philosophers are the patriarchs of the <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>
<span id="v.CXXXIII-Page_273"></span>heretics.” It is they who have
stained with their perverse doctrine the spotlessness of the Church, not
knowing that of human weakness it is said: “Why is earth and ashes
proud?” <span id="fr_3777"></span>[3778](#fn_3777) So likewise the
apostle: “I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind and bringing me into captivity”; <span
id="fr_3778"></span>[3779](#fn_3778) and again, “The good that I would I
do not: but the evil which I would not that I do.” <span
id="fr_3779"></span>[3780](#fn_3779) Now if Paul does what he wills not,
what becomes of the assertion that a man may be without sin if he will?
Given the will, how is it to have its way when the apostle tells us that
he has no power to do what he wishes? Moreover if we ask them who the
persons are whom they regard as sinless they seek to veil the truth by a
new subterfuge. They do not, they say, profess that men are or have been
without sin; all that they maintain is that it is possible for them to
be so. Remarkable teachers truly, who maintain that a thing may be which
on their own shewing, never has been; whereas the scripture says:—“The
thing which shall be, it is that which hath been already of old
time.” <span id="fr_3780"></span>[3781](#fn_3780)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p20"></span>I need not go through the lives of the
saints or call attention to the moles and spots which mark the fairest
skins. Many of our writers, it is true, unwisely, take this course;
however, a few sentences of scripture will dispose alike of the heretics
and the philosophers. What says the chosen vessel? “God had concluded
all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all;” <span
id="fr_3781"></span>[3782](#fn_3781) and in another place, “all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_3782"></span>[3783](#fn_3782) The preacher also who is the
mouthpiece of the Divine Wisdom freely protests and says: “there is not
a just man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not:” <span
id="fr_3783"></span>[3784](#fn_3783) and again, “if thy people sin
against thee, for there is no man that sinneth not:” <span
id="fr_3784"></span>[3785](#fn_3784) and “who can say, I have made my
heart clean?” <span id="fr_3785"></span>[3786](#fn_3785) and “none is
clean from stain, not even if his life on earth has been but for one
day.” David insists on the same thing when he says: “Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity and in sin did my mother conceive me;” <span
id="fr_3786"></span>[3787](#fn_3786) and in another psalm, “in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.” <span
id="fr_3787"></span>[3788](#fn_3787) This last passage they try to
explain away from motives of reverence, arguing that the meaning is that
no man is perfect in comparison with God. Yet the scripture does not
say: “in comparison with thee shall no man living be justified” but “in
thy sight shall no man living be justified.” And when it says “in thy
sight” it means that those who seem holy to men to God in his fuller
knowledge are by no means holy. For “man looketh on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.” <span
id="fr_3788"></span>[3789](#fn_3788) But if in the sight of God who sees
all things and to whom the secrets of the heart lie open <span
id="fr_3789"></span>[3790](#fn_3789) no man is just; then these heretics
instead of adding to man’s dignity, clearly take away from God’s power.
I might bring together many other passages of scripture of the same
import; but were I to do so, I should exceed the limits I will not say
of a letter but of a volume.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p30"></span>3. It is with no new doctrines that in
their self-applauding perfidy they deceive the simple and untaught. They
cannot, however, deceive theologians who meditate in the law of the Lord
day and night. <span id="fr_3790"></span>[3791](#fn_3790) Let those
blush then for their leaders and companions who say that a man may be
“without sin” if he will, or, as the Greeks term it <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.CXXXIII-p31.2"></span>αναμάρτητος</span> ,
“sinless.” As such a statement sounds intolerable to the Eastern
churches, they profess indeed only to say that a man may be “without
sin” and do not presume to allege that he may be “sinless” as well. As
if, forsooth, “sinless” and “without sin” had different meanings;
whereas the only difference between them is that Latin requires two
words to express what Greek gives in one. If you adopt “without sin” and
reject “sinless,” then condemn the preachers of sinlessness. But this
you cannot do. You know <span id="fr_3791"></span>[3792](#fn_3791) very
well what it is that you teach your pupils in private; and that while
you say one thing with your lips you engrave another on your heart. To
us, ignorant outsiders you speak in parables; but to your own followers
you avow your secret meaning. And for this you claim the authority of
scripture which says: “to the multitudes Jesus spake in parables;” but
to his own disciples He said: “it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.” <span
id="fr_3792"></span>[3793](#fn_3792)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p34"></span>But to return; I will shortly set forth
the names of your leaders and companions to shew you who those are of
whose fellowship you make your boast. Manichæus says of his elect—whom
he places among Plato’s orbits in heaven—that they are free from all
sin, and cannot sin even if they will. To so great heights have they
attained in virtue that they laugh at the works of the flesh. Then there
is Priscillian in Spain whose infamy makes him as bad as Manichæus, and
whose disciples profess a high esteem for you. These are rash enough to
claim for them<span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_274"></span>selves the twofold credit of perfection
and wisdom. Yet they shut themselves up alone with women and justify
their sinful embraces by quoting the lines:

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p35"></span>The almighty father takes the earth to
wife;

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p36"></span>Pouring upon her fertilizing rain,

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p37"></span>That from her womb new harvest he may
reap. <span id="fr_3793"></span>[3794](#fn_3793)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p39"></span>These heretics have affinities with
Gnosticism which may be traced to the impious teaching of
Basilides. <span id="fr_3794"></span>[3795](#fn_3794) It is from him
that you derive the assertion that without knowledge of the law it is
impossible to avoid sin. But why do I speak of Priscillian who has been
condemned by the whole world and put to death by the secular
sword? <span id="fr_3795"></span>[3796](#fn_3795) Evagrius <span
id="fr_3796"></span>[3797](#fn_3796) of Ibera in Pontus who sends
letters to virgins and monks and among others to her whose name bears
witness to the blackness of her perfidy, <span
id="fr_3797"></span>[3798](#fn_3797) has published a book of maxims on
apathy, or, as we should say, impassivity or imperturbability; a state
in which the mind ceases to be agitated and—to speak simply—becomes
either a stone or a God. His work is widely read, in the East in Greek
and in the West in a Latin translation made by his disciple
Rufinus. <span id="fr_3798"></span>[3799](#fn_3798) He has also written
a book which professes to be about monks and includes in it many not
monks at all whom he declares to have been Origenists, and who have
certainly been condemned by the bishops. I mean Ammonius, Eusebius,
Euthymius, <span id="fr_3799"></span>[3800](#fn_3799) Evagrius himself,
Horus, <span id="fr_3800"></span>[3801](#fn_3800) Isidorus, <span
id="fr_3801"></span>[3802](#fn_3801) and many others whom it would be
tedious to enumerate. He is careful, however, to do as the physicians,
of whom Lucretius says: <span id="fr_3802"></span>[3803](#fn_3802)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p49"></span>To children bitter wormwood still they
give

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p50"></span>In cups with juice of sweetest honey
smeared.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p51"></span>That is to say, he has set in the
forefront of his book John, <span id="fr_3803"></span>[3804](#fn_3803)
an undoubted Catholic and saint, by his means to introduce to the church
the heretics mentioned farther on. But who can adequately characterize
the rashness or madness which has led him to ascribe a book of the
Pythagorean philosopher Xystus, <span
id="fr_3804"></span>[3805](#fn_3804) a heathen who knew nothing of
Christ, to Sixtus <span id="fr_3805"></span>[3806](#fn_3805) a martyr
and bishop of the Roman church? In this work the subject of perfection
is discussed at length in the light of the Pythagorean doctrine which
makes man equal with God and of one substance with Him. Thus many not
knowing that its author was a philosopher and supposing that they are
reading the words of a martyr, drink of the golden cup of Babylon.
Moreover in its pages there is no mention of prophets, patriarchs,
apostles, or of Christ; so that according to Rufinus <span
id="fr_3806"></span>[3807](#fn_3806) there has been a bishop and a
martyr who had nothing to do with Christ. Such is the book from which
you and your followers quote passages against the church. In the same
way he played fast and loose with the name of the holy martyr Pamphilus
ascribing to him the first of the six books in defence of Origen written
by Eusebius of Cæsarea <span id="fr_3807"></span>[3808](#fn_3807) who is
admitted by every body to have been an Arian. His object in doing so was
of course to commend to Latin ears Origen’s four wonderful books about
First Principles.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p57"></span>Would you have me name another of your
masters in heresy? Much of your teaching is traceable to Origen. For, to
give one instance only, when he comments on the psalmist’s words: “My
reins also instruct me in the night season,” <span
id="fr_3808"></span>[3809](#fn_3808) he maintains that when a holy man
like yourself has reached perfection, he is free even at night from
human infirmity and is not tempted by evil thoughts. You need not blush
to avow yourself a follower of these men; it is of no use to disclaim
their names when you adopt their blasphemies. Moreover, your teaching
<span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_275"></span>corresponds to Jovinian’s second
position. <span id="fr_3809"></span>[3810](#fn_3809) You must,
therefore, take the answer which I have given to him as equally
applicable to yourself. Where men’s opinions are the same their
destinies can hardly be different.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p60"></span>4. Such being the state of the case,
what object is served by “silly women laden with sins, carried about
with every wind of doctrine, ever learning and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth?” <span id="fr_3810"></span>[3811](#fn_3810) Or
how is the cause helped by the men who dance attendance upon these, men
with itching ears <span id="fr_3811"></span>[3812](#fn_3811) who know
neither how to hear nor how to speak? They confound old mire with new
cement and, as Ezekiel says, daub a wall with untempered mortar; so
that, when the truth comes in a shower, they are brought to
nought. <span id="fr_3812"></span>[3813](#fn_3812) It was with the help
of the harlot Helena that Simon Magus founded his sect. <span
id="fr_3813"></span>[3814](#fn_3813) Bands of women accompanied Nicolas
of Antioch that deviser of all uncleanness. <span
id="fr_3814"></span>[3815](#fn_3814) Marcion sent a woman before him to
Rome to prepare men’s minds to fall into his snares. <span
id="fr_3815"></span>[3816](#fn_3815) Apelles possessed in Philumena an
associate in his false doctrines. <span
id="fr_3816"></span>[3817](#fn_3816) Montanus, that mouthpiece of an
unclean spirit, used two rich and high born ladies Prisca and Maximilla
first to bribe and then to pervert many churches. <span
id="fr_3817"></span>[3818](#fn_3817) Leaving ancient history I will pass
to times nearer to our own. Arius intent on leading the world astray
began by misleading the Emperor’s sister. <span
id="fr_3818"></span>[3819](#fn_3818) The resources of Lucilla helped
Donatus to defile with his polluting baptism many unhappy persons
throughout Africa. <span id="fr_3819"></span>[3820](#fn_3819) In Spain
the blind woman Agape led the blind man Elpidius into the ditch. <span
id="fr_3820"></span>[3821](#fn_3820) He was followed by Priscillian, an
enthusiastic votary of Zoroaster and a magian before he became a bishop.
A woman named Galla seconded his efforts and left a gadabout sister to
perpetuate a second heresy of a kindred form. <span
id="fr_3821"></span>[3822](#fn_3821) Now also the mystery of iniquity is
working. <span id="fr_3822"></span>[3823](#fn_3822) Men and women in
turn lay snares for each other till we cannot but recall the prophet’s
words: “the partridge hath cried aloud, she hath gathered young which
she hath not brought forth, she getteth riches and not by right; in the
midst of her days she shall leave them, and at her end she shall be a
fool.” <span id="fr_3823"></span>[3824](#fn_3823)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p75"></span>5. The better to deceive men they have
added to the maxim given above <span
id="fr_3824"></span>[3825](#fn_3824) the saving clause “but not without
the grace of God;” and this may at the first blush take in some readers.
However, when it is carefully sifted and considered, it can deceive
nobody. For while they acknowledge the grace of God, they tell us that
our acts do not depend upon His help. Rather, they understand by the
grace of God free will and the commandments of the Law. They quote
Isaiah’s words: “God hath given the law to aid men,” <span
id="fr_3825"></span>[3826](#fn_3825) and say that we ought to thank Him
for having created us such that of our own free will we can choose the
good and avoid the evil. Nor do they see that in alleging this the devil
uses their lips to hiss out an intolerable blasphemy. For if God’s grace
is limited to this that He has formed us with wills of our own, and if
we are to rest content with free will, not seeking the divine aid lest
this should be impaired, we should cease to pray; for we cannot entreat
God’s mercy to give us daily what is already in our hands having been
given to us once for all. Those who think thus make prayer impossible
and boast that free will makes them not merely controllers of themselves
but as powerful as God. For they need no external help. Away with
fasting, away with every form of self-restraint! For why need I strive
to win by toil what has once for all been placed within my reach? The
argument that I am using is not mine; it is that put forward by a
disciple of Pelagius, or rather one who is the teacher and commander of
his whole army. <span id="fr_3826"></span>[3827](#fn_3826) This man, who
is the opposite of Paul for he is a vessel of perdition, roams through
thickets—not, as his partisans say, of syllogisms, but of solecisms, and
theorizes thus: “If I do nothing without the help of God and if all that
I do is His act, I cease to labour and the crown that I shall win will
belong not to me but to the grace of God. It is idle for Him to have
given me the power of choice if I cannot use it without His constant
help. For will that requires external support ceases to be will. God has
given me freedom of <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_276"></span>choice, but what becomes of this if I
cannot do as I wish?” Accordingly he propounds the following dilemma:
“Either once for all I use the power which is given to me, and so
preserve the freedom of my will; or I need the help of another, in which
case the freedom of my will is wholly abrogated.”

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p79"></span>6. Surely the man who says this is no
ordinary blasphemer; the poison of his heresy is no common poison. Since
our wills are free, they argue, we are no longer dependent upon God; and
they forget the Apostle’s words “what hast thou that thou didst not
receive? Now if thou didst receive it why dost thou glory as if thou
hadst not received it?” <span id="fr_3827"></span>[3828](#fn_3827) A
nice return, truly, does a man make to God when to assert the freedom of
his will he rebels against Him! For our parts we gladly embrace this
freedom, but we never forget to thank the Giver; knowing that we are
powerless unless He continually preserves in us His own gift. As the
apostle says, “it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that sheweth mercy.” <span
id="fr_3828"></span>[3829](#fn_3828) To will and to run are mine, but
they will cease to be mine unless God brings me His continual aid. For
the same apostle says “it is God which worketh in you both to will and
to do.” <span id="fr_3829"></span>[3830](#fn_3829) And in the Gospel the
Saviour says: “my Father worketh hitherto and I work.” <span
id="fr_3830"></span>[3831](#fn_3830) He is always a giver, always a
bestower. It is not enough for me that he has given me grace once; He
must give it me always. I seek that I may obtain, and when I have
obtained I seek again. I am covetous of God’s bounty; and as He is never
slack in giving, so I am never weary in receiving. The more I drink, the
more I thirst. For I have read the song of the psalmist: “O taste and
see that the Lord is good.” <span id="fr_3831"></span>[3832](#fn_3831)
Every good thing that we have is a tasting of the Lord. When I fancy
myself to have finished the book of virtue, I shall then only be at the
beginning. For “the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,” <span
id="fr_3832"></span>[3833](#fn_3832) and this fear is in its turn cast
out by love. <span id="fr_3833"></span>[3834](#fn_3833) Men are only
perfect so far as they know themselves to be imperfect. “So likewise
ye,” Christ says, “when ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that
which was our duty to do.” <span id="fr_3834"></span>[3835](#fn_3834) If
he is unprofitable who has done all, what must we say of him who has
failed to do so? This is why the Apostle declares that he has attained
in part and apprehended in part, that he is not yet perfect, and that
forgetting those things which are behind he reaches forth unto those
things which are before. <span id="fr_3835"></span>[3836](#fn_3835) Now
he who always forgets the past and longs for the future shews that he is
not content with the present.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p89"></span>They are for ever objecting to us that
we destroy free will. Nay, we reply, it is you who destroy it; for you
use it amiss and disown the bounty of its Giver. Which really destroys
freedom? the man who thanks God always and traces back his own tiny rill
to its source in Him? or the man who says: “come not near to me, for I
am holy; <span id="fr_3836"></span>[3837](#fn_3836) I have no need of
Thee. Thou hast given me once for all freedom of choice to do as I wish.
Why then dost Thou interfere again to prevent me from doing anything
unless Thou Thyself first makest Thy gifts effective in me?” To such an
one I would say: “your profession of belief in God’s grace is insincere.
For you explain this of the state in which man has been created and you
do not look for God to help him in his actions. To do this, you argue,
would be to surrender human freedom. Thus disdaining the aid of God you
have to look to men for help.”

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p91"></span>7. Listen, only listen, to the
blasphemer. “Suppose,” he avers, “that I want to bend my finger or to
move my hand, to sit, to stand, to walk, to run to and fro, to spit or
to blow my nose, to perform the offices of nature; must the help of God
be always indispensable to me?” Thankless, nay blasphemous wretch, hear
the apostle’s declaration: “whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_3837"></span>[3838](#fn_3837) Hear also the words of James: “go
to now, ye that say, To-day or to-morrow we will go into such a city and
continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain. Whereas ye know
not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? It is even a
vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. For
that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that. But now ye rejoice in your boastings; all such rejoicing is
evil.” <span id="fr_3838"></span>[3839](#fn_3838) You fancy that a wrong
is inflicted on you and your freedom of choice is destroyed if you are
forced to fall back on God as the moving cause of all your actions, if
you are made dependent on His Will, and if you have to echo the
psalmist’s words: “mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for it is he that
shall pluck my feet out of the net.” <span
id="fr_3839"></span>[3840](#fn_3839) And so you presume rashly to
maintain that each individual is governed by his own choice. But if he
is governed by his own choice, what becomes of God’s help? If he does
not need Christ to rule him, why does Jeremiah write: “the way of man is
not in himself” <span id="fr_3840"></span>[3841](#fn_3840) and “the Lord
directeth his steps.” <span id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p97"></span><span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_277"></span>You say that the commandments of God are
easy, and yet you cannot produce any one who has fulfilled them all.
Answer me this: are they easy or are they difficult? If they are easy,
then produce some one who has fulfilled them all. Explain also the words
of the psalmist: “thou dost cause toil by thy law,” <span
id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842) and “because of the words of thy
lips I have kept hard ways.” <span id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843)
And make plain our Lord’s sayings in the gospel: “enter ye in at the
strait gate;” <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844) and “love your
enemies;” and “pray for them which persecute you.” <span
id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845) If on the other hand the
commandments are difficult and if no man has kept them all, how have you
presumed to say that they are easy? Do not you see that you contradict
yourself? For either they are easy and countless numbers have kept them;
or they are difficult and you have been too hasty in calling them easy.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p102"></span>8. It is a common argument with your
party to say that God’s commandments are either possible or impossible.
So far as they are the former you admit that they are rightly laid upon
us; but so far as they are the latter you allege that blame attaches not
to us who have received them but to God who has imposed them on us.
What! has God commanded me to be what He is, <span
id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846) to put no difference between myself
and my creator, to be greater than the greatest of the angels, to have a
power which no angels possess? Sinlessness is made a characteristic of
Christ, “who did no sin neither was guile found in his mouth.” <span
id="fr_3847"></span>[3848](#fn_3847) But if I am sinless as well as He,
how is sinlessness any longer His distinguishing mark? for if this
distinction exists, your theory becomes fatal to itself.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p105"></span>You assert that a man may be without
sin if he will; and then, as though awakening from a deep sleep, you try
to deceive the unwary by adding the saving clause “yet not without the
grace of God.” For if by his own efforts a man can keep himself without
sin, what need has he of God’s grace? If on the other hand he can do
nothing without this, what is the use of saying that he can do what he
cannot do? It is argued that a man may be without sin and perfect if he
only wills it. What Christian is there who does not wish to be sinless
or who would reject perfection if, as you say, it is to be had for the
wishing, and if the will is sure to be followed by the power? There is
no Christian who does not wish to be sinless; wishing to be so,
therefore, they all will be so. Whether you like it or not you will be
caught in this dilemma, that you can produce nobody or hardly anybody
who is without sin, yet have to admit that everybody may be sinless if
he likes. God’s commandments, it is argued, are possible to keep. Who
denies it? But how this truth is to be understood the chosen vessel thus
most clearly explains: “what the law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh;” <span
id="fr_3848"></span>[3849](#fn_3848) and again: “by the deeds of the law
there shall no flesh be justified.” <span
id="fr_3849"></span>[3850](#fn_3849) And to shew that it is not only the
law of Moses that is meant or all those precepts which collectively are
termed the law, the same apostle writes: “I delight in the law of God
after the inward man. But I see another law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? The grace of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.” <span id="fr_3850"></span>[3851](#fn_3850) Other words of his
further explain his meaning: “we know that the law is spiritual: but I
am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I know <span
id="fr_3851"></span>[3852](#fn_3851) not: for what I would that do I
not, but what I hate that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I
consent unto the law that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do
it: but sin that dwelleth in me. For I know that in me (that is, in my
flesh) dwelleth no good thing. For to will is present with me: but how
to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would, I
do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I do that I
would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in
me.” <span id="fr_3852"></span>[3853](#fn_3852)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p111"></span>9. But you will demur to this and say
that I follow the teaching <span id="fr_3853"></span>[3854](#fn_3853) of
the Manichæans and others who make war against the church’s doctrine in
the interest of their belief that there are two natures diverse from one
another and that there is an evil nature which can in no wise be
changed. But it is not against me that you must make this imputation but
against the apostle who knows well that God is one thing and man
another, that the flesh is weak and the spirit strong. <span
id="fr_3854"></span>[3855](#fn_3854) “The flesh lusteth against the
spirit and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one
to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.” <span
id="fr_3855"></span>[3856](#fn_3855) But from me you will never hear
that any nature is essentially evil. Let us learn then from him who
tells us so in what sense the flesh is weak. Ask him why he has said:
<span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_278"></span>“the good that I would, I do not; the
evil which I would not, that I do.” <span
id="fr_3856"></span>[3857](#fn_3856) What necessity fetters his will?
What compulsion commands him to do what he dislikes? And why must he do
not what he wishes but what he dislikes and does not wish? He will
answer you thus: “nay, but, O man, who art thou that repliest against
God? Shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why hast thou
made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump
to make one vessel unto honour and another unto dishonour?” <span
id="fr_3857"></span>[3858](#fn_3857) Bring a yet graver charge against
God and ask Him why, when Esau and Jacob were still in the womb, He
said: “Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” <span
id="fr_3858"></span>[3859](#fn_3858) Accuse Him of injustice because,
when Achan the son of Carmi stole part of the spoil of Jericho, He
butchered so many thousands for the fault of one. <span
id="fr_3859"></span>[3860](#fn_3859) Ask Him why for the sin of the sons
of Eli the people were well-nigh annihilated and the ark captured. <span
id="fr_3860"></span>[3861](#fn_3860) And why, when David sinned by
numbering the people, so many thousands lost their lives. <span
id="fr_3861"></span>[3862](#fn_3861) Or lastly make your own the
favorite cavil of your associate Porphyry, and ask how God can be
described as pitiful and of great mercy when from Adam to Moses and from
Moses to the coming of Christ He has suffered all nations to die in
ignorance of the Law and of His commandments. <span
id="fr_3862"></span>[3863](#fn_3862) For Britain, that province so
fertile in despots, the Scottish tribes, and all the barbarians round
about as far as the ocean were alike without knowledge of Moses and the
prophets. Why should Christ’s coming have been delayed to the last
times? Why should He not have come before so vast a number had perished?
Of this last question the blessed apostle in writing to the Romans most
wisely disposes by admitting that he does not know and that only God
does. Do you too, then, condescend to remain ignorant of that into which
you inquire. Leave to God His power over what is His own; He does not
need you to justify His actions. I am the hapless being against whom you
ought to direct your insults, I who am for ever reading the words: “by
grace ye are saved,” <span id="fr_3863"></span>[3864](#fn_3863) and
“blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered.” <span id="fr_3864"></span>[3865](#fn_3864) Yet, to lay bare my
own weakness, I know that I wish to do many things which I ought to do
and yet cannot. For while my spirit is strong and leads me to life my
flesh is weak and draws me to death. And I have the warning of the Lord
in my ears: “watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.” <span
id="fr_3865"></span>[3866](#fn_3865)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p125"></span>10. It is in vain that you misrepresent
me and try to convince the ignorant that I condemn free will. Let him
who condemns it be himself condemned. We have been created endowed with
free will; still it is not this which distinguishes us from the brutes.
For human free will, as I have said before, depends upon the help of God
and needs His aid moment by moment, a thing which you and yours do not
choose to admit. Your position is that, if a man once has free will, he
no longer needs the help of God. It is true that freedom of the will
brings with it freedom of decision. Still man does not act immediately
on his free will, but requires God’s aid who Himself needs no aid. You
yourself boast that a man’s righteousness may be perfect and equal to
God’s; yet you confess that you are a sinner. Answer me this, then; do
you or do you not wish to be free from sin? If you do, why on your
principle do you not carry out your desire? And if you do not, do you
not prove yourself a despiser of God’s commandments? If you are a
despiser, then you are a sinner. And if you are a sinner, then the
scripture says: “unto the wicked God saith, what hast thou to do to
declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy
mouth? seeing thou hatest instruction and castest my words behind
thee.” <span id="fr_3866"></span>[3867](#fn_3866) So long as you are
unwilling to do what God commands, so long do you cast His words behind
you. And yet like a new apostle you lay down for the world what to do
and what not to do. However, your words and your thoughts by no means
correspond. For when you say that you are a sinner—yet that a man may be
without sin if he will, you wish it to be understood that you are a
saint and free from all sin. It is only out of humility <span
id="fr_3867"></span>[3868](#fn_3867) that you call yourself a sinner; to
give you a chance of praising others while you depreciate yourself.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p128"></span>11. Another of your arguments is also
intolerable, one which runs thus: “To be sinless is one thing, to be
able to be so is another. The first is not in our power, the second
generally is. For though none ever has been sinless, yet, if a man wills
to be so, he can be so.” What sort of reasoning, I ask, is this? that a
man can be what a man never has been! that a thing is possible which
according to your own admission, no man has yet achieved! You are
predicating of man a quality which, for aught you know, he may never
possess! and you are assigning to any chance person a grace which you
cannot <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="v.CXXXIII-Page_279"></span>shew to have marked patriarchs, prophets,
or apostles. Listen to the Church’s words, plain as they may seem to you
or crude or ignorant. And speak what you think; preach publicly what
secretly you tell your disciples. You profess to have freedom of choice;
why do you not speak your thoughts freely? Your secret chambers hear one
doctrine, the crowd around the platform hear another. The uneducated
throng, I suppose, is not able to digest your esoteric teaching.
Satisfied with the milk-diet of an infant it cannot take solid
food. <span id="fr_3868"></span>[3869](#fn_3868)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p130"></span>I have written nothing yet, and still
you menace me with the thunders of a reply; hoping, I suppose, that I
may be scared by your terrors and may not venture to open my mouth. You
fail to see that my purpose in writing is to force you to answer and to
commit yourself plainly to doctrines which at present you maintain or
ignore, as time, place, and person require. One kind of freedom I must
deny to you, the freedom to deny what you have once written. An open
avowal on your part of the opinions that you hold will be a victory for
the church. For either the language of your reply will correspond to
mine, in which case I shall count you no longer as opponents but as
friends; or else you will gainsay my doctrine, in which case the making
known of your opinion to all the churches will be a triumph for me. To
have brought your tenets to light is to have overcome them. Blasphemy is
written on the face of them, and a doctrine, which in its very statement
is blasphemous, needs no refutation. You threaten me with a reply, but
this nobody can escape except the man who does not write at all. How do
you know what I am going to say that you talk of a reply? Perhaps I
shall take your view and then you will have sharpened your wits to no
purpose. Eunomians, Arians, Macedonians—all these, unlike in name, alike
in impiety, give me no trouble. For they say what they think. Yours is
the only heresy which blushes openly to maintain what secretly it does
not fear to teach. But the frenzy of the disciples exposes the silence
of the masters; for what they have heard from them in the closet they
preach upon the housetop. If their auditors like what they say, their
masters get the credit; and if they dislike it, only the disciples are
blamed, the masters go free. In this way your heresy has grown and you
have deceived many; especially those who cleave to women and are assured
that they cannot sin. You are always teaching, you are always denying;
you deserve to have the prophet’s words applied to you: “give to them
glory, O Lord, when they are in travail and in the throes of labour.
Give them, O Lord; what wilt thou give? Give them a miscarrying womb and
dry breasts.” <span id="fr_3869"></span>[3870](#fn_3869) My temper rises
and I cannot check my words. The limits of a letter do not admit of a
lengthy discussion. I assail nobody by name here. It is only against the
teacher of perverse doctrine that I have spoken. If resentment shall
induce him to reply, he will but betray himself like a mouse which
always leaves traces of its presence; and, when it comes to blows in
earnest, will receive more serious wounds.

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p132"></span>12. From my youth up until now I have
spent many years in writing various works and have always tried to teach
my hearers the doctrine that I have been taught publicly in church. I
have not followed the philosophers in their discussions but have
preferred to acquiesce in the plain words of the apostles. For I have
known that it is written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent,” <span
id="fr_3870"></span>[3871](#fn_3870) and “the foolishness of God is
wiser than men.” <span id="fr_3871"></span>[3872](#fn_3871) This being
the case, I challenge my opponents thoroughly to sift all my past
writings and, if they can find anything that is faulty in them, to bring
it to light. One of two things must happen. Either my works will be
found edifying and I shall confute the false charges brought against me;
or they will be found blameworthy and I shall confess my error. For I
would sooner correct an error than persevere in an opinion proved to be
wrong. And as for you, illustrious doctor, go you and do likewise:
either defend the statements that you have made, and support your clever
theories with corresponding eloquence, and do not when the whim takes
you disown your own words; or if, as a man may do, you have made a
mistake, confess it frankly and restore harmony where there has been
disagreement. Recall to mind how even the soldiers did not rend the coat
of the Saviour. <span id="fr_3872"></span>[3873](#fn_3872) When you see
brothers at strife you laugh; and are glad that some are called by your
name and others by that of Christ. Better would it be to imitate Jonah
and say: “If it is for my sake that this great tempest is upon you, take
me up and cast me forth into the sea.” <span
id="fr_3873"></span>[3874](#fn_3873) He in his humility was thrown into
the deep that he might rise again in glory to be a type of the
Lord. <span id="fr_3874"></span>[3875](#fn_3874) But you are lifted up
in your pride to the stars, only that of you too Jesus may <span
id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="v.CXXXIII-Page_280"></span>say: “I
beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.” <span
id="fr_3875"></span>[3876](#fn_3875)

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p139"></span>13. It is true that in the holy
scriptures many are called righteous, as Zacharias and Elizabeth, Job,
Jehosaphat, Josiah, and many others who are mentioned in the sacred
writings. Of this fact I shall, if God gives me grace, give a full
explanation in the work which I have promised <span
id="fr_3876"></span>[3877](#fn_3876) ; in this letter it must suffice to
say that they are called righteous, not because they are faultless but
because their faults are eclipsed by their virtues. <span
id="fr_3877"></span>[3878](#fn_3877) In fact Zacharias is punished with
dumbness, <span id="fr_3878"></span>[3879](#fn_3878) Job is condemned
out of his own mouth, <span id="fr_3879"></span>[3880](#fn_3879) and
Jehoshaphat and Josiah who are beyond a doubt described as righteous are
narrated to have done things displeasing to the Lord. The first leagued
himself with the ungodly Ahab and brought upon himself the rebuke of
Micaiah; <span id="fr_3880"></span>[3881](#fn_3880) and the
second—though forbidden by the word of the Lord spoken by Jeremiah—went
against Pharaoh-Nechoh, king of Egypt, and was slain by him. <span
id="fr_3881"></span>[3882](#fn_3881) Yet they are both called righteous.
Of the rest this is not the time to write; for you have asked me not for
a treatise but for a letter. For a complete refutation I require leisure
and then I hope to destroy all their cavils by the help of Christ. For
this purpose I shall rely on the holy scriptures in which God every day
speaks to those who believe. And this is the warning which I would give
through you to all who are assembled within your holy and illustrious
house, that they should not allow one or at the most three mannikins to
taint them with the dregs of so many heresies and with the infamy—to say
the least—attaching to them. A place once famous for virtue and holiness
must not be defiled by the presumption of the devil and by unclean
associations. And let those who supply money to such men know that they
are adding to the ranks of the heretics, raising up enemies to Christ
and fostering his avowed opponents. It is idle for them to profess one
thing with their lips when by their actions they are proved to think
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3771"></span>[272:3772](2060144.htm#fr_3771) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p4"></span> [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3772"></span>[272:3773](2060144.htm#fr_3772) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p5"></span> Cf. Letter LXXIX. § 9.

<span id="fn_3773"></span>[272:3774](2060144.htm#fr_3773) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p6"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3774"></span>[272:3775](2060144.htm#fr_3774) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p9"></span> Virgil, Æneid, vi. 733, 734.

<span id="fn_3775"></span>[272:3776](2060144.htm#fr_3775) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p13"></span> Horace, Sat. I. iii. 68, 69.

<span id="fn_3776"></span>[272:3777](2060144.htm#fr_3776) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p15"></span> Tertullian, against Hermogenes, c. ix.

<span id="fn_3777"></span>[273:3778](2060144.htm#fr_3777) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p16"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3778"></span>[273:3779](2060144.htm#fr_3778) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p17"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3779"></span>[273:3780](2060144.htm#fr_3779) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p18"></span> [Rom. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3780"></span>[273:3781](2060144.htm#fr_3780) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p19"></span> [Eccles. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p19.1"></span>.
Jerome inverts the words of the Preacher.

<span id="fn_3781"></span>[273:3782](2060144.htm#fr_3781) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p21"></span> [Rom. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3782"></span>[273:3783](2060144.htm#fr_3782) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p22"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3783"></span>[273:3784](2060144.htm#fr_3783) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p23"></span> [Eccles. vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3784"></span>[273:3785](2060144.htm#fr_3784) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p24"></span> [1 Kings viii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3785"></span>[273:3786](2060144.htm#fr_3785) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p25"></span> [Prov. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3786"></span>[273:3787](2060144.htm#fr_3786) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p26"></span> [Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3787"></span>[273:3788](2060144.htm#fr_3787) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p27"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3788"></span>[273:3789](2060144.htm#fr_3788) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p28"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3789"></span>[273:3790](2060144.htm#fr_3789) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p29"></span> [Ps.
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021), [Heb.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3790"></span>[273:3791](2060144.htm#fr_3790) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p31"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3791"></span>[273:3792](2060144.htm#fr_3791) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p31.3"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p32"></span> Jerome here addresses Pelagius.

<span id="fn_3792"></span>[273:3793](2060144.htm#fr_3792) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p33"></span> [Matt.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3793"></span>[274:3794](2060144.htm#fr_3793) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p38"></span> Virgil, Georg. ii. 325–327.

<span id="fn_3794"></span>[274:3795](2060144.htm#fr_3794) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p40"></span> See note on Letter LXXV. § 3.

<span id="fn_3795"></span>[274:3796](2060144.htm#fr_3795) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p41"></span> He was condemned by a council at
Saragossa in 380–381 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p41.1"></span>a.d.</span> and was put to death by Maximus
at Trêves in 385 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p41.2"></span>a.d.</span> at the instigation of the
Spanish bishops. Martin of Tours tried to save his life in vain.

<span id="fn_3796"></span>[274:3797](2060144.htm#fr_3796) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p41.3"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p42"></span> According to Sozomen (H. E. vi. c. 30)
Evagrius was in his youth befriended by Gregory of Nyssa, who left him
in Constantinople to assist Nectarius in dealing with theological
questions. Being in danger, both as to his chastity and as to his
personal safety on account of an acquaintance he had formed with a lady
of rank, he withdrew to Jerusalem, where he was nursed through a severe
illness by Melanium. The rest of his life he spent as an ascetic in the
Egyptian desert. See also Pallad. Hist. Laus., § lxxxvi.

<span id="fn_3797"></span>[274:3798](2060144.htm#fr_3797) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p43"></span> Viz., Melanium, who having sided with
Rufinus in his controversy with Jerome, incurred the latter’s
displeasure. The name means ‘black.’ See Letter IV. § 2.

<span id="fn_3798"></span>[274:3799](2060144.htm#fr_3798) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p44"></span> Viz., Rufinus of Aquileia, Jerome’s
former friend.

<span id="fn_3799"></span>[274:3800](2060144.htm#fr_3799) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p45"></span> These three were known as ‘the long
brothers.’ Their expulsion from Egypt by Theophilus was one of the
causes which led to the downfall of John of Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_3800"></span>[274:3801](2060144.htm#fr_3800) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p46"></span> A contemporary Egyptian monk of great
celebrity.

<span id="fn_3801"></span>[274:3802](2060144.htm#fr_3801) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p47"></span> See Letter XCII. and note.

<span id="fn_3802"></span>[274:3803](2060144.htm#fr_3802) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p48"></span> Lucretius, i. 935–937.

<span id="fn_3803"></span>[274:3804](2060144.htm#fr_3803) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p52"></span> Viz., John of Lycopolis, an Egyptian
hermit of the latter half of the fourth century. His reputation for
sanctity was only second to that of Antony. The book about monks here
spoken of does not occur in the list of the writings of Evagrius in the
Dict. of Chr. Biog., taken from Socrates, Gennadius and Palladius.
Rufinus’ History of the Monks bears a close affinity to the Historia
Lausiaca of Palladius, who was closely allied to Evagrius; and it is
possible that Jerome may have attributed Palladius’ work to Evagrius.
See Prolegomena to Rufinus, and comp. Ruf. Hist. Mon. i. with Pall.
Hist. Laus., xliii.

<span id="fn_3804"></span>[274:3805](2060144.htm#fr_3804) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p53"></span> In his references (here and in his
comm. on Jeremiah, book iv., ch. 22) to the Gnomes of Sixtus or Xystus,
Jerome is both inaccurate and unfair. For Rufinus merely states that the
author was traditionally identified with Sixtus, bishop of Rome and
martyr; and he does not endorse the statement. In its present form the
book is so strongly Christian in tone and language that it is strange to
find it described as Christless and heathen. Of its origin nothing
certain is known, but probably it is “the production of an early
Christian philosopher working up heathen material with a leaven of the
Gospel” (Dict. Chr. Biog. s. v. Xystus).

<span id="fn_3805"></span>[274:3806](2060144.htm#fr_3805) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p54"></span> It is not clear which Sixtus is meant.
Sixtus I. is not known to have been a martyr and Sixtus II. can hardly
be intended. For though his claim to the title is undisputed he can
scarcely have written what Origen already quotes as well known.

<span id="fn_3806"></span>[274:3807](2060144.htm#fr_3806) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p55"></span> Jerome elsewhere twits Rufinus with the
same mistake (see Comm. on Jer., book iv., ch. 22). He was not, however,
alone in making it, for even Augustine was for a time similarly deceived
(see his Retractations, ii. 42).

<span id="fn_3807"></span>[274:3808](2060144.htm#fr_3807) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p56"></span> Cf. Against Rufinus, i. 8, 9. There is
now no doubt that Jerome was wrong and Rufinus right as to the
authorship of the book. See the article entitled Eusebius in the Dict.
of Christian Biog. and the prolegomena to his works as issued in this
series.

<span id="fn_3808"></span>[274:3809](2060144.htm#fr_3808) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p58"></span> [Ps. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p58.1"></span>
and Origen’s Comm. ad loc.

<span id="fn_3809"></span>[275:3810](2060144.htm#fr_3809) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p59"></span> See Against Jovinian, book ii. 1. His
second position is that “persons baptized with water and the spirit
cannot be tempted of the devil.”

<span id="fn_3810"></span>[275:3811](2060144.htm#fr_3810) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p61"></span> [Eph.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014), [2 Tim.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3811"></span>[275:3812](2060144.htm#fr_3811) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p62"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3812"></span>[275:3813](2060144.htm#fr_3812) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p63"></span> [Ezek. xiii.
10-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3813"></span>[275:3814](2060144.htm#fr_3813) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p64"></span> This legendary companion and disciple
of Simon Magus is said to have been identified by him with Helen of
Troy. According to Justin Martyr she had been a prostitute at Tyre.

<span id="fn_3814"></span>[275:3815](2060144.htm#fr_3814) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p65"></span> Cf. Epiphanius, Adv. Hær. lib. i. tom.
ii, p. 76, ed. Migne.

<span id="fn_3815"></span>[275:3816](2060144.htm#fr_3815) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p66"></span> Jerome is alone in speaking of this
emissary. It has been suggested that he may have had in mind the gnostic
Marcellina, who came to Rome during the episcopate of Anicetus.

<span id="fn_3816"></span>[275:3817](2060144.htm#fr_3816) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p67"></span> Apelles, the most famous of the
disciples of Marcion, lived and taught mainly at Rome. Philumena was a
clairvoyante whose revelations he regarded as inspired.

<span id="fn_3817"></span>[275:3818](2060144.htm#fr_3817) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p67.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p68"></span> See Letter XLI.

<span id="fn_3818"></span>[275:3819](2060144.htm#fr_3818) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p69"></span> Constantia, sister of Constantine the
Great.

<span id="fn_3819"></span>[275:3820](2060144.htm#fr_3819) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p70"></span> Lucilla, a wealthy lady of Carthage,
having been condemned by its bishop Cæcilianus, is said to have procured
his deposition by bribing his fellow-bishops.

<span id="fn_3820"></span>[275:3821](2060144.htm#fr_3820) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p71"></span> Agape, a Spanish lady, was a disciple
of the gnostic Marcus of Memphis (cf. Letter LXXV. § 3). She was thus
one of the links between the gnosticism of the East and the
Priscillianism of Spain. Elpidius was a rhetorician who spread in Spain
the Zoroastrian opinions which culminated in Priscillianism.

<span id="fn_3821"></span>[275:3822](2060144.htm#fr_3821) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p72"></span> Of these sisters nothing further is
known.

<span id="fn_3822"></span>[275:3823](2060144.htm#fr_3822) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p73"></span> [2 Th. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3823"></span>[275:3824](2060144.htm#fr_3823) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p74"></span> [Jer. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p74.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_3824"></span>[275:3825](2060144.htm#fr_3824) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p76"></span> Viz., “A man may be without sin.” See
for this and the other statements of Pelagius, Aug. de Gestis Pelagii,
esp. c. 2 and 6. Jerome’s Anti-Pelagian Dialogue takes these words as
containing the essence of Pelagianism.

<span id="fn_3825"></span>[275:3826](2060144.htm#fr_3825) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p77"></span> [Isa. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p77.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3826"></span>[275:3827](2060144.htm#fr_3826) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p78"></span> Celestius is meant, after Pelagius the
principal champion of free will.

<span id="fn_3827"></span>[276:3828](2060144.htm#fr_3827) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p80"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3828"></span>[276:3829](2060144.htm#fr_3828) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p81"></span> [Rom. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3829"></span>[276:3830](2060144.htm#fr_3829) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p82"></span> [Phil. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3830"></span>[276:3831](2060144.htm#fr_3830) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p83"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3831"></span>[276:3832](2060144.htm#fr_3831) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p84"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3832"></span>[276:3833](2060144.htm#fr_3832) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p85"></span> [Ps. cxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#010)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3833"></span>[276:3834](2060144.htm#fr_3833) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p86"></span> [1 Joh. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3834"></span>[276:3835](2060144.htm#fr_3834) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p87"></span> [Luke xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3835"></span>[276:3836](2060144.htm#fr_3835) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p87.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p88"></span> [Phil.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3836"></span>[276:3837](2060144.htm#fr_3836) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p90"></span> [Isa. lxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p90.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3837"></span>[276:3838](2060144.htm#fr_3837) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p91.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p92"></span> [1 Cor. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3838"></span>[276:3839](2060144.htm#fr_3838) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p93"></span> [Jas. iv.
13-16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3839"></span>[276:3840](2060144.htm#fr_3839) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p93.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p94"></span> [Ps. xxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3840"></span>[276:3841](2060144.htm#fr_3840) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p94.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p95"></span> [Jer. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[276:3842](2060144.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p95.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p96"></span> [Prov. xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[277:3843](2060144.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p98"></span> [Ps. xciv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p98.1"></span>,
LXX and Vulg.

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[277:3844](2060144.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p98.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p99"></span> [Ps. xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p99.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[277:3845](2060144.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p100"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[277:3846](2060144.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p100.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p101"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[277:3847](2060144.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p102.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p103"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p103.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.CXXXIII-p103.2"></span>υταρκής</span>, self-determined.

<span id="fn_3847"></span>[277:3848](2060144.htm#fr_3847) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p103.3"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p104"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3848"></span>[277:3849](2060144.htm#fr_3848) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p105.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p106"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3849"></span>[277:3850](2060144.htm#fr_3849) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p106.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p107"></span> [Rom. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3850"></span>[277:3851](2060144.htm#fr_3850) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p107.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p108"></span> [Rom. vii.
22-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p108.1"></span>. In the Latin as in the Greek one word
does duty for ‘grace’ and ‘thanks.’

<span id="fn_3851"></span>[277:3852](2060144.htm#fr_3851) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p108.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p109"></span> R.V.

<span id="fn_3852"></span>[277:3853](2060144.htm#fr_3852) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p109.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p110"></span> [Rom. vii.
14-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3853"></span>[277:3854](2060144.htm#fr_3853) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p111.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p112"></span> This is the well known dualism of
Manes (Manichæus), who held that the physical world and the human body
are essentially evil.

<span id="fn_3854"></span>[277:3855](2060144.htm#fr_3854) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p112.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p113"></span> cf. [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3855"></span>[277:3856](2060144.htm#fr_3855) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p113.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p114"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3856"></span>[278:3857](2060144.htm#fr_3856) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p114.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p115"></span> [Rom. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3857"></span>[278:3858](2060144.htm#fr_3857) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p115.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p116"></span> [Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3858"></span>[278:3859](2060144.htm#fr_3858) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p116.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p117"></span> [Mal.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003), [Rom.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3859"></span>[278:3860](2060144.htm#fr_3859) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p117.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p118"></span> [Josh.
vii](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#000)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3860"></span>[278:3861](2060144.htm#fr_3860) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p118.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p119"></span> [1 Sam.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#000)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3861"></span>[278:3862](2060144.htm#fr_3861) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p119.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p120"></span> [2 Sam.
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#000)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3862"></span>[278:3863](2060144.htm#fr_3862) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p120.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p121"></span> This objection is dealt with at length
by Augustine (Letter CXI. §§ 8–15. See Vol. I. Series I. of this
Library).

<span id="fn_3863"></span>[278:3864](2060144.htm#fr_3863) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p121.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p122"></span> [Eph. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3864"></span>[278:3865](2060144.htm#fr_3864) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p122.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p123"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3865"></span>[278:3866](2060144.htm#fr_3865) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p123.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p124"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3866"></span>[278:3867](2060144.htm#fr_3866) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p125.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p126"></span> [Ps.
50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#017)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3867"></span>[278:3868](2060144.htm#fr_3867) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p126.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p127"></span> Or rather, mock humility.

<span id="fn_3868"></span>[279:3869](2060144.htm#fr_3868) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p128.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p129"></span> cf. [1 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3869"></span>[279:3870](2060144.htm#fr_3869) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p130.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p131"></span> [Hos.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#014)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p131.1"></span>, partly after the LXX., partly from
memory.

<span id="fn_3870"></span>[279:3871](2060144.htm#fr_3870) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p132.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p133"></span> [Isa.
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014), [1 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3871"></span>[279:3872](2060144.htm#fr_3871) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p133.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p134"></span> [1 Cor. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3872"></span>[279:3873](2060144.htm#fr_3872) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p134.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p135"></span> [John
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3873"></span>[279:3874](2060144.htm#fr_3873) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p135.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p136"></span> [Jon. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#012)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3874"></span>[279:3875](2060144.htm#fr_3874) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p136.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p137"></span> [Matt.
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3875"></span>[280:3876](2060144.htm#fr_3875) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p137.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p138"></span> [Luke x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3876"></span>[280:3877](2060144.htm#fr_3876) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p139.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p140"></span> The Anti-Pelagian Dialogue, to which
this letter is a kind of prelude.

<span id="fn_3877"></span>[280:3878](2060144.htm#fr_3877) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p140.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p141"></span> Cf. Letter CXXIII. § 3.

<span id="fn_3878"></span>[280:3879](2060144.htm#fr_3878) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p141.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p142"></span> [Luke i.
20-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#020)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3879"></span>[280:3880](2060144.htm#fr_3879) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p142.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p143"></span> [Job xlii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3880"></span>[280:3881](2060144.htm#fr_3880) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p144"></span> [1 Kings xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019)<span id="v.CXXXIII-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3881"></span>[280:3882](2060144.htm#fr_3881) <span
id="v.CXXXIII-p144.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXXIII-p145"></span> [2 Chr. xxxv.
20-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)<span
id="v.CXXXIII-p145.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXIV](2060145)
