<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml15)  [Next](ml17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. LUNAR FANCIES.

There are a few phosphorescent fancies about the moon, like *ignes
fatui*,

"Dancing in murky night o'er fen and lake,"

which we may dispose of in a section by themselves. Those of them that
are mythical are too evanescent to become full-grown myths; and those
which are religious are too volatile to remain in the solution or salt
of any bottled creed. Like the wandering lights of the Russians,
answering to our will-o'-the-wisp, they are the souls of still-born
children. There is, for example, the insubstantial and formless but
pleasing conception of the Indian Veda. In the Râmâyanam the moon is a
good fairy, who in giving light in the night assumes a benignant aspect
and succours the dawn. In the Vedic hymn, Râkâ, the full moon, is
exhorted to sew the work with a needle which cannot be broken. Here the
moon is personified as preparing during the night her luminous garments,
one for the evening, the other for the morning, the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

one lunar and of silver, the other solar and of gold. <span
id="fr_277"></span>[274](ml21.htm#fn_277.md) Another notion, equally airy
but more religious, has sprung up in Christian times and in Catholic
countries. It is that heathen fancy which connects the moon with the
Virgin Mary. Abundant evidence of this association in the minds of Roman
Catholics is furnished by the style of the ornaments which crowd the
continental churches. One of the most conspicuous is the sun and moon in
conjunction, precisely as they are represented on Babylonian and Grecian
coins; and the identification of the Virgin and her Child with the moon
any Roman Catholic cathedral will show. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[275](ml21.htm#fn_278.md) The *Roman Missal* will
present to any reader "Sancta Maria, cœli Regina, et mundi Domina"; the
*Glories of Mary* will exhibit her as the omnipotent mother, Queen of
the Universe; and Ecclesiastical History will declare how, as early as
the close of the fourth century, the women who were called Collyridians
worshipped her "as a goddess, and judged it necessary to appease her
anger, and seek her favour and protection, by libations, sacrifices, and
oblations of cakes (*collyridæ*)." <span
id="fr_279"></span>[276](ml21.htm#fn_279.md) This is but a repetition of
the women kneading dough to make cakes to the queen of heaven, as
recorded by Jeremiah; and proves that the relative position occupied by
Astarte in company with Baal, Juno with Jupiter, Doorga with Brahma, and
Ma-tsoo-po with Boodh, is that occupied by Mary with God. Nay more, she
is "Mater Creatoris" and "Dei Genetrix": Mother of the Creator, Mother
of God. Having thus been

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

enthroned in the position in the universal pantheon which was once
occupied by the moon, what wonder that the ignorant devotee should see
her in that orb, especially as the sun, moon, and stars of the
Apocalypse are her chief symbols. Southey has recorded a good
illustration of this superstitious fancy. "A fine circumstance occurred
in the shipwreck of the *Santiago*, 1585. The ship struck in the night;
the wretched crew had been confessing, singing litanies, etc., and this
they continued till, about two hours before break of day, the moon arose
beautiful and exceeding bright; and forasmuch as till that time they had
been in such darkness that they could scarcely sec one another when
close at hand, such was the stir among them at beholding the brightness
and glory of that orb, that most part of the crew began to lift up their
voices, and with tears, cries, and groans called upon Our Lady, saying
they saw her in the moon." <span
id="fr_280"></span>[277](ml21.htm#fn_280.md)

The preceding fancies would produce upon the poetic and religious sense
only an agreeable effect. Other hallucinations have wrought effects of
an opposite kind. The face in the moon does not always wear an amiable
aspect, and it is not unnatural that those who have been taught to
believe in angry gods and frowning providences should see the
caricatures of their false teachers reproduced in the heavens above and
in the earth beneath. We are reminded here of the magic mirror mentioned
by Bayle. There is a trick, invented by Pythagoras, which is performed
in the following manner. The moon being at the full,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

some one writes with blood on a looking-glass anything he has a mind to;
and having given notice of it to another person, he stands behind that
other and turns towards the moon the letters written in the glass. The
other looking fixedly on the shining orb reads in it all that is written
on the mirror as if it were written on the moon. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[278](ml21.htm#fn_281.md) This is precisely the *modus
operandi* by which the knavish have imposed upon the foolish in all
ages. The manipulator of the doctrine stands behind his credulous
disciple, writing out of sight his invented science or theology, and
writing too often with the blood of some innocent victim. The poor
patient student is meanwhile gazing on the moon in dreamy devotion;
until as the writing on the mirror is read with solemn intonation, it
all appears before his moon-struck gaze as a heavenly revelation. Woe to
the truth-loving critic who breaks the enchantment and the mirror,
crying out in the vernacular tongue, Your mysteries are myths, your
writings are frauds; and the fair moon is innocent of the lying
imposition!

To multitudes the moon has always been an object of terror and dread.
Not only is it a supramundane and magnified man--that it will always be
while its spots are so anthropoid, and man himself is so
anthropomorphic--but it has ever been, and still is, a being of
maleficent and misanthropic disposition. As Mr. Tylor says, "When the
Aleutians thought that if any one gave offence to the moon, he would
fling down stones on the offender and kill him; or when the moon came
down to an Indian squaw, appearing in

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the form of a beautiful woman with a child in her arms, and demanding an
offering of tobacco and fur-robes: what conceptions of personal life
could be more distinct than these?" <span
id="fr_282"></span>[279](ml21.htm#fn_282.md) Personal and distinct, indeed,
but far from pleasant. Another author tells us that "in some parts of
Scotland to point at the stars or to do aught that might be considered
an indignity in the face of the sun or moon, is still to be dreaded and
avoided; so also it was not long since, probably still is, in Devonshire
and Cornwall. The Jews seem to have been equally superstitious on this
point (Jer. viii. 1, 2), and the Persians believed leprosy to be an
infliction on those who had committed some offence against the
sun." <span id="fr_283"></span>[280](ml21.htm#fn_283.md) Southey supplies
us with an illustration of the moon in a fit of dudgeon. He is
describing the sufferings of poor Hans Stade, when he was caught by the
Tupinambas and expected that he was about to die. "The moon was up, and
fixing his eyes upon her, he silently besought God to vouchsafe him a
happy termination of these sufferings. Yeppipo Wasu, who was one of the
chiefs of the horde, and as such had convoked the meeting, seeing how
earnestly he kept gazing upwards, asked him what he was looking at. Hans
had ceased from praying, and was observing the man in the moon, and
fancying that he looked angry; his mind was broken down by continual
terror, and he says it seemed to him at that moment as if he were hated
by God, and by all things which God had created. The question only half
roused him from this phantasy, and he

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

answered, it was plain that the moon was angry. The savage asked whom
she was angry with, and then Hans, as if he had recollected himself,
replied that she was looking at his dwelling. This enraged him, and Hans
found it prudent to say that perhaps her eyes were turned so wrathfully
upon the Carios; in which opinion the chief assented, and wished she
might destroy them all." <span id="fr_284"></span>[281](ml21.htm#fn_284.md)
Some such superstitious fear must have furnished the warp into which the
following Icelandic story was woven. "There was once a sheep-stealer who
sat down in a lonely place, with a leg of mutton in his hand, in order
to feast upon it, for he had just stolen it. The moon shone bright and
clear, not a single cloud being there in heaven to hide her. While
enjoying his gay feast, the impudent thief cut a piece off the meat,
and, putting it on the point of his knife, accosted the moon with these
godless words:--

        'O moon, wilt thou  
        On thy mouth now  
This dainty bit of mutton-meat?'

Then a voice came from the heavens, saying:--

        'Wouldst thou, thief, like  
        Thy cheek to strike  
This fair key, scorching-red with heat?'

At the same moment, a red-hot key fell from the sky on to the cheek of
the thief, burning on it a mark which he carried with him ever
afterwards. Hence arose the custom in ancient times of branding or

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

marking thieves." <span id="fr_285"></span>[282](ml21.htm#fn_285.md) The
moral influence of this tale is excellent, and has the cordial
admiration of all who hate robbery and effrontery: at the same time it
exhibits the moon as an irascible body, with which no liberty may be
taken. In short, it is an object of superstitious awe.

One other lunar fancy, born and bred in fear, is connected with the
abominable superstition of witchcraft. Abominable, unquestionably, the
evil was; but justice compels us to add that the remedy of relentless
and ruthless persecution with which it was sought to remove the pest was
a reign of abhorrent and atrocious cruelty. Into the question itself we
dare not enter, lest we should be ourselves bewitched. We know that
divination by supposed supernatural agency existed among the Hebrews,
that magical incantations were practised among the Greeks and Romans,
and that more modern witchcraft has been contemporaneous with the
progress of Christianity. But we must dismiss the subject in one
borrowed sentence. "The main source from which we derived this
superstition is the East, and traditions and facts incorporated in our
religion. There were only wanted the ferment of thought of the fifteenth
century, the energy, ignorance, enthusiasm, and faith of those days, and
the papal denunciation of witchcraft by the bull of Innocent the Eighth,
in 1459, to give fury to the delusion. And from this time, for three
centuries, the flames at which more than a hundred thousand victims
perished cast a lurid light over Europe." <span
id="fr_286"></span>[283](ml21.htm#fn_286.md)<span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

The singular notion, which we wish to present, is the ancient belief
that witches could control the moon. In the *Clouds* of Aristophanes,
Strepsiades tells Socrates that he has "a notion calculated to deprive
of interest"; which is as follows:--

"*Str*. If I were to buy a Thessalian witch, and draw down the moon by
night, then shut her up in a round helmet-case, like a mirror, and then
keep watching her--"

"*Soc*. What good would that do you, then?"

"*Str*. What? If the moon were not to rise any more anywhere, I should
not pay the interest."

"*Soc*. Because what?"

"*Str*. Because the money is lent by the month." <span
id="fr_287"></span>[284](ml21.htm#fn_287.md)

Shakespeare alludes to this, where Prospero says, "His mother was a
witch, and one so strong that could control the moon " (*Tempest*, Act
v.).

If the witch's broom, on whose stick she rode to the moon, be a type of
the wind, we may guess how the fancy grew up that the airy creation
could control those atmospheric vapours on which the light and humidity
of the night were supposed to depend. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[285](ml21.htm#fn_288.md)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Lunar Eclipses](ml17.md)

</div>
