<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml16)  [Next](ml18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. LUNAR ECLIPSES.

All round the globe, from time immemorial, those periodic phenomena
known as solar and lunar eclipses have been occasions of mental
disquietude and superstitious alarm. Though now regarded as perfectly
natural and regular, they have seemed so preternatural

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and irregular to the unscientific eye that we cannot wonder at the
consternation which they have caused. And it must be confessed that a
total obscuration of the sun in the middle of the day casts such a gloom
over the earth that men not usually timid are still excusable if during
the parenthesis they feel a temporary uneasiness, and are relieved when
the ruler of the day emerges from his dark chamber, apparently rejoicing
to renew his race. An eclipse of the moon, though less awe-inspiring, is
nevertheless sufficiently so to awaken in the superstitious brain
fearful forebodings of impending calamity. Science may demonstrate that
there is nothing abnormal in these occurrences, but to the seeker after
signs it wilt be throwing words away; for, as Lord Kames says,
Superstitious eyes are never opened by instruction."

We will now produce a number of testimonies to show how these lunar
eclipses have been viewed among the various races of the earth in
ancient and modern times. The Chaldæans were careful observers of
eclipses, and Berosus believed that when the moon was obscured she
turned to us her dark side. Anaximenes said that her mouth was stopped.
Plato, Aristotle, the Stoics, and the Mathematicians said that she fell
into conjunction with the bright sun. Anaxagoras of Clazomenæ (born B.C.
499) was the first to explain the eclipse of the moon as caused by the
shadow of the earth cast by the sun. But he was as one born out of due
time. We are all familiar with the use made by students of unfulfilled
prophecy

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

of every extraordinary occurrence in nature, such as the sudden
appearance of a comet, an earthquake, an eclipse, etc. We know how
mysteriously they interpret those simple passages in the Bible about the
sun being darkened and the moon being turned into blood. If they were
not wilfully blind, such facts as are established by the following
quotations would open their eyes to the errors in their exegesis. At any
rate, they would find their theories anticipated in nearly every
particular by those very heathen whom they are wont to pity as so
benighted and hopelessly lost.

Grimm writes: "One of the most terrible phenomena to heathens was an
*eclipse* of the sun or moon, which they associated with a destruction
of all things and the end of the world. I may safely assume that the
same superstitious notions and practices attend eclipses among nations
ancient and modern. The Indian belief is that a serpent eats up the sun
and moon when they arc eclipsed, or a demon devours them. To this day
the Hindoos consider that a giant lays hold of the luminaries and tries
to swallow them. The Chinese call the solar eclipse zhishi (solis
devoratio), the lunar yueshi (lunæ devoratio), and ascribe them both to
the machinations of a dragon. Nearly all the populations of Northern
Asia hold the same opinion. The Finns of Europe, the Lithuanians, and
the Moors in Africa, have a similar belief." <span
id="fr_289"></span>[286](ml21.htm#fn_289.md) Flammarion says: "Among the
ancient nations people used to come to the assistance of the moon, by
making

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

a confused noise with all kinds of instruments, when it was eclipsed. It
is even done now in Persia and some parts of China, where they fancy
that the moon is fighting with a great dragon, and they think the noise
will make him loose his hold and take to flight. Among the East Indians
they have the same belief that when the sun and the moon are eclipsed, a
dragon is seizing them, and astronomers who go there to observe eclipses
are troubled by the fears of their native attendants, and by their
endeavours to get into the water as the best place under the
circumstances. In America the idea is that the sun and moon are tired
when they are eclipsed. But the more refined Greeks believed for a long
time that the moon was bewitched, and that the magicians made it descend
from heaven to put into the herbs a certain maleficent froth. Perhaps
the idea of the dragon arose from the ancient custom of calling the
places in the heavens at which the eclipses of the moon took place the
head and tail of the dragon." <span
id="fr_290"></span>[287](ml21.htm#fn_290.md) Sir Edward Sherburne, in his
"Annotations upon the *Medea*," quaintly says: "Of the beating of
kettles, basons, and other brazen vessels used by the ancients when the
moone was eclipsed (which they did to drown the charms of witches, that
the moon might not hear them, and so be drawne from her spheare as they
suppos'd), I shall not need to speake, being a thing so generally
knowne, a custom continued among the Turks to this day; yet I cannot but
adde, and wonder at, what Joseph Scaliger, in his 'Annotations upon<span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Manilius,' reports out of Bonincontrius, an ancient commentator upon the
same poet, who affirms that in a town of Italy where he lived (within
these two centuries of yeares), he saw the same piece of paganisme acted
upon the like occasion." <span id="fr_291"></span>[288](ml21.htm#fn_291.md)
Another, and more recent writer, also says of these eclipses: "The
Chinese imagine them to be caused by great dragons trying to devour the
sun and moon, and beat drums and brass kettles to make the monsters give
up their prey. Some of the tribes of American Indians speak of the moon
as hunted by huge dogs, catching and tearing her till her soft light is
reddened and put out by the blood flowing from her wounds. To this day
in India the native beats his gong, as the moon passes across the sun's
face, and it is not so very long ago that in Europe both eclipses and
rushing comets were thought to show that troubles were near." <span
id="fr_292"></span>[289](ml21.htm#fn_292.md) Respecting China, a modern
traveller speaks in not very complimentary language. "If there is on the
earth a nation absorbed by the affairs of this world and who trouble
themselves little about what passes among the heavenly bodies, it is
assuredly the Chinese. The most erudite among them just know of the
existence of astronomy, or, as they call it, *tienwen*--'celestial
literature.' But they are ignorant of the simplest principles of the
science, and those who regard an eclipse as a natural phenomenon,
instead of a dragon who is seeking to devour the sun and moon, are
enlightened indeed." <span id="fr_293"></span>[290](ml21.htm#fn_293.md)
This statement ought to be taken with more than one *granum salis*,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

especially as Mrs. Somerville assures us that the Chinese had made
advances in the science of astronomy 1,100 years before the Christian
era, and also adds: "Their whole chronology is founded on the
observation of eclipses, which prove the existence of that empire for
more than 4,700 years." <span id="fr_294"></span>[291](ml21.htm#fn_294.md)
With this discount the charge against Chinese ignorance may be passed.
"A Mongolian myth makes out that the gods determined to punish Arakho
for his misdeeds, but he hid so effectually that no one could find out
his lurking-place. They therefore asked the *sun*, who gave an
unsatisfactory answer; but when they asked the *moon*, she disclosed his
whereabouts. So Arakho was dragged forth and chastised; in revenge of
which he *pursues both sun and moon*, and whenever he comes to
hand-grips with one of them, *an eclipse occurs*. To help the lights of
heaven in their sad plight, a *tremendous uproar* is made with musical
and other instruments, till Arakho is scared away." <span
id="fr_295"></span>[292](ml21.htm#fn_295.md) "Referring to the Shoo, Pt.
III., Bk. IV., parag. 4, we find this sentence: 'On the first day of the
last month of autumn the sun and moon did not meet harmoniously in
Fang.'" <span id="fr_296"></span>[293](ml21.htm#fn_296.md) In less
euphemistic phrase, the sun and moon were *crossed*.

Dr. Wells Williams describes an interesting scene. "In the middle of the
sixth moon lanterns are hung from the top of a pole placed on the
highest part of the house. A single small lantern is deemed sufficient,
but if the night be calm, a greater display is made by some
householders, and especially in boats,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

by exhibiting coloured glass lamps arranged in various ways. The
illumination of a city like Canton, when seen from a high spot, is made
still more brilliant by the moving boats on the river. On one of these
festivals at Canton, an almost total eclipse of the moon called out the
entire population, each one carrying something with which to make a
noise, kettles, pans, sticks, drums, gongs, guns, crackers, and what not
to frighten away the dragon of the sky from his hideous feast. The
advancing shadow gradually caused the myriads of lanterns to show more
and more distinctly, and started a still increasing clamour, till the
darkness and the noise were both at their climax. Silence gradually
resumed its sway as the moon recovered her fulness." <span
id="fr_297"></span>[294](ml21.htm#fn_297.md) On another page Dr. Williams
tells us that "some clouds having on one occasion covered the sky, so
that an eclipse could not be seen, the courtiers joyfully repaired to
the emperor to felicitate him that Heaven, touched by his virtues, had
spared him the pain of witnessing the 'eating of the sun.'" <span
id="fr_298"></span>[295](ml21.htm#fn_298.md) The following passage from
Doolittle's work on the Chinese is sufficiently interesting to be given
without abridgment: "It is a part of the official duties of mandarins to
'save the sun and moon when eclipsed.' Prospective eclipses are never
noticed in the Imperial Calendar, published originally at Peking, and
republished in the provinces. The imperial astronomers at the capital, a
considerable time previous to a visible eclipse, inform the Board of
Rites of its month, day, and hour.<span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

These officers send this intelligence to the viceroys or governors of
the eighteen provinces of the empire. These, in turn, communicate the
information to all the principal subordinate officers in the provinces
of the civil and the military grade. The officers make arrangements to
save the moon or the sun at the appointed time. On the day of the
eclipse, or on the day preceding it, some of them put up a written
notice in or near their yamuns, for the information of the public.

"The Chinese generally have no rational idea of the cause of eclipses.
The common explanation is that the sun or the moon has experienced some
disaster. Some even affirm that the object eclipsed is being devoured by
an immense ravenous monster. This is the most popular sentiment in
Fuhchau in regard to the procuring cause of eclipses. All look upon the
object eclipsed with wonder. Many are filled with apprehension and
terror. Some of the common people, as well as mandarins generally, enter
upon some course of action, the express object of which is to save the
luminary from its dire calamity, or to rescue it from the jaws of its
greedy enemy. Mandarins must act officially, and in virtue of their
being officers of government. Neither they nor the people seem to regard
the immense distance of the celestial object as at all interfering with
the success of their efforts. The various obstacles which ought
apparently to deter them from attempting to save the object eclipsed do
not seem to have occurred

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

to them at all, or, if they have occurred, do not appear to be
sufficient to cause them to desist from prosecuting their laudable
endeavours. The high mandarins procure the aid of priests of the Taoist
sect at their yamuns. These place an incense censer and two large
candlesticks for holding red candles or tapers on a table in the
principal reception room of the mandarin, or in the open space in front
of it under the open heavens.

"At the commencement of the eclipse the tapers are lighted, and soon
after the mandarin enters, dressed in his official robes. Taking some
sticks of lighted incense in both hands, he makes his obeisance before
or facing the table, raising and depressing the incense two or three
times, according to the established fashion, before it is placed in the
censer. Or sometimes the incense is lighted and put in the censer by one
of the priests employed. The officer proceeds to perform the high
ceremony of kneeling down three times, and knocking his head on the
ground nine times. After this he rises from his knees. Large gongs and
drums near by are now beaten as loudly as possible. The priests begin to
march slowly around the tables, reciting formulas, etc., which marching
they keep up, with more or less intermissions, until the eclipse has
passed off.

"A uniform result always follows these official efforts to save the sun
and the moon. *They are invariably successful*. There is not a single
instance recorded in the annals of the empire when the measures
prescribed

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

in instructions from the emperor's astronomers at Peking, and correctly
carried out in the provinces by the mandarins, have not resulted in a
complete rescue of the object eclipsed. Doubtless the vast majority of
the common people in China believe that the burning of tapers and
incense, the prostration of the mandarins, the beating of the gongs and
drums, and the recitations on the part of the priests, are signally
efficacious in driving away the voracious monster. They observe that the
sun or the moon does not seem to be permanently injured by the attacks
of its celestial enemy, although a half or nearly the whole appeared to
have been swallowed up. This happy result is doubtless viewed with much
complacency by the parties engaged to bring it about. The lower classes
generally leave the saving of the sun or the moon, when eclipsed, to
their mandarins, as it is a part of their official business. Some of the
people occasionally beat in their houses a winnowing instrument, made of
bamboo splints, on the occasion of an eclipse. This gives out a loud
noise. Some venture to assert that the din of this instrument penetrates
the clouds as high as the very temple of Heaven itself! The sailors
connected with junks at this place, on the recurrence of a lunar
eclipse, always contribute their aid to rescue the moon by beating their
gongs in a most deafening manner.

"Without doubt, most of the mandarins understand the real occasion of
eclipses, or, at least, they

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

have the sense to perceive that nothing which they can do will have any
effect upon the object eclipsed, or the cause which produces the
phenomenon; but they have no optional course in regard to the matter.
They must comply with established custom, and with the understood will
of their superiors. The imperial astronomers, having been taught the
principles of astronomy and the causes which produce eclipses by the
Roman Catholic missionaries a long while since, of course know that the
common sentiments on the subject are as absurd as the common customs
relating to it are useless. But the emperor and his cabinet cling to
ancient practices, notwithstanding the clearest evidences of their false
and irrational character." <span
id="fr_299"></span>[296](ml21.htm#fn_299.md)

Mr. Herbert Giles accounts for this Chinese obtuseness, or, as some
would have it, opacity, in much the same way. Under the head of *Natural
Phenomena*, he writes: "It is a question of more than ordinary interest
to those who regard the Chinese people as a worthy object of study, What
are the speculations of the working and uneducated classes concerning
such natural phenomena as it is quite impossible for them to ignore?
Their theory of eclipses is well known, foreign ears being periodically
stunned by the gonging of an excited crowd of natives, who are
endeavouring with hideous noises to prevent some imaginary dog of
colossal proportions from banqueting, as the case may be, upon the sun
or moon. At such laughable exhibitions of native ignorance it will be
observed there is always a fair sprinkling of well-to-do, educated

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

persons, who not only ought to know better themselves, but should be
making some effort to enlighten their less fortunate countrymen instead
of joining in the din. Such a hold, however, has superstition on the
minds of the best informed in a Chinese community, that under the
influence of any real or supposed danger, philosophy and Confucius are
scattered to the four winds of heaven, and the proudest disciple of the
master proves himself after all but a man." <span
id="fr_300"></span>[297](ml21.htm#fn_300.md) No doubt Mr. Doolittle and Mr.
Giles are both right: custom and superstition form a twisted rope which
pinions the popular mind. But there is yet another strand to be
mentioned which makes the bond a threefold cord which it will take some
time to break. *Prescriptive right* requires that the official or
cultured class in China, answering to the clerical caste elsewhere,
should keep the other classes in ignorance; because, if science and
religion are fellow-helpers, science and superstition can never dwell
together, and the downfall of superstition in China would be the
destruction of imperial despotism and magisterial tyranny. "Sirs, ye
know that by this craft we have our wealth. But this Paul says that they
be no gods, which are made with hands: so that our craft is in danger to
be set at nought. Great is Diana of the Ephesians!" The mandarins know
why they encourage the mechanics and merchants to save the moon.

We once met a good story in reading one of Jean Astruc's medical works.
"Theodore de Henry, of<span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Paris, coming one time into the church of St. Dionis, he fell prostrate
at the foot of the statue of Charles the Eighth, as in a sudden fit of
devotion. When being told by one of the monks that was not the image of
any saint, he replied, he was not ignorant of that, but was willing to
pay a grateful acknowledgment to the memory of that prince who had
brought the *Morbus Gallicus* into France, by which he had made his own
fortune." Herein lies the secret of half of the hypocrisy of the world.
Thank God! the world moves; and the millennium of truth is at hand.

The literature of China is, happily, not all linsey-woolsey. The
following sample is of the finest silk, worthy to adorn the purest
saint.

"MING TI of the HOUSE of WEI.

"Reigned 227-239 A.D.

"*On an Eclipse.--A Rescript*. WE have heard that if a sovereign is
remiss in government, Heaven terrifies him by calamities and strange
portents. These are divine reprimands sent to recall him to a sense of
duty. Thus, partial eclipses of the sun and moon are manifest warnings
that the rod of empire is not wielded aright. Ever since WE ascended the
throne, OUR inability to continue the glorious traditions of our
departed ancestors and carry on the great work of civilization, has now
culminated in a warning message from on high. It therefore

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

behoves Us to issue commands for personal reformation, in order to avert
the impending calamity.

"But the relations of Heaven with Man are those of a father and son; and
a father about to chastise his son would not be deterred were the latter
to present him with a dish of meat. WE do not therefore consider it part
of OUR duty to act in accordance with certain memorials advising that
the prime minister and chief astronomer be instructed to offer up
sacrifices on this occasion. Do ye, governors of districts and other
high officers of State, seek rather to rectify your own hearts; and if
any one can devise means to make up for OUR shortcomings, let him submit
his proposals to the Throne." <span
id="fr_301"></span>[298](ml21.htm#fn_301.md)

 

The writer of that was "not far from the kingdom of God."

Father Borri, in his account of Cochin China, describes the effect of a
lunar eclipse upon several scholars in the city of Nuoecman in the
province of Pulucambi. "I showed them that the circle of the moon, on
that side the eclipse began, was not so perfect as it should be, and
soon after all the moon being darkened, they perceived the truth of my
prediction. The commander and all of them being astonished, presently
sent to give notice of it to all the ward, and spread the news of the
eclipse throughout the city, that every man might go out to make the
usual noise in favour of the moon; giving out everywhere that there were
no such men as the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

fathers, whose doctrine and books could not fail being true, since they
had so exactly foretold the eclipse, which their learned men had taken
no notice of; and therefore, in performance of his promise, the
commander with all his family became Christians, as did many more of his
ward, with some of the most learned men of the city and others of
note." <span id="fr_302"></span>[299](ml21.htm#fn_302.md) In no unkind
spirit we cannot refrain from noticing, what will strike every reader,
how ready divines of all denominations are to turn the teachings of
science to their own account in the propagation of their faith. It would
have been seemlier for theologians in all ages, if their attitude
towards physical inquirers had been less hostile; they would then have
made converts through eclipses with a better grace. They would,
moreover, have prevented the alienation of many of their truest friends.

Captain Beeckman gives an amusing story of an eclipse in Cantongee, in
the island of Borneo, on the 10th of November, 1714. "We sat very merry
till about eight at night, when, preparing to go to bed, we heard all on
a sudden a most terrible outcry, mixed with squealing, halloing,
whooping, firing of guns, ringing and clattering of gongs or brass pans,
that we were greatly startled, imagining nothing less but that the city
was surprised by the rebels. I ran immediately to the door, where I
found my old fat landlord roaring and whooping like a man raving mad.
This increased my astonishment, and the noise was so great that I could
neither be heard, nor get an

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

answer to know what the matter was. At last I cried as loud as possibly
I could to the old man to know the reason of this sad confusion and
outcry, who in a great fright pointed up to the heavens, and said,
'*Look there; see, the devil is eating up the moon*!' I was very glad to
hear that there was no other cause of their fright but their own
ignorance. It was only a great eclipse of the moon. I smiled, and told
him that there was no danger; that in a little while the moon would be
as well as ever. Whereupon, catching fast hold of my sleeve, as I was
returning to bed, he asked me if I was sure on't (for they take us white
men to be very wise in those matters). I assured him I was, and that we
always knew many years before when such a thing would happen; that it
proceeded from a natural cause, according to the course and motion of
the sun and moon, and that the devil had no hand in it. After the
eclipse was over, the old man, being not a little rejoiced, took me
in." <span id="fr_303"></span>[300](ml21.htm#fn_303.md) Another writer
speaks of the East India Islands in general. "There is to this day
hardly a country of the Archipelago in which the ceremony of frightening
the supposed monster from his attack on the luminary is not performed.
This consists in shouting, in striking gongs, but, above all, in
striking their stampers against the sides of the wooden mortars which
are used by the villagers in husking their corn." <span
id="fr_304"></span>[301](ml21.htm#fn_304.md) That the Indians of the
continent regard the phenomena in question with more than ordinary
interest is evinced by their resorting in large numbers

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

to Benares, the ancient seat of brahminical learning and religion, on
every occasion of an eclipse of the moon. Lord Kames reminds us that
among the Greeks " an eclipse being held a prognostic given by the gods
of some grievous calamity, Anaxagoras was accused of atheism for
attempting to explain the eclipse of the moon by natural causes: he was
thrown into prison, and with difficulty was relieved by the influence of
Pericles. Protagoras was banished Athens for maintaining the same
doctrine." <span id="fr_305"></span>[302](ml21.htm#fn_305.md)

Thucydides tells us that an eclipse of the moon delayed the departure of
the expedition against the Syracusans. "The preparations were made, and
they were on the point of sailing, when the moon, being just then at the
full, was eclipsed. The mass of the army was greatly moved, and called
upon the generals to remain. Nicias himself, who was too much under the
influence of divination and omens, refused even to discuss the question
of their removal until they had remained thrice nine days, as the
soothsayers prescribed. This was the reason why the departure of the
Athenians was finally delayed." <span
id="fr_306"></span>[303](ml21.htm#fn_306.md)

"At any eclipse of the moone, the Romanes would take their brazen pots
and pannes, and beat them, lifting up many torches and linckes lighted,
and firebrandes into the aire, thinking by these superstitious meanes to
reclaime the moone to her light." <span
id="fr_307"></span>[304](ml21.htm#fn_307.md)

The Constantinople Messenger of December 23rd, 1880, contains the
following:--"Mgr. Mamarbasci, who represents the Syrian Patriarch at the
Porte,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

and who resides in St. Peter's Monastery in Galata, underwent a singular
experience on the evening of the last eclipse of the moon. Hearing a
great noise outside of the firing of revolvers and pistols, he opened
his window to see what could be the cause of so much waste of powder.
Being a native of Aleppo, he was at no loss to understand the cause of
the disturbance as soon as he cast his eye on the heavens, and he
therefore immediately withdrew his head from the window again. Hardly
had he done so, however, ere a ball smashed the glass into a thousand
pieces. Rising from the seat into which he had but just sat down, he
perceived a conical ball on the floor of his room, which there is every
reason to believe would have killed him on the spot had he remained a
moment longer on the spot he had just quitted. From the yard of the
mosque of Arab-Djami, which is in front of the prelate's window, the
bullet had, it appears, been fired with the intention of frightening the
dragon or bear which, according to oriental superstition, lies in wait
to devour the moon at its eclipse. It is a fortunate circumstance that
the Syrian ecclesiastic escaped scathless from the snares laid to
destroy the celestial dragon." <span
id="fr_308"></span>[305](ml21.htm#fn_308.md)

In the *Edda*, an ancient collection of Scandinavian poetry, embodying
the national mythology, Managarmer is the monster who sometimes swallows
up the moon, and stains the heaven and the air with blood. "Here," says
M. Mallett, "we have the cause of eclipses; and it is upon this very
ancient

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

opinion that the general practice is founded, of making noises at that
time, to fright away the monster, who would otherwise devour the two
great luminaries." <span id="fr_309"></span>[306](ml21.htm#fn_309.md) Of
the Germans, Grimm says:--"In a lighted candle, if a piece of the wick
gets half detached and makes it burn away too fast, they say 'a *wolf*
(as well as a thief) is in the candle'; this too is like the wolf
devouring the sun or moon. Eclipses of sun or moon have been a terror to
many heathen nations; the incipient and increasing obscuration of the
luminous orb marks for them the moment when the gaping jaws of the wolf
threaten to devour it, and they think by loud cries to bring it
succour." <span id="fr_310"></span>[307](ml21.htm#fn_310.md) And
again:--"The personality of the sun and moon shows itself moreover in a
fiction that has well-nigh gone the round of the world. These two, in
their unceasing unflagging career through the void of heaven, appear to
be in flight, avoiding some pursuer. A pair of wolves are on their
track, *Sköll* dogging the steps of the sun, *Hati* of the moon: they
come of a giant race, the mightiest of whom, Mânagarmr (moon-dog),
apparently but another name for Hati, is sure some day to *overtake and
swallow the moon*." <span id="fr_311"></span>[308](ml21.htm#fn_311.md)
Francis Osborn, whose *Advice* contains, in the opinion of Hallam, "a
considerable sprinkling of sound sense and observation," thus counsels
his son: "Imitate not the wild Irish or Welch, who, during eclipses, run
about beating kettles and pans, thinking their clamour and vexations
available to the assistance of the higher orbs." <span
id="fr_312"></span>[309](ml21.htm#fn_312.md) "In eclipses of the moon, the
Greenlanders

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

carry boxes and kettles to the roofs of their houses, and beat on them
as hard as they can." <span id="fr_313"></span>[310](ml21.htm#fn_313.md)
With the Californian Indians, "on an eclipse, all is consternation. They
congregate and sing, as some say to appease, and others to frighten, the
evil spirits. They believe that the devils are eating up the luminary,
and they do not cease until it comes forth in its wonted
splendour." <span id="fr_314"></span>[311](ml21.htm#fn_314.md) Among
certain Indian tribes "dogs were supposed to stand in some peculiar
relation to the moon, probably because they howl at it, and run at
night; uncanny practices which have cost them dear in reputation. The
custom prevailed among tribes so widely asunder as Peruvians, Tupis,
Creeks, Iroquois, Algonkins, and Greenland Eskimos, to thrash the curs
most soundly during an eclipse. The Creeks explained this by saying that
the big dog was swallowing the sun, and that by whipping the little ones
they could make him desist. What the big dog was they were not prepared
to say. We know. It was the night goddess, represented by the dog, who
was thus shrouding the world at midday." <span
id="fr_315"></span>[312](ml21.htm#fn_315.md)

It is well known that Columbus found his acquaintance with the
calculations of astronomy of great practical value. For when, during his
last expedition, he was reduced to famine by the inhabitants of the
newly discovered continent, who kept him and his companions prisoners,
he, aware that an eclipse was at hand, threatened to deprive them of the
light of the moon, if they did not forthwith bring him provisions. At
first they did not care; but when

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the moon disappeared, they brought abundance of supplies, with much
entreaty of pardon. This occurred on the 1st day of March, 1504, a date
which modern tables of lunar eclipses may fully verify.

"In the Mexican mythology we read of the woman serpent, or the moon,
devoured by the sun, a myth probably descriptive of the changes in the
phases of the moon." <span id="fr_316"></span>[313](ml21.htm#fn_316.md)
More probably this myth referred to the moon's eclipse; for Bradford
tells us that "the Mexicans believed when there was an eclipse of the
sun or moon, that one of those bodies was being devoured by the other.
The Peruvians believed these phenomena portended some great calamity;
that the eclipsed body was sick and about to die, in which case the
world would perish. As soon as an eclipse commenced, they made a
dreadful noise with their musical instruments; they struck their dogs
and made them howl, in the hope that the moon, which they believed had
an affection for those animals in consequence of some signal service
which they had rendered her, would have pity on their cries. The
Araucanians called eclipses the 'deaths' of the sun and moon." <span
id="fr_317"></span>[314](ml21.htm#fn_317.md) In Aglio we are told of the
Mexicans that "in the year of Five Rabbits, or in 1510, there was an
eclipse of the sun; they take no account of the eclipses of the moon,
but only of those of the sun; for they say that the sun devours the moon
when an eclipse of the moon takes place." <span
id="fr_318"></span>[315](ml21.htm#fn_318.md) "The Tlascaltecs, regarding
the sun and the moon as husband and wife, believed eclipses to be
domestic

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

quarrels. Ribas tells how the Sinaloas held that the moon in an eclipse
was darkened with the dust of battle. Her enemy had come upon her, and a
terrible fight, big with consequence to those on earth, went on in
heaven. In wild excitement the people beat on the sides of their houses,
encouraging the moon, and shooting flights of arrows up into the sky to
distract her adversary. Much the same as this was also done by certain
Californians." <span id="fr_319"></span>[316](ml21.htm#fn_319.md) "At a
lunar eclipse the Orinoko Indians seized their hoes and laboured with
exemplary vigour on their growing corn, saying the moon was veiling
herself in anger at their habitual laziness." <span
id="fr_320"></span>[317](ml21.htm#fn_320.md) The umbrated moon did good in
this way: as many of us remember the beautiful comet of 1858 did good,
when it frightened some trembling Londoners into a speedy settlement of
old debts, in anticipation of the final account. Ellis says of the
Tahitians: "An eclipse of the moon filled them with dismay; they
supposed the planet was *natua*, or under the influence of the spell of
some evil spirit that was destroying it. Hence they repaired to the
temple, and offered prayers for the moon's release. Some imagined that
on an eclipse, the sun and moon were swallowed by the god which they had
by neglect offended. Liberal presents were offered, which were supposed
to induce the god to abate his anger, and eject the luminaries of day
and night from his stomach." <span
id="fr_321"></span>[318](ml21.htm#fn_321.md) The Tongans or Friendly
Islanders have a notion that the earth's surface is flat, that the sun
and moon "pass through the sky and come back

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

some way, they know not how. When the moon is eclipsed, they attribute
the phenomenon to a thick cloud passing over it: the same with the
sun." <span id="fr_322"></span>[319](ml21.htm#fn_322.md) In the Hervey
Islands, the common exclamation during an eclipse is, "Alas! a divinity
has devoured the moon!"

Finally, to close this chapter where it commenced, in Chaldæa, the
cradle of *star-reading*, Sir Austen Henry Layard says: "I gained, as
other travellers have done before me, some credit for wisdom and
superhuman knowledge by predicting, through the aid of an almanack, a
partial eclipse of the moon. It duly took place, to the great dismay of
my guests, who well-nigh knocked out the bottoms of all my kitchen
utensils in their endeavour to frighten away the jins who had thus laid
hold of the planet. The common notion amongst ignorant Mahometans is,
that an eclipse is caused by some evil spirit catching hold of the sun
or moon. On such occasions, in Eastern towns, the whole population
assembles with pots, pans, and other equally rude instruments of music,
and, with the aid of their lungs, make a din and turmoil which might
suffice to drive away a whole army of evil spirits, even at so great a
distance." <span id="fr_323"></span>[320](ml21.htm#fn_323.md) We have
reached three general conclusions. *First*, when the moon is occulted by
the earth it is believed to be devoured by some evil demon, or by wolves
or dogs. This is the superstitious vagary of the Hindoos, the Chinese,
Asiatics generally, Europeans, Africans, Americans, and Polynesians.
*Secondly*, a lunar

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

eclipse is the precursor of some dreadful calamity to the inhabitants of
the earth. This notion is also traceable in every quarter of the globe.
And *thirdly*, during the obscuration the light of the moon is reddened,
and at last extinguished, by the blood which flows from its wounds;
which belief originates with the *Edda*, and obtains in the Western
world. Students of sacred prophecy may still elect to deem these
occurrences that are purely natural as of supernatural significance, and
may risk the interests of true religion in their insane disregard of
science; but the truth will remain, in spite of their misconceptions,
that eclipses of the moon have no concern with the moral destiny of
mankind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Lunar Influences](ml18.md)

</div>
