[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby06)  [Next](piby08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER 2

### PRESENTATION OF THE LAW

And it came to pass that the mighty angel robed in four colors descended
from among the great heavenly host.

When the Athlyi saw the angel descending he feared with great fear and
hid behind the root of a tree.

But the angel of the Lord came upon him and said., "Athlyi, come forth
for the Lord has made thee shepherd of his anointed children of
Ethiopia. "

And Athlyi answered saying, "Who are thou?" "I am Douglas, a messenger
from the Lord," replied the angel. "I am sent to robe thee and to give
in thy hands and in thy care the Lord's articles."

Verily no man shall take away that which the Lord giveth, for the word
of the Lord who is God, will not come unto any save he who is appointed
by the Father.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### Athlyi Robed

The angel of the Lord robed Athlyi in four colors and commanded him to
put forth his right hand and the messenger presented in his right hand a
staff and in his left hand the Holy Law saying, "Go and administer this
Law through thine apostles unto the children of Ethiopia and command
them to rise from the feet of their oppressors. Great is the penalty if
there be any failure on your part to deliver the Law; the hand of the
Lord shall come upon thee with horror and thou shalt regret the day ye
was born."

The angel of the Lord hesitated, then said to Athlyi "Swear before the
Lord God that thou wilt administer the Law unto the children"; then
Athlyi lifted his eyes to the heaven and said, "Heaven and earth bear
witness to my saying, I will."

Then the messenger of the Lord touched Athlyi on his left breast with
the first finger of his right hand saying, "Be thou brave," then
disappeared from the presence of the shepherd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. God's Holy Law to the Children of Ethiopia](piby08)
