[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby12)  [Next](piby14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

### CHAPTER 8

### ATHLYI SENT ABROAD

And it came to pass that the word of the Lord came to Athlyi saying,
"Get thee into foreign countries and provide stars of the Law and of the
gospel of the twentieth century."

"Go the way of the Atlantic and return by way of the Pacific," and
Athlyi obeyed the Lord.

And when he was in the Strait of Magellan, the Lord spake to him saying:

"My holy house of Athlyi let her be of two wings, the Church to the
right and a green pasture to the left.

"Let the Church teach and the green pasture to provide for the people;
let the house of Athlyi be the director thereof, and I, the Lord, shall
dwell in the house of Athlyi and give light to her wings, then shall the
inhabitants of the earth know that I am the Lord God of Ethiopia.

"Let there be but one church of denomination upon the Law and the gospel
commanded for the salvation of Ethiopia's generations.

"In entering the inner door of the Church let the people bow with
reverence to the holy dictuary."

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Suffer no one to preach upon or in the dictuary save a teacher of the
Law and a believer in the gospel commanded to the children of Ethiopia.

Let the people take interest in the apostles, but he that boost not the
green pasture to provide for the people is not worthy of compensation.

Let the people give to the green pasture for their own good and for the
welfare of their generations.

Oh Athlyians, love ye one another, forget not the assembling of
yourselves together that no corruption gather between thee, for thou art
the light and guide unto salvation; Let all the children of Ethiopia
follow thee.

May the Lord God of Ethiopia watch between us whilst we are absent one
from another. May he endow us with unity of spirit and anxious hearts to
again assemble for the rise of falling humanity through the guidance of
the house of Athlyi and in the name of one God, his Law and the Holy
Ghost for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9. The Word of the Lord](piby14)
