[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc07)  [Next](gc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 7

### The Betrayal of Christ

 

I was then carried down to the time when Jesus ate the Passover supper
with his disciples.  Satan had deceived Judas, and led him to think he
was one of Christ’s true disciples; but his heart had ever been carnal. 
He had seen the mighty works of Jesus, he had been with him through his
ministry, and yielded to the overpowering evidences that he was the
Messiah; but he was close and covetous.  He loved money.  He complained
in anger of the costly ointment poured upon Jesus.  Mary loved her
Lord.  He had forgiven her sins which were many, and had raised from the
dead her much loved brother, and she felt that nothing was too dear to
bestow upon Jesus.  The more costly and precious the ointment, the
better could Mary express her gratitude to her Saviour, by devoting it
to him.  Judas, as an excuse for his covetousness, said that the
ointment might have been sold and given to the poor.  But it was not
because he had any care for the poor; for he was selfish, and often
appropriated to his own use that which was entrusted to his care to be
given to the poor.  Judas had not been attentive to the comforts and
wants of Jesus, and to excuse his covetousness, he often referred to the
poor.  And this act of generosity on the part of Mary was a most cutting
rebuke of his covetous disposition.

The way was prepared for the temptation of Satan to find a ready
reception in Judas’ heart.  The Jews hated Jesus; but multitudes
thronged him to listen to his words of wisdom, and to witness his mighty
works.  This drew the attention of the people from the chief priests and
elders, for the people were stirred with the deepest interest, and
anxiously followed Jesus, and listened to the instructions of this
wonderful teacher.  Many of the chief rulers believed on Jesus, but were
afraid to confess it, fearing they would be put out of the synagogue. 
The priests and elders decided that something must be done to draw the
attention of the people from Jesus.  They feared that all men would
believe on him.  They could see no safety for themselves.  They must
lose their position, or put Jesus to death.  And after they should put
him to death, there were still those who were living monuments of his
power.  Jesus had raised Lazarus from the dead.  And they feared that if
they should kill Jesus, Lazarus would testify of his mighty power.  The
people were flocking to see him who was raised from the dead, and the
rulers determined to slay Lazarus also, and put down the excitement. 
Then they would turn the people to the traditions and doctrines of men,
to tithe mint and rue, and again have influence over them.  They agreed
to take Jesus when he was alone; for if they should attempt to take him
in a crowd, when the minds of the people were all interested in him,
they would be stoned.

Judas knew how anxious they were to obtain Jesus, and offered to betray
him to the chief priests and elders for a few pieces of silver.  His
love of money led him to agree to betray his Lord into the hands of his
bitterest enemies.  Satan was working directly through Judas, and in the
midst of the impressive scene of the last supper, he was contriving
plans to betray Jesus.  Jesus sorrowfully told his disciples that all of
them would be offended because of him, that night.  But Peter ardently
affirmed that although all should be offended because of him, he would
not.  Jesus said to Peter, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may
sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not;
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

I then viewed Jesus in the garden with his disciples.  In deep sorrow he
bade them watch and pray lest they should enter into temptation.  Jesus
knew that their faith was to be tried, and their hopes disappointed, and
that they would need all the strength they could obtain by close
watching and fervent prayer.  With strong cries and weeping, Jesus
prayed, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me,
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done.  The Son of God prayed in
agony.  Large drops of sweat like blood came out of his face, and fell
upon the ground.  Angels were hovering over the place, witnessing the
scene, while only one was commissioned to go and strengthen the Son of
God in his agony.  The angels in heaven cast their crowns and harps from
them, and with the deepest interest silently watched Jesus.  There was
no joy in heaven.  They wished to surround the Son of God, but the
commanding angels suffered them not, lest, as they should behold his
betrayal, they would deliver him; for the plan was laid out, and it must
be fulfilled.

After Jesus had prayed, he came to see his disciples.  They were
sleeping.  He had not the comfort and prayers of even his disciples in
that dreadful hour.  Peter who was so zealous a little before, was heavy
with sleep.  Jesus reminded him of his positive declarations, and said
unto him, What! could ye not watch with me one hour?  Three times the
Son of God prayed in agony, when Judas, with his band of men, was at
hand.  He met Jesus as usual to salute him.  The band surrounded Jesus;
but there he manifested his divine power, as he said, Whom seek ye? I am
he.  They fell backward to the ground.  Jesus made this inquiry that
they might witness his power, and have evidence that he could deliver
himself from their hands if he would.

The disciples began to hope as they saw the multitude with their staves
and swords fall so quickly.  As they arose and again surrounded the Son
of God, Peter drew the sword and cut off an ear.  Jesus bid him put up
the sword, and said unto him, Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
angels?  I saw that as these words were spoken, the countenances of the
angels were animated.  They wished then, and there, to surround their
commander, and disperse that angry mob.  But again sadness settled upon
them as Jesus added, But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled,
that thus it must be?  The hearts of the disciples sunk again in despair
and bitter disappointment, as Jesus suffered them to lead him away.

The disciples were afraid of their own lives, and fled one this way, and
the other that, and Jesus was left alone.  O what triumph of Satan
then!  And what sadness and sorrow with the angels of God!  Many
companies of holy angels, with each a tall commanding angel at their
head, were sent to witness the scene.  They were to record every act,
every insult and cruelty imposed upon the Son of God, and to register
every pang of anguish which Jesus should suffer; for the very men should
see it all again in living characters.

 

See Matthew 26:1-56; Mark 14:1-52; Luke 22:1-46; John chap.11, 12:1-11,
18:1-12

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. The Trial of Christ](gc09)
