[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc13)  [Next](gc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 13

### The Death of Stephen

 

Disciples multiplied greatly in Jerusalem.  The word of God increased,
and many of the priests were obedient unto the faith.  Stephen, full of
faith, was doing great wonders and miracles among the people.  Many were
angry; for the priests were turning from their traditions, and from the
sacrifices and offerings, and were accepting Jesus as the great
sacrifice.  Stephen, with power from on high, reproved the priests and
elders, and exalted Jesus before them.  They could not withstand the
wisdom and power by which he spoke, and as they found that they could
prevail nothing against him, they hired men to falsely swear that they
had heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God. 
They stirred up the people, and took Stephen, and, through false
witnesses, accused him of speaking against the temple and the law.  They
testified that they had heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth would
destroy the customs which Moses gave them.

All who sat in judgment against Stephen saw the light of the glory of
God in his countenance.  His countenance was lighted up like the face of
an angel.  He stood up full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and, beginning
at the prophets, he brought them down to the advent of Jesus, his
crucifixion, his resurrection and ascension, and showed them that the
Lord dwelt not in temples made with hands.  They worshiped the temple. 
Anything spoken against the temple filled them with greater indignation
than if spoken against God.  The spirit of Stephen was stirred with
heavenly indignation as he cried out against them for being wicked, and
uncircumcised in heart.  Ye do always resist the Holy Spirit.  They
observed the outward ordinances, while their hearts were corrupt, and
full of deadly evil.  Stephen referred them to the cruelty of their
fathers in persecuting the prophets, saying, Ye have slain them which
showed before the coming of the Just One, of whom ye have been now the
betrayers and murderers.

The chief priests and the rulers were enraged as the plain, cutting
truths were spoken; and they rushed upon Stephen.  The light of heaven
shone upon him, and as he looked up steadfastly into heaven, a vision of
God's glory was given him, and angels hovered around him.  He cried out,
Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God.  The people would not hear him.  They cried out with
a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord,
and cast him out of the city, and stoned him.  And Stephen kneeled down,
and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

I saw that Stephen was a mighty man of God, especially raised up to fill
an important place in the church.  Satan exulted as he was stoned to
death; for he knew that the disciples would greatly feel his loss.  But
Satan's triumph was short; for there was one standing in that company,
witnessing the death of Stephen, to whom Jesus was to reveal himself. 
Although he took no part in casting the stones at Stephen, yet he
consented to his death.  Saul was zealous in persecuting the church of
God, hunting them, seizing them in their houses, and delivering them to
those who would slay them.  Satan was using Saul effectually.  But God
can break the Devil's power, and set free those who are led captive by
him.  Saul was a learned man, and Satan was triumphantly employing his
talents to help carry out his rebellion against the Son of God, and
those who believed in him.  But Jesus selected Saul as a chosen vessel
to preach his name, to strengthen the disciples in their work, and more
than fill the place of Stephen.  Saul was greatly esteemed by the Jews. 
His zeal and his learning pleased them, and terrified many of the
disciples.

 

See Acts chap. 6 & 7

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14. The Conversion of Saul](gc15)
