[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc17)  [Next](gc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 17

### The Great Apostasy

 

I was carried forward to the time when the heathen idolators cruelly
persecuted the Christians, and killed them.  Blood flowed in torrents. 
The noble, the learned, and the common people, were alike slain without
mercy.  Wealthy families were reduced to poverty because they would not
yield their religion.  Notwithstanding the persecution and sufferings
those Christians endured, they would not lower the standard.  They kept
their religion pure.  I saw that Satan exulted and triumphed over the
sufferings of God's people.  But God looked with great approbation upon
his faithful martyrs, and the Christians who lived in that fearful time
were greatly beloved of him; for they were willing to suffer for his
sake.  Every suffering endured by them increased their reward in
heaven.  But although Satan rejoiced because the saints suffered, yet he
was not satisfied.  He wanted control of the mind as well as the body. 
The sufferings those Christians endured drove them closer to the Lord,
and led them to love one another, and caused them to fear more than ever
to offend him.  Satan wished to lead them to displease God; then they
would lose their strength, fortitude and firmness.  Although thousands
were slain, yet others were springing up to supply their place.  Satan
saw that he was losing his subjects, and although they suffered
persecution and death, yet they were secured to Jesus Christ, to be the
subjects of his kingdom, and he laid his plans to more successfully
fight against the government of God, and overthrow the church.  He led
on those heathen idolators to embrace part of the Christian faith.  They
professed to believe in the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ,
without a change of heart, and proposed to unite with the followers of
Jesus.  O the fearful danger of the church!  It was a time of mental
anguish.  Some thought that if they should come down and unite with
those idolators who had embraced a portion of the Christian faith, it
would be the means of their conversion.  Satan was seeking to corrupt
the doctrines of the Bible.  At last I saw the standard lowered, and the
heathen were uniting with Christians.  They had been worshipers of
idols, and although they professed to be Christians, they brought along
with them their idolatry.  They changed the objects only of their
worship, to images of saints, and even the image of Christ, and Mary the
mother of Jesus.  Christians gradually united with them, and the
Christian religion was corrupted, and the church lost its purity and
power.  Some refused to unite with them and they preserved their purity,
and worshiped God alone.  They would not bow down to any image of
anything in the heavens above, or in the earth beneath.

Satan exulted over the fall of so many; and then he stirred up the
fallen church to force those who would preserve the purity of their
religion, to either yield to their ceremonies and image worship, or to
put them to death.  The fires of persecution were again kindled against
the true church of Jesus Christ, and millions were slain without mercy.

It was presented before me in the following manner: A large company of
heathen idolators bore a black banner upon which were figures of the
sun, moon and stars.  The company seemed to be very fierce and angry. I
was then shown another company bearing a pure white banner, and upon it
was written Purity, and Holiness unto the Lord.  Their countenances were
marked with firmness and heavenly resignation.  I saw the heathen
idolators approach them, and there was a great slaughter.  The
Christians melted away before them; and yet the Christian company
pressed the more closely together, and held the banner more firmly.  As
many fell, others rallied around the banner and filled their places.

I saw the company of idolators consulting together.  They failed to make
the Christians yield, and they agreed to another plan.  I saw them lower
their banner, and they approached that firm Christian company, and made
propositions to them.  At first their propositions were utterly
refused.  Then I saw the Christian company consulting together.  Some
said that they would lower the banner, accept the propositions, and save
their lives, and at last they could gain strength to raise their banner
among those heathen idolators.  But some would not yield to this plan,
but firmly chose to die holding their banner, rather than lower it. 
Then I saw many of that Christian company lower the banner, and unite
with the heathen; while the firm and steadfast seized the banner, and
bore it high again. I saw individuals continually leaving the company of
those bearing the pure banner, and joining the idolators, and they
united together under the black banner, to persecute those bearing the
white banner, and many were slain; yet the white banner was held high,
and individuals were raised up to rally around it.

The Jews who first started the rage of the heathen against Jesus, were
not to escape.  In the judgment hall the infuriated Jews cried, as
Pilate hesitated to condemn Jesus, His blood be on us and on our
children.  The race of the Jews experienced the fulfillment of this
terrible curse which they called down upon their own heads.  Heathen and
those called Christians were alike their foes.  Those professed
Christians, in their zeal for the cross of Christ, because the Jews had
crucified Jesus, thought that the more suffering they could bring upon
them, the better could they please God; and many of those unbelieving
Jews were killed, while others were driven from place to place, and were
punished in almost every manner.

The blood of Christ, and of the disciples, whom they had put to death,
was upon them, and in terrible judgments were they visited.  The curse
of God followed them, and they were a by-word and a derision to the
heathen and to Christians.  They were shunned, degraded and detested, as
though the brand of Cain was upon them.  Yet I saw that God marvelously
preserved this people, and had scattered them over the world, that they
might be looked upon as especially visited by a curse from God.  I saw
that God had forsaken the Jews as a nation; yet there was a portion of
them who would be enabled to tear the veil from their hearts.  Some will
yet see that prophecy has been fulfilled concerning them, and they will
receive Jesus as the Saviour of the world, and see the great sin of
their nation in rejecting Jesus, and crucifying him.  Individuals among
the Jews will be converted; but as a nation they are forever forsaken of
God.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18. Mystery of Iniquity](gc19)
