[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc24)  [Next](gc26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 24

### The Second Angel’s Message

 

The churches would not receive the light of the first angel's message,
and as they rejected the light from heaven they fell from the favor of
God.  They trusted in their own strength, and placed themselves by their
opposition to the first message where they could not see the light of
the second angel's message.  But the beloved of God, who were oppressed,
answered to the message, Babylon is fallen, and left the fallen
churches.

Near the close of the second angel's message, I saw a great light from
heaven shining upon the people of God.  The rays of this light seemed
bright as the sun.  And I heard the voices of angels crying, Behold the
Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him!

The midnight cry was given to give power to the second angel's message. 
Angels were sent from heaven to wake up the discouraged saints, and
prepare them for the great work before them.  The most talented men were
not the first to receive this message.  Angels were sent to the humble,
devoted ones, and constrained them to raise the cry, Behold the
Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him.  Those entrusted with the cry
made haste, and in the power of the Holy Spirit spread the cry, and
aroused their discouraged brethren.  This cry did not stand in the
wisdom and learning of men, but in the power of God, and his saints who
heard the cry could not resist it.  The most spiritual received this
message first, and those who had formerly led in the work were the last
to receive and help swell the cry, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go ye
out to meet him.

In every part of the land, light was given upon the second angel's
message, and the cry was melting down thousands.  It went from city to
city, and from village to village, until the waiting people of God were
fully aroused.  Many would not permit this message to enter the
churches, and a large company who had the living testimony within them
left the fallen churches.  A mighty work was accomplished by the
midnight cry.  The message was heart-searching, and led the believers to
seek a living experience for themselves.  They knew that they could not
lean upon one another.

The saints anxiously waited for their Lord with fasting, watching and
almost constant prayer.  Even some sinners looked forward to the time
with terror, while the great mass seemed to be stirred against this
message, and manifested the spirit of Satan.  They mocked and scoffed,
and everywhere was heard, No man knoweth the day and the hour.  Evil
angels exulted around them, urging them on to harden their hearts, and
to reject every ray of light from heaven, that they might fasten them in
the snare.  Many professed to be looking for their Lord, who had neither
part nor lot in the matter.  The glory of God they had witnessed, the
humility and deep devotion of the waiting ones, and the overwhelming
weight of evidence, caused them to profess to receive the truth.  But
they were not converted.  They were not ready.  A spirit of solemn and
earnest prayer was everywhere felt by the saints.  A holy solemnity was
resting upon them.  Angels with the deepest interest had watched the
result, and were elevating those who received the heavenly message, and
were drawing them from earthly things to obtain large supplies from
salvation's fountain.  God's people were then accepted with him.  Jesus
looked upon them with pleasure.  His image was reflected in them.  They
had made a full sacrifice, an entire consecration, and expected to be
changed to immortality.  But they were destined to be again sadly
disappointed.  The time to which they looked, expecting deliverance,
passed.  They were still upon the earth, and the effects of the curse
never seemed more visible.  They had placed their affections on heaven,
and in sweet anticipation, had tasted immortal deliverance; but their
hopes were not realized.

The fear that had rested upon many of the people did not at once
disappear.  They did not immediately triumph over the disappointed
ones.  But as no visible wrath of God was felt by them, they recovered
from the fear they had felt, and commenced their ridicule, their
mocking, and scoffing.  The people of God were again proved, and
tested.  The world laughed, and mocked, and reproached them; and those
who had believed without a doubt that Jesus would then come and raise
the dead, and change the living saints, and take the kingdom, and
possess it forever, felt like the disciples of Christ.  They have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

 

See Matthew 24:36, 25:6; John 20:13; Revelation 14:8

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25. Advent Movement Illustrated](gc26)
