[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc30)  [Next](gc32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 30

### Spiritualism

 

I saw the rapping delusion.  Satan has power to bring the appearance of
forms before us purporting to be our relatives and friends that now
sleep in Jesus.  It will be made to appear as if they were present, the
words they uttered while here, which we were familiar with, will be
spoken, and the same tone of voice which they had while living will fall
upon the ear.  All this is to deceive the world, and ensnare them into
the belief of this delusion.

I saw that the saints must have a thorough understanding of the present
truth, which they will have to maintain from the Scriptures.  They must
understand the state of the dead; for the spirits of devils will yet
appear to them, professing to be beloved friends and relatives, who will
declare to them unscriptural doctrines.  They will do all in their power
to excite sympathy, and work miracles before them, to confirm what they
declare.  The people of God must be prepared to withstand these spirits
with the Bible truth that the dead know not anything, and that they are
the spirits of devils.

I saw that we must examine well the foundation of our hope, for we shall
have to give a reason for it from the Scriptures; for we shall see this
delusion spreading, and we shall have to contend with it face to face. 
And unless we are prepared for it, we shall be ensnared and overcome. 
But if we do what we can on our part to be ready for the conflict that
is just before us, God will do his part, and his all-powerful arm will
protect us.  He would sooner send every angel out of glory to make a
hedge about faithful souls, than that they should be deceived and led
away by the lying wonders of Satan.

I saw the rapidity with which this delusion was spreading.  A train of
cars was shown me, going with the speed of lightning.  The angel bade me
look carefully.  I fixed my eyes upon the train.  It seemed that the
whole world was on board.  Then he showed me the conductor, who looked
like a stately fair person, whom all the passengers looked up to and
reverenced.  I was perplexed, and asked my attending angel who it was. 
Said he, It is Satan.  He is the conductor in the form of an angel of
light.  He has taken the world captive.  They are given over to strong
delusions, to believe a lie that they may be damned.  His agent, the
next highest in order to him, is the engineer, and others of his agents
are employed in different offices as he may need them, and they are all
going with lightning speed to perdition.  I asked the angel if there
were none left.  He bade me look in an opposite direction, and I saw a
little company traveling a narrow pathway.  All seemed to be firmly
united, and bound together by the truth.

This little company looked care-worn, as though they had passed through
severe trials and conflicts.  And it seemed as if the sun had just
appeared from behind the cloud, and shone upon their countenances, and
caused them to look triumphant, as though their victories were nearly
won.

I saw that the Lord had given the world opportunity to discover the
snare.  This one thing was evidence enough for the Christian if there
were no other.  There is no difference made between the precious and the
vile.

Thomas Paine, whose body has mouldered to dust, and who is to be called
forth at the end of the 1000 years, at the second resurrection, to
receive his reward, and suffer the second death, is purported by Satan
to be in heaven, and highly exalted there.  Satan used him on earth as
long as he could, and now he is carrying on the same work through
pretensions of having Thomas Paine so much exalted and honored; and as
he taught on earth, Satan is making it appear that he is teaching in
heaven.  And some on earth who have looked with horror at his life and
death, and his corrupt teachings while living, now submit to be taught
by him who was one of the vilest and most corrupt of men; one who
despised God and his law.

He who is the father of lies, blinds and deceives the world by sending
his angels forth to speak for apostles, and make it appear that they
contradict what they wrote when on earth, which was dictated by the Holy
Ghost.  These lying angels make the apostles to corrupt their own
teachings and declare them to be adulterated.  By so doing he can throw
professed Christians, who have a name to live and are dead, and all the
world, into uncertainty about the word of God; for that cuts directly
across his track, and is likely to thwart his plans.  Therefore he gets
them to doubt the divine origin of the Bible, and then sets up the
infidel Thomas Paine, as though he was ushered into heaven when he died,
and with the holy apostles whom he hated on earth, is united, and
appears to be teaching the world.

Satan assigns each one of his angels their part to act.  He enjoins upon
them to be cunning, artful and sly.  He instructs some of them to act
the part of the apostles, and speak for them, while others are to act
out infidels and wicked men who died cursing God, but now appear to be
very religious.  There is no difference made between the most holy
apostles and the vilest infidel.  They are both made to teach the same
thing.  It matters not who Satan makes to speak, if his object is only
accomplished.  He was so intimately connected with Paine upon earth, and
so aided him, that it is an easy thing for him to know the very words he
used, and the very hand-writing of one of his devoted children who
served him so faithfully, and accomplished his purposes so well.  Satan
dictated much of his writings, and it is an easy thing for him to
dictate sentiments through his angels now, and make it appear that it
comes through Thomas Paine, who was his devoted servant while he lived. 
But this is the masterpiece of Satan.  All this teaching purporting to
be from apostles, and saints, and wicked men who have died, comes
directly from his Satanic majesty.

This should be enough to remove the vail from every mind and discover
unto all the dark, mysterious works of Satan; -- that he has got one
whom he loved so well, and who hated God so perfectly, with the holy
apostles and angels in glory: virtually saying to the world and
infidels, No matter how wicked you are; no matter whether you believe in
God or the Bible, or disbelieve; live as you please, heaven is your
home; -- for everyone knows that if Thomas Paine is in heaven, and so
exalted, they will surely get there.  This is so glaring that all may
see if they will.  Satan is doing now what he has been trying to do
since his fall, through individuals like Thomas Paine.  He is, through
his power and lying wonders, tearing away the foundation of the
Christians' hope, and putting out their sun that is to lighten them in
the narrow way to heaven.  He is making the world believe that the Bible
is no better than a story-book, uninspired, while he holds out something
to take its place; namely, *Spiritual Manifestations*!

Here is a channel wholly devoted to himself, under his control, and he
can make the world believe what he will.  The Book that is to judge him
and his followers, he puts back into the shade, just where he wants it. 
The Saviour of the world he makes to be no more than a common man; and
as the Roman guard that watched the tomb of Jesus, spread the false and
lying report that the chief priests and elders put in their mouth, so
will the poor, deluded followers of these pretended spiritual
manifestations, repeat, and try to make it appear, that there is nothing
miraculous about our Saviour's birth, death and resurrection; and they
put Jesus with the Bible, back into the shade, where they want him, and
then get the world to look to them and their lying wonders and miracles,
which they declare far exceed the works of Christ.  Thus the world is
taken in the snare, and lulled to security; not to find out their awful
deception, until the seven last plagues are poured out.  Satan laughs as
he sees his plan succeed so well, and the whole world in the snare.

 

See Ecclesiastes 9:5; John 11:1-45; 2 Thessalonians 2:9-12; Revelation
13:3-14

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31. Covetousness](gc32)
