[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc31)  [Next](gc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 31

### Covetousness

 

I saw Satan and his angels consulting together.  He bade his angels go
and lay their snares especially for those who were looking for Christ's
second appearing, and who were keeping all God's commandments.  Satan
told his angels that the churches were all asleep.  He would increase
his power and lying wonders, and he could hold them.  But the sect of
Sabbath-keepers we hate.  They are continually working against us, and
taking from us our subjects, to keep that hated law of God.

Go, make the possessors of lands and money drunk with cares.  If you can
make them place their affections upon these things, we have them yet. 
They may profess what they please, only make them care more for money
than the success of Christ's kingdom, or the spread of the truths we
hate.  Present the world before them in the most attractive light, that
they may love and idolize it.  We must keep all the means in our ranks
we can.  The more means they have, the more will they injure our kingdom
by getting our subjects.  And as they appoint meetings in different
places, then we are in danger.  Be very vigilant then.  Cause all the
distraction you can.  Destroy love for each other.  Discourage and
dishearten their ministers; for we hate them.  Hold up every plausible
excuse to those that have means, lest they hand it out.  Control the
money matters if you can, and drive their ministers to want, and
distress.  This will weaken their courage and zeal.  Battle every inch
of ground.  Make covetousness and love of earthly treasures the ruling
traits of their character.  As long as these traits rule, salvation and
grace stand back.  Crowd all you can around them to attract them, and
they will be surely ours.  Not only are we sure of them, but their
hateful influence will not be exercised toward others to lead them to
heaven.  And those who shall attempt to give, put within them a grudging
disposition, that it may be sparingly.

I saw that Satan carried out his plans well.  And as the servants of God
appointed meetings, Satan and his angels understood their business, and
were on the ground to hinder the work of God, and he was constantly
putting suggestions into the minds of God's people.  Some he leads in
one way, and some in another, always taking advantage of evil traits in
the brethren and sisters, exciting and stirring up their natural
besetments.  If they are disposed to be selfish and covetous, Satan is
well pleased to take his stand by their side, and then with all his
power he seeks to lead them to manifest their besetting sins.  If the
grace of God and the light of truth melt away these covetous, selfish
feelings for a little, and they do not obtain entire victory over them,
when they are not under a saving influence, Satan comes in and withers
up every noble, generous principle, and they think that they have to do
too much.  They become weary of well-doing and forget all about the
great sacrifice Jesus made for them, to redeem them from the power of
Satan, and hopeless misery.

Satan took advantage of Judas' covetous, selfish disposition, and led
him to murmur against the ointment Mary dedicated to Jesus.  Judas
looked upon it as a great waste; it might have been sold and given to
the poor.  He cared not for the poor, but considered the liberal
offering to Jesus extravagant.  Judas prized his Lord just enough to
sell him for a few pieces of silver.  And I saw that there were some
like Judas among those who profess to be waiting for their Lord.  Satan
has the control over them, but they know it not.  Not a particle of
covetousness or selfishness can God approbate.  He hates it, and he
despises the prayers and exhortations of those who possess it.  As Satan
sees his time is short, he leads them on to be more and more selfish,
more and more covetous, and then exults as he sees them wrapt up in
themselves, close, penurious and selfish.  If the eyes of such could be
opened, they would see Satan in hellish triumph, exulting over them, and
laughing at the folly of those who accept his suggestions, and enter his
snares.  Then he and his angels take the mean and covetous acts of these
individuals, and present them to Jesus and the holy angels, and
reproachfully say, These are Christ's followers!  They are getting ready
to be translated!  Satan marks their deviating course, and then compares
it with the Bible, with passages which plainly rebuke such things, and
then presents it to annoy the heavenly angels, saying, These are
following Christ and his word!  These are the fruits of Christ's
sacrifice and redemption!  Angels turn in disgust from the scene.  God
requires a constant doing on the part of his people, and when they
become weary of well and generous doing, he becomes weary of them.  I
saw that God was greatly displeased with the least manifestation of
selfishness on the part of his professed people, for whom Jesus has not
spared his own precious life.  Every selfish, covetous individual will
fall out by the way.  Like Judas, who sold his Lord, they will sell good
principles, and a noble, generous disposition for a little of earth's
gain.  All such will be sifted out from God's people.  Those who want
heaven, must, with every energy they possess, be encouraging the
principles of heaven.  And instead of their souls withering up with
selfishness, they should be expanding with benevolence, and every
opportunity should be improved in doing good to one another, and
increasing and growing more and more into the principles of heaven. 
Jesus was held up to me as the perfect pattern.  His life was without
selfish interest, and was marked with disinterested benevolence.

 

See Mark 14:3-11; Luke 12:15-40; Colossians 3:5-16; 1 John 2:15-17

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32. The Shaking](gc33)
