[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc34)  [Next](gc36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 34

### The Loud Cry

 

I saw angels hurrying to and fro in heaven.  They were descending to
earth, and again ascending to heaven, preparing for the fulfilment of
some important event.  Then I saw another mighty angel commissioned to
descend to earth, and unite his voice with the third angel, and give
power and force to his message.  Great power and glory were imparted to
the angel, and as he descended, the earth was lightened with his glory. 
The light which went before and followed after this angel, penetrated
everywhere, as he cried mightily, with a strong voice, saying, Babylon
the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird.  The message of the fall of Babylon, as given by the
second angel, is again given, with the addition of the corruptions which
have been entering the churches since 1844.  The work of this angel
comes in at the right time, and joins in the last great work of the
third angel's message, as it swells into a loud cry.  And the people of
God are fitted up everywhere to stand in the hour of temptation which
they are soon to meet.  I saw a great light resting upon them, and they
united in the message, and fearlessly proclaimed with great power the
third angel's message.

Angels were sent to aid the mighty angel from heaven, and I heard voices
which seemed to sound everywhere, Come out of her, my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; for
her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her
iniquities.  This message seemed to be an addition to the third message,
and joined it, as the midnight cry joined the second angel's message in
1844.  The glory of God rested upon the patient, waiting saints, and
they fearlessly gave the last solemn warning, proclaiming the fall of
Babylon, and calling upon God's people to come out of her; that they
might escape her fearful doom.

The light that was shed upon the waiting ones penetrated everywhere, and
those who had any light in the churches, who had not heard and rejected
the three messages, answered to the call, and left the fallen churches. 
Many had come to years of accountability since these messages had been
given, and the light shone upon them, and they were privileged to choose
life or death.  Some chose life, and took their stand with those looking
for their Lord, and keeping all his commandments.  The third message was
to do its work; all were to be tested upon it, and the precious ones
were to be called out from the religious bodies.  A compelling power
moves the honest, while the manifestation of the power of God holds in
fear and restraint relatives and friends, and they dare not, neither
have they power to, hinder those who feel the work of the Spirit of God
upon them.  The last call is carried even to the poor slaves, and the
pious among them, with humble expressions, pour forth their songs of
extravagant joy at the prospect of their happy deliverance, and their
masters cannot check them; for a fear and astonishment keep them
silent.  Mighty miracles are wrought, the sick are healed, and signs and
wonders follow the believers.  God is in the work, and every saint,
fearless of consequences, follows the convictions of his own conscience,
and unites with those who are keeping all the commandments of God; and
they sound abroad the third message with power.  I saw that the third
message would close with power and strength far exceeding the midnight
cry.

Servants of God, endowed with power from on high, with their faces
lighted up, and shining with holy consecration, went forth fulfilling
their work, and proclaiming the message from heaven.  Souls that were
scattered all through the religious bodies answered to the call, and the
precious were hurried out of the doomed churches, as Lot was hurried out
of Sodom before her destruction.  God's people were fitted up and
strengthened by the excellent glory which fell upon them in rich
abundance, preparing them to endure the hour of temptation.  A multitude
of voices I heard everywhere, saying, Here is the patience of the
saints; here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith
of Jesus.

 

See Genesis chap.19; Revelation 14:12, 18:2-5

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35. The Third Message Closed](gc36)
