[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 41

### The Second Death

 

Satan rushes into the midst, and tries to stir up the multitude to
action.  But fire from God out of heaven is rained upon them, and the
great men, and the mighty men, and the noble, and poor and miserable
men, are all consumed together.  I saw that some were quickly destroyed,
while others suffered longer.  They were punished according to the deeds
done in the body.  Some were many days consuming, and just as long as
there was a portion of them unconsumed, all the sense of suffering was
there.  Said the angel, The worm of life shall not die; their fire shall
not be quenched as long as there is the least particle for it to prey
upon.

But Satan and his angels suffered long.  Satan not only bore the weight
and punishment of his sins, but the sins of all the redeemed host had
been placed upon him; and he must also suffer for the ruin of the souls
which he had caused.  Then I saw that Satan, and all the wicked host,
were consumed, and the justice of God was satisfied; and all the angelic
host, and all the redeemed saints, with a loud voice said, Amen!

Said the angel, Satan is the root, his children are the branches.  They
are now consumed root and branch.  They have died an everlasting death. 
They will never have a resurrection, and God will have a clean
universe.  I then looked, and saw the fire which had consumed the
wicked, burning up the rubbish and purifying the earth.  Again I looked
and saw the earth purified.  There was not a single sign of the curse. 
The broken up, and uneven surface of the earth now looked like a level,
extensive plain.  God's entire universe was clean, and the great
controversy was forever ended.  Everywhere we looked, everything the eye
rested upon, was beautiful and holy.  And all the redeemed host, old and
young, great and small, cast their glittering crowns at the feet of
their Redeemer, and prostrated themselves in adoration before him, and
worshiped him that liveth forever and ever.  The beautiful New Earth,
with all its glory, was the eternal inheritance of the saints.  The
kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, was then given to the saints of the Most High who were to
possess it forever, even forever and ever.

 

See Isaiah 66:24; Daniel 7:26-27; Revelation 20:9-15, 21:1, 22:3

 

 
