<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow146)  [Next](pow148) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TO PREVENT BEING CHEATED, CHARMED OR BEWITCHED, AND TO BE AT ALL TIMES
BLESSED.

Like unto the cup and the wine, and the holy supper, which our dear Lord
Jesus Christ gave unto his dear disciples on Maunday Thursday, may the
Lord Jesus guard me in daytime, and at night, that no dog may bite me,
no wild beast tear me to pieces, no tree fall on me,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

no water rise against me, no fire-arms injure me, no weapons, no steel,
no iron, cut me, no fire burn me, no false sentence fall upon me, no
false tongue injure me, no rogue enrage me, and that no fiends, no
witchcraft and enchantment can harm me. Amen.

DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS TO EFFECT THE SAME.

The Holy Trinity guard me, and be and remain with me on the water and
upon the land, in the water or in the fields, in cities or villages, in
the whole world wherever I am. The Lord Jesus Christ protect me against
all my enemies, secret or public; and may the Eternal Godhead also guard
me through the bitter sufferings of Jesus Christ; his holy rosy blood,
shed on the cross, assist me, J. J. Jesus has been crucified, tortured
and died. These are true words, and in the same way must all words be
efficacious which are here put down, and spoken in prayer by me. This
shall assist me that 1 shall not be imprisoned, bound or overcome by
anyone. Before me all guns or other weapons shall be of no use or power.
Fire-arms, hold your fire in the almighty hand of God. Thus all
fire-arms shall be charmed. + + + When the right hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ was fastened to the tree, of the cross; like unto the Son of the
Heavenly Father who was obedient unto death, may the Eternal Godhead
protect me. by the rosy blood, by the five holy wounds on the tree of
the cross; and thus must I be blessed and well protected like the cup
and the wine, and the genuine true bread, which Jesus Christ gave to his
disciples on the evening of Maunday Thursday. J. J. J.

ANOTHER SIMILAR DIRECTION.

The grace of God and his benevolence he with me (N). I shall now ride or
walk out; and I will gird about my loins with a sure ring. So it pleases
God, the Heavenly Father, he will protect me, my flesh and blood,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and all my arteries and during this day and night which I have before
me; and however numerous my enemies may be, they must be dumbstruck, and
all become like a dead man, white as snow, so that no one will be able
to shout, cut or throw at me, or to overcome me, although he may hold
rifle or steel against whomever else evil weapons and arms might be
called, in his hand. My rifle shall go off like lightening, and my sword
shall cut as a razor. Then wen our dear lady Mary upon a very high
mountain; she looked down into a very dusky valley and beheld her dear
child standing amidst the Jews, harsh, very harsh, because he was bound
so harsh, because he was bound so hard; and therefore may the dear Lord
Jesus Christ save me from all that is injurious to me. + + + Amen.

ANOTHER SIMILAR DIRECTION

There walk out during this day and night, that thou mayest not let any
of my enemies,, or thieves, approach me, if they do not intend to bring
me what was spent from the holy altar. Because God the Lord Jews is
ascended into heaven in his living body. O Lord, this is good for me
this day and night. + + + Amen.

ANOTHER ONE LIKE IT.

In the name of God I walk out. God the Father be with me, and God the
Holy Ghost be by my side. Who ever is stronger than these three persons
may approach my body and my life; yet whoso is not stronger than these
three would much better let me be. J. J. J.

ANOTHER ONE LIKE IT.

I conjure thee, sword, sabre or knife, that mightest injure or harm me,
by the priest of all prayers, who had gone into the temple at Jerusalem,
and said: An edged sword shall pierce your soul that you may not injure
me, who am a child of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: More Charms](pow148)

</div>
