<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow129)  [Next](pow131.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TO SPELL-BIND A THIEF HE THAT HE CANNOT STIR.

This benediction must be spoken on a Thursday morning, before sunrise
and in the open air:

"Thus shall rule it, God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Thirty-three Angels speak to each other coming to administer in company
with Mary. Then spoke dear Daniel, the holy one: Trust, my dear woman, I
see some thieves coming who intend stealing your dear babe; this I
cannot conceal from you. Then spake our dear Lady to Saint Peter: I have
bound with a band, through Christ's hand; therefore, my thieves are
bound even by the hand of Christ, if they wish to steal mine own, in the
house, in the chest, upon the meadow or fields, in the woods, in the
orchard, in the vineyard, or in the garden, or wherever they intend to
steal. Our dear Lady said: Whoever chooses may steal; yet if anyone does
steal, he shall stand like a buck, he shall stand like a stake, and
shall count all the stones upon the earth, and all the stars in the
heavens. Thus I give thee leave, and command every spirit to be master
over every thief, by the guardianship of Saint Daniel,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and by the burden of this world's goods. And the countenance shall be
unto thee, that thou canst not move from the spot, as long as my tongue
in the flesh shall not give thee leave. This I command thee by the Holy
Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, by the power and might by which he has
created heaven and earth, by the host of all the angels, and by all the
saints of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen." If you
wish to set the thief free, you must tell him to leave in the name of
St. John.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Immobilizing a Thief (3)](pow131.md)

</div>
