<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow148)  [Next](pow150) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOW TO RECOVER STOLEN GOODS.

Take good care to notice through which door the thief passed out, and
cut off three small chips from the posts of that door; then take these
three chips to a wagon, unbeshrewdly, however; take off one of the
wheels and put the three chips into the stock of the wheel, in the three
highest names, then turn the wheel backwards; and say:

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Thief, thief, thief! Turn back with the stolen goods: thou art forced to
do it by the Almighty power of God: + + + God the Father calls thee
back, God the son turns thee back so that thou must return, and God, the
Holy Ghost leads thee back, until thou arrive at the place from which
thou hast stolen. By the almighty power of God the Father thou must
come; by the wisdom of God the Son thou hast neither peace nor quiet
until thou hast returned the stolen goods to their former place; by the
grace of God the Holy Ghost thou must ran and jump and canst find no
peace or rest until thou arrivest at the place from which thou hast
Stolen. God the Father binds thee, God the Son forces thee, and God the
Holy Ghost turns thee back. (You must not turn the wheel too fast.)
Thief, thou must come, + + + thief, thou must come, + + + thief, thou
must come, + + +. If thou art more almighty, thief, thief, thief; if
thou art more almighty than God himself, then you may remain where you
are. The ten commandments force thee--thou shalt not steal, and
therefore thou must come. + + + Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Well-Tried Charm](pow150)

</div>
