<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow152)  [Next](pow154.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TALISMAN.

It is said that anyone going out hunting and carrying it in his
game-bag, cannot but shoot something worth while and bring it home.

An old hermit once found an old, lame huntsman in a forest, lying beside
the road and weeping. The hermit asked him the cause of his dejection.
"Ah me, thou man of God, I am a poor, unfortunate being; I must annually
furnish my lord with as many deer, and hares, and partridges, as a young
and healthy huntsman could hunt up, or else I will be discharged from my
office; now I am old and lame; besides game is getting scarce, and I
cannot follow it up as I ought to; and I know not whit will become of
me." Here the old man's feelings overcame him, and he could not utter
another word. The hermit, upon this, took out a small piece of paper,
upon which he wrote some words with a pencil, and handing it to the
huntsman, he said: "there, old friend, put this in your game-bag
whenever you go out hunting, and you shall certainly shoot something
worth while, and bring it home, too; yet be careful to shoot no more
than you necessarily need, nor to communicate it to anyone that might
misuse it, on account of the high meaning contained in these words." The
hermit then went on his journey, and after a little the huntsman

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

also arose, and without thinking of anything in particular he went into
the woods, and had scarcely advanced a hundred yards when he shot as
fine a roebuck as he ever saw in his life.

This huntsman was afterward and during his whole lifetime lucky in his
hunting, so much so that he was considered one of the best hunters in
that whole country. The following is what the hermit wrote on the paper:

Ut nemo in sense tentat, descendre nemo.

\* \*  
\*  
+++  
At precedenti spectatur mantica tergo.

The best argument is to try it.

TO PREVENT ANYONE FROM KILLING GAME.

Pronounce the name, as for instance, *Jacob Wohlgemuth*, shoot whatever
you please; shoot but hair and feathers with and what you give to poor
people. + + + Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stolen Goods](pow154.md)

</div>
