<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow161)  [Next](pow163.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CURE FOR DROPSY.

Dropsy is a disease derived from a cold humidity, which passes through
the different limbs to such a degree that it either swells the whole or
a portion of them. The usual symptoms and precursors of every case of
dropsy are the swelling of the feet and thighs, and then of the face;
besides this the change of the natural color of the flesh into a dull
white, with great thirst, loss of appetite, costiveness, sweating,
throwing up of slimy substances, but little water, laziness and aversion
to exercise.

Physicians know three different kinds of dropsy, which they name:

1\. *Anasarca*, when the water penetrates between the skin and the flesh
over the whole body, and all the limbs, and even about the face and
swells them.

2\. *Ascites*, when the belly and thighs swell, while the upper
extremities dry up.

3\. *Tympanites*, caused rather by wind than water. The belly swells up
very hard, the navel is forced out

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

very far, and the other members fall away. The belly becomes so much
inflated that knocking against it causes a sound like that of a large
drum, and from this circumstance its name is derived.

The chief thing in curing dropsy rests upon three points, namely:

1\. To reduce the hardness of the swelling which may be in the bowels or
other parts.

2\. To endeavor to scatter the humors.

3\. To endeavor to pass them off either through the stool or through the
water.

The best cure therefore must chiefly consist in this: To avoid as much
as possible all drinking, and use only dry victuals; to take moderate
exercise, and to sweat and purge the body considerably.

If anyone feels symptoms of dropsy, or while it is yet in its first
stages, let him make free use of the sugar of the herb called
*Fumatory*, as this purifies the blood, and the *Euphrasy* sugar to open
the bowels.

A CURE FOR DROPSY (SAID TO BE INFALLIBLE).

Take a jug of stone or earthenware, and put four quarts of strong,
healthy cider into it; take two handfuls of parsley roots and tops, cut
it fine; a handful of scraped horse-radish, two tablespoonfuls of
bruised mustard-seed, half an ounce of squills, and half an ounce of
juniper berries; put all these in the jug, and place it near the fire
for 24 hours so as to keep the cider warm, and shake it up often; then
strain it through a cloth and keep it for use.

To a grown person give half a wineglassful three times a day, on an
empty stomach. But if necessary you may increase the dose, although it
must decrease again as soon as the water is carried off, and, as stated
before, use dry victuals and exercise gently.

This remedy has cured a great many persons, and among them a woman of 70
years of age, who had the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

dropsy so badly that she was afraid to get out of bed, for fear her skin
might burst, and who it was thought could not live but a few days. She
used this remedy according to the directions given, and in less than a
week the water had passed off her, the swelling of her stomach fell, and
in a few weeks afterward she again enjoyed perfect health.

Or: Drink for a few days very strong Bohea tea, and eat the leaves of
it. This simple means is said to have carried away the water from some
persons in three or four days, and freed them from the swelling,
although the disease had reached the highest pitch.

Or: Take three spoonfuls of rape-seed, and half an ounce of clean gum
myrrh, put these together in a quart of good old wine, and let it stand
over night in the room, keeping it well covered. Aged persons are to
take two teaspoonfuls of this an hour after supper, and the same before
going to bed; younger persons must diminish the quantity according to
their age, and continue the use of it as long as necessary.

Or: Take young branches of spruce pine, cut them into small pieces, pour
water on them and let them boil a while, then pour it into a large tub,
take off your clothes, and sit down over it, covering yourself and the
tub with a sheet or blanket, to prevent the vapor from escaping. When
the water begins to cool let some one put in hot bricks; and when you
have thus been sweating for a while, wrap the sheet or blanket close
around you and go to bed with it. A repetition of this for several days
will free the system from all water.

The following Valuable Recipes, not in the original work of Hohman, are
added by the publisher.

CURE FOR DROPSY. Make of the broom-corn seed, well powdered and

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

sifted, one drachm. Let it steep twelve hours in a wineglass and a half
of good, rich wine, and take it in the morning fasting, having first
shaken it so that the whole may be swallowed. Let the patient walk after
it. if able, or let him use what exercise he can without fatigue, for an
hour and a half; after which let him take two ounces of olive oil, and
not eat or drink anything in less than half an hour afterward. Let this
be repeated every day, or once in three days, and not oftener, till a
cure is effected, and do not let blood, or use any other remedy during
the course.

Nothing can be more gentle and safe than the operation of this remedy.
If the dropsy is in the body it discharges it by water, without any
inconvenience; if it is between the skin and flesh, it causes blisters
to rise on the legs, by which it will run off; but this does not happen
to more than one in thirty: and in this case no plasters must be used,
but apply red-cabbage leaves. It cures dropsy in pregnant women, without
injury to the mother or child. It also alleviates asthma, consumption
and disorders of the liver.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lock Jaw](pow163.md)

</div>
