[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp00)  [Next](dmp02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE

THE MS., dating from the third century A.D., which is here edited for
the first time in a single whole, has long been known to scholars. Its
subject-matter--magic and medicine--is not destitute of interest. It is
closely connected with the Greek magical papyri from Egypt of the same
period, but, being written in demotic, naturally does not reproduce the
Greek hymns which are so important a feature of those papyri. The
influence of purely Greek mythology also is here by comparison very
slight--hardly greater than that of the Alexandrian Judaism which has
supplied a number of names of Hellenistic form to the demotic magician.
Mithraism has apparently contributed nothing at all: Christianity
probably only a deformed reference to the Father in Heaven. On the other
hand, as might have been expected, Egyptian mythology has an
overwhelmingly strong position, and whereas the Greek papyri scarcely go
beyond Hermes, Anubis, and the Osiris legend, the demotic magician
introduces Khons, Amon, and many other Egyptian gods. Also, whereas the
former assume a knowledge of the *modus operandi* in divination by the
lamp and bowl, the latter describes it in great detail.

But the papyrus is especially interesting for the language in which it
is written. It is probably the

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

latest Egyptian MS. which we possess written in the demotic script, and
it presents us with the form of the language as written--almost as
spoken--by the pagans at the time when the Greek alphabet was being
adopted by the Christians. It must not be forgotten, too, that this is
the document which contributed perhaps more than any other to the
decipherment of demotic, partly through its numerous Greek glosses.

We have therefore thought that a complete edition, with special
reference to its philological importance, would be useful. The
vocabulary is extensive, comprising about a thousand words. The present
volume, containing the introduction, the transliteration, translation,
and notes, will be followed by a complete glossary, with separate
indices of Greek words, invocation names, names of animals, plants, and
minerals, and a list of the glosses, &c., besides a chapter dealing with
the principal grammatical forms met with in the MS., and a hand-copy of
the text; the photographic reproduction by Hess of the pages in the
British Museum and Leemans' facsimile of those at Leiden will of course
preserve their independent value for reference, as, for instance, in
judging the condition of the MS. and the precise forms of the signs in
particular passages.

There is considerable inconsistency in the spelling of words in the
papyrus itself. So much having to be rendered more or less
conventionally, while fresh light is thrown daily on the intricacies of
demotic, it is probable that there are a good many inconsistencies in
our transliterations, translations, and notes, in spite of the
watchfulness of the excellent reader at the Clarendon

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Press. Those, however, who have dealt with the
subject at all will probably not judge these too hardly.

In conclusion, we have to record our gratitude, first, to our
predecessors in publication and decipherment of the papyrus--to Reuvens,
Leemans, and Hess, to Brugsch, Maspero, Revillout, and W. Max
Müller--but for whose varied contributions our task would have been
infinitely more laborious even in the present advanced state of the
study: and secondly, to the authorities of the Egyptian department in
the British Museum, and of the Rijksmuseum in Leiden, for their courtesy
in affording every facility for studying the original MS., and more
especially to Dr. Boeser of the Leiden Museum for much kindness and
assistance.

 

F. LL. G.  
H. T.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](dmp02.md)
