[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp08)  [Next](dmp10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. VI.

\(1\) An inquiry of the lamp. You go to a clean dark cell without light
and you dig a new hole in an east wall (2) and you take a white lamp in
which no minium or gum water has been put, its wick being clean, and you
fill it with clean genuine Oasis oil, (3) and you recite the spells of
praising Ra at dawn in his rising and you bring the lamp when lighted
opposite the sun and recite to it the spells as below four times, (4)
and you take it into the cell, you being pure, and the boy also, and you
pronounce the spells to the boy, he not looking at the lamp, his eyes
being (5) closed, seven times. You put pure frankincense on the brazier.
You put your finger on the boy's head, his eyes being closed. (6) When
you have finished you make him open his eyes towards the lamp; then he
sees the shadow of the god about the lamp, and he inquires for you (7)
concerning that which you desire. You must do it at midday in a place
without light, if it be that you are inquiring for a spirit damned, a
wick of sail-cloth (?) (8) is what you put in the lamp and you fill it
with clean butter. If it is some other business, a clean wick with pure
genuine oil (9) is that which you put in the lamp; if you will do it to
bring

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

a woman to a man, ointment of roses is that which you put in the lamp.
You must lay the lamp (10) on a new brick and the boy also must sit on
another brick with his eyes closed. You cry down into his head four
times. (11) The spells which you recite &lt;to the lamp&gt; to the wick
previously before you recite to the boy: Formula: 'Art thou the unique
great wick of the linen of Thoth? (12) Art thou the byssus robe of
Osiris, the divine Drowned, woven by the hand of Isis, spun by the hand
of Nephthys? (13) Art thou the original band that was made for Osiris
Khentamente? Art thou the great bandage with which Anubis put forth his
hand to the body of Osiris the mighty god? (14) I have brought thee
to-day--ho! thou wick--to cause the boy to look into thee, that thou
mayest make reply to every matter concerning which I ask here to-day.
(15) Is it that you will (?) not do it? O wick, I have put thee in the
hand of the black cow, I have lighted thee in the hand (16) of the
female cow. Blood of the Drowned one is that which I put to thee for
oil; the hand of Anubis is that which is laid on thee. The spells (17)
of the great Sorcerer are those which I recite to thee. Do thou bring me
the god in whose hand is the command to-day and let him give me answer
as to everything about which(18) I inquire here to-day truly without
falsehood. Ho! Nut, mother of water, ho! Apet, mother of fire,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (19) come unto me, Nut, mother of water, come
Apet, mother of fire, come unto me Yaho.' You say it drawling(?) with
your voice exceedingly. You say again: 'Esex, Poe, Ef-khe-ton,'
otherwise said, 'Khet-on,' seven times. If it is a direct (?) inquiry,
these alone are the things that you recite (21) to the lamp, and you lie
down without speaking. But if obduracy take place, you rise, you recite
(22) his summons, which is his compulsion. Formula: 'I am the Ram's
face, Youth is my name: I was born under the venerable persea (23) in
Abydos, I am the soul of the great chief who is in Abydos; I am the
guardian of the great corpse that is in U-pek; (24) I am he whose eyes
are as the eyes of Akhom when he watcheth Osiris by night; I am Teptuf
upon the desert of Abydos; (25) I am he that watcheth the great corpse
which is in Busiris; I am he who watcheth for Light-scarab-noble (?).'
(*In margin*) The spells that you write on the lamp, Bakhukhsikhukh
(*and figures*) (26) 'whose name is hidden in my heart; Bibiou (Soul of
souls) is his name.' Formula, seven times. If it is a direct (?)
inquiry, (27) these things alone are what you recite. If it is an
inquiry by the boy that you are about, you recite these aforesaid to the
lamp (28) before calling down into the head of the boy, you turn round
(?), you recite this other invocation to the lamp also. Formula: 'O
Osiris, O lamp (29) that giveth vision

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

of the things &lt;of days&gt; above, that giveth vision of the things
below and vice versa, O lamp (*bis*), Amen is moored in thee; O lamp
(*bis*) I (30) invoke thee, thou goest up to the shore of the great sea,
the sea of Syria, the sea of Osiris. Do I speak (31) to thee? Dost thou
come that I may send thee? Ho, lamp, witness (?) to thyself, since thou
hast found Osiris upon his boat of papyrus and *teḥen*, (32) Isis being
at his head, Nephthys at his feet, and the male and female gods about
him. Speak, Isis, let it be told (33) to Osiris concerning the things
which I ask about, to cause the god to come in whose hand is the
command, and give me answer to everything about which I shall inquire
(34) here to-day. When Isis said "Let a god be summoned to me that I may
send him, he being discreet (?) as to the business on which he will go
and he accomplish it," (35) they went and they brought to her; thou art
the lamp that was brought to her. The fury of Sekhmet thy mother and of
Heke thy father is (36) cast at thee, thou shalt not be lighted for
Osiris and Isis, thou shalt not be lighted for Anubis until thou hast
given me an answer to everything which I ask (37) about here to-day
truly without telling me falsehood. If thou wilt not do it, I will not
give thee oil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. VII](dmp10.md)
