[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp05)  [Next](dmp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. III.

\(1\) 'let them eat, let them drink, let them pass a festal day.' When
they have finished, you speak to Anubis (*sic*) saying 'Dost thou make
inquiry for me?' If he says 'At once,' you say to him 'The god who will
make my inquiry (2) to-day, let him stand up.' If he says 'He has stood
up,' you say to him (i.e. the child) 'Say to Anubis "Carry off the
things from the midst"'; you cry (3) before him (i.e. the god) instantly
saying 'O Agathodaemon of to-day, lord of to-day, O thou whose
(possession) these moments are!' You cause him (the boy) to say (4) to
Anubis 'The god who will inquire for me today, let him tell me his
name.' When he stands up and tells his name, you ask him (5) concerning
everything that you wish. Its spirit-gathering. You take seven new
bricks, before they have been moved so as to turn them (6) to the other
face; you take them, you being pure, without touching them against
anything on earth, and you place them in their manner in which they were
(7) placed, again; and you place three tiles under the oil; and the
other four tiles, you arrange them about the child without (8) touching
any part of him against the ground; or seven palm-sticks, you treat them
in this fashion also. And you take seven clean loaves (9) and arrange
them around the oil, with seven lumps of salt,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and you take a new dish and fill it with (10) clean Oasis oil and add to
the dish gradually without producing cloudiness (?) so that it becomes
clear (11) exceedingly; and you take a boy, pure, before he has gone
with a woman, you speak down into his head (12) while he stands,
previously, (to learn) whether he will be profitable in going to the
vessel. If he is profitable, you make him lie on(?) his belly; (13) you
clothe (?) him with a clean linen tunic (?), &lt;you call down into his
head&gt;, there being a girdle on the upper part (14) of the tunic; you
utter this invocation that is above, down into his head, he gazing
downwards &lt;looking&gt; into the oil, for seven times, his eyes being
(15) closed. When you have finished, you make him open his eyes, you ask
him about what you desire; you do it until the time of the seventh hour
of the day.

\(16\) The invocation that you utter down into his head previously to
test him in his ears as to whether he will be profitable in going to
(17) the vessel. Formula: 'Noble ibis, falcon, hawk, noble and mighty,
let me be purified in the manner of the noble ibis, falcon, (18) hawk,
noble and mighty.' You utter this down into his head for seven times;
when you utter this, then (19) his ears speak. If his two ears speak, he
is very good; if it be his right ear, (30) he is good; if it be his left
ear, he is bad.

Prescription for enchanting the vessel quickly so that

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the gods enter and tell (21) you answer truthfully. You put the shell of
a crocodile's egg, or that which is inside it, on the flame; it will be
enchanted instantly.

Prescription to make them (22) speak: you put a frog's head on the
brazier, then they speak.

Prescription for bringing the gods in by force: you put the bile (23) of
a crocodile with pounded frankincense on the brazier.

If you wish to make them come in quickly again, you put stalks (?) of
anise (?) on the brazier together with the (24) egg-shell as above, then
the charm works at once. If you wish to bring in a living man, you put
sulphate of copper on the brazier, then he comes in.

\(25\) If you wish to bring in a spirit, you put *sa-wr* stone with
stone of *ilkh* on the brazier, then the spirit comes in. You put the
heart (26) of a hyaena or a hare, excellent (*bis*).

If you wish to bring in a drowned man, you put sea-*karab*-stone (?) on
the brazier.

\(27\) If you wish to bring in a murdered (?) man, you put ass's dung
with an amulet of Nephthys on the brazier, then he comes in.

If you (28) wish to make (them) all depart, you put ape's dung on the
brazier, then they all depart to their place, and you utter their spell
of dismissal also.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\(29\) If you wish to bring in a thief, you put crocus powder with alum
on the brazier.

The charm which you pronounce when you (30) dismiss them to their place:
'Good dispatch, joyful dispatch!'

\(31\) If you wish to make the gods come in to you and that the vessel
work its magic quickly, you take a scarab and drown it in the milk of a
black cow (32) and put it on the brazier; then it works magic in the
moment named, and the light comes.

\(33\) An amulet to be bound to the body of him who has the vessel, to
cause it to work magic quickly. You take a band of linen of sixteen
threads, four of white, four of \[green\], (34) four of blue, four of
red, and make them into one band and stain, them with the blood of a
hoopoe, and you bind it with a scarab in its attitude of the sun-god,
(35) drowned, being wrapped in byssus, and you bind it to the body of
the boy who has the vessel and it will work magic quickly; there being
nothing \[in the world better (?)\] than it (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. IV.](dmp07)
