[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp12)  [Next](dmp14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. X.

\(1\) the spirits, the dead; let them tell me the truth to-day in that
about which I shall ask: for I am Artemi ... se(?)-mau, rising in the
East. (2) Come in to me, Anubis with thy fair face, I have come to pray
to thee. Woe(?) (*bis*), fire (*bis*), \[South, North,\] West, East, (3)
every breeze of Amenti, let them come into being, proved (*bis*),
established, correct, enchanted, like the fury \[of the great one\] of
reverence; for I am (4) Iae, Iao, Iaea, Iao, Sabaoth, Atone; for I cast
fury at thee, Thiai, Klatai, (5) Arkhe, Ioa, Phalekmi, Iao, Makhahai,
Iee, Kho..n, Khokhrekhi, Aaioth, (6) Sarbiakou, Ikra, Phibiek, Momou,
Mounaikh, Stitho, Sothon, Naon, Kharmai, (7) the fury of all these gods,
whose names I have uttered here to-day, rouse them for me (*bis*), the
drowned (?), the dead; let your (plural) soul and your (plural) form
live for me (8) at the mouths of my lamp,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

my bandage (?), my word-seeking (?). Let him make me answer to every
word \[about\] which I am asking here to-day in truth (*bis*) without
(9) falsehood therein. Hasten(*bis*), quickly (*bis*).' Its
spirit-gathering: You go to a dark chamber with its \[face\] open to the
South or East (10) in a clean place: you sprinkle it with clean sand
brought from the great river; you take a clean bronze cup or (11) a new
vessel of pottery and put a *lok*-measure of water that has settled (?)
or of pure water into the \[cup\] and a *lok*-measure of real oil (12)
pure, or oil alone without putting water into it, and put a stone of
*qs-ankh* in the vessel containing oil, and put a 'heart--(13)
of-the-good-house' (plant?) in the bottom of the vessel, and put three
bricks round about the vessel, of new bricks, (14) and place seven clean
loaves on the bricks that are round the vessel and bring a pure child
that has been tested (15) in his ears before, that is, is profitable in
proceeding with the vessel. You make him sit on a new \[brick\] and you
also sit (16) on another brick, you being at (?) his face, otherwise
said, his back, and you put your hand before \[his\] eyes, \[his eyes
being\] closed and call down (17) into the middle of his head seven
times. When you have finished, you take your hand from before his eyes,
you \[make him bend over\] the vessel; you put your hand. (18) to his
ears, you take hold of them with your hand also, you ask the child
saying, 'Do you \[? see ...\]?' If he says, 'I see a (19) darkness,' you
say to him 'Speak, saying, "I see thy beautiful face, and do thou \[hear
my salutation?\], O great god Anubis!"'

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

\(20\) If you wish to do it by vessel alone, you fill your eyes with
this ointment, you sit (?) \[over the vessel?\] as aforesaid, your eyes
being (21) closed; you utter the above invocation seven times, you open
your eyes, you ask him concerning everything \[that you wish (?)\]. you
do it from the (22) fourth day of the lunar month until the fifteenth
day, which is the half-month when the moon fills the *uzat*.

\[A\] vessel-\[inquiry\] alone in order to see (23) the bark of Phre.
Formula: 'Open to me heaven, O mother of die gods! Let \[me see the
ba\]rk of Phre descending and ascending (24) in it; for I am Geb, heir
of the gods; prayer is what I make before Phre my father \[on account
of\] the things which have proceeded from me. (25) O Heknet, great one,
lady of the shrine, the Rishtret (?). Open to me, mistress of the
spirits, \[open\] to me, primal heaven, let (26) me worship the Angels!
\[for\] I am Geb, heir of the gods. Hail! ye seven Kings, hoi! ye
\[seven Mônts\], bull that engendereth, lord of strength (27) that
lighteth the earth, soul of the abyss; ho! lion as lion of (?) the
abyss, bull of the night, hail! thou that rulest the people of the East,
(28) Noun, great one, lofty one, hail! soul of a ram, soul of the people
of the West, hail! \[soul of souls, bull\] of the night,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

bull (?) of bulls, (29) son of Nut, open to me, I am the Opener of
earth, that came forth from Geb, hail! \[I am I, I.\] I, E, E, E, \[He,
He, He,\] (30) Ho, Ho, Ho; I am Anepo, Miri-po-re, Maat (?) Ib,
Thi\[bio. Ar\]oui, Ouoou, \[Iaho.'\] (31) Formula: blood of a
*smun*-goose, blood of a hoopoe, blood of a n\[ightjar\], *ankh-amu*
plant, \[*senepe* plant\], (32) 'Great-of-Amen' plant, *qes-ankh* stone,
genuine lapis-lazuli, myrrh, 'footprint-of-Isis' plant, pound, make into
a ball, \[you paint\] your \[eyes\] with it; put(?) a goat's-\[tear\]
(33) in (?) a 'pleasure-wood' of *ani* or ebony wood, \[you bind it
(?)\] around (?) you \[with a\] (34) strip of male-palm fibre in \[an\]
elevated place opposite the sun after putting \[the ointment as above
on\] your eyes ... (35) according to what is prescribed for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XI](dmp14)
