[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp17)  [Next](dmp19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XV.

\(1\) A potion. You take a little shaving of the head of a man who has
died a violent death, (2) together with seven grains of barley that has
been buried in a grave of a dead (?) man; you pound them with ten
*oipe*, (3) otherwise nine, (of) apple-seeds (?); you add blood of a
worm (?) of a black dog to them, with a little (4) blood of your second
finger, (that) of the heart (?), of your left hand, and with your semen
(?), and you (5) pound them together and put them into a cup of wine and
add three *uteh* to it of (6) the first-fruits of the vintage, before
you have tasted it and before they have poured out from it; and you
pronounce this invocation to it seven times (7) and you make the woman
drink it; and you tie the skin of the parasite aforesaid with a band of
byssus (8) and tie it to your left arm. Its invocation formula: 'I am he
of Abydos in truth, (9) by formation (?) (and?) birth in her (?) name of
Isis the bringer (?) of fire, she of the mercy-seat of the Agathodaemon.
(10) I am this figure of the sun, *Sitamesro* is my name. I am this

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

figure of a Captain of the host, very valiant, this (11) Sword (?), this
Overthrower (?), the Great Flame is my name. I am this figure of Horus,
this Fortress (?), this Sword (?), this (12) Overthrower (?) is my name.
I am this figure of One Drowned, that testifieth by writing, that
resteth on die other side (?) here under (13) the great offering-table
(?) of Abydos; as to which, the blood of Osiris bore witness to her (?)
name of Isis when it (the blood) was poured into (14) this cup, this
wine. Give it, blood of Osiris (that?) he (?) gave to Isis to make her
feel love in her heart for him (15) night and day at any time, there not
being time of deficiency. Give it, the blood of N. born of N. to give it
(16) to N. born of N. in this cup, this bowl of wine to-day, to cause
her to feel a love for him in her heart, (17)the love that Isis felt for
Osiris, when she was seeking after him everywhere, let N. the daughter
of N. feel it, (18) she seeking after N. the son of N. everywhere; the
longing that Isis felt for Horus of Edfu, (19) let N. born of N. feel
it, she loving him, mad after him, inflamed by him, seeking him (20)
everywhere, there being a flame of fire in her heart in her moment of
not seeing him.'

\(21\) Another method of doing it again. The paring (?) of your nail's
point (?) from an apple-fruit (?), and blood (22) of your finger
aforesaid again; you pound the apple and put blood on it, and put it in
the cup of wine (23) and invoke it seven times, and make the woman drink
it at the moment named.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

\(24\) \[A spell\] of going to meet a sovereign (?) when he fights with
you and will not parley (?) with you. (25) 'Do not pursue me, thou! I am
Papipetou Metoubanes. I am carrying (26) the mummy of Osiris and I am
proceeding to take it to Abydos, (27) to take \[it\] to Tastai (?) and
to deposit it in Alkhai; if N. deal blows at me, (28) I will cast it at
him. 'Its invocation in Egyptian also is this as below; (29) 'Do not
pursue me, N., I am Papipetu Metubanes. I am carrying the mummy of
Osiris, (30) I am proceeding to take it to Abydos, to cause it to rest
in Alkhah. If N. fight with me to-day, (31) I will cast it away.' Say
seven times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XVI](dmp19)
