[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp13)  [Next](dmp15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XI

\(1\) A spell of giving favour: 'Come to me, O ....... thy beautiful
name. O Thoth, hasten (*bis*); come to me. (2) Let me see thy beautiful
face here today ....... \[I stand (?)\] being in the form of an ape; and
do thou greet (?) me (3) with praise and adoration (?) with thy tongue
of. \[Come unto me\] that thou mayest hearken to my voice to-day, and
mayest save me from all things evil (4) and all slander (?). Ho! thou
whose form is of ...... his great and mysterious form, from whose
begetting

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

came forth a god, (5) who resteth deep (?) in Thebes; I am ...... of the
great Lady, under whom cometh forth the Nile, (6) I am the face of
reverence great......... soul (?) in his protection; I am the noble
child (7) who is in the House of Re. I am the noble dwarf who is in the
cavern ....... the ibis as a true protection, who resteth in On; (8) I
am the master of the great foe, lord of the obstructor (?) of semen,
mighty .... my name (?) I am a ram, son of a ram, Sarpot Mui-Sro (and
vice versa) (9) is my name, Light-scarab-noble (?) is my true name
(*bis*); grant me praise and love \[and reverence from N. son of\] N.
to-day, and let him give me all good things, (10) and let him give me
nourishment and fat things, and let him do for me everything which I
\[wish for; and let him not\] injure me so as to do me harm, nor let him
say to me a thing (11) which (I) hate, to-day, to-night, this month,
this year, \[this\] hour (?). \[But as for my enemies?\] the sun shall
impede their hearts and blind (12) their eyes, and cause the darkness to
be in their faces; for I am Birai...rai, depart ye(?), Rai; I am the son
of Sochmet,(13) I am Bikt, bull of Lat, I am Gat, son of Gat, whose
..... the Underworld, who rests deep(?) in the Great Residence in On,
(14) I am son of Heknet, lady of the protecting bandage (?), who binds
with thongs (?) ... \[I am the ...\] phallus (?) which the great and
mighty Powers guard,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (15) which rests in Bubastis; I am the divine
shrew-mouse which \[resteth with\] in Skhym; lord of Ay, sole(?) lord.
(16) is my name Light-scarab-noble (?) is my true name (*bis*). Ho! all
ye these gods, \[whose names I have spoken\] here to-day, come to me,
that ye may hearken to that which I have said to-day (17) and rescue
\[me\] from all weakness(?), every disgrace, everything, every evil (?)
to-day; grant me praise, love \[and reverence before\] such an one, the
King and his host, (18) the desert and its animals; let him do
everything which I shall say to him together with \[every man who shall
see\] me or to whom I shall speak or who shall speak (19) to me, among
every man, every woman, every child, every old man, every person \[or
animal or thing (?) in the\]whole land, \[which\] shall see me in these
moments to-day, (20)and let them cause my praise to be in their hearts
of everything which I shall \[do\] daily, together with those who shall
come to me, to (?) overthrow every enemy (?), (21) hasten (*bis*)
quickly (*bis*), before I say them or repeat them.'         Over an ape
of wax.

An oxyrhynchus (?) fish--you put it (22) in prime lily otherwise
*tesheps*-oil or moringa (?) oil which \[has been ... and you put
liquid?\] styrax to it, with prime frankincense

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

together with seeds of (23) 'great-of-love' plant in a metal (?) vase;
you bring a wreath of flowers of ...... and you anoint it with this oil
as above, and recite (24) these spells over it seven times before the
sun in the morning, before speaking to any man on earth; you extract it,
you anoint your face with it, (25) you place the wreath, in your hand,
and proceed to any place \[and be\] amongst any people; then it brings
you (26) great praise among them exceedingly. This scribe's feat is that
of King \[Dariu\]s (?); there is no better than it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XII](dmp15.md)
