[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp25)  [Next](dmp27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XXIII.

\(1\) A spell to inflict (?) Catalepsy (?) Formula: (2) You take an
ass's head, and you place it between your feet opposite the sun in the
morning when it is about to rise, (3) opposite it again in the evening
when it goes to the setting, and you anoint your right foot with
set-stone (4)of Syria, and your left foot with clay, the soles (?) of
your foot also and place your right hand (5) in front and your left hand
behind, the head being between them. You anoint your hand, of your two
hands, with ass's blood, (6) and the two *fnz* of your mouth, and utter
these charms towards the sun in the morning and evening of four days,
then (7) he sleeps. If you wish to make him die, you do it for seven
days, you do its magic, you bind a thread of palm-fibre (8) to your
hand, a mat (?) of wild palm-fibre to your phallus and your head; very
excellent. This is the invocation which you utter before the sun: (9) 'I
invoke thee who art in the void air, terrible, invisible, (10) almighty,
god of gods dealing destruction and making desolate, O thou

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

that hatest (11) a household well established. When thou wast cast out
of Egypt and out of (12) the country thou wast entitled, "He that
destroyeth all and is unconquered." (13) I invoke thee, Typhon Set, I
perform thy ceremonies of divination, (14) for I invoke thee by thy
powerful name in (words?) which thou canst not (15) refuse to hear; Io
erbeth, lopakerbeth, Iobolkhoseth, Iopatathnax, (16) Iosoro,
Ioneboutosoualeth, Aktiophi, Ereskhigal, Neboposoaleth, (17)
Aberamenthoou, Lerthexanax, Ethreluoth, Nemareba, Aemina, (18) entirely
(?) come to me and approach and strike down Him or Her with frost and
(19) fire; he has wronged me, and has poured out the blood of Typhon(?)
beside (?) him (20) or her: therefore I do these things.' Common form.

\(21\) To divine, opposite the moon. You do it by vessel-inquiry alone
or (with) a child. If it is you who will inquire, you fill your eye (22)
with green eye-paint (and) stibium, you stand on a high place, on the
top of your house, you address the moon when it fills (23) the *uzat* on
the 15th day, you being pure for three days; you pronounce this
invocation to the moon seven or nine times until he appear to you (34)
and speak to you: 'Ho! Sax, Amun, Sax, Abrasax; for thou art the moon,
(25) the chief of the stars, he that did form them, listen to the things
that I have(?) said, follow the (words) of my mouth, reveal thyself to
me, Than, (26) Thana, Thanatha, otherwise Thei, this is my correct
name.' Nine (times) of saying it until she (*sic*) reveal herself to
thee.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

\(27\) Another form of it again, to be pronounced to the moon. You paint
your eye with this paint, you (going?) up before the moon when it fills
the *uzat*, then you see the figure of the god in the *uzat* (28)
speaking unto you: 'I am Hah, Qo, Amro, Ma-amt, Mete is my name, for I
am ... bai, So, Akanakoup, (29) Melkh, Akh, Akh, Hy, Melkh is my true
... (*bis*) ... eternity, I am Khelbai, Setet, Khen (?)-em-nefer is my
name, Sro, Oshenbet, is my correct name.' (30) Say it nine times. You
stand opposite the moon, your eye being filled with this
ointment;--green eye-paint (and) stibium, grind with Syrian honey and
put the gall of a chick (31) full grown to it, and put it on a thing of
glass, and lay it (by) for yourself in a hidden place till the time when
you are ready for it; then you do it again as above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XXIV](dmp27.md)
