[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred Time](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smd05)  [Next](smd07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

### April--The Month of Venus

This month of April has only thirty days, which is the number said to
have been given to it by Romulus. The king who came after him gave it
only twenty-nine, but Caesar, when he altered the calendar, gave it
thirty again.

The name April comes from the Latin word aperire, which means "to open",
and the month was no doubt so named because it is during April that the
earth, which has been bound by the sharp frosts of winter, once again
opens beneath the warm rays of the sun; the withered sheaths fall away
from the ripened buds, which, opening out, disclose to our eyes their
long hidden treasures of beautiful colour.

We find that the month was sacred to Venus, the Roman Goddess of Beauty,
and some people think for this reason that the name April comes not from
aperire, but from Aphrilis, which in turn comes from Aphrodite, the name
given to the Goddess of Beauty by the Greeks.

Venus is said to have sprung from the foam of the sea, and to have made
her way to Mount Olympus, the home of the gods, where, because of her
wonderful beauty and grace, she was welcomed as the Goddess of Love and
Beauty. All the gods fell in love with her, but she scorned them all,
and Jupiter, to punish her for her pride, ordered her to marry Vulcan,
the God of Fire, who was deformed and very rough in his manner. He had
been thrown from the top of Mount Olympus by Jupiter in a fit of anger.
Had he not been a god, he would, of course, have been killed by the
fall, but he escaped with a broken leg which made him lame for the rest
of his life. He now lived on the earth, and spent his time at the forge
making many wonderful and useful things from the metals which he found
buried in the mountains. He built gorgeous palaces of gold for the gods,
which he decorated with precious stones, forged the terrible
thunderbolts used by Jupiter, and also made the arrows used by Venus's
son, Cupid. Vulcan was naturally worshiped by all blacksmiths and
workers in metal, and a great festival called the Vulcanalia was held in
his honour.

Cupid, whom we have just mentioned, was the God of Love; he never grew
up, but remained a little chubby boy, with beautiful wings. He always
carried a bow, and with his arrows pierced the hearts of young men and
maidens in order to make them fall in love with one another.

Another son of Venus was Aeneas, the great hero who was supposed to have
been the founder of the Roman race. He escaped from Troy, when at the
end of ten years' siege it fell into the hands of the Greeks, and after
many adventures reached a part of Italy, called Latium, where in later
times his descendants, Romulus and Remus, founded the city of Rome.

The story of Aeneas has been wonderfully told by the Roman poet Virgil
in his great work called the Aeneid. In this book Virgil wishes to show
that Augustus, the emperor of his time, being a descendant of Aeneas,
was also descended from the gods, since Aeneas was said to be the son of
Venus.

Part of the story of Troy, or Ilium, is told in the Iliad of Homer, the
great Greek poet. We read there of the fierce struggles which took place
before the walls of the city, of deeds of strength and valour, and
particularly of the final combat between the great heroes Hector the
Trojan and Achilles the Greek, in which the Trojan was killed. In spite
of many successes in the field, the Greeks were unable to gain an entry
into the city, nor were the Trojans able to drive the Greeks from the
shore, and it seemed as if neither side would ever secure the victory.

At last Ulysses, a Greek prince who was renowned for his cunning, formed
a plan for entering the city and thus finally bringing to an end the war
that had lasted for ten years. The Greeks built a wooden horse of such
size that a number of men could be hidden within its hollow sides. This
horse, filled with fighting men led by Ulysses, was left on the shore,
while the army embarked in their ships and sailed away as if tired of
the endless struggle. The Greeks also left behind a cunning slave, named
Sinon, who was to play an important part in the plot. The Trojans,
overjoyed at the departure of the Greeks, flocked down to the shore and
crowded round the enormous wooden horse, full of wonderment at its
strangeness. Many wished to drag it into the city at once, while some
were filled with suspicion and urged their companions to distrust
anything made by their enemies. Sinon, when questioned by the Trojans,
pretended that he had been ill-treated by the Greeks, and spoke with
hatred and anger against them. He explained that the horse was an
offering to the sea god, Neptune, whose help the Greeks would need on
their journey home, and he advised the Trojans to seize it and take it
into the city. In spite even of those who suggested that armed men might
be hidden in the horse, the Trojans dragged it into the city with great
triumph, pulling down part of the wall to admit it, since it was too
large to go through the gates.

Then followed a night of feast and revelry; the Trojans in their
excitement laid aside their armour and their weapons, and gave
themselves up to wild merrymaking. The smoky flare of the torches lit up
a scene of mad delight. Suddenly shouts of alarm arose on every side,
followed by the clash of weapons. Armed men poured in on the astonished
Trojans, and in a short time Troy was in the hands of the Greeks. Under
cover of the darkness and the noise Ulysses and his companions had crept
from their hiding-place, had overpowered the careless sentries, and
opened the gates for the Greek army, whose ships had returned in the
night. Thus, through the help of the clever Ulysses, the Greeks overcame
the army that had so often beaten them in the field, and by a trick
brought to a victorious end the great Trojan war, for which the Goddess
Venus had been responsible, as we shall read in a later chapter.

The Old English name for the month of April was Oster-monath or
Easter-monath, because it was the month sacred to Eastre, or Ostara, the
Goddess of Spring; the same name is still kept by the Germans, who call
it Ostermonath. The time of year known as Easter is named after this
goddess, and though Easter is now a Christian festival, it was in the
first place a feast held by the Saxons in honour of their goddess
Eastre. It was the custom for the people to give one another presents of
coloured eggs, because the egg is supposed to represent the beginning of
life, and the feast was held in the spring-time, when Nature awakes to a
new life from the death of winter. The custom, which we still have, of
sending Easter eggs to our friends, is therefore a very, very old one
indeed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. May--The Month of Maia](smd07.md)
