[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred Time](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smd04)  [Next](smd06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

### March--The Month of Mars

This month, originally the first in the year, is named after Mars, the
God of War. He was the son of Jupiter and Juno, the king and queen of
the gods, and was generally represented in a shining suit of armour,
with a plumed helmet on his head, a spear in one hand, and a shield in
the other. His chariot was driven by the Goddess of War, Bellona, who
also watched over his safety in battle; for the gods often took part in
the battles which were constantly raging on the earth. During the great
fight between the gods and the giants to decide who was to rule the
world, Mars was captured by two of the giants, who bound him with iron
chains and kept watch over him day and night. After over a year of
captivity he was freed by the clever god Mercury, who succeeded in
loosening the chains so silently that the giants heard no sound. Mars
also took part in the Trojan War, when he was actually wounded.

Mars was loved by Venus, the Goddess of Beauty, but wishing to keep
their love a secret from the other gods, they met only during the night,
and Mars appointed his servant Alectryon to keep watch and to call him
before the sun rose as he did not wish Apollo, the Sun God, to see them.
One night Alectryon fell asleep, and so was too late to warn Mars of the
sun's approach. Apollo saw them from his chariot as he drove across the
sky, and told Vulcan, the God of Fire, who caught them in a net of
steel, and thus held them prisoner, while the other gods made fun of
them. As soon as he was set free, Mars, who was filled with anger
against Alectryon for failing in his duty, changed  him into a cock, and
driving him into a farmyard, condemned him to give warning every day of
the sun's rising--a fanciful explanation why

    "the cock with lively din,  
Scatters the rear of darkness thin".  
        MILTON--L'Allegro.

The gods, though they themselves were immortal--that is, could never
die, nor even grow old--yet sometimes married mortal, the men or women
whom they found on the earth, and Mars fell in love with a beautiful
girl named Ilia, who had given up her life to serve in the temple of
Vesta, the Goddess of Fire. It was the duty of these priestesses of
Vesta to guard the fire which continually burned on the altar of the
goddess, for the safety of the people was thought to depend on this
sacred flame. No Vestal, as these priestesses were called, was allowed
to marry, under penalty of death. Ilia, however, in spite of her solemn
promise, consented to marry Mars, and keeping her marriage a secret,
continued to live in the temple. In course of time she had two sons,
Romulus and Remus. Her father and mother, hearing that she had broken
her vow, ordered the full punishment of her crime to be carried out; the
mother was buried alive, and the children were left in the forest to be
killed by the wild beasts.

Thus Ilia perished, but the children were wonderfully saved, so the
story tells us, by a wolf, who cared for them as if they had been her
own young. They were soon after found by a shepherd, who took them to
his home, where they grew up to be strong and brave men. As soon as they
had reached manhood they left their home and went out into the world to
seek their fortune. Coming to a beautiful country of hills and valleys,
they decided to build a great city; but before they had even finished
the outer walls, they quarrelled about the name which was to be given to
it when it was built. Romulus lost his temper and struck his brother
Remus, so that he fell dead to the ground. With the help of a band of
wicked and cruel men like himself, Romulus at last succeeded in building
a city, which, called Rome, after its founder's name, was to become one
of the most famous cities the world has ever known.

Romulus became the first king of Rome, but he ruled so harshly that the
senators, the chief men of the city, determined to rid themselves of
him. During an eclipse of the sun, which darkened the city just at the
time when Romulus and the senators were assembled in the marketplace,
the senators fell on the king with their swords and slew him. They then
cut his body into small pieces, which they hid beneath their cloaks.
When the light returned and the people found that their king had
disappeared, the senators told them that Romulus had been carried off by
the gods to Mount Olympus, and ordered a temple to be built in his
honour on one of the seven hills of Rome.

Mars took the city of Rome under his special protection, and is said to
have sent a shield from heaven, during a time of plague, as a sign that
he would always watch over the city. The Romans, afraid lest the shield
should be stolen, had eleven other shields made, so like the first that
only the priests who guarded them in the temple of Mars could tell which
was the one sent from heaven. These priests were called Salii, the
Leapers, because they danced war dances when, during the month of March,
the shields were carried in a procession through the streets of Rome.

To Mars, as the God of War, the Romans naturally turned for help in
war-time, and a Roman general, before setting out, went into the temple
of Mars and, touching the sacred shield with the point of his spear,
cried "Mars, watch over us!"

The training-ground of the Roman soldiers was called Campus Martius (the
Field of Mars), in honour of the God of War, and it was commonly
believed that Mars himself led their army into battle and helped to give
them the victory. March was named after Mars because of its rough and
boisterous weather, and we find the same idea in the minds of the Angles
and Saxons, who called it Hlythmonath--the loud or stormy month. Another
name for it was Lenctenmonath, the lengthening month, because it is
during March that the days rapidly become longer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. April--The Month of Venus](smd06)
