[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred Time](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smd01)  [Next](smd03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE STORIES OF THE MONTHS AND DAYS

### INTRODUCTION

Our Divisions of Time

How familiar to us are the names of the months, and the days of the
week, and yet how few of us know to whom we owe these names or what a
wealth of meaning they possess. They have come to us from the past, from
the time when people worshiped many gods and explained the wonders of
nature in their own simple way. But before listening to the stories
which these names can tell us, we ought first of all to remind ourselves
of the way in which our divisions of time came into being.

We all know that the earth turns round on its own axis, giving us
periods of light and darkness, which we call day and night. The word "
day", which comes from a very, very old word meaning "to shine", really
means, of course, the time during which the earth is lit up by the sun,
but it has also come to mean the time which the earth takes to revolve,
as from sunrise to sunrise, sunset to sunset, midday to midday. The
Greeks measured the day from sunset to sunset, the Romans from midnight
to midnight, the Babylonians from sunrise to sunrise. The day, in this
sense, became the first measurement of time.

The day, however, is a very short period, so another measurement was
taken for a longer space of time, and this measurement was suggested by
the changes in the moon. It was noticed that the moon altered in shape,
beginning with the new moon, waxing to the full moon and then gradually
waning. So the space of time from one new moon to the next--about 29-1/2
days--was called a moonth or month, afterwards known as the lunar month
(lunar, from Latin; Luna = moon).

The next measurement of time, the year, was suggested by the seasons.
People noticed that there was a period of heat and a period of cold, a
time when the trees and plants put forth their buds, and a time when all
Nature seemed to die, and these periods became known as the
Seasons--Spring, the time when plants spring up; Summer, the mild or
gentle season; Autumn, the season of increase, when the fruits of the
earth are gathered in; Winter, the windy or cold season.

It was found that the time from one Spring to the next, or from one
Winter to the next, was about twelve lunar months, and these twelve
months were known as a year. The change of season is, of course, due to
the movement of the earth round the sun, and the exact time taken by the
earth is 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes. Now, a year of twelve lunar
months is only 354 days, and the result of this difference was that the
months got ahead of the seasons, and in a year or two, when, according
to the Calendar, the Spring months had come, it was really still Winter.
In order to put this right, the lunar year (moon year) was made longer
by having an extra month put in every now and then. In this way the
lunar year was made to correspond more nearly to the solar year (sun
year), that is, the year of 365 days. The Jews put in a month seven
times in every nineteen years, and the Greeks a month three times in
every eight years. The Romans had first of all a year of only ten
months, beginning with March. Then they added two months, making a year
of 355 days.

But even now the number of days was short, and to make up for the loss,
days were added from time to time. These extra days, however, were added
in such a way that they led to great confusion, and the Roman Dictator,
Julius Caesar, in order to do away with this confusion, decreed that the
year 46 B.C. should consist of 445 days, and fixed the length of future
years at 365 days. But since the earth's journey takes 365 days, 5
hours, 49 minutes, a quarter of a day was still lost each year, so
Caesar ordered an extra day to be put on to February every fourth year,
making that year what we call Leap Year, because the Calendar makes a
"leap" of one day. This new Calendar is called the Julian Calendar,
after Julius Caesar.

The lunar year, that is, the year of twelve months, seemed at last to be
of the right length, but even now there was a very tiny mistake. You
will have noticed that 5 hours, 49 minutes was taken as a quarter of a
day, but it is short of 6 hours by 11 minutes. A very small difference
you will say; but after several hundred years it amounted to ten days,
so that the lunar year was now too long. In 1582 Pope Gregory ordered
that ten days should be left out in that year, and the day after the 4th
of October was called the 15th.

The change was not made in England until 1751, when eleven days were
dropped, and it led to a great deal of discontent among uneducated
people, who thought that these days had been stolen from them! In order
to prevent the mistake occurring again, it was arranged that instead of
every fourth year being a leap year, the years which end in 00, as 1700,
1800, 1900, should not be leap years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. January--The Month of Janus](smd03.md)
