[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sotu08)  [Next](sotu10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00086EZJI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Universe*, by Nathan R. Wood, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### III. THE SECRET OF THE UNIVERSE AND THE PROBLEM OF SPACE, MOTION AND TIME

<span class="small">How Time comes in the physical world—The organic
relation of space, matter and time—What Time does—The triunity of the
three—How Time connects the mind with the universe—The true and
universal Relativity—The Vast Outline of the Universe—Why we can
comprehend the universe—A real universe.</span>

There remains a third set of relations with the third element in this
triunity.

Time is clearly the third element. But what is time? What is the
essential nature of time in the physical universe?

Time, of course, has many aspects. But essentially time is
consecutiveness or successiveness. In eternity things may be, in a way
which we cannot really comprehend, largely simultaneous. But here in
this time-world, the world which we know so well, all things,—thoughts,
motions or actions,—are one after another. They are successive or
consecutive. And time is essentially that successiveness or
consecutiveness.

*In the physical universe time is the successiveness of motion in
space*. Motion in space occupies one location after another. In that is
consecutiveness, or successiveness, or time. For each successive
location of the motion is later than those before it. Time, then,
proceeds from motion. Time may equally be called the successiveness of
the locations of motion in space. Time is not a thing. Therefore, some
say, it inheres entirely in the mind. But that is obviously not true. It
does inhere in the mind, which is successive in its thinking, but it
inheres also in motion. It is the successiveness of motion in space. If
Kant could have known matter not as "objects" but as motion, he would
have known that space

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

and time not only inhere in the mind but that they also inhere in
motion. Motion involves space. It proceeds from space. Successiveness,
which means time, is inevitable in motion. It is the inevitable outcome
of motion. Space produces motion, then, and space and motion produce
time.

This is what the principle of Triunity reveals very clearly. It reveals
space, through energy, as producing motion, and space and motion as
producing time. The principle of Triunity, as we have seen it working in
the original Source, and in the various reflections, leads to further
analysis of the relations of space, and of matter or motion, to time.

 

For in the Three in One the Spirit proceeds from the Father, through the
Son. That is the very definite presentation of them. So, in the
universal reflections of triunity in matter, phenomena come from energy,
through motion. So, in the reflection in the triunity of time itself,
the past comes from the future, through the present. And in the
wonderful triunity in man the personality comes from the nature, through
the person. So now, in the combined triunity of space, matter or motion,
and time, we find that time proceeds from motion, or from space through
motion. It is the direct result of motion in space. It is the result of
the emergence of space, or outspread power, through energy, into motion.

 

But the relations revealed to us in this way are still more remarkable.
Time is invisible and inaudible. Yet, invisible and inaudible as it is,
it is time which reveals motion, and reveals space through motion, and
makes

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

motion and space visible and audible. As in the Divine Triunity Father
and Son touch us and influence us and are revealed to us by the
invisible and inaudible Spirit, so in the physical universe, in vast
reflection of the Trinity, space and matter touch us and influence us
and become visible and audible to us entirely through invisible and
inaudible time. It cannot be questioned. The vibrations of matter or
motion touch and influence us and become visible and audible to our
senses through consecutiveness, through successiveness of impact, that
is, through sensations of time. The differences of colour or of sound
are differences purely in the time of the vibrations. They are
differences, indeed, of space length. But they strike us, and strike
other objects, as differences in time length. The differences in wave
lengths or vibrations reach us or other objects which they touch purely
as faster or slower. A long wave is to us a slow one. A short wave is to
us a quick one. They come to us as variations in time. So that both
space and matter become real to us and affect us, and affect other
things, through time. In the Trinity the Spirit, Himself mysterious,
unseen and unheard by us, reveals the Son, and through Him the Father,
to us. So, in the physical world, time, itself mysterious, unseen and
unheard by us, reveals matter or motion to us, and through that reveals
space. Invisible and inaudible itself, time alone makes the world of
space and of matter or motion visible and audible to us.

 

How closely bound together space, matter and time prove to be! Space,
the omnipresent outspreading of Creative power, emerges into energy.
Energy passes into motion. Motion becomes phenomena, waves of

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

sound, of light, of colour, of all the infinite variety of the universe.
Phenomena consist of successive vibrations, fast or slow. That
successiveness, that fastness or slowness, is time. Everything we see,
or hear, or touch, is known to us through the time length of its
vibrations. So closely are space, matter and time bound to each other.

We may put this relationship very clearly in terms of motion. *Potential
motion is space. Actual motion is the tangible universe. Successive
motion is time*.

#### *The Triunity of the Three*

In all these things, the principle of Triunity points out both the
absolute threeness and the absolute oneness of space, motion and time.
The three are so much three that no one of the three can exist without
the other two. For space, potential activity, comes into full existence
only in actual motion; and this motion exists inevitably as
successiveness, which is time. Space then is completely real only as
motion and as time. Secondly, matter or motion is of course that
potential activity of space realized. It cannot exist except as the
embodiment of space. And on the other hand motion exists as
successiveness, or time. Motion without successiveness is impossible.
Thirdly, time in turn exists only as space comes into motion and motion
into successiveness. Time in the physical world cannot exist except as
the result of space and motion.

Each of the three, space, matter or motion, and time, then necessitates
the other two. It is absolute threeness.

The principle of Triunity in the same way points out the oneness of the
triunity of space, motion and time.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Each one of the
three is itself the whole. For the physical universe is all of it space,
the outspreading of power, realized in motion and in successiveness. It
is also all of it matter or motion, embodying space, and existing as
successiveness. It is also all of it time,—space and motion acting in
the form of successiveness.

It is absolute threeness, then, and absolute oneness. It is a
triuniverse.

These three are of course three modes of being. They are three things
which the physical universe is.

 

Yet more wonderfully and mysteriously we find the Triunity of God
explaining the nature and working of time. In the Triune God the Spirit
enters the very being of our souls, and not only influences them, but is
a part of their very life. And this leads us to a remarkable thing in
the nature of time. In the triune universe time enters the being of the
soul and becomes a part of its very life. Neither space nor motion so
enters the soul. They stay outside the windows of the senses. Neither of
them becomes a part of the very existence of the mind. It is possible to
think thoughts which have nothing to do with space or motion. But the
mind can do nothing at all without consecutiveness, succession of
thoughts. Time belongs to the mind as well as to the physical universe.
As the soul was created to have the Spirit of God dwelling in it, and
that Spirit, who is also the third in the Three in One, works to bring
the soul to know Father and Son, so also the soul was created with time
existing in it as a part of its consecutive inner life, and that element
of time, which is also in the physical universe as the third great
element there, works to bring the mind to know space and motion.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

So the Triunity of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, whose reflection is the
universal triunity, reveals one after another the subtle but absolute
relations which space, matter and time bear to each other. Excepting
three centres of personal consciousness in one Being, not one of the
Triune distinctions is found in God which does not reveal its
counterpart in the triune relations of space, matter and time, as we
have seen them.

#### *The True and Universal Relativity*

The great fact of relativity has long been neglected. Now it is being
felt everywhere in the world of thought. Its hour has come. No longer
to-day can we think of things in the physical universe by absolute and
rigid formulae. The great fact that all things of sense and space and
time exist in relation to each other has found in recent years its new
and right emphasis, and its priests and prophets.

It is true that those who have rescued the fact of relativity from
neglect now make too much of it. They go to the other extreme. That is
always done when a truth has been ignored and is again affirmed. One
need not adopt every extreme speculative conclusion which has been
linked with the new emphasis upon relativity, in order to give the fact
of relativity its due. Nor need one make relativity the basis of all
beliefs. It is only one among other facts of the universe.

But there is indeed relativity. We have seen it. We have seen it
remarkable and universal in the relationship of space, motion and time
in their infinite triunity. Everything in each of the three in that
absolute triunity exists in relation to the other two. Nothing in any
one of the three in that triunity can be computed

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

except in terms of the other two. Space is abstract, unmeasured,
unrevealed, but for motion, or matter, and time. It comes into full
reality only when it is embodied in matter or motion, and consecutive
motion from point to point in space, which means time. As for motion, it
can be stated in the abstract as energy. But that energy is meaningless,
its rapidity, and therefore its impact, cannot be measured or stated,
except by space and time, the length or shortness of time required for
the motion to cover a certain space, or the length or shortness of space
which it covers in a given time; or the space-length and the time-length
of its vibrations. And time,—this too exists in the abstract as
consecutiveness; but it becomes real and measurable in the physical
universe only as it results from the combination of space and motion. A
unit of time is the piece of consecutiveness resulting when a certain
motion of a pendulum goes a certain distance, or as a certain star moves
from one point in the universe to another. Time in the physical universe
is especially relative. For the momentum of the pendulum grows less. The
elasticity of the spring decreases. The star moves in a universe not
static but shifting in a million million orbits. Space and motion and
time are to us wholly relative to each other, and we can know no one of
them except in terms of the other two.

Professor Einstein reasons that since motion is all that we know in the
physical universe,—space and time being intangible,—and since motion is
relative, therefore all that we know in the world of sense and substance
is purely relative. And since we have no absolute standards of space and
time, therefore, he reasons, there is nothing definite in the physical
universe.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

This is a healthy scepticism. It does away with our scientific
arrogance. We do not get and we cannot get absolute accuracy in our
scientific measurements. We can only get almost or relative certainty.

But this which is a healthy scepticism cannot itself be made an absolute
view of things. You need not sit down under the juniper tree, or throw
away your test-tube, or go out and riot around in daily life as though
there were no standards for you, no meaning in the universe, and no God.
It is true that everything in space or motion or time is relative to
everything else in each of the other two. But this does not mean that
the world is one vast shifting irregularity, one infinite
indefiniteness. Very much the contrary. There is an exceedingly definite
thing in all this shifting interplay of space, motion and time. It is
Triunity. This universal triunity, which is the reflection of the Divine
Triunity, reveals to us those relations of space and matter and time.
All this interplay of relativity is but the omnipresent, living,
constant outworking of that absolute triunity which is the structure of
the physical universe. It is, of course, not a rigid structure, but a
living one, the image not of a rigid but of a living God. All of this
relativity, this shifting and partially elusive interdependence, is the
absolute operation of an absolute, never-changing, never-failing,
universal triunity, the reflection and immanent working of an absolute,
glorious Triune God.

#### *The Vast Outline of the Universe*

From this Relativity, this Triunity of Space, Matter and Time, a vast
Outline of the universe dawns upon

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

us. It is an infinite circuit going out from the life and outspread
power of God, through the physical universe, and back into the eternity
and life of God.

This is the outline:

The power of God is spiritual. It also from eternity spreads out into
dimensions. That is space.

Acting as energy, or power to move, that outspread power proceeds, as
God wills, into actual motion. Then we have a universe of motion.

The motion works out in phenomena. Then we have light, heat, colour,
sound and substance.

Both the motion and the phenomena mean and are successiveness. That
successiveness, of the locations of motion, of the impacts of vibration
in phenomena, is time in the physical universe.

But time, like space, is both physical and spiritual. It is
successiveness of mind as well as of motion. As space issues from the
mind and power of God into physical dimensions, so time passes again
from physical successiveness into mental successiveness, and so into the
eternal mind of God.

*This is the vast outline. From the all-powerful mind of God, through
space, through energy, motion and phenomena, through time, back into the
eternal mind of God. Out from the omnipotence of the Creator, back into
the eternity of the Creator*.

It is a continuous process, a vast unchanging Circuit. The universe is
forever emerging, and forever returning, through space, through motion,
through time, back into its Source.

"For *of* Him and *through* Him and *unto* Him are all things."

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

#### *Why We Can Comprehend the Universe*

For this same reason, because space at the source of the physical
universe and time at the exit of it are both of them of the mind as well
as of the physical world, the mind of man can grasp and comprehend the
universe. Man can comprehend the universe, not in its extent, but in its
nature.

For the comprehension of space is possible to us because space is of the
mind as well as of the physical world.

And the comprehension of time is possible to us because time is of the
mind as well as of the physical world.

And because motion comes out of space and passes into time, both of
which we grasp, we can comprehend motion. We can comprehend it in terms
of space and time. We define it as a motion of so many miles of space in
so many moments of time. We can do this because space and time blend
into our minds as they do into God's, and because the triune
space-motion-time universe issues from the mind of God into reality, and
returns again to that mind of God as its eternal goal, *and the mind of
man reflects the mind of God*.

That is why we can comprehend the universe.

#### *A Real Universe*

It is necessary to be very clear about what all this means. It is not
pantheism. It is not a vision of the physical universe as a mere
manifestation of the being of God showing itself in unreal appearances
which are but parts of Him, a universe which seems to be space, matter
and time, but is not. It is quite the contrary.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

It is reality. It is the perception of how the mind of God through its
omnipresent, outspread power projects into reality a universe which is
not mind, and is not God, but is physical motion, and of how that
universe of physical reality returns through phenomena and time into the
mental eternity of God.

*The physical universe becomes, then, a vast circuit from the mind of
God to the mind of God, and this vast circuit is in the absolute
likeness of the Three in One.*

*Space, or the outspreading of power, is the source, like the Father in
the Three in One.*

*Motion or matter is the visible, active embodiment, like the Son in the
Three in One.*

*Time is from space, through matter, as the Spirit is from the Father
through the Son in the Three in One.*

*And as the Spirit is the return of the Godhead again into the life of
God, so time is the return of the physical universe into the life of
God.*

*"For of Him and through Him and unto Him are all things."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Secret of the Universe and the Problem of
Relativity](sotu10)
