<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

### APPENDIX

### A ROSICRUCIAN INSTITUTION IN SWITZERLAND

SOME time after the first edition of the foregoing pages appeared, an
attempt was made in republican Switzerland to carry into effect these
ideas. In the midst of the mountains, among the most sublime and
picturesque scenery, upon a secluded hill near the shore of the most
beautiful Italian lake, extensive grounds were purchased, and it was
proposed to build a house whose object it was to serve as a refuge for
those who wanted to cultivate spirituality pure and simple, without any
admixture of priestcraft and superstition. It has not yet been finally
decided whether this undertaking will be a success or a failure; but the
latter is more than probable, as the method of thinking in old
dilapidated and dying Europe is too narrowminded to permit of grasping
such an exalted idea.

We have asked the question whether there would be any use or necessity
for such

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

an institution, and received the following answer.

Upon the wide expanse of our social sea of life there is at present no
dry spot to be found where the white dove of truth may rest her weary
feet. The waves of contending self-interests clash together, being blown
into fury by the storms of passion that rage in the human heart.
Selfishness, deceit, and the follies of fashion are the kings that rule
over the peoples of Europe, claiming as their tribute the immortality of
their souls. The battle for superiority in the struggle for existence
forces nations and individuals to use evil means; conventionalism forces
men and women to be hypocritical; to be honest and unselfish means
starvation and ruin; to be true and sincere means to incur social
ostracism; sharpness, cunning, and policy are the vermin that infest the
seat of divine wisdom; every social unit seeks to live and to thrive
upon the ignorance of the rest. Thus man's whole time and attention is
taken up with running after the worthless baubles and pleasures of this
grossly material world, and the only redeeming angel, the true living
faith--meaning the spiritual power to recognise spiritual truth--is fast
driven away, taking with it the true light and leaving the world in
darkness and despair.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

Is there no one whose aspirations go higher than to enjoy the comforts
of life, to eat and to drink, to be merry to-day and to die tomorrow,
and who has ever been longing to find some way of escape from this great
carnival, and to throw off the mask which he is forced to wear and which
prevents him from seeing the truth? Do such persons never wish for a
place where they might find refuge and enjoy communication with the God
whose temples they are? Is such a desire to escape selfish, and is it
necessary to hold out in the whirling dance that ends in the abyss of
death?

It is truly said that spiritual strength grows only by resistance to
temptations, but there must be a certain amount of strength before these
temptations can be resisted and overcome by the power of the spirit. Is
it selfish to seek to gain strength before the battle is entered? Is it
selfish to wish for the possession of a certain amount of truth before
one enters into an atmosphere filled with lies? Is it selfish if the
gardener shelters a delicate plant in the hot-house until it grows
strong enough to be set out in the garden and to encounter the
vicissitudes of the climate? and is not spirituality such a delicate
plant? Is it selfish for a child to remain in the mother's womb until it
has gained strength to support

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

its own life, and is not the spiritual regeneration of man most
difficult to accomplish? The world is full of spiritual miscarriages
which have entered the battle with the devils that rule the world
prematurely, and without being prepared for the fight; neither will the
means for such a preparation be found in our churches and schools as
they are constituted at present; where what is miscalled "religion" is
carried on as a social amusement, and where not even the meaning of the
term "spirituality" seems to be known. Those who wish to find the true
light must rise up and embrace it with their whole heart and their whole
being; they have no time to dream or to amuse themselves with the
illusory treasures of the [terrestrial](errata.htm#1) plane.

It is often said that people with spiritual aspirations should remain in
the world and teach others, and do all the good they can; but what good
can anyone do, if he has no knowledge of the consequences of his acts,
and what knowledge can anyone teach to another if he knows nothing
himself? Spiritual aspirations alone do not constitute spiritual
knowledge; we must not only feel the truth but see it before we can know
it ourselves. How can anyone teach the truth if the truth does not
itself teach in and through him? There

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

is already an abundance of preachers and teachers in the world who know
the truth only from hearsay and from the reading of books; but it is
only their light that shines, and not the light of the truth. What man
needs is the Light itself, and not merely a description of it. There is
no necessity to start a new sect with a new set of opinions and creeds;
but there is a great necessity that a way should be found to teach
mankind how they may open their eyes, so as to be able to perceive the
truth themselves.

To those who know nothing about the possibility of attaining
self-knowledge, imagining that God is incapable of teaching anything to
the soul and that divine wisdom like manmade science is to be learned
from man, the object of our institution will be incomprehensible. To
those we can only say that it is not the object of this enterprise to
furnish a retreat for misanthropes and hypochondriacs, where they may
lead a lazy life, amusing themselves with bemoaning the wickedness of
this sinful world; neither is it to be an infirmary for ghost-seers,
visionaries, or dreamers, where they may revel to their hearts' content
among the creations of their own fancy; nor is it to be a "school for
occultism," where magic arts are taught to the fool; but it is intended
to

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

be a place where those who earnestly aspire to spirituality may find the
external conditions necessary to cultivate it and to acquire the true
"magic staff" that will securely support them on their voyage through
eternity; namely, the power to recognise divine truth within their own
selves--not by any capacity of their own, but by the power of the Light
itself, which comes to all men if they are willing that the darkness
should be driven away.
