[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fmf05)  [Next](fmf07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Forty Modern Fables*, by George Ade, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fable of The Girl with a Handicap Who Had to Lock Up Her Parents

    HERE we have a Fable regarding a Nice Girl who liked to have Young
Men drop in of an Evening. She always used them the best she knew how
and she might have closed a Deal early in the Game, had it not been for
her Parents. They were not overly Bright, for they carried the Delusion
that they could help Daughter in her efforts to jolly along the local
Lotharios.

    Instead of taking to the Back Rooms and giving little Jeanette full
Leeway in the Parlor, they would butt into the Tête-a-Tête and try to be
Cordial with the Young Man.

    Father's Idea of making himself the Life of the Party was to tell of
his Experiences at the Battle of Stone River and what he said to Cap and
what Cap said to him. And plenty more that never got into the Records of
the War Department. Mother thought it would Help Some if she would sit
over by the Gentleman Caller and refer to the two Distinguished
Relatives, so that the Young Man might know that there was a Family
Tree. Mother's work was very much to the Sand-Paper and Jeanette would
try to Call her off.

    After Father had told what he could remember about the Civil War and
Mother had spread herself on the Prominence of their Connections in the
East, the Young Man would move his Feet a few times and guess he would
have to be going. Jeanette would follow him out to the Hallway and help
him with his Coat and tuck in his Muffler and tell him to be sure and
come back soon. He would Promise, of course, but it was Dollars to
Dumplings that many a Moon would Wax and Wane ere George went against
that Combination once more.

    Jeanette was a dutiful Child and respected her Parents, but after
they had dished many a Bright Prospect she had to rise up and have her
Say.

    "You two would be Strong Cards in an Old People's Home," she said,
"but when it comes to fixing up a Good Time for one of the Boys, you are
a couple of superannuated Shines. I am only a poor, weak Maiden, with a
Vocabulary of about 300 Words, and I do not belong to the G. A. H. or
know much about our Family History, but if you two will go lose
yourselves and let me handle all Comers alone and single-handed, I
wouldn't be a bit surprised if there would be Something Doing in a
little while."

    Although convinced that she needed their Assistance, they yielded to
her Wishes. She moved the Sofa out in front of the Grate and
extinguished all the Lights except a couple of blue Candles and the next
time a Young Man called he didn't care if he never went home.

    And there was no War Talk.

    Then when she began to wear an Engagement Ring, Father and Mother
had to Admit that she had been right.

MORAL: A Good Girl doesn't need any Help.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fable of The Good Fellow Who Got the Short End of it](fmf07)
