[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030358)  [Next](2030360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxx"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p1"></span> *CLXIX. Letter written by Theodoretus,
Bishop of Cyrus, from Chalcedon to Alexander of Hierapolis.* <span
id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281)

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p3"></span>We have left no means untried, of
courtesy, of sternness, of entreaty, of eloquence before the most pious
emperor, and the illustrious assembly, testifying before God who sees
all things and our Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the world in
justice, <span id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) and the Holy Spirit
and his elect angels, lest the Faith be despised which is now being
corrupted by the maintainers and bold subscribers of heretical
doctrines: and that charge be given for it to be laid down in the same
terms as at Nicæa and for the rejection of the heresy introduced to the
loss and ruin of true religion. Up to this time however we have produced
not the slightest effect, our hearers being carried now in one direction
and now in another.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p5"></span>Nevertheless all these difficulties have
not been able to deter me from urging my point, but by God’s grace I
have pressed on. I have even stated to our pious emperor with an oath
that it is perfectly impossible for Cyril and Memnon to be reconciled
with me, and that we can never communicate with any one who has not
previously repudiated the heretical Chapters. This then is our mind. The
object of men who “seek their own not the things which are Jesus
Christ’s” <span id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) is to be reconciled
with them against our will. But this is no business of mine, for God
weighs our motives and tries our character, nor does He inflict
chastisement for what is done against our will. Be it known to your
holiness that if ever I said a word about our friend <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) either before the very pious
emperor or the illustrious assembly, I was at once branded as a rebel.
So intensely is he hated by the court party. This is most annoying. The
most pious emperor, especially, cannot bear to hear his name mentioned
and says publicly “Let no one speak to me of this man.” On one occasion
he gave an instance of this to me. Nevertheless as long as I am here I
shall not cease to serve the interests of this our father, knowing that
the impious have done him wrong.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p8"></span>My desire is that both your piety and I
myself get quit of this. No good is to be hoped from it, in as much as
all the judges trust in gold, and contend that the nature of the Godhead
and manhood is one.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p9"></span>All the people however by God’s grace are
in good case, and constantly come out to us. I have begun to discourse
to them and have celebrated very large communions.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p10"></span>On the fourth occasion I spoke at length
about the faith and they listened with such delight that they did not go
away till the seventh hour but held out even till the midday heat. An
enormous crowd was gathered in a great court, with four verandahs, and I
preached from above from a platform near the roof.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p11"></span>All the clergy with the excellent monks
are on the contrary utterly opposed to me, so that when we came back
from the Rufinianum, after the visit of the very pious emperor, stone
throwing began and many of my companions were wounded, by the people and
false monks.

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p12"></span>The very pious emperor knew that the mob
was gathered against me and coming up to me alone he said, “I know that
you are assembling improperly.” Then, said I, “As you have allowed me to
speak hear me with favour. Is it fair for excommunicated heretics to be
doing duty in churches, while I, who am fighting for the Faith and am
therefore excluded by others from communion, am not allowed to enter a
church?” He replied “What am I to do?” I said, “What your *comes
largitionum* did at Ephesus. When he found that some were <span
id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxx-Page_342"></span>assembling, but that we were not
assembling, he stopped them saying, ‘If you are not peaceful I will
allow neither party to assemble.’ It would have become your piety also
to have given directions to the bishop here to forbid both the opposite
party and ourselves to assemble before our meeting together to make
known your righteous sentence to all.” To this he replied “It is not for
me to order the bishop;” and I answered “Neither shall you command us,
and we will take a church, and assemble. Your piety will find that there
are many more on our side than on theirs.” In addition to this I pointed
out that we had neither reading of the holy Scripture, nor oblation; but
only “prayer for the Faith and for your majesty, and pious
conversation.” So he approved, and made no further prohibition. The
result is that increased crowds flock to us, and gladly listen to our
teaching. I therefore beg your piety to pray that our case may have an
issue pleasing to God. I am in daily danger, suspecting the wiles of
both monks and clergy, as I witness alike their influence and their
negligence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[341:2282](2030359.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="iv.x.clxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p2"></span> Dated by Garnerius at the end of
September or beginning of October 431, before the order had been given
for the withdrawal of the Easterns and the entry of the other party to
consecrate a bishop.

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[341:2283](2030359.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="iv.x.clxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p4"></span> cf. <span id="iv.x.clxx-p4.1"></span>[2
Tim. iv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.x.clxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[341:2284](2030359.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="iv.x.clxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.clxx-p6.1"></span>[Phil.
ii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.clxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[341:2285](2030359.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="iv.x.clxx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxx-p7"></span> i.e. Nestorius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of certain Easterns, who had been sent to Constantinople,
to Bishop Rufus.](2030360)
