[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030824)  [Next](2030826) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. If any one wishes to hear the
arrangements for my journey from Rome, they were these. In the month of
August, <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) when the etesian
winds were blowing, accompanied by the reverend presbyter Vincentius and
my young brother, and other monks who are now living at Jerusalem, I
went on board ship at the port of Rome, choosing my own time, and with a
very large body of the saints attending me, I arrived at Rhegium. I
stood for a while on the shore of Scylla, and heard the old stories of
the rapid voyage of the versatile Ulysses, of the songs of the sirens
and the insatiable whirlpool of Charybdis. The inhabitants of that spot
told me many tales, and gave me the advice that I should sail not for
the columns of Proteus but for the port where Jonah landed, because the
former of those was the course suited for men who were hurried and
flying, but the latter was best for a man who was imprisoned; but I
preferred to take the course by Malea and the Cyclades to Cyprus. There
I was received by the venerable bishop Epiphanius, of whose testimony to
you you boast. I came to Antioch, where I enjoyed the communion of
Paulinius the pontiff and confessor and was set forward by him on my
journey to Jerusalem, which I entered in the middle of winter and in
severe cold. I saw there many wonderful things, and verified by the
judgment of my own eyes things which had before come to my ears by
report. Thence I made my way to Egypt. I saw the monasteries of Nitria,
and perceived the snakes <span id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182)
which lurked among the choirs of the monks. Then making haste I at once
returned to Bethlehem, which is now my home, and there poured my perfume
upon the manger and cradle of the Saviour. I saw also the lake of
ill-omen. Nor did I give myself to ease and inertness, but I learned
many things which I did not know before. As to what judgment was formed
of me at Rome, or what was written afterwards, you are quite welcome to
speak out, especially since you have writings to trust to; for I am not
to be tried by your words which you at your will either veil in enigma
or blurt out with open falsehood, but by the documents of the church.
You may see how little I am afraid of you. If you can produce against me
a single record of the Bishop of Rome or of any other church, I will
confess myself to be chargeable with all the iniquities which I find
assigned to you. It would be easy for me to tell of the circumstances of
your departure, your age, the date of sailing, the places in which you
lived, the company you kept. But far be it from me to do what I blame
you for doing, and in a discussion between churchmen, to make up a story
worthy of the ravings of quarrelling hags. Let this word be enough for
your wisdom to remember. Do not adopt a method with another which can at
once be retorted on yourself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[530:3182](2030825.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385.

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[530:3183](2030825.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> He means Origenistic heresies;
but there is no trace in his early works of this detection of heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epiphanius, it is true, gave you the kiss of peace; but he showed
afterwards that he had come to distrust you.](2030826)
