[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030628)  [Next](2030630) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="vi.v-Page_420"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>Translation of Pamphilus’ Defence of
Origen.</span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.v-p2.1"></span>Written at Pinetum <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.v-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 397.</span>

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>While Rufinus was staying at Pinetum, a
Christian named Macarius <span id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779)
sought his advice and assistance. He was engaged in a controversy with
the Mathematici, a class of men who had deserted the scientific studies
from which they took their name, and had turned to astrology and a
belief in Fatalism. Macarius, having heard of Origen’s greatness in the
region of Christian speculation, earnestly desired some knowledge of his
writings: but was unable to attain it through ignorance of Greek. He
declared to Rufinus that he had had a dream in which he saw a ship laden
with Eastern merchandize arriving in Italy, and that it was declared to
him that this ship would contain the means of attaining the knowledge he
desired. The coming of Rufinus seemed to him the fulfilment of his
dream, and he earnestly besought him to impart to him some of the
treasures of his Greek learning, and especially to translate for him
Origen’s great speculative work, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, that is On First
Principles. <span id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) Rufinus
hesitated, knowing that there was a strong prejudice against Origen, and
that he was looked on, especially in the West, as a heretic, though his
writings were little known there. He yielded, however, to the
solicitations of Macarius: but to guard against the imputation of
heresy, he undertook three preliminary works. First, he translated the
Apology of the Martyr Pamphilus for Origen; secondly, he wrote a short
treatise on the Adulteration by heretics of the works of Origen; and,
thirdly, in translating the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> he prefixed to it an elaborate
Preface in justification of his course in translating the work. All
these documents became the subject of vehement controversy which found
its expression in the letter of Jerome to his friends at Rome, and the
Apologies of Rufinus and Jerome translated in this volume.

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>The Apology of Pamphilus for Origen forms the
sixth book of a work undertaken by him in connexion with Eusebius of
Cæsarea, the Church Historian. Pamphilus was a great collector of books,
and a learned man, but Eusebius was the chief writer. Pamphilus was put
to death in the last persecution, that under Galerius; and Eusebius
having at a later time fallen under suspicion of Arianism, it was
attempted by those who disliked Origen, to dissociate Pamphilus from all
connexion with the work. There seems however no reason to doubt,
notwithstanding Jerome’s violent protestations, that Pamphilus was
associated with Eusebius throughout the work, and that he actually wrote
the sixth book. The translation of this Apology was made first, and sent
out with a Preface which runs as follows:

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>You have been moved by your desire to know the
truth, Macarius, who are “a man greatly beloved,” <span
id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781) to make a request of me, which will
bring you the blessing attached to the knowledge of the truth; but it
will win for me the greatest indignation on the part of those who
consider themselves aggrieved whenever any one does not think evil of
Origen. It is true that it is not my opinion about him that you have
asked for, but that of the holy martyr Pamphilus; and you have requested
to have the book which he is said to have written in his defence in
Greek translated for you into Latin: nevertheless I do not doubt that
there will be some who will think themselves aggrieved if I say anything
in his defence even in the words of another man. I beg them to do
nothing in the spirit of presumption and of prejudice; and, since we
must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, not to refuse to hear
the truth spoken, lest haply they should do wrong through ignorance. Let
them consider that to wound the consciences of their weaker brethren by
false accusations is to sin against Christ; and therefore let them not
lend their ears to the accusers, nor seek an account of another man’s
faith from a third party, especially when an opportunity is given them
for gaining personal and direct knowledge, and the substance and quality
of each man’s faith is to be known by his own confession. For so the
Scripture says: <span id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782) “With the
heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation”: and: <span id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783)
“By his words shall each man be justified, and by his word shall he be
condemned.” The opinions of Origen in the various parts of Scripture are
clearly set forth in the present work: as to the cause of our finding
certain places in which he contradicts himself, an explanation will be
offered in the short document subjoined. <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784) But as for myself, I hold that
which has been handed down to us from the holy fathers, namely, that the
Holy Trinity is coeternal, and of a single nature, virtue and substance;
that the Son of God in these last times has been made man, has suffered
for <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="vi.v-Page_421"></span>our transgressions and rose again from the
dead in the very flesh in which he suffered, and thereby imparted the
hope of the resurrection to the whole race of mankind. When we speak of
the resurrection of the flesh, we do so, not with any subterfuges, as is
slanderously reported by certain persons; we believe that it is this
very flesh in which we are now living which will rise again, not one
kind of flesh instead of another, nor another body than the body of this
flesh. When we speak of the body rising we do so in the words of the
apostle; for he himself made use of this word: and when we speak of the
flesh, our confession is that of the Creed. It is an absurd invention of
maliciousness to think that the human body is different from the flesh.
However, whether we speak of that which is to rise, according to the
common faith, as the flesh, or, according to the Apostle, as the body,
this we must believe, that according to the clear statement of the
Apostle, that which shall rise shall rise in power and in glory; it will
rise an incorruptible and a spiritual body: for “corruption cannot
inherit incorruption.” We must maintain this preëminence of the body, or
flesh, which is to be: but, with this proviso, we must hold that the
resurrection of the flesh is perfect and entire; we must on the one hand
maintain the identity of the flesh, while on the other we must not
detract from the dignity and glory of the incorruptible and spiritual
body. For so the Scripture speaks. This is what is preached by the
reverend Bishop John at Jerusalem; this we with him both confess and
hold. If any one either believes or teaches otherwise, or insinuates
that we believe differently from the exposition of our faith, let him be
anathema. Let this then be taken as a record of our belief by any who
desire to know it. Whatever we read and whatever we do is in accordance
with this account of our faith; we follow the words of the
Apostle, <span id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785) “proving all things,
holding fast that which is good, avoiding every form of evil.” <span
id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786) “And as many as walk by this rule,
peace be upon them and upon the Israel of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[420:2780](2030629.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span> See the account in Rufinus’ Apology I. 11.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[420:2781](2030629.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="vi.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span> The word may also mean On beginnings, or On
Principalities and Powers: these ideas being connected together in the
speculation of the Alexandrian theology.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[420:2782](2030629.htm#fr_2781) <span
id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> <span id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>[Daniel x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)<span id="vi.v-p8.2"></span>, ix.
23. The name Macarius means Blessed.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[420:2783](2030629.htm#fr_2782) <span
id="vi.v-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span> <span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>[Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="vi.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[420:2784](2030629.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="vi.v-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span> <span id="vi.v-p10.1"></span>[Matt. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="vi.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[420:2785](2030629.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="vi.v-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span> See the Epilogue, *infra.*

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[421:2786](2030629.htm#fr_2785) <span
id="vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span> <span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>[1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span id="vi.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[421:2787](2030629.htm#fr_2786) <span
id="vi.v-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span> <span id="vi.v-p13.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)<span id="vi.v-p13.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rufinus's Epilogue to Pamphilus the Martyr's Apology for Origen;
otherwise The Book Concerning the Adulteration of the Works of
Origen.](2030630)
