[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030067)  [Next](2030069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Concerning the
Banishment and Return of the Holy Liberius*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>This</span> victorious champion of the
truth was sent into Thrace, according to the imperial order. Two years
after this event Constantius went to Rome. The ladies of rank urged
their husbands to petition the emperor for the restoration of the
shepherd to his flock: they added, that if this were not granted, they
would desert them, and go themselves after their great pastor. Their
husbands replied, that they were afraid of incurring the resentment of
the emperor. “If we were to ask him,” they continued, “being men, he
would deem it an unpardonable offence; but if you were yourselves to
present the petition, he would at any rate spare you, and would either
accede to your request, or else dismiss you without injury.” These noble
ladies adopted this suggestion, and presented themselves before the
emperor in all their customary splendour of array, that so the
sovereign, judging their rank from their dress, might count them worthy
of being treated with courtesy and kindness. Thus entering the presence,
they besought him to take pity on the condition of so large a city,
deprived of its shepherd, and made an easy prey to the attacks of
wolves. The emperor replied, that the flock possessed a shepherd capable
of tending it, and that no other was needed in the city. For after the
banishment of the great Liberius, one of his deacons, named Felix, had
been appointed bishop. He preserved inviolate the doctrines set forth in
the Nicene confession of faith, yet he held communion with those who had
corrupted that faith. For this reason none of the citizens of Rome would
enter the House of Prayer while he was in it. The ladies mentioned these
facts to the emperor. Their persuasions were successful; and he
commanded that the great Liberius should be recalled from exile, and
that the two bishops should conjointly rule the Church. The edict of the
emperor was read in the circus, and the multitude shouted that the
imperial ordinance was just; that the spectators were divided into two
factions, each deriving its name from its own colours <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) , and that each faction would now have
its own bishop. After having thus ridiculed the edict of the emperor,
they all exclaimed with one voice, “One God, one Christ, one bishop.” I
have deemed it right to set down their precise words. Some time after
this Christian people had uttered these pious and righteous
acclamations, the holy Liberius returned, and Felix retired to another
city.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p7"></span>I have, for the sake of preserving
order, appended this narrative to what relates to the proceedings of the
bishops at Milan. I shall now return to the relation of events in their
due course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[79:544](2030068.htm#fr_543) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p3"></span> There were originally four factions
in the Circus; blue, green, white, and red. Domitian added two more,
golden and purple. But the blue and the green absorbed the rest, and
divided the multitude at the games. Cf. Juv. XI. 197.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p4"></span>“Totam hodie Romam circus capit, et
fragor aurem

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p5"></span>Percutit, eventum viridis quo
colligo panni.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p6"></span>Cf. Amm. Marc. xiv. 6, and Plin. Ep.
ix. 6<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council of Ariminum.](2030069)
