[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030076)  [Next](2030078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Of what befell
the orthodox bishops at Constantinople*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Constantius</span>, on his return from
the West, passed some time at Constantinople. There Acacius urged many
accusations against the assembled bishops in presence of the emperor,
called them a set of vile characters convoked for the ruin and
destruction of the churches, and so fired the imperial wrath. And not
least was Constantius moved by what was alleged against Cyrillus, “for,”
said Acachius, “the holy robe, which the illustrious Constantine the
emperor, in his desire to honour the church of Jerusalem, gave to
Macarius, the bishop of that city, to be worn when he performed the rite
of divine baptism, all fashioned with golden threads as it was, has been
sold by Cyrillus. It has been bought,” he continued, “by a certain stage
dancer; dancing about when he was wearing it, he fell down and perished.
With a man like this Cyrillus,” he went on, “they set themselves up to
judge and decide for the rest of the world.” The influential party at
the court made this an occasion for persuading the emperor not to summon
the whole synod, for they were alarmed at the concord of the majority,
but only ten leading men. Of these were Eustathius of Armenia, Basilius
of Galatia, Silvanus of Tarsus, and Eleusius of Cyzicus. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="page_88">p. 88</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-Page_88"></span>On their arrival they urged
the emperor that Eudoxius should be convicted of blasphemy and
lawlessness. Constantius, however, schooled by the opposite party,
replied that a decision must first be come to on matters concerning the
faith, and that afterwards the case of Eudoxius should be enquired into.
Basilius, relying on his former intimacy, ventured boldly to object to
the emperor that he was attacking the apostolic decrees; but Constantius
took this ill, and told Basilius to hold his tongue, “for to you,” said
he, “the disturbance of the churches is due.” When Basilius was
silenced, Eustathius intervened and said, “since, sir, you wish a
decision to be come to on what concerns the faith, consider the
blasphemies rashly uttered against the Only Begotten by Eudoxius,” and
as he spoke he produced the exposition of faith wherein, besides many
other impieties, were found the following expressions: “Things that are
spoken of in unlike terms are unlike in substance:” “There is one God
the Father of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ through
whom are all things.” Now the term “of whom” is unlike the term “through
whom;” so the Son is unlike God the Father. Constantius ordered this
exposition of the faith to be read, and was displeased with the
blasphemy which it involved. He therefore asked Eudoxius if he had drawn
it up. Eudoxius instantly repudiated the authorship, and said that it
was written by Aetius. Now Aetius was he whom Leontius, in dread of the
accusations of Flavianus and Diodorus, had formerly degraded from the
diaconate. He had also been the supporter of Georgius, the treacherous
foe of the Alexandrians, alike in his impious words and his unholy
deeds. At the present time he was associated with Eunomius and Eudoxius;
for, on the death of Leontius, when Eudoxius had laid violent hands on
the episcopal throne of the church at Antioch, he returned from Egypt
with Eunomius, and, as he found Eudoxius to be of the same way of
thinking as himself, a sybarite in luxury as well as a heretic in faith,
he chose Antioch as the most congenial place of abode, and both he and
Eunomius were fast fixtures at the couches of Eudoxius. His highest
ambition was to be a successful parasite, and he spent his whole time in
going to gorge himself at one man’s table or another’s. The emperor had
been told all this, and now ordered Aetius to be brought before him. On
his appearance Constantius showed him the document in question and
proceeded to enquire if he was the author of its language. Aetius,
totally ignorant of what had taken place, and unaware of the drift of
the enquiry, expected that he should win praise by confession, and owned
that he was the author of the phrases in question. Then the emperor
perceived the greatness of his iniquity, and forthwith condemned him to
exile and to be deported to a place in Phrygia. So Aetius reaped
disgrace as the fruit of blasphemy, and was cast out of the palace.
Eustathius then alleged that Eudoxius too held the same views, for that
Aetius had shared his roof and his table, and had drawn up this
blasphemous formula in submission to his judgement. In proof of his
contention that Eudoxius was concerned in drawing up the document he
urged the fact that no one had attributed it to Aetius except Eudoxius
himself. To this the emperor enjoined that judges must not decide on
conjecture, but are bound to make exact examination of the facts.
Eustathius assented, and urged that Eudoxius should give proof of his
dissent from the sentiments attributed to him by anathematizing the
composition of Aetius. This suggestion the emperor very readily
accepted, and gave his orders accordingly; but Eudoxius drew back, and
employed many shifts to evade compliance. But when the emperor waxed
wroth and threatened to send him off to share the exile of Aetius, on
the ground that he was a partner in the blasphemy so punished, he
repudiated his own doctrine, though both then and afterwards he
persistently maintained it. However, he in his turn protested against
the Eustathians that it was their duty to condemn the word “*Homoüsion*”
as unscriptural.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p6"></span>Silvanus on the contrary pointed
out that it was their duty to reject and expel from their holy
assemblies the phrases “*out of the non-existent*” and “*creature*” and
“*of another substance,*” these terms being also unscriptural and found
in the writings of neither prophets nor apostles. Constantius decided
that this was right, and bade the Arians pronounce the condemnation. At
first they persisted in refusing; but in the end, when they saw the
emperor’s wrath, they consented, though much against the grain, to
condemn the terms Silvanus had put before them. But all the more
earnestly they insisted on their demand for the condemnation of the
“*Homoüsion.*” But then with unanswerable logic Silvanus put both before
the Arians and the emperor the truth that if God the Word is not of the
non-Existent, He is not a Creature, and is not of another Substance. He
is then of one Sub<span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-Page_89"></span>stance with God Who begat Him, as
God of God and Light of Light, and has the same nature as the Begetter.
This contention he urged with power and with truth, but not one of his
hearers was convinced. The party of Acacius and Eudoxius raised a mighty
uproar; the emperor was angered, and threatened expulsion from their
churches. Thereupon Eleusius and Silvanus and the rest said that while
authority to punish lay with the emperor, it was their province to
decide on points of piety or impiety, and “we will not,” they protested,
“betray the doctrine of the Fathers.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p7"></span>Constantius ought to have admired
both their wisdom and their courage, and their bold defence of the
apostolic decrees, but he exiled them from their churches, and ordered
others to be appointed in their place. Thereupon Eudoxius laid violent
hands on the Church of Constantinople; and on the expulsion of Eleusius
from Cyzicus, Eunomius was appointed in his place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_577"></span>[87:578](2030077.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> *i.e.*, Eustathius of Sebasteia,
and Basilius of Ancyra (vide note on p. 86). Silvanus of Tarsus was one
of the Semiarians of high character. For his kindly entertainment of
Cyril of Jerusalem vide page 87. Tillemont places his death in 363.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiii-p4"></span>Eleusius of Cyzicus was also a
Semiarian of the better type (cf. Hil. de Syn. p. 133). The evil genius
of his life was Macedorius of Constantinople, by whose influence he was
made bishop of Cyzicus in 356. Here with equal zeal he destroyed pagan
temples and a Novatian church, and this was remembered against him when
he attempted to return to his see on the accession of Julian. At
Nicomedia in 366 he was moved by the threats of Valens to declare
himself an Arian and then in remorse resigned his see, but his flock
refused to let him go, Socr. iv. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodical Epistle written against Aetius.](2030078)
