[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030148)  [Next](2030150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p1"></span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>
<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-Page_137"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Synodical letter from
the council at Constantinople*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p2"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>To</span> the right honourable lords our
right reverend brethren and colleagues Damasus, Ambrosius, Britton,
Valerianus, Ascholius, Anemius, Basilius and the rest of the holy
bishops assembled in the great city of Rome, the holy synod of the
orthodox bishops assembled at the great city of Constantinople, sends
greeting in the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p3"></span>“To recount all the sufferings
inflicted on us by the power of the Arians, and to attempt to give
information to your reverences, as though you were not already well
acquainted with them, might seem superfluous. For we do not suppose your
piety to hold what is befalling us as of such secondary importance as
that you stand in any need of information on matter’s which cannot but
evoke your sympathy. Nor indeed were the storms which beset us such as
to escape notice from their insignificance. Our persecutions are but of
yesterday. The sound of them still rings in the ears alike of those who
suffered them and of those whose love made the sufferers’ pain their
own. It was but a day or two ago, if I may so say, that some released
from chains in foreign lands returned to their own churches through
manifold afflictions; of others who had died in exile the relics were
brought home; others again, even after their return from exile, found
the passion of the heretics still at boiling heat, and, slain by them
with stones as was the blessed Stephen, met with a sadder fate in their
own than in a stranger’s land. Others, worn away with various cruelties,
still bear in their bodies the scars of their wounds and the marks of
Christ. <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p5"></span>“Who could tell the tale of fines, of
disfranchisements, of individual confiscations, of intrigues, of
outrages, of prisons? In truth all kinds of tribulation were wrought out
beyond number in us, perhaps because we were paying the penalty of sins,
perhaps because the merciful God was trying us by means of the multitude
of our sufferings. For these all thanks to God, who by means of such
afflictions trained his servants and, according to the multitude of his
mercies, brought us again to refreshment. We indeed needed long leisure,
time, and toil to restore the church once more, that so, like physicians
healing the body after long sickness and expelling its disease by
gradual treatment, we might bring her back to her ancient health of true
religion. It is true that on the whole we seem to have been delivered
from the violence of our persecutions and to be just now recovering the
churches which have for a long time been the prey of the heretics. But
wolves are troublesome to us who, though they have been driven from the
byre, yet harry the flocks up and down the glades, daring to hold rival
assemblies, stirring seditions among the people, and shrinking from
nothing which can do damage to the churches.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p6"></span>“So, as we have already said, we needs
must labour all the longer. Since however you showed your brotherly love
to us by inviting us (as though we were your own members) by the letters
of our most religious emperor to the synod which you are gathering by
divine permission at Rome, to the end that since we alone were then
condemned to suffer persecution, you should not now, when our emperors
are at one with us as to true religion, reign apart from us, but that
we, to use the apostle’s phrase, <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842)
should reign with you, our prayer was, if it were possible, all in
company to leave our churches, and rather gratify our longing to see you
than consult their needs. For who will give us wings as of a dove, and
we will fly and be at rest? <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) But
this course seemed likely to leave the churches who were just recovering
quite undefended, and the undertaking was to most of us impossible, for,
in accordance with the letters sent a year ago from your holiness after
the synod at Aquileia to the most pious emperor Theodosius, we had
journeyed to Constantinople, equipped only for travelling so far as
Constantinople, and bringing the consent of the bishops remaining in the
provinces for this synod alone. We had been in no expectation of any
longer journey nor had heard a word about it before our arrival at
Constantinople. In addition to all this, and on account of the narrow
limits of the appointed time which allowed of no preparation for a
longer journey, nor of communicating with the bishops of our communion
in the provinces and of obtaining their consent, the journey to Rome was
for the majority impossible. We have therefore adopted the next best
course open to us under the circumstances, both for the better
administration of the church, and for manifesting our love towards you,
by strongly urging our most venerated, and honoured colleagues and
brother bishops Cyriacus, Eusebius and Priscianus, to consent to travel
to you.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p9"></span>“Through them we wish to make it plain
<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-Page_138"></span>that our disposition is all for peace
with unity for its sole object, and that we are full of zeal for the
right faith. For we, whether we suffered persecutions, or afflictions,
or the threats of emperors, or the cruelties of princes or any other
trial at the hands of heretics, have undergone all for the sake of the
evangelic faith, ratified by the three hundred and eighteen fathers at
Nicæa in Bithynia. This is the faith which ought to be sufficient for
you, for us, for all who wrest not the word of the true faith; for it is
the ancient faith; it is the faith of our baptism; it is the faith that
teaches us to believe in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p10"></span>“According to this faith there is one
Godhead, Power and Substance of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost; the dignity being equal, and the majesty being equal in
three perfect essences <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) and three
perfect persons. <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) Thus there is
neither room for the heresy of Sabellius by the confusion of the
essences or destruction of the individualities; thus the blasphemy of
the Eunomians, of the Arians, and of the Pneumatomachi is nullified,
which divides the substance, the nature and the godhead and superinduces
on the uncreated consubstantial and co-eternal trinity a nature
posterior, created and of a different substance. We moreover preserve
unperverted the doctrine of the incarnation of the Lord, holding the
tradition that the dispensation of the flesh is neither soulless nor
mindless nor imperfect; and knowing full well that God’s Word was
perfect before the ages, and became perfect man in the last days for our
salvation.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p13"></span>“Let this suffice for a summary of
the doctrine which is fearlessly and frankly preached by us, and
concerning which you will be able to be still further satisfied if you
will deign to read the report of the synod of Antioch, and also that
issued last year by the œcumenical council held at Constantinople, in
which we have set forth our confession of the faith at greater length,
and have appended an anathema against the heresies which innovators have
recently inscribed.

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p14"></span>“Now as to the particular
administration of individual churches, an ancient custom, as you know,
has obtained, confirmed by the enactment of the holy fathers at Nicæa,
that, in every province, the bishops of the province, and, with their
consent, the neighbouring bishops with them, should perform ordinations
as expediency may require. In conforming with these customs note that
other churches have been administered by us and the priests of the most
famous churches publicly appointed. Accordingly over the new made (if
the expression be allowable) church at Constantinople, which, as though
from a lion’s mouth, we have lately snatched by God’s mercy from the
blasphemy of the heretics, we have ordained bishop the right reverend
and most religious Nectarius, in the presence of the œcumenical council,
with common consent, before the most religious emperor Theodosius, and
with the assent of all the clergy and of the whole city. And over the
most ancient and truly apostolic church in Syria, where first the noble
name of Christians <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) was given
them, the bishops of the province and of the eastern diocese <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) have met together and canonically
ordained bishop the right reverend and most religious Flavianus, with
the consent of all the church, who as though with one voice joined in
expressing their respect for him. This rightful ordination also received
the sanction of the general council. Of the church at Jerusalem, mother
of all the churches, we make known that the right reverend and most
religious Cyril is bishop, who was some time ago canonically ordained by
the bishops of the province, and has in several places fought a good
fight against the Arians. We beseech your reverence to rejoice at what
has thus been rightly and canonically settled by us, by the intervention
of spiritual love and by the influence of the fear of the Lord,
compelling the feelings of men, and making the edification of churches
of more importance than individual grace or favour. Thus since among us
there is agreement in the faith and Christian charity has been
established, we shall cease to use the phrase condemned by the apostles,
‘I am of Paul and I of Apollos and I of Cephas,’ <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) and all appearing as Christ’s, who in
us is not divided, by God’s grace we will keep the body of the church
unrent, and will boldly stand at the judgment seat of the Lord.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p18"></span>These things they wrote against the
madness of Arius, Aetius, and Eunomius; and moreover against Sabellius,
Photinus, Marcellus, Paul of Samosata, and Macedonius. Similarly they
openly condemned the innovation of Apollinarius in the phrase, “And we
preserve the doctrine of the incarnation of the Lord, holding the
tradition that the dispensation of the flesh is neither soulless, nor
mindless, nor imperfect.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_841"></span>[137:842](2030149.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_842"></span>[137:843](2030149.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p7"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_843"></span>[137:844](2030149.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p8"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p8.1"></span>[Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_844"></span>[138:845](2030149.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p11.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p11.2"></span>ποστάσεσι</span>

<span id="fn_845"></span>[138:846](2030149.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p12.1"></span>προσώποις</span>

<span id="fn_846"></span>[138:847](2030149.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p15.1"></span>[Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_847"></span>[138:848](2030149.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p16"></span> Vide note on p. 53.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[138:849](2030149.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.ix-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p17.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.viii.v.ix-p17.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodical letter of Damasus bishop of Rome against Apollinarius
and Timotheus.](2030150)
