[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030006)  [Next](2030008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Prolegomena.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>The Life and Writings of the Blessed
Theodoretus,</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p4.1"></span>Bishop of Cyrus.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p6.1"></span>I.—Parentage, Birth, and Education.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>At Antioch at the close of the fourth
century there were living a husband and wife, opulent and happy in the
enjoyment of all the good things of this life, one thing only excepted.
They were childless. Married at seventeen, the young bride lived for
several years in the enjoyment of such pleasures as wealth and society
could give. At the age of twenty-three she was attacked by a painful
disease in one of her eyes, for which neither the books of older
authorities nor later physiological discoveries could suggest a remedy.
One of her domestic servants, compassionating her distress, informed her
that the wife of Pergamius, at that time in authority in the East, had
been healed of a similar ailment by Petrus, a famous Galatian solitary
who was then living in the upper story of a tomb in the neighbourhood,
to which access could only be obtained by climbing a ladder. The
afflicted lady, says the story which her son himself repeats, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) hastened to climb to the recluse’s latticed
cell, arrayed in all her customary elaborate costume, with earrings,
necklaces, and the rest of her ornaments of gold, her silk robe blazing
with embroidery, her face smeared with red and white cosmetics, and her
eyebrows and eyelids artificially darkened. “Tell me,” said the hermit,
on beholding his brilliant visitor, “tell me, my child, if some skilful
painter were to paint a portrait according to his art’s strict rules and
offer it for exhibition, and then up were to come some dauber dashing
off his pictures on the spur of the moment, who should find fault with
the artistic picture, lengthen the lines of brows and lids, make the
face whiter and heighten the red of the cheeks, what would you say? Do
you not think the original painter would be hurt at this insult to his
art and these needless additions of an unskilled hand.” These arguments,
we learn, led eventually to the improvement of the young Antiochene
gentlewoman both in piety and good taste and her eye is said to have
been restored to health by the imposition of the sign of the cross. Not
impossibly the discontinuance of the use of cosmetics may have helped,
if not caused, the cure.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>Six years longer the husband and wife lived
together a more religious life, but still unblessed with children. Among
the ascetic solitaries whom the disappointed husband begged to aid him
in his prayers was one Macedonius, distinguished, from the simplicity of
his diet, as “the barley eater.” In answer to his prayers, it was
believed, a son was at last granted to the pious pair. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) The condition of the boon being that the boy
should be devoted to the divine service, he was appropriately named at
his birth “Theodoretus,” or “Given by God.” <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Of the exact date of this birth, productive
of such important consequences to the history and literature of the
Church, no precise knowledge is attainable. The less probable year is
386 as given by Garnerius, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) the more
probable and now generally accepted year 393 follows the computation of
Tillemont. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span><span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_2"></span>While yet in his swaddling bands the little
Theodoret began to receive training appropriate to his high
career, <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) and, as he himself tells us,
with the pardonable exaggeration of enthusiasm, was no sooner weaned
than he began to learn the apostolic teaching. Among his earliest
impressions were the lessons and exhortations of Peter of Galatia, to
whom his mother owed so much, and of Macedonius “the barley eater,” who
had helped to save the Antiochenes in the troubles that arose about the
statues. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Of the latter <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Theodoret quotes the earnest charges to a
holy life, and in his modesty expresses his sorrow that he had not
profited better by the solitary’s solemn entreaties. If however
Macedonius was indeed quite ignorant of the Scriptures, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) it may have been well for the boy’s
education to have been not wholly in his hands. It is not impossible
that he may have had a childish recollection of Chrysostom, who left
Antioch in 398. To Peter he used to pay a weekly visit, and
records <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) how the holy man would take
him on his knees and feed him with bread and raisins. A treasure long
preserved in the household of Theodoret’s parents was half Peter’s
girdle, woven of coarse linen, which the old man had one day wound round
the loins of the boy. Frequently proved an unfailing remedy in various
cases of family ailment, its very reputation led to its loss, for all
the neighbours used to borrow it to cure their own complaints, and at
last an unkind or careless friend omitted to return it. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span>When a stripling Theodoret was blessed by
the right hand of Aphraates the monk, of whom he relates an anecdote in
his Ecclesiastical History, <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) and
when his beard was just beginning to grow was also blessed by the
ascetic Zeno. <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) At this period he was
already a lector <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and was therefore
probably past the age of eighteen. By this time his general education
would be regarded as more or less complete, and to these earlier years
may be traced the acquaintance which he shows with the writings of
Homer, Thucydides, Plato, Euripides, and other Greek classics. Lighter
literature, too, will not have been excluded from his reading, if we
accept the genuineness of the famous letter on the death of Cyril, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) and may infer that the dialogues of
Lucian are more likely to have amused the leisure hours of a lad at
school and college than have intruded on the genuine piety and
marvellous industry of the Bishop of Cyrus.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p28"></span>Theodoret was familiar with Greek, Syriac,
and Hebrew, but is said to have been unacquainted with Latin. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) Such I presume to be an inference from a
passage in one of his works <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) in
which he tells us “The Romans indeed had poets, orators, and historians,
and we are informed by those who are skilled in both languages that
their reasonings are closer than the Greeks‘ and their sentences more
concise. In saying this I have not the least intention of disparaging
the Greek language which is in a sense mine, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) or of making an ungrateful return to it
for my education, but I speak that I may to some extent close the lips
and lower the brows of those who make too big a boasting about it, and
may teach them not to ridicule a language which is illuminated by the
truth.’ But it is not clear from these words that Theodoret had no
acquaintance with Latin. His admiration for orthodox Western theology as
well as his natural literary and social curiosity would lead him to
learn it. In the Ecclesiastical History (III. 16) there is a possible
reference to Horace.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p32"></span>Theodoret’s chief instructor in Theology
was the great light of the school of Antioch, Theodorus, known from the
name of the see to which he was appointed in 392, “Mopsuestia,” or “the
hearth of Mopsus,” in Cilicia Secunda. He also refers to his obligations
<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span id="iv.iv.i-Page_3"></span>to
Diodorus of Tarsus. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) Accepting 393
as the date of his birth and 392 as that of Theodore’s appointment to
his see, it would seem that the younger theologian must have been rather
a reader than a hearer as well of Theodore as of Diodore. But Theodore
expounded Scripture in many churches of the East. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) The friendship of Theodoret for Nestorius
may have begun when the latter was a monk in the convent of St.
Euprepius at the gates of Antioch. It is recorded <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) that on one occasion Theodore gave
offence while preaching at Antioch by refusing to give to the blessed
Virgin the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p35.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>. He afterwards retracted this
refusal for the sake of peace. The original objection and subsequent
consent have a curious significance in view of the subsequent careers of
his two famous pupils. Of the school of Antioch as distinguished from
that of Alexandria it may be said broadly that while the latter shewed a
tendency to syntheticism and to unity of conception, the former, under
the influence of the Aristotelian philosophy, favoured analytic
processes. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) And while the general
bent of the school of thinkers among whom Theodoret was brought up
inclined to a recognition of a distinction between the two natures in
the Person of Christ, there was much in the special teaching of its
great living authority which was not unlikely to lead to such division
of the Person as was afterwards attributed to Nestorius. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Such were the influences under which
Theodoret grew up.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p38"></span>On the death of his parents he at once
distributed all the property that he inherited from them, and embraced a
life of poverty, <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) retiring, at about
the age of three and twenty, to Nicerte, a village three miles from
Apamea, and seventy-five from Antioch, in the monastery of which he
passed seven calm and happy years, occasionally visiting neighbouring
monasteries and perhaps during this period paying the visit to Jerusalem
which left an indelible impression on his memory. “With my own eyes,” he
writes, <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) “I have seen that
desolation. The prediction rang in my ears when I saw the fulfillment
before my eyes and I lauded and worshipped the truth.” Of the peace of
Theodoret’s earlier manhood Dr. Newman <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) says in a sentence less open to criticism
than another which shall be quoted further on, “There he laid deep
within him that foundation of faith and devotion, and obtained that
vivid apprehension of the world unseen and future which lasted him as a
secret spring of spiritual strength all through the conflict and
sufferings of the years that followed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](2030007.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span> Relig. Hist. 1188 et seq.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](2030007.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span> Relig. Hist. 1214.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](2030007.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span> The Hebrew equivalents of this very
general designation are Nathaniel and Matthew. Modern English custom has
travelled back to the Greek for its Theodore, Theodora, but Dieudonné
and Diodati are familiar in French and Italian.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:4](2030007.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span> Garnier the French Jesuit Father, was
born in Paris in 1612, and died in 1681. His “Auctarium Theodoreti
Episcopi Cyrensis,” with dissertations, was published in 1684.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:5](2030007.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span> According to this reckoning Theodoret
would be fifty-six at the time of the letter to Leo, written 449, in
which he speaks of his old age, and about thirty at his consecration as
bishop in 423.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span>W. Möller in Herzog’s Encyclopedia of
Prot. Theol. (Ed. 1885. xv. 402) gives 390.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:6](2030007.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span> Ep. LXXXI.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:7](2030007.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span> Ecc. Hist. v. 19. p. 146.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[2:8](2030007.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span> Relig. Hist. 1215.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[2:9](2030007.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span> cf. Ecc. Hist. p. 146.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[2:10](2030007.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span> Relig. Hist. 1188.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[2:11](2030007.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span> The confidence of Theodoret in the wonder
working powers of half Peter’s girdle may be taken as a crucial instance
of what detractors of the individual and of the age would call his
foolish credulity. But an unsound process of reasoning from *post hoc*
to *propter hoc* is not confined to any particular period, and it is not
impossible that the scientists of the thirty-fourth century may smile
benevolently at some of the cherished remedies of the nineteenth.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[2:12](2030007.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span> Cf. p. 127.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[2:13](2030007.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span> Relig. Hist. 1203.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:14](2030007.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p25"></span> Vide n. p. 34.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[2:15](2030007.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p26"></span> Vide p. 346. To what is said there may be
added the following remarks from Dr. Salmon’s “Infallibility of the
Church,” p. 303, n. “The letter from which these passages are taken was
read as Theodoret’s at the fifth General Council (fifth Session) and
there accepted as his. But on questions of this kind Councils are not
infallible; and the letter contains a note of spuriousness in purporting
to be addressed to John, bishop of Antioch, who died before Cyril. I own
that the suggestion that for ‘John’ we ought to read ‘Domnus’ does not
suffice to remove suspicion from my mind. But it is solely for the
reason just stated that I feel no confidence in accepting the letter as
Theodoret’s. Newman’s opinion that it is incredible Theodoret could have
written so ‘atrocious’ a letter is one which it is amazing should be
held by any one familiar with the controversial amenities of the time.
Our modern urbanity is willing to bury party animosities in the grave;
but in the fifth century Swift’s translation would be thought the only
proper one of the maxim ‘*De mortuis nil nisi bonum*,’ ‘when scoundrels
die let all bemoan them.’ Certainly the man who half a dozen years after
Chrysostom’s death spoke of him as Judas Iscariot had no right to expect
to be politely treated after his own death by one whom he had
relentlessly persecuted.”

<span id="iv.iv.i-p27"></span>Glubowski, whose great work on Theodoret
now in progress is unfortunately a sealed volume to the majority of the
readers on account of its being written in the author’s native Russian,
is of opinion that the letter is spurious. See also Schröckh Kircheges.
xviii. 370. I am myself unable to see the force of the *internal*
evidence of spuriousness. It may have been half playful, and never meant
for publication.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[2:16](2030007.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p29"></span> Cf. Can. Venables Dict. Christ. Biog. iv.
906.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[2:17](2030007.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p30"></span> *Græcarum affectionum curatio* 843.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[2:18](2030007.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p31"></span> To a Syrian it would not be literally the
mother tongue but was possibly acquired in infancy.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[3:19](2030007.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p33"></span> Ep. xvi.<span id="iv.iv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="fn_19"></span>[3:20](2030007.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p34"></span> John of Antioch Fac. ii. 2.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[3:21](2030007.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p35"></span> Cyril. Alex. Ep. LXIX.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[3:22](2030007.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p36"></span> Glubokowski p. 63.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[3:23](2030007.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p37"></span> e.g. Theodorus, Migne 776.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[3:24](2030007.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p39"></span> Ep. CXIII.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[3:25](2030007.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p40"></span> *Græc. Affect. Cur.* 1099.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[3:26](2030007.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p41"></span> *Historical Sketches* iii. 319.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Episcopate at Cyrus.](2030008)
