[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030859)  [Next](2030861) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.xii-p1"></span> 11. These things, since they are
asserted upon the warrant of the Prophetical Scriptures, may possibly
silence the Jews, infidel and incredulous though they be. But the Pagans
are wont to ridicule us when they hear us speak of a Virgin-birth. We
must, therefore, say a few words in reply to their cavils. Every birth,
I suppose, depends upon three conditions. There must be a woman of
mature age, she must have intercourse with a man, her womb must not be
barren. Of these three conditions, in the birth of which we are
speaking, one was wanting, the man. And this, forasmuch as He of Whose
birth we speak was not an earthly but a heavenly man, was supplied by
the Heavenly Spirit, the virginity of the mother being preserved
inviolate. And yet why should it be thought marvellous for a virgin to
conceive, when it is well known that the Eastern bird, which they call
the Phœnix, is in such wise born, or born again, without the
intervention of a mate, that it remains continually one, and continually
by being born or born again succeeds itself? <span
id="fr_3281"></span>[3282](#fn_3281) That bees know no wedlock, and no
bringing forth of young, is notorious. There are also other things which
are found to be subject to some such law of birth. Shall it be thought
incredible, then, that was done by divine power, for the renewal and
restoration of the whole world, of which instances <span
id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span id="vi.xiii.xii-Page_548"></span>are
observed in the nativity of animals? And yet it is strange that the
Gentiles should think this impossible, who believe their own Minerva to
have been born from the brain of Jupiter. What is more difficult to
believe, or what more contrary to nature? Here, there is a woman, the
order of nature is kept, there is conception, and in due time birth;
there, there is no female, but a man alone, and—birth! Why does he who
believes the one marvel at the other? Again, they say that Father
Bacchus was born from Jupiter’s thigh. Here is another portent, yet it
is believed. Venus also, whom they call Aphrodite, was born, they
believe, of the foam of the sea, as her compounded name shews. They
affirm that Castor and Pollux were born of an egg, the Myrmidons of
ants. There are a thousand other things which, though contrary to
nature, find credit with them, such as the stones thrown by Deucalion
and Pyrrha, and the crop of men sprung from thence. And when they
believe such myths and so many of them, does one thing seem impossible
to them, that a woman of mature age, not defiled by man but impregnated
by the Holy Ghost, should conceive a divine progeny? who, forsooth, if
they are hard of belief, ought in no wise to have given credence to
those prodigies, being, as they are, so many and so degrading; but if
they do believe them, they ought much more readily to receive these
beliefs of ours, so honourable and so holy, than theirs so discreditable
and so vile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3281"></span>[547:3282](2030860.htm#fr_3281) <span
id="vi.xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.xii-p2"></span> The fable of the Phœnix was very
generally believed in the ancient Church, and was used as an
illustration both of the Virgin-birth, as here, and of the Resurrection.
Cyril of Jerusalem (xviii. 8), whom Rufinus evidently had in view,
refers to it as a providentially designed confirmation of the latter.
Possibly the Septuagint translation of <span
id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.1"></span>[Ps. xcii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.2"></span>,
“The righteous shall flourish as a palm tree,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.3"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.4"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.5"></span>φοίνιξ</span> may have been thought to
sanction the fable. On the Literature connected with the Phœnix, see Bp.
Jacobson’s edition or the Apostolical Fathers, Clemens Romanus, [Ep.
i.](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000)<span id="vi.xiii.xii-p2.6"></span>
§25, note, p. 104.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](2030861)
