[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030436)  [Next](2030438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.lvi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="v.iii.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="v.iii.lvi-p2.1"></span>Origen</span>, <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) surnamed Adamantius, a persecution
having been raised against the Christians in the tenth year of Severus
Pertinax, and his father Leonidas having received the crown of martyrdom
for Christ, was left at the age of about seventeen, with his six
brothers and widowed mother, in poverty, for their property had been
confiscated because of confessing Christ. When only eighteen years old,
he undertook the work of instructing the Catechetes in the scattered
churches of Alexandria. Afterwards appointed by Demetrius, bishop of
this city, successor to the presbyter Clement, he flourished many years.
When he had already reached middle life, on account of the churches of
Achaia, which were torn with many heresies, he was journeying to Athens,
by way of Palestine, under the authority of an ecclesiastical letter,
and having been ordained presbyter by Theoctistus and Alexander, bishops
of Cæsarea and Jerusalem, he offended Demetrius, who was so wildly
enraged at him that he wrote everywhere to injure his reputation. It is
known that before he went to Cæsarea, he had been at Rome, under bishop
Zephyrinus. Immediately on his return to Alexandria he made Heraclas the
presbyter, who continued to wear his philosopher’s garb, his assistant
in the school for catechetes. Heraclas became bishop of the church of
Alexandria, after Demetrius. How great the glory of Origen was, appears
from the fact that Firmilianus, bishop of Cæsarea, with all the
Cappadocian bishops, sought a visit from him, and entertained him for a
long while. Sometime afterwards, going to Palestine to visit the holy
places, he came to Cæsarea <span id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463)
and was instructed at length by Origen in the Holy Scriptures. It
appears also from the fact that he went to Antioch, on the request of
Mammaea, mother of the Emperor Alexander, and a woman religiously
disposed, and was there held in great honour, and sent letters to the
Emperor Philip, who was the first among the Roman rulers, to become a
christian, and to his mother, letters which are still extant. Who is
there, who does not also know that he was so assiduous in the study of
Holy Scriptures, that contrary to the spirit of his time, and <span
id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span id="v.iii.lvi-Page_374"></span>of his
people, he learned the Hebrew language, and taking the Septuagint
translation, he gathered the other translations also in a single work,
namely, that of Aquila, of Ponticus the Proselyte, and Theodotian the
Ebonite, and Symmachus an adherent of the same sect who wrote
commentaries also on the gospel according to Matthew, from which he
tried to establish his doctrine. And besides these, a fifth, sixth, and
seventh translation, which we also have from his library, he sought out
with great diligence, and compared with other editions. And since I have
given a list of his works, in the volumes of letters which I have
written to Paula, in a letter which I wrote against the works of Varro,
I pass this by now, not failing however, to make mention of his immortal
genius, how that he understood dialectics, as well as geometry,
arithmetic, music, grammar, and rhetoric, and taught all the schools of
philosophers, in such wise that he had also diligent students in secular
literature, and lectured to them daily, and the crowds which flocked to
him were marvellous. These, he received in the hope that through the
instrumentality of this secular literature, he might establish them in
the faith of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p5"></span>It is unnecessary to speak of the cruelty
of that persecution which was raised against the Christians and under
Decius, who was mad against the religion of Philip, whom he had
slain,—the persecution in which Fabianus, bishop of the Roman church,
perished at Rome, and Alexander and Babylas, Pontifs of the churches of
Jerusalem and Antioch, were imprisoned for their confession of Christ.
If any one wishes to know what was done in regard to the position of
Origen, he can clearly learn, first indeed from his own epistles, which
after the persecution, were sent to different ones, and secondly, from
the sixth book of the church history of Eusebius of Cæsarea, and from
his six volumes in behalf of the same Origen.

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p6"></span>He lived until the time of Gallus and
Volusianus, that is, until his sixty-ninth year, and died at Tyre, in
which city he also was buried.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[373:2463](2030437.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="v.iii.lvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p3"></span> Born at Alexandria 185, died at Tyre
253.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[373:2464](2030437.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="v.iii.lvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.lvi-p4"></span> *Cæsarea.* Cæsarea in Palestine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ammonius.](2030438)
