[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030727)  [Next](2030729) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xliv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xliv-p1"></span> 39. If your reply to him had been
couched in terms like these, would you not have ministered grace and
edification both to him, since he has been initiated into the fear of
God, and to all your other readers, whereas these invectives of yours
are the cause of sadness and confusion to all who fear God, since they
see you a prey to this hideous lust of detraction, and me driven to the
wretched necessity of recrimination. But, as I have said, this evidence
was unnecessary. You yourself in the books you published against
Jovinian, at one time assert, as can be shewn, the same things which you
blamed in him, while at another you fall into the opposite extreme, and
declare marriage to be so disgraceful a state that its stain cannot even
be washed away by the blood of martyrdom. But, if it appeared to you an
easy thing for your friend to procure what amounts to a correction of
the dogma of the Manichæans as it was originally expressed in these
books, and that when they were already published and placed in the hands
of many persons to copy, what difficulty would there have been in my
correcting a work which was not my own but a translation of that of
another man, if any mistakes could be pointed out in it, I will not say
by reason, but even by envy? especially when it was <span
id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xliv-Page_479"></span>still in rough sheets, which I had
not read over again or corrected, and which were not published when your
friends took possession of them. Was it an impossibility to get these
writings corrected which were then in an uncorrected state? But the
sting does not proceed from that quarter; he would have found nothing to
blame there. It proceeds wholly from the fact that he was afraid that it
might come to light what is the source of all that he says, and whence
he gains the reputation of a learned man and a great expounder of the
Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: My translation of the Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν was meant to aid in a good
cause.](2030729)
