[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030070)  [Next](2030072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Synodical Act of
Damasus, Bishop of Rome, and of the Western Bishops, about the Council
at Ariminum*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> condemnation of this formula
by all the champions of the truth, and specially those of the West, is
shewn by the letter which they wrote to the Illyrians <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) . First of the signatories was
Damasus, who obtained the presidency of the church of Rome after
Liberius, and was adorned with many virtues <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) . <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-Page_83"></span>With him signed ninety bishops
of Italy and Galatia <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) , now
called Gaul, who met together at Rome. I would have inserted their names
but that I thought it superfluous.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p8"></span>“The bishops assembled at Rome in
sacred synod, Damasus and Valerianus <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) and the rest, to their beloved
brethren the bishops of Illyria, send greeting in God.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p10"></span>“We believe that we, priests of
God, by whom it is right for the rest to be instructed, are holding and
teaching our people the Holy Creed which was founded on the teaching of
the Apostles, and in no way departs from the definitions of the Fathers.
But through a report of the brethren in Gaul and Venetia we have learnt
that certain men are fallen into heresy.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>“It is the duty of the bishops not
only to take precautions against this mischief, but also to make a stand
against whatever divergent teaching has arisen, either from incomplete
instruction, or the simplicity of readers of unsound commentators. They
should be minded not to slide into slippery paths, but rather whensoever
divergent counsels are carried to their ears, to hold fast the doctrine
of our fathers. It has, therefore, been decided that Auxentius of Milan
is in this matter specially condemned. So it is right that all the
teachers of the law in the Roman Empire should be well instructed in the
law, and not befoul the faith with divergent doctrines.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p12"></span>“When first the wickedness of the
heretics began to flourish, and when, as now, the blasphemy of the
Arians was crawling to the front, our fathers, three hundred and
eighteen bishops, the holiest prelates in the Roman Empire, deliberated
at Nicæa. The wall which they set up against the weapons of the devil,
and the antidote wherewith they repelled his deadly poisons, was their
confession that the Father and the Son are of one substance, one
godhead, one virtue, one power, one likeness <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) , and that the Holy Ghost is of the
same essence <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) and substance.
Whoever did not thus think was judged separate from our communion. Their
deliberation was worthy of all respect, and their definition sound. But
certain men have intended by other later discussions to corrupt and
befoul it. Yet, at the very outset, error was so far set right by the
bishops on whom the attempt was made at Ariminum to compel them to
manipulate or innovate on the faith, that they confessed themselves
seduced by opposite arguments, or owned that they had not perceived any
contradiction to the opinion of the Fathers delivered at Nicæa. No
prejudice could arise from the number of bishops gathered at Ariminum,
since it is well known that neither the bishop of the Romans, whose
opinion ought before all others to have been waited for, nor Vincentius,
whose stainless episcopate had lasted so many years, nor the rest, gave
in their adhesion to such doctrines. And this is the more significant,
since, as has been already said, the very men who seemed to be tricked
into surrender, themselves, in their wiser moments, testified their
disapproval.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p15"></span>“Your sincerity then perceives
that this one faith, which was founded at Nicæa on the authority of the
Apostles, ought to be kept secure for ever. You perceive that with us,
the bishops of the East, who confess themselves Catholic, and the
western bishops, together glory in it. We believe that before long those
who think otherwise ought without delay to be put out from our
communion, and deprived of the name of bishop, that their flocks may be
freed from error and breathe freely. For they cannot be expected to
correct the errors of their people when they themselves are the victims
of error. May the opinion of your reverence be in harmony with that of
all the priests of God. We believe you to be fixed and firm in it, and
thus ought we rightly to believe with you. May your charity make us glad
by your reply.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p16"></span>“Beloved brethren, farewell.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_558"></span>[82:559](2030071.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> The letter is given in Soz. vi.
23. The Latin text (Coll. Rom. ed. Holsten. p. 163) differs materially
from the Greek.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[82:560](2030071.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> These were displayed after his
establishment in his see. He was the nominee of the Arian party, and
bloody scenes marked the struggle with his rival Ursinus. “Damasus et
Ursinus, supra humanum modum ad rapiendam episcopatus sedem ardentes,
scissis studiis asperrime conflictabantur, adusque mortis vulnerumque
discrimina progressis.…Constat in basilica ubi ritus christiani
conventiculum uno die centum triginta septem reperta cadavera
peremptorum.” Amm. Marc. xxvii. 3, 13. “But we can say that he used his
success well, and that the chair of St. Peter was never more respected
nor more vigorous than during his bishopric.” Mr. Moberly in *Dict.
Christ. Biog.* i. 782. Jerome calls him (Ep. Hier. xlviii. 230) “an
illustrious man, virgin doctor of the virgin church.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p5"></span>But not his least claim to our
regard is that in the Catacombs it was his “labour of love to rediscover
the tombs which had been blocked up for concealment under Diocletian, to
remove the earth, widen the passages, adorn the sepulchral chambers with
marble, and support the friable tufa walls with arches of brick and
stone.” “Roma Sotterranea,” Northcote and Brownlow, p. 97.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[83:561](2030071.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>Γαλάται</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6.2"></span>=</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6.3"></span>Κέλτοι</span>, the
older name, which exists in Herodotus II. 33 and IV. 49. Pausanias (I.
iii. 5) says <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6.4"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p6.5"></span>ψὲ δέ ποτε αὐτοὺς καλεὶσθαι Γαλάτας
ἐξενίκησε, Κέλτοι γὰρ κατά τε σφᾶς τὸ ἀρχαῖον καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις
ὠνομάζοντο</span>. Galatia occurs on the Monumentum Ancyranum. Bp.
Lightfoot (Galat. p. 3) says the first instance of Gallia (Galli) which
he has found in any Greek writer is in Epictetus II. 20, 17.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[83:562](2030071.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p9"></span> In Sozomen, Valerius, Bishop of
Aquileia. “But little is known of his life, but under his rule there
grew up at Aquileia the society of remarkable persons of whom Hieronymus
became the most famous.” *Dict. Christ. Biog.* iv. 1102.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[83:563](2030071.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>χαρακτήρ</span>; contrast the
statement in [Heb. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13.2"></span>, that the Son is the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13.3"></span>χαρακτήρ</span> of
the person of the Father. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13.4"></span>χαρακτήρ</span> in the letter of
Damasus approaches more nearly our use of “character” as meaning
distinctive qualities. cf. Plato Phæd. 26 B.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[83:564](2030071.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvii-p14.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, concerning the
same Council.](2030072)
