[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030645)  [Next](2030647) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.ix-p1"></span> 8. But suffer it to be so, I beg you,
as you are lovers of Christ, that the body is to be in incorruption and
without these conditions when it rises from the dead: then let such
things henceforward cease to be mentioned. Let us believe that in the
resurrection even lawful intercourse will no longer exist between the
sexes, since there would be danger that unlawful intercourse would creep
in if such things remained present and unforgotten. What is the use of
carefully and minutely going over and discussing “the belly and what is
below it?” You tell us that we live amidst carnal delights: but I
perceive that it is your belief that we are not to give up such things
even in the resurrection. Let us not deny that this very flesh in which
we now live is to rise again: but neither let us make men think that the
imperfections of the flesh are wrapped up in it and will come again with
it. The flesh, indeed, will rise, this very flesh and not another: it
will not change its nature, but it will lose its frailties and
imperfections. Otherwise, if its frailties remain, it cannot even be
immortal. And thus, as I said, we avoid heresy, whether with you or
without you. For the faith of the Church, of which we are the disciples,
takes a middle path between two dangers: it does not deny the reality of
the natural flesh and body when it rises from the dead, but neither does
it assert, in contradiction to the Apostle’s words, <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835) that in the kingdom which is to
come corruption will inherit incorruption. We therefore do not assert
that the flesh or body will rise, as you put it, with some of its
members lost or amputated, but that the body will be whole and complete,
having laid aside nothing but its corruption and dishonour and frailty
and also having amputated all the imperfections of mortality: nothing of
its own nature will be lacking to that spiritual body which shall rise
from the dead except this corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[438:2836](2030646.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.ix-p2"></span> <span id="vi.xi.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.ix-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The resurrection body is a spiritual body.](2030647)
