[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030079)  [Next](2030081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*Of the siege of
the city of Nisibis,* <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) *and the
apostolic conversation of Bishop Jacobus*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>On</span> war being waged against the
Romans by Sapor King of Persia, Constantius mustered his forces and
marched to Antioch. But the enemy were driven forth, not by the Roman
army, but by Him whom the pious in the Roman host worshipped as their
God. How the victory was won I shall now proceed to relate.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span>Nisibis, sometimes called Antiochia
Mygdonia, lies on the confines of the realms of Persia and of Rome. In
Nisibis Jacobus whom I named just now was at once bishop,
guardian, <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) and commander in
chief. He was a man who shone with the grace of a truly apostolic
character. His extraordinary and memorable miracles, which I have fully
related in my religious history, I think it superfluous and irrelevant
to enumerate again. <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p8"></span>One however I will record because
of the subject before us. The city which Jacobus ruled was now in
possession of the Romans, and besieged by the Persian Army. The blockade
was prolonged for seventy days. “Helepoles” <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) and many other engines were advanced
to the walls. The town was begirt with a palisade and entrenchment, but
still held out. The river Mygdonius flowing through the middle of the
town, at last the Persians dammed its stream a considerable distance up,
and increased the height of its bank on both sides so as to shut the
waters in. When they saw that a great mass of water was collected and
already beginning to overflow the dam, they suddenly launched it like an
engine against the wall. The impact was tremendous; the bulwarks could
not sustain it, but gave way and fell down. Just the same fate befell
the other side of the circuit, through which the Mygdonius made its
exit; it could not withstand the shock, and was carried away. No sooner
did Sapor see this than he expected to capture the rest of the city, and
for all that day he rested for the mud to dry and the river to become
passable. Next day he attacked in full force, and looked to enter the
city through the breaches that had been made. But he found the wall
built up on both sides, and all his labour vain. For that holy man,
through prayer, filled with valour both the troops and the rest of the
townsfolk, and both built the walls, withstood the engines, and beat off
the advancing foe. And all this he did without approaching the walls,
but by beseeching the Lord of all within the church. Sapor, moreover,
was not only <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-Page_92"></span>astounded at the speed of the
building of the walls but awed by another spectacle. For he saw standing
on the battlements one of kingly mien and all ablaze with purple robe
and crown. He supposed that this was the Roman emperor, and threatened
his attendants with death for not having announced the imperial
presence; but on their stoutly maintaining that their report had been a
true one and that Constantius was at Antioch, he perceived the meaning
of the vision and exclaimed “their God is fighting for the Romans.” Then
the wretched man in a rage flung a javelin into the air, though he knew
that he could not hit a bodiless being, but unable to curb his passion.
Therefore the excellent Ephraim (he is the best writer among the
Syrians) besought the divine Jacobus to mount the wall to see the
barbarians and to let fly at them the darts of his curse. So the divine
man consented and climbed up into a tower but when he saw the
innumerable host he discharged no other curse than to that mosquitoes
and gnats might be sent forth upon them, so that by means of these tiny
animals they might learn the might of the Protector of the Romans. On
his prayer followed clouds of mosquitoes and gnats; they filled the
hollow trunks of the elephants, and the ears and nostrils of horses and
other animals. Finding the attack of these little creatures past
endurance they broke their bridles, unseated their riders and threw the
ranks into confusion. The Persians abandoned their camp and fled
head-long. So the wretched prince learned by a slight and kindly
chastisement the power of the God who protects the pious, and marched
his army home again, reaping for all the harvest of the siege not
triumph but disgrace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[91:582](2030080.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span> Now Nisibin, an important city of
Mesopotamia on the Mygdonius (Hulai). Its name was changed under the
Macedonian dynasty to Antiochia Mygdonica. Frequently taken and retaken
it was ultimately ceded by Jovian to Sapor <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 363.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[91:583](2030080.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p5"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>πολιοῦχος</span>” is an epithet of the
protecting deity of a city, as of Athens “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>Παλλὰς πολιοῦχος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p5.3"></span>;</span>” Ar. Eq.
581.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[91:584](2030080.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p6"></span> Born in the city of which he was
afterwards bishop, Jacobus early acquired fame by his ascetic austerity.
While on a journey into Persia with the object at once of confirming his
own faith and that of the Christian sufferers under the persecution of
Sapor II, he was supposed to work wonders, of which the following,
related by Theodoretus, is a specimen. Once upon a time he saw a Persian
judge delivering an unjust sentence. Now a huge stone happening to be
lying close by, he ordered it to be crushed and broken into pieces, and
so proved the injustice of the sentence. The stone was instantly divided
into innumerable fragments, the spectators were panic-stricken, and the
judge in terror revoked his sentence and delivered a righteous judgment.
On the see of his native city falling vacant Jacobus was made bishop.
The “Religious History” describes him as signalling his episcopate by
the miracle attributed by Gregory of Nyssa to Gregory the Wonder-Worker,
and by Sozomen (vii. 27) to Epiphanius. As in the “Nuremberg Chronicle,”
the same woodcut serves for Thales, Nehemiah, and Dante, so a popular
miracle was indiscriminately assigned to saint after saint. “Once upon a
time he came to a certain village,—the spot I cannot name,—and up come
some beggars putting down one of their number before him as though dead,
and begging him to supply some necessaries for the funeral. Jacobus
granted their petition, and on behalf of the apparently dead man began
to pray to God to forgive him the sins of his lifetime and grant him a
place in the company of the just. Even while he was speaking, away flew
the soul of the man who had up to this moment shammed death, and
coverings were provided for the corpse. The holy man proceeded on his
journey, and the inventors of this play told their recumbent companion
to get up. But now they saw that he did not hear, that the pretence had
become a reality, and that what a moment ago was a live man’s mask was
now a dead man’s face. So they overtake the great Jacobus, bow down
before him, roll at his feet and declare that they would not have played
their impudent trick but for their poverty, and implored him to forgive
them and restore the dead man’s soul. So Jacobus in imitation of the
philanthropy of the Lord granted their prayer, exhibited his wonder
working power, and through his prayer restored the life which his power
had taken away.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p7"></span>At Nicæa Theodoret describes
Jacobus as a “champion” of the orthodox “phalanx.” (Relig. Hist. 1114.)
At the state dinner given by Constantine to the Nicene Fathers, “James
of Nisibis (so ran the Eastern tale—Biblioth. Pat. clv.) saw angels
standing round the Emperor, and underneath his purple robe discovered a
sackcloth garment. Constantine, in return, saw angels ministering to
James, placed his seat above the other bishops, and said: ‘There are
three pillars of the world, Antony in Egypt, Nicolas of Myra, James in
Assyria.’” Stanley, *Eastern Church,* Lect. V.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[91:585](2030080.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p9"></span> Ammianus Marcellinus 23. 4. 10.
thus describes the “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>Ελέπολις μηχανή</span>.” “An enormous
testudo is strengthened by long planks and fitted with iron bolts. This
is covered with hides and fresh wicker-work. Its upper parts are smeared
with mud as a protection against fire and missiles. To its front are
fastened three-pronged spear points made exceedingly sharp, and steadied
by iron weights, like the thunderbolts of painters and potters. Thus
whenever it was directed against anything these stings were shot out to
destroy. The huge mass was moved on wheels and ropes from within by a
considerable body of troops, and advanced with a mighty impulse against
the weaker part of a town wall. Then unless the defenders prevailed
against it the walls were beaten in and a wide breach made.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Council of Antioch and what was done there against the
holy Meletius.](2030081)
