[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030355)  [Next](2030357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p1"></span> *CLXVI. First Petition of the
Commissioners, addressed from Chalcedon, to the Emperor.*

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p2"></span>It had been much to be desired that the
word of true religion should not be adulterated by ridiculous
explanations, and least of all by men who have obtained the priesthood
and high office in the churches, and who have been induced, we know not
how, by ambition, by lust of authority, and by certain poor promises, to
despise all the commandments of Christ. Their only motive has been the
desire to pay court to a man who has the presumption to hope that he and
his abettors will be able to manage the whole business with success; I
mean Cyril of Alexandria. Of his own frivolity he has intruded into the
holy churches of God heretical doctrines which he believes himself able
to support by argument. He expects to escape the chastisement of sinners
by the sole help of Memnon and the bishops of the aforesaid conspiracy.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p3"></span>We are lovers of silence; in general we
advise a philosophic course of action. Now, however, sensible that to be
silent and to cultivate philosophy would be to throw away the Faith, we
turn in supplication to you who, next to the Goodness on high, are the
sole preserver of the world. We know that it specially belongs to you to
be anxious for <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxvii-Page_338"></span>true religion, as having, up to this
present day, continually protected it, and being in turn protected by
it.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p4"></span>We beg you therefore to receive this
treatise, as though our defence were to be pleaded in the presence of
the most holy God; not because we are less active in the sacred cause,
but because we are devoted to true religion, and are speaking in its
behalf. For in Christian times the clergy have no more bounden duty than
to bear testimony before so faithful a prince, however ready we might
have been to yield our bodies and to lay down our lives a thousand times
in the battle for the faith. We therefore beseech you by God who seeth
all things, by our Lord Jesus Christ who will judge all men in
righteousness, by the Holy Ghost by whose grace you hold your empire,
and by the elect angels who are your guardians and whom one day you
shall see standing by the awful throne, and ceaselessly offering unto
God that dread doxology which it is now sought to corrupt; we beseech
your piety, besieged as you now are by the craftiness of certain men who
are forbidding access to you, and are supporting the introduction into
the faith of heretical Chapters, utterly at variance with sound
doctrine, and tainted with heresy, to order all who subscribe them, or
assent to them, and wish, after your promised pardon, to dispute
further, to come forth and submit to the discipline of the Church.
Nothing, sir, is more worthy of an emperor than to fight for the truth,
for which you hurried to join battle with Persians and other barbarians,
when Christ granted you to win fair victories in acknowledgment of your
zeal towards Him. We beseech you that the questions at issue may be put
before your piety in writing, for thus their purport will be more easily
perceived, and the transgressors will be convicted for all future time.
If however anyone, heedless of the utterances for which he shall be at
fault, shall wish by his teaching to prevail over the right faith, it
will be the part of your justice and judgment to consider whether the
very name of teachers has not been thrown away by men who are reluctant
to run any risks concerning the doctrines which they introduce, refusing
to be obedient to your orders, that they may escape conviction for
having done wrong; nor reckoning them worth refutation, that their
mutual conspiracy be not proved fruitless. For now it is clear, from
those that have been ordained by them that some of them, in return for
this impiety, have bethought them of obliging certain persons by the
concession of dignities and have devised certain other means. This will
become still more clear; and your piety will soon see that they will
distribute the rewards of their treachery, as though they were the
spoils of the faith of Christ.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p5"></span>But we, of whom some were long ago
ordained by the very pious Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem, have kept
silence, although it was our duty to contend for the canon, that we
might not seem to be troubled for our own reputation’s sake. We are now
perfectly well aware of his active trickery through Phœnicia Secunda and
Arabia. We really have not time to attend to such things. We are men who
have preferred rather to be deprived of the very places of which the
ministry has been entrusted to us, and so of our life, than of our ready
zeal for the faith. To the attempts of those men we will oppose the
sentence of God and of your piety.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p6"></span>Now also we beg that true religion may
be your one and primary care, and that the brightness of orthodoxy,
which at length with difficulty blazed forth in the days of Constantine
of holy name, was maintained by your blessed grandfather and father, and
was extended by your majesty among the Persians and other barbarians, be
not allowed to grow dim in the very innermost courts of your imperial
palace, or, in your serenity’s days, to be dispersed.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p7"></span>You will not send, sir, a divided
Christianity into Persia; nor here at home will there be anything great,
while we are distressed by disputes, and while there is no one existing
on their side to settle them; no one will take part in a divided Word
and Sacraments; no one without loss of faith will cut himself off from
such famous fathers and saints who have never been condemned. No
imperial successes will be permitted to a people at variance among
themselves; a burst of derision will be roused from the enemies of true
religion; and all the other noxious consequences of their malignant
controversy are too numerous to reckon.

<span id="iv.x.clxvii-p8"></span>If there is anyone who thinks little of
the science of theology, let that one be any one in the world rather
than he to whom the Lord has given the supreme government of the world.
Our petition is that your piety will give judgment, for God will guide
your intelligence into exact comprehension. Finally, should this be
impracticable (and all the engagements of your piety we cannot know) we
beseech your serenity to give us leave to travel safely home. We are
aware that to the dioceses entrusted to us cause of offence is given by
so protracted a delay, on account of those men who even in sacred
matters <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxvii-Page_339"></span>look out for opportunities of
dissension whence no advantage can be derived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Petition of the same, sent from Chalcedon to Theodosius
Augustus.](2030357)
