[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030672)  [Next](2030674) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvi-p1"></span> 33. These are the things which we
learn from the Commentaries to which you direct us. These are the rules
for the confusion <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) of our
faith which you teach us. You wish us to condemn in others what you
teach yourself in private. For, of course, if you are now that ‘other’
who do not admit the doctrine which holds that our souls existed in
heaven before they were joined to bodies, you are undoubtedly the man
who not only promise pardon to the devil and his angels and all
unbelievers but also undertake that they shall be endowed with rewards
of the second order. But if you deny this second doctrine, you must be
the author of that which we first discussed. And I wonder that those
able and learned men who read these writings of his about which he now
writes in commendation, should laugh at me because he calls me a mole,
and should not feel that he is all the while thinking of them much more
as moles, for not seeing that the things I have pointed out are imbedded
in his books. For, if he thought that they could understand as well as
read, he would never have requested them to get a copy of those books
with a view to the condemnation of the very things which their master
there teaches; for these very things which he urges us to condemn are
most plainly and manifestly contained in them. I have shewn, at all
events, that he himself in these chosen Commentaries of his asserts the
doctrines which he desires to have condemned in another man’s books,
namely, that souls existed in heaven before they were born in bodies in
this world, and that all sinners and unbelievers, together with the
devil and his angels, will, at the time when every knee shall bow to
Jesus of things heavenly and things earthly and things infernal, not
only receive pardon, but also be summoned to receive the second order of
rewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[453:2879](2030673.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvi-p2"></span> *Regulas confusionis fidei.*
Another reading is *Confessionis.* But probably Rufinus meant to give
point to his expression by substituting for the well known words “Rule
of faith” “Rule of confusion of faith.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Principalities and Powers.](2030674)
