[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030064)  [Next](2030066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*The evil and daring
deeds done by Georgius* <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) *in
Alexandria.*

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p6"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>Athanasius</span> having thus escaped the
bloodstained hands of his adversaries, Georgius, who was truly another
wolf, was entrusted with authority over the flock. He treated the sheep
with more cruelty than wolf, or bear, or leopard could have shewn. He
compelled young women who had vowed perpetual virginity, not only to
disown the communion of Athanasius, but also to anathematize the faith
of the fathers. The agent in his cruelty was Sebastianus, an officer in
command of troops. He ordered a fire to be kindled in the centre of the
city, and placed the virgins, who were stripped naked, close to it,
commanding them to deny the faith. Although they formed a most sorrowful
and pitiable spectacle for believers as well as for unbelievers, they
considered that all these dishonours conferred the highest honour on
them; and they joyfully received the blows inflicted on them on account
of their faith. All these facts shall be more clearly narrated by their
own pastor.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p7"></span>“About Lent, Georgius returned from
Cappadocia, and added to the evils which he had been taught by our
enemies. After the Easter week virgins were cast into prison, bishops
were bound and dragged away by the soldiers, the homes of widows and of
orphans were pillaged, robbery and violence went on from house to house,
and the Christians during the darkness of night were seized and torn
away from their dwellings. Seals were fixed on many houses. The brothers
of the clergy were in peril for their brothers’ sake. These cruelties
were very atrocious, but still more so were those which were
subsequently perpetrated. In the week following the holy festival of
Pentecost, the people who were keeping a fast came out to the
cemetery <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) to pray, because they
all renounced any communion with Georgius. This vilest of men was
informed of this circumstance, and he incited Sebastianus the military
commander, a Manichean <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) , to
attack the people; and, accordingly, on the Lord’s day itself he rushed
upon them with a large body of armed soldiers wielding naked swords, and
bows, and arrows. He found but few Christians in the act of praying, for
most of them had retired on account of the lateness of the hour. Then he
did such deeds as might be expected from one who had lent his ears to
such teachers. He ordered a large fire to be lighted, and the virgins to
be brought close to it, and then tried to compel them to declare
themselves of the Arian creed. When he perceived that they were
conquering, and giving no heed to the fire, he ordered them to be
stripped naked, and to be beaten until their faces for a long while were
scarcely recognisable. He then seized forty men, and inflicted on them a
new kind of torture. He ordered them to be scourged with branches of
palm-trees, retaining their thorns; and by these their flesh was so
lacerated that some because of the thorns fixed fast in them had again
and again to put themselves under the surgeon’s hand; others were not
able to bear the agony and died. All who survived, and also the virgins,
were then banished to the Greater Oasis. They even refused to give up
the bodies of the dead to their kinsfolk for burial, but flung them away
unburied, and hid them just as they pleased, in order that it might
appear that they had nothing to do with these cruel transactions, and
were ignorant of them. But they were deceived in this foolish
expectation: for the friends of the slain, while they rejoiced at the
faithfulness of the deceased, deeply lamented the loss of the corpses,
and spread abroad a full account of the cruelty that had been
perpetrated.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p10"></span>“The following bishops were banished
from Egypt and from Libya:—Ammonius, Muïus, Caius, Philo, Hermes,
Plenius, Psinosiris, Nilammon, Agapius, Anagamphus, Marcus, Dracontius,
Adelphius, another Ammonius, another Marcus, and Athenodorus; and also
<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-Page_76"></span>the presbyters Hierax and
Dioscorus <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) . These were all
driven into exile in so cruel a manner that many died on the road, and
others at the place of their banishment. The persecutors caused the
death <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) of more than thirty
bishops. For, like Ahab, their mind was set on rooting out the truth,
had it been possible <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) .”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p14"></span>Athanasius also, in a letter
addressed to the virgins <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) who
were treated with so much barbarity, uses the following words: “Let none
of you be grieved although these impious heretics grudge you burial and
prevent your corpses being carried forth. The impiety of the Arians has
reached such a height, that they block up the gates, and sit like so
many demons around the tombs, in order to hinder the dead from being
interred.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p16"></span>These and many other similar
atrocities were perpetrated by Georgius in Alexandria.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p17"></span>The holy Athanasius was well aware
that there was no spot which could be considered a place of safety for
him; for the emperor had promised a very large reward to whoever should
bring him alive, or his head as a proof of his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_509"></span>[75:510](2030065.htm#fr_509) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p2"></span> Georgius, a fraudulent contractor of
Constantinople (Ath. *Hist. Ar.* 75), made Arian Bishop of Alexandria on
the expulsion of Athanasius, in <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 356, was born in a fuller’s
shop at Epiphania in Cilicia. (Amm. Marc. xxii. 11, 3.) He was known as
“the Cappadocian,” and further illustrates the old saying of “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>Καππάδοκες Κρήτες
Κίλικες, τρία κάππα κάκιστα</span>,” and the kindred epigram

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>Καππαδόκην ποτ᾽ ἔχιδνα κακὴ δάκεν· &
135·λλὰ καὶ αὐτή</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>κάτθανε γευσαμένη αἵματος ἱοβόλου</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p5"></span>The crimes of the brutal “Antipope”
(Prof. Bright in *Dict. Christ. Biog.*) are many, but he was a
book-collector. (Jul. Ep. ix. 36<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>,
cf. Gibbon 1. Chap. 23.) Gibbon says “the infamous George of Cappadocia
has been transformed into the renowned St. George of England;” an
identity sufficiently disproved.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[75:511](2030065.htm#fr_510) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>κοιμητήριον</span>, or sleeping-place.
Cf. Chrysost. ed. Migne. ii. 394.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[75:512](2030065.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p9"></span> The earliest account of the system
of Manes or Mani is to be found in Euseb. H.E. vii. 31. From the end of
the \* century it made rapid progress.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[76:513](2030065.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p11"></span> One Ammonius had been consecrated
by Alexander, and was bishop of Pacnemunis (Ath. *ad Drac.* 210, and
*Hist. Ar.* §72). Another was apparently consecrated by Athanasius
(*Hist. Ar.* §72). An Ammonius was banished to the Upper Oasis (id.).
Caius was the orthodox bishop of Thmuis. Philo was banished to Babylon
(*Hist. Ar.* §72, cf. Jer. *Vita Hilarionis* 30). Muïus, Psinosiris,
Nilammon, Plenius, Marcus (the sees of these two Marci were Zygra and
Philæ), and Athenodorus, were relegated to the parts about the Libyan
Ammon, nine days’ journey from Alexandria, only that they might perish
on the road. One did die. (*Hist Ar.* §72.) Adelphius was bishop of
Onuphis in the Delta, and was sent to the Thebaid. (*Tom. ad Ant*. 615.)
Dracontius, to whom Athanasius addressed a letter, went to the deserts
about Clysma (25 m. s.w. of Suez), and Hierax and Dioscorus to Syene
(Assouan (*Hist. Ar.* §72), whither Trajan had banished Juvenal.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[76:514](2030065.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p12"></span> Some authorities read more mildly,
“drove into exile.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[76:515](2030065.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p13"></span> *Ap. de fug*. §7. Cf. *Hist. Ar.*
§72.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[76:516](2030065.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xi-p15"></span> “Hæc Athanasii Epistola hodie quod
sciam non extat.” Valesius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council of Milan.](2030066)
