[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030732)  [Next](2030734) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p1"></span> 44. It remains that every reader of
this book should give his suffrage for one or the other of us, judging
as he desires that he may himself be judged by God; and that he should
not injure his own soul by favoring either party unjustly. Also, my
beloved son Apronianus, go to Pammachius, that saintly man whose letter
is put forward by our friend in this Invective or Bill of Indictment of
his, and adjure him in Christ’s name to incline in his judgment to the
cause of innocence not that of party-spirit: it is the cause of truth
that is at stake, and religion not party should be our guide. It is a
precept of our Lord <span id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995) to “judge
not according to the appearance, but judge a righteous judgment,” and,
just as in each one of the least of his brethren it is Christ who is
thirsty and hungry, who is clothed and fed; so in these who are unjustly
judged it is He who is judged unrighteously. When some are hated without
a cause, he will speak on their behalf and say: <span
id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) “You have hated me without a
cause.” What judgment does he think will be formed of this cause and of
his action in it before the tribunal of Christ? He remembers well no
doubt how, when the men we are speaking of had written and published his
books against Jovinian, and men were already reading them and finding
fault with them, he withdrew them from the hands of the readers, and
stopped their remarks, and blamed them for their blame of his friend;
and how, further, he sent the books back to the author, with the
suggestion that he should either correct those passages which had been
found fault with, or in any way that he would set matters right. But
when what I had written fell into his hands,—it was not then a book but
merely a number of imperfect, uncorrected papers, which had been
sub<span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-Page_481"></span>tracted by fraud and theft by some
scoundrel; he did not bring it to me and complain of it, though I was
close at hand; he did not deign even to rebuke me or to convict me of
wrong through some friend, as it might have been, or even some enemy;
but sent my papers to the East, and set to work the tongue of that man
who never yet knew how to control it. Would it have been against the
precepts of our religion if he had met me face to face? Did he think me
so utterly unworthy of holding converse with him, that it was not worth
while even to argue with me? Yet for us too Christ died, for our
salvation also He shed his blood. We are sinners, I grant, but we belong
to his flock and are numbered among his sheep. Pammachius, however, must
be held in honour for his excellent deeds wrought through faith in
Christ, which should be an example to all others; for he has counted his
rank as nothing worth, and has made himself equal to the humble;
consequently, I was unwilling to see him carried away by human
partisanship and contention, lest his faith should suffer damage in any
way. At all events we shall see how far he preserves a right judgment
when he sees that that great master Jerome <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) taught, in the commentaries which
he selected as satisfactory even after his repentance, the very things
which he condemns in others as being alien to his own teaching. We shall
think that his former action was a mistake due to ignorance if he
recognizes it and sets it right. As for myself, though <span
id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) under the compulsion of necessity,
I have endeavoured to make answer to him who had attacked me with such
great bitterness, yet for this also I ask for forgiveness if I have
handled the matter too sharply; for God is my witness how truly I can
say that I have kept silence on many more points than I have brought
forward. I could not wholly keep silence in the presence of accusations
which I know to be undeserved, when I heard from many that my silence
would bring their own faith into peril.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[480:2996](2030733.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p2.1"></span>[John vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[480:2997](2030733.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p3.1"></span>[John xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[481:2998](2030733.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p4"></span> The older editions do not contain
the name.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[481:2999](2030733.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlix-p5"></span> Some copies read *visi* instead of
*nisi sumus:* I seemed to be compelled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why my translations of Origen had created offence, but Jerome's
not.](2030734)
