[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030319)  [Next](2030321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p1"></span> *CXXX. To Bishop Timotheus.* <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p3"></span>Not without purpose does the supreme
Ruler allow the spirits that are against us to agitate the waves of
impiety. He does so that He may try the courage of the sailors, and,
while He exhibits some men’s manliness, convicts others of cowardice,
stripping the mask from the faces of some who put on an appearance of
piety, and proclaiming others as foremost fighters in the ranks of the
truth. We have seen an instance of this in the present time. The storm
rose high; some shewed their secret impiety; some abandoned the truth
which they were holding, went over to the phalanx of our foes, and now,
with them, are smiting the very men whom they used to call their chiefs.
The witnesses of these things detest the enemy and pity the deserters,
but are afraid to give aid to the victims of the attack upon the
apostolic doctrines. Nay, suppose the traitors to urge them with greater
insistency, they will perhaps themselves pass over to the side of the
assailants, will give no quarter to their fellow-believers, but will
drive against them their barbs side by side with the very men whom they
accuse. They will act thus though they have been taught by the divine
Scripture that a wrong done to one’s neighbour incurs punishment, while
the suffering of injustice entails great and lasting rewards.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p4"></span>Your own piety, your zeal for the faith,
and your good will to myself, have been proved by this agitation. Twice
you have written me a letter in contempt of all that might deter you,
and have thus shewn your brotherly affection. You have also indicated
the conflict you are sustaining on behalf of the apostolic doctrines.
You ask me to tell you by letter what we ought to think and preach
concerning the passion of salvation. I have received your request with
delight, and, not indeed to give you information but only to remind one
who is beloved of God, will proceed to tell you what I have learnt from
the divine Scripture and from the Fathers who have interpreted it.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p5"></span>Know then, most godly sir, that before
all things it is necessary to observe the distinction of terms, and, in
addition to this, the cause of the divine incarnation. Once let these be
made clear, and there will be no ambiguity left about the passion. We
will therefore first, to those who endeavour to contradict us, put this
enquiry. Which of the names given to the only begotten Son of God are
anterior to the incarnation, and which posterior, or rather, connected
with the operation of the œconomy? They will reply that the terms
anterior are, “God the Word,” “only begotten Son,” “Almighty,” and “Lord
of all creation”; and that the names “Jesus Christ” belong to the
incarnation. For, after the incarnation, God the Word, the only begotten
Son of God is called Jesus Christ; for “Behold” He says “unto you is
born this day Christ the Lord” <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) and because others had been called
christs, priests, kings, and prophets, lest any one should suppose Him
to be like unto them, the angels conjoined the title Lord with that of
Christ, in order to prove the supreme <span id="page_302">p. 302</span>
<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-Page_302"></span>dignity of Him that was born. And,
again, Gabriel says to the blessed Virgin, “Behold thou shalt conceive
in thy womb, and bring forth a son and shalt call His name Jesus” <span
id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) “for He shall save His people from
their sins.” <span id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) Before the
incarnation, however, He was never called either Christ or Jesus. For
truly the divine Prophets, in their predictions of things to come, used
the words, just as they prophesied about the birth, the cross, and the
passion, when the events had not yet come to pass. Nevertheless, even
after the incarnation He is called God the Word, Lord, Almighty, only
begotten Son, Maker, and Creator. For He was not made man by mutation,
but, remaining just what He was, assumed what we are, for “Being in the
form of God,” to use the words of the divine Apostle “He took the form
of a servant.” <span id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) On this
account, therefore, even after the incarnation, He is called also by the
titles which are anterior to the incarnation, since His nature is
invariable and immutable. But when relating the passion the divine
Scripture nowhere uses the term God, since that is the name of the
absolute nature. No one on hearing the words “In the beginning was the
Word and the Word was with God, and the Word was God” <span
id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) and similar expressions, would
suppose that the flesh existed before the ages, or is of one substance
with the God of the universe, or was Creator of the world. Every one
knows that these terms are proper to the Godhead. Nor would any one on
reading the genealogy of St. Matthew suppose that David and Abraham
according to nature were forefathers of God, for it is the assumed
nature which is derived from them.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p11"></span>Since then these points are plain and
indubitable even among extreme heretics, and we acknowledge both the
nature which is before the ages, and that which is of recent time, so
are we bound to recognise at once the passibility of the flesh, and the
impassibility of the Godhead, not dividing the union nor separating the
only begotten into two persons, but contemplating the properties of the
natures in the one Son. In the case of soul and body, which are of
natures contemporary and naturally united, we are accustomed to make
this distinction, describing the soul as simple, reasonable, and
immortal, but the body as complex, passible, and mortal. We do not
divide the union, nor cut one man in two. Far rather, then, in the case
of the Godhead, begotten of the Father before the ages, and of the
manhood assumed of David’s seed, is it becoming to adopt a similar
course, and distinctly to recognise the everlasting, eternal, simple,
uncircumscribed, immortal, and invariable character of the one nature,
and the recent, complex, circumscribed, and fluctuating nature of the
other. We acknowledge the flesh to be now immortal and incorruptible,
although before the resurrection it was susceptible of death and of
passion; for how otherwise was it nailed to the tree, and committed to
the tomb? And though we recognise the distinction of the natures, we are
bound to worship one Son, and to acknowledge the same as Son of God and
Son of man, form of God, and form of a servant, Son of David, and Lord
of David, seed of Abraham, and creator of Abraham. The union causes the
names to be common, but the community of names does not confound the
natures. With them that are right-minded some names are plainly
appropriate as to God, and others as to man; and in this way both the
passible and the impassible are properly used of the Lord Christ, for in
His humanity He suffered, while as God He remained impassible. If,
according to the argument of the impious, it was in the Godhead that He
suffered, then, I apprehend, the assumption of the flesh, was
supererogatory; for suppose the divine nature to have been capable of
undergoing passion, then He did not need the passible manhood. But grant
that, as even their own argument contends, the Godhead was impassible,
and the passion was real, let them beware of denying that which
suffered, lest they deny with it the reality of the passion; for if that
which suffers does not exist, then the passion is unreal. Now for any
one who likes to open the quaternion <span
id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) of the sacred evangelists, it is
easy to perceive that the divine Scripture distinctly proclaims the
passion of the body, and to learn from them how Joseph of Arimathæa came
to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus; how Pilate ordered the body of
Jesus to be delivered, how Joseph took down the body of Jesus from the
tree and wrapped the body of Jesus in the linen cloth, and laid it in
the new tomb. All this is described by the four evangelists with
frequent mention of the body. But if our opponents adduce the words of
the angel to Mary and her companions, “Come <span id="page_303">p.
303</span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxi-Page_303"></span>where the Lord
lay,” <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) let them be referred to
the passage in the Acts which states that devout men “carried Stephen to
his burial” <span id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946) and observe that
it was not the soul, but the body, of the victorious Stephen, to which
the customary rites were paid. And to this very day, when we approach
the shrines of the victorious martyrs, we commonly enquire what is the
name of him who is buried in the grave, and those who are acquainted
with the facts reply peradventure “Julian the martyr,” or “Romanus,” or,
“Timotheus.” <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p16"></span>Very often it is not entire bodies that
are buried, but only very small remains, yet nevertheless we speak of
the body by the name that belongs to the whole man. It was in this sense
that the angel called the body of the Lord, “Lord,” because it was the
body of the Lord of the universe. Moreover the Lord Himself promised to
give on behalf of the life of the world, not His invisible nature, but
His body. “For,” He says, “the bread that I will give is my flesh which
I will give for the life of the world,” <span
id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) and when He took the symbol of
divine mysteries, He said, “This is my body which is given for
you.” <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) Or according to the
version of the Apostle, “broken.” <span
id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) In no place where He spoke of the
passion did He mention the impassible Godhead.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p20"></span>It is therefore before all things
necessary that the question should be put to those who are endeavouring
to contradict us whether they confess that the perfect manhood was
assumed by God the Word, and assert the union to have been made without
confusion. Once let these points be admitted, and the rest will follow
in due course, and the passion will be attributed to the passible
nature. I have now summed up these heads and have exceeded the limits of
my letter. I have sent also what I lately wrote at the suggestion of a
very godly and holy man of God, the lord— <span
id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) in the form of a concise
instruction designed to teach the truth of the apostolic doctrines.
Should I find a good copyist, I will also send your holiness what I have
written in the form of a dialogue, <span
id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) extending the argument, and
strengthening my positions, by the teaching of the Fathers. I have
moreover now sent a few statements of the ancient teachers, sufficient
to shew the drift of their instruction. Give me in return, most godly
sir, the succour of your prayers, that I may pass through the terrible
tempest and reach the quiet haven of the Saviour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[301:1939](2030320.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p2"></span> Timotheus was Bishop of Doliche, a town
of the Euphratensis. He was present at Antioch when Athanasius of Perrha
was deposed, and also at Chalcedon. The letter may be dated from Nicerte
in 450.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[301:1940](2030320.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p6.1"></span>[Luke
ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[302:1941](2030320.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p7"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p7.1"></span>[Luke
i. 31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031)<span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[302:1942](2030320.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p8"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p8.1"></span>[Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p8.2"></span>.
Observe the confusion of quotation.

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[302:1943](2030320.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p9.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[302:1944](2030320.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p10"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p10.1"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[302:1945](2030320.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.1"></span>τετρακτύς</span> commonly expresses the sum
of the first four numbers in the Pythagorean system, i.e. 10, the root
of creation; (1+2+3+4=10.) Cf. the Pythagorean oath “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.2"></span>Ναὶ μὰ τὸν ἁμετέρᾳ ψύχᾳ
παραδόντα τετρακτύν</span>.” Its use for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.3"></span>τετραδεῖον</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.4"></span>τετράδιον</span> (cf.
<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.5"></span>[Acts xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.6"></span>)
may indicate acceptance of the theory of the mystic and necessary number
of the gospels of which early and remarkable expression is found in
Irenæus (cont. Hær. iii. 11.)

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[303:1946](2030320.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p12.7"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p13"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p13.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[303:1947](2030320.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p14.1"></span>[Acts viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[303:1948](2030320.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p15"></span> There were many martyrs of the name of
Julianus. Theodoret might have visited a shrine of Julianus martyred at
Emesa in the reign of Numerian. A Romanus was one of the seven martyrs
at Samosata in the persecution of Diocletian. Among martyred Timothei
was one who suffered at Gaza in 304.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[303:1949](2030320.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p17.1"></span>[John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[303:1950](2030320.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p18.1"></span>[Luke xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[303:1951](2030320.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p19"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p19.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[303:1952](2030320.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p21"></span> The name is omitted.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[303:1953](2030320.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxi-p22"></span> Garnerius identifies the “short
instruction” with the composition mentioned in letter CIX. and sent to
Eusebius of Ancyra; and the bishop whose name is omitted with the same
Eusebius. But in his note on CIX, he thinks this composition is a part
of Dial. II. It would seem from this letter that the composition in
question was distinct from the Dialogues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Longinus, Archimandrite of Doliche.](2030321)
