[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030782)  [Next](2030784) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p1"></span> 10. Unhappy souls! stricken through
with all these barbarisms as with so many lances! I doubt whether they
had so much trouble when, according to the erroneous theory of Origen,
they tell from heaven to earth, and were clothed in these gross bodies,
as they have now in being knocked about on all sides by these strange
words and sentences: not to mention that word of ill omen which says
that they are infused through the channel of the human seed. I know that
it is not usual in Christian writings to criticise mere faults of style;
but I thought it well to shew by a few examples how rash it is to teach
what you are ignorant of, to write what you do not know: so that, when
we come to the subject-matter, we may be prepared to find the same
amount of wisdom. He sends a letter, which he calls a very strong stick,
as a weapon for the Bishop of Rome; and on the very subject about which
the dogs are barking at him he professes entire ignorance of the
question. If he is ignorant on the subject for which ill-reports are
current against him, what need was there for him to send an Apology,
which contains no defence of himself, but only a confession of his
ignorance? This course is calculated to sow a crop of suspicions, not to
calm them. He gives us three opinions about the origin of souls; and his
conclusion at the end is: “I do not deny that I have read each of them,
and I confess that I still am ignorant.” You would suppose him to be
Arcesilaus <span id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) or Carneades <span
id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) who declare that there is no
certainty; though he surpasses even them in his cautiousness; for they
were driven by the intolerable ill-will which they aroused among
philosophers for taking all truth out of human life, to invent the
doctrines of probability, so that by making their probable assertions
they might temper their agnosticism; but he merely says that he is
uncertain, and does not know which of these opinions is true. If this
was all the answer he had to make, what could have induced him to invoke
so great a Pontiff as the witness of his lack of theological culture. I
presume this is the lassitude about which he tells us that he is
exhausted with his thirty-years journey and cannot come to Rome. There
are a great many things of which we are all ignorant; but we do not ask
for witnesses of our ignorance. As to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as
to the nativity of our Lord and Saviour, about which Isaiah cries, <span
id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106) “Who shall declare his gen<span
id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-Page_506"></span>eration?” he speaks boldly, and a
mystery of which all past ages knew nothing he claims as quite within
his knowledge: this alone he does not know, the ignorance of which
causes men to stumble. As to how a virgin became the mother of God, he
has full knowledge; as to how he himself was born he knows nothing. He
confesses that God is the maker of souls and bodies, whether souls
existed before bodies or whether they came into being with the germs of
bodies, or are sent into them when they are already formed in the womb.
In any case we recognize God as their author. The question at issue is
not whether the souls were made by God or by another, but which of the
three opinions which he states is true. Of this he professes ignorance.
Take care! You may find people saying that the reason for your
confession of your ignorance of the three is that you do not wish to be
compelled to condemn one. You spare Tertullian and Lactantius so as not
to condemn Origen with them. As far as I remember (though I may be
mistaken) I am not aware of having read that Lactantius spoke of the
soul as planted at the same time as the body. <span
id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107) But, as you say that you have read
it, please to tell me in what book it is to be found, so that you may
not be thought to have calumniated him in his death as you have me in my
slumber. But even here you walk with a cautious and hesitating step. You
say: “I think that, among the Latins, Tertullian or Lactantius held this
opinion, perhaps also some others.” You not only are in doubt about the
origin of souls, but you have only ‘thoughts’ as to the opinion which
each writer holds: yet the matter is of some importance. On the question
of the soul, however, you openly proclaim your ignorance, and confess
your untaught condition: as to the authors, your knowledge amounts only
to ‘thinking,’ hardly to ‘presuming.’ But as to Origen alone you are
quite clear. “This is Origen’s opinion,” you say. But, let me ask you:
Is the opinion sound or not? Your reply is, “I do not know.” Then why do
you send me messengers and letter-carriers, who are constantly coming,
merely to teach me that you are ignorant? To prevent the possibility of
my doubting whether your incapacity is as great as you say, and thinking
it possible that you are cunningly concealing all you know, you take an
oath in the presence of God that up to the present moment you hold
nothing for certain and definite on this subject, and that you leave it
to God to know what is true, and to any one to whom it may please Him to
reveal it. What! Through all these ages does it seem to you that there
has been no one worthy of having this revealed to him? Neither
patriarch, nor prophet, nor apostle, nor martyr? Were not these
mysteries made clear even to yourself when you dwelt amidst princes and
exiles? The Lord says in the Gospel: <span
id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108) “Father, I have revealed thy name
to men.” Did he who revealed the Father keep silence on the origin of
souls? And are you astonished if your brethren are scandalized when you
swear that you know nothing of a thing which the churches of Christ
profess to know? <span id="fr_3109"></span>[3110](#fn_3109)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[505:3105](2030783.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p2"></span> Of Pitane in Æolia, <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>b.c.</span> 316–241.
Founder of the Middle Academy, half-way between the Platonic idealism
and the scepticism of Pyrrho.

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[505:3106](2030783.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p3"></span> Of Cyrene, <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>b.c.</span> 214–124. Founder of the Third
or New Academy, a disputant rather than a philosopher of fixed
principles.

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[505:3107](2030783.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p4"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>[Is. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[506:3108](2030783.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>Συσπειρομένην</span>

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[506:3109](2030783.htm#fr_3108) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p6"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>[John xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006)<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3109"></span>[506:3110](2030783.htm#fr_3109) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xi-p7"></span> Though Jerome here speaks as if the
question had been determined by church authority, the perusal of his
correspondence with Augustin (Jerome’s Letters 126, 131, 134) shows that
he was in the same perplexity as Rufinus, but less ingenuous in
confessing it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to translating the Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν, it is not a question, but a
charge that you unjustifiably altered the book.](2030784)
