[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030270)  [Next](2030272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p1"></span> *LXXXII. To Eusebius, Bishop of
Ancyra.* <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p3"></span>I had hoped at this time to hear
frequently from your holiness. Suffering as I do under charges which are
plain calumny I stand in need of brotherly consolation. For they who are
now renewing the heresy of Marcion, Valentinus, Manes, and of the other
Docetæ, annoyed at my publicly pillorying their heresy, have endeavoured
to deceive the imperial ears, by calling me a heretic and falsely
accusing me of dividing into two sons our one Lord Jesus Christ, the
divine Word made man. Their utterances did not meet with the success
that they expected. A despatch was therefore written to the right
honourable and glorious commander and consul, containing indeed no
accusation of heresy, but certain other charges no less <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-Page_278"></span>unfounded. They alleged that I was
endeavouring to assemble frequent synods at Antioch; that certain
persons thereupon took umbrage; that for this reason I ought to desist
from these proceedings and manage the churches entrusted to my charge.
When this communication was shewn me I caught at the sentence as an
opportunity of good. For in the first place I gained the rest I so much
longed for; furthermore I trust in the wiping out of the stains of the
many errors I have committed, on account of the wrong devised against me
by the enemies of truth. Even in this present life our supreme Ruler
very plainly shews us what care He takes of them that suffer wrong.
While I have been remaining at rest, prisoned within the boundaries of
my own country; while throughout the East all men have been distressed
and have been bitterly lamenting though compelled to silence by the
terror that has fallen on them (for what has befallen me has stricken
terror into the hearts of all) the Lord has stooped from heaven, has
convicted my calumniators of their falsehood, and laid bare their
impious intent. They armed even Alexandria against me and by means of
their worthy instruments are dinning into all men’s ears that I am
preaching two sons instead of one.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p4"></span>I, on the contrary, am so far from
holding this abominable opinion, that, on finding some of the holy
fathers of the Nicene Council opposing in their treatises the madness of
Arius and forced in their struggle against their opponents to make too
marked a distinction, I have objected, and refused to admit such
distinction, for I know how the exigencies of the distinction result in
exaggeration.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p5"></span>And lest any one should suppose that I
am speaking as I do through fear, let any one who likes get hold of my
ancient writings written before the Council of Ephesus, and those
written after it twelve years ago. For by God’s grace I interpreted all
the Prophets and the Psalms and the Apostles: I wrote long ago against
the Arians, the Macedonians, the sophistry of Apollinarius and the
madness of Marcion: and in every one of my books by God’s grace the mind
of the Church shines clear. Moreover I have written a book on the
Mysteries, another on Providence, another on the Questions of the Magi,
a life of the Saints, and besides these, not to name every one in
detail, many more. <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p7"></span>I have enumerated them not for
ambition’s sake, but to challenge my accusers and my judges to put any
of my writings they may choose to the test. They will find that by God’s
grace I hold no other opinion than just that which I have received from
holy Scripture.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p8"></span>When, then, your holiness has heard
this from me, I beg you to inform the ignorant and to persuade the
unbridled tongues that revile me and all who are deceived by them, not
to believe what they have heard of me from my calumniators. Beg them to
believe rather the Lawgiver when he exclaims “Men shall not receive a
false report.” <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) Ask them to
wait till the facts are proved.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p10"></span>My prayer is that the churches may
enjoy a calm and that this long and painful storm may vanish away. But
if the multitude of our sins suffer not this to come to pass; if for
their sakes we are delivered to the sifter; we pray that we may share
the perils undergone for the faith, in order that since we have not the
confidence that comes from this life, at least for guarding the faith in
its integrity we may meet with pity and pardon in the day of the
appearance of the Lord. And for this we beseech your holiness to join us
in our prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[277:1762](2030271.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p2"></span> Eusebius was present at the Council of
Chalcedon in 451, Mansi vi. 565 c. See also Letter CIX. A Latin
translation of this letter is in Baronius ann. 443.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[278:1763](2030271.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6"></span> The works mentioned are (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.1"></span>α</span>) those on the
Octateuch, the Books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, the Psalms,
Canticles, and the Prophets; (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.2"></span>β</span>) on the xiv Epp. of St. Paul,
including the Hebrews; the *Dialogues,* and the *Hæreticarum Fabularum
Compendium;* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.3"></span>γ</span>) XII Books on the mysteries of the
Faith; (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.4"></span>ε</span>)
the “*de Providentia;*” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.5"></span>ζ</span>) on the *Questions of the Magi,*
and (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.6"></span>η</span>)
the *Religious History.* Of these (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.7"></span>γ</span>) and (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p6.8"></span>ζ</span>) are lost.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[278:1764](2030271.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxxii-p9.1"></span>[Ex. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.lxxxii-p9.2"></span>,
lxx. and marg.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Theodoretus, Bishop of Cyrus, to Dioscorus, Archbishop of
Alexandria.](2030272)
