[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030899)  [Next](2030901) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_565">p. 565</span> <span
id="vi.xvi-Page_565"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Preface to the Two Books of Ecclesiastical
History, Added by Rufinus to His Translation of Eusebius.</span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>Addressed to Chromatius, Bishop of Aquileia,
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xvi-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 401.</span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p3"></span>(For the occasion of writing, and the date,
see Prolegomena, p. 412.)

<span id="vi.xvi-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.xvi-p5"></span>It is the custom, they say, of skilful
physicians, when they perceive that some epidemic disease is near at
hand in one of our cities, to provide some kind of medicine, whether
solid or liquid, which men may use as a preventative to defend
themselves from the destruction which is hanging over them. You have
imitated this method of the doctors, my venerable Father, Chromatius, at
the moment when the gates of Italy were broken through by Alaric the
commander of the Goths, and thus a disease and plague poured in upon us,
which made havoc of the fields and cattle and men throughout the land.
You then sought a remedy against the cruelty and destruction, so that
the minds of men which were languishing might be drawn away from the
contagion of the prevailing malady, and might preserve their balance
through an interest in better pursuits. This you have done by enjoining
on me the task of translating into Latin the ecclesiastical history
which was written in the Greek language by that most learned man,
Eusebius of Cæsarea. You thought that the mind of those who heard it
read to them might be so held fast by it that, in its eager desire for
the knowledge of past events, it might to some extent become oblivious
of their actual sufferings. I tried to excuse myself from the task, as
being, through my weakness unequal to it, and as having in the lapse of
years lost the use of the Latin tongue. But I reflected that your
commands were not to be divaricated from your position in the Apostolic
order. For, at the time when the multitude in the desert were hungering,
and the Lord said to his Apostles, “Give ye them to eat,” Philip who was
one of them instead of bringing out the loaves which were hid in the
wallet of the Apostles, said that there was a little lad there who had
five loaves and two fishes. He knew that the exhibition of the divine
virtue would be none the less brilliant if the ministry of some of the
little ones were used in its fulfilment. He modestly excused his action
by adding, “What are these among so many?” So that the divine power
might be more conspicuous through the difficult and desperate
circumstances in which it acted. I felt that, since you were a scion of
the Apostolic order, you had possibly acted in remembrance of Philip’s
example, and that, when you saw that the time was come for the
multitudes to be fed, you had engaged the services of a little lad who
might be able to contribute, twice told, the five loaves <span
id="fr_3438"></span>[3439](#fn_3438) which he had received, but who
further, to fulfil the Gospel type, might add two small fishes <span
id="fr_3439"></span>[3440](#fn_3439) which he had captured by his own
efforts. I have therefore made the attempt to execute what you had
ordered, having the assurance that the deficiency of my inexperience
would be excused on account of the authority of him who gave the
command.

<span id="vi.xvi-p8"></span>I must point out the course I have taken in
reference to the tenth book of this work. As it stands in the Greek, it
has little to do with the process of events. All but a small part of it
is taken up with discussions tending to the praise of particular
Bishops, and adds nothing to our knowledge of facts. I have therefore
left out all this superfluous matter; and, whatever in it belonged to
genuine history I have added to the ninth book, with which I have made
his history close. The tenth and eleventh books I have myself compiled,
partly from the traditions of the former generation, partly from facts
within my own memory; and these I have added to the previous books, like
the two fishes to the loaves. If you bestow your approval and
benediction upon them, I shall have a sure confidence that they will
suffice for the multitude. The work as now completed contains the events
from the Ascension of the Saviour to the present time; my own two books
those from the days of Constantine when the persecution came to an end
on to the death of the Emperor Theodosius.

<span id="vi.xvi-p9"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.xvi-p10"></span>The following note occurs at the end of the
ninth book of Rufinus’ Latin Version of Eusebius.

<span id="vi.xvi-p11"></span>Thus far Eusebius has given us the record
of the history. As to the subsequent events, as they have followed on up
to the present time, as I have found them recorded in the writings of
the last generation, or so far as they are covered by my own knowledge,
I will add them, obeying, as best I may, in this point also the commands
of our father in God. <span id="fr_3440"></span>[3441](#fn_3440)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3438"></span>[565:3439](2030900.htm#fr_3438) <span
id="vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p6"></span> That is, the ten books of Eusebius’
History.

<span id="fn_3439"></span>[565:3440](2030900.htm#fr_3439) <span
id="vi.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p7"></span> That is, the two books added by Rufinus.

<span id="fn_3440"></span>[565:3441](2030900.htm#fr_3440) <span
id="vi.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p12"></span> Chromatius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rufinus' Preface to the Translation of Origen's Commentary on
Psalms 36, 37, and 38.](2030901)
