[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030830)  [Next](2030832) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p1"></span> 28. You pass on to the origin of
souls, and at great length exclaim against the smoke which you say I
raise. You want to be allowed to express ignorance on a point on which
you advisedly dissemble your knowledge; and therefore begin questioning
me about angels and archangels; as to the mode of their existence, the
place and nature of their abodes, the differences, if there be any,
existing between them; and then as to the course of the sun, the waxing
and waning of the moon, the character and movements of the stars. I
wonder that you did not set down the whole of the lines: <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185)

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p3"></span>Whence come the earthquakes, whence
the high-swoll’n seas

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p4"></span>Breaking their bounds, then sinking
back to rest;

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p5"></span>The Sun’s eclipse, the labours of
the moon;

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p6"></span>The race of men and beasts, the
storm, the fire,

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p7"></span>Arcturus’ rainy Hyads, and the
Bears:

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p8"></span>Why haste the winter’s suns to
bathe themselves

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p9"></span>Beneath the wave, what stays its
lingering nights.

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p10"></span>Then, leaving things in heaven,
and condescending to those on earth, you philosophize on minor points.
You say: “Tell us what are the causes of the fountains, and of the wind;
what makes the hail and the showers; why the sea is salt, the rivers
sweet; what account is to be given of clouds and storms, thunderbolts,
and thunder and lightning.” You mean that if I do not know all this, you
are entitled to say you know nothing about the origin of souls. You wish
to balance your ignorance on a single point by mine on many. But do not
you, who in page after page stir up what you call my smoke, understand
that I can see your mists and whirlwinds? You wish to be thought a man
of extensive knowledge, and among the disciples of Calpurnius <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186) to enjoy a great reputation for
wisdom, and therefore you raise up the whole physical world in front of
me, as if Socrates had said in vain when he passed over to the study of
Ethics: “What is above us is nothing to us.” So then, if I cannot tell
you why the ant, which is such a little creature, whose body is a mere
point, has six feet, whereas an elephant with its vast bulk has only
four to walk on; why serpents and snakes glide along on their chests and
bellies; why the worm which is commonly called the millipede has such a
swarming array of feet; I am prohibited from knowing anything about the
origin of souls! You ask me what I know about souls, so that, when I
make any statement about them, you may at once attack it. And if I say
that the church’s doctrine is that God forms souls every day, and sends
them into the bodies of those who are born, you will at once bring out
the snares your master invented, and ask, Where is God’s justice if
<span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-Page_534"></span>he grants souls to those who are
born of adultery or incest? Is he not an accessory to men’s sins, if he
creates souls for the adulterers who make the bodies? as if, when you
hear that seed corn had been stolen, you are to suppose the fault to lie
in the nature of the corn, and not in the man who stole the wheat; and
that therefore the earth had no business to nourish the seed in its
bosom, because the hands of the sower who cast them in were unclean.
Hence comes also your mysterious question, Why do infants die? since it
is because of their sins, as you hold, that they received bodies. There
exists a treatise of Didymus addressed to you, in which he meets this
inquiry of yours, with the answer, that they had not sinned much, and
therefore it was enough punishment for them just to have touched their
bodily prisons. He, who was your master and mine also, when you asked
this question, wrote at my request three books of comments on the
prophet Hosea, and dedicated them to me. This shows what parts of his
teaching we respectively accepted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[533:3186](2030831.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p2"></span> Virgil Georg, ii, 473, Æn. i. 746.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[533:3187](2030831.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxix-p11"></span> A Latin rhetorician of the time
of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius. Some of his exercises are still extant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: My ignorance of many natural phenomena is no excuse for your
ignorance as to the origin of souls. You ought, according to your
boasting dream to know everything. The thing of most importance was
forgotten in your cargo of Eastern wares.](2030832)
