[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030375)  [Next](2030377) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span> 2. *Literature*.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span>1. *The literature on Jerome* is immense.
The most often quoted general works are Zöckler, *Hieronymus.* Gotha,
1865 and Thierry, *St. Jérome* Par. 1867. On Jerome in general the
article by Freemantle in Smith and Wace *Dict. of Christian Biography*
is the first for the English reader to turn to. Ceillier and other
patrologies, while sufficiently full for their purpose, give very little
special treatment to this work, Ebert (*Gesch. chr.-Lat.-Lit.* Lpz.
1874) being a partial exception to this statement. The best literary
sources are the prolegomena and notes to the various editions of the
work itself. Much the same may be said of *Gennadius* though the
relative importance of his catalogue among his writings gives that a
larger proportionate attention. In English the article by Cazenove in
Smith and Wace and in French the account in the Histoire litteraire de
la France are the best generally accessible references.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span>2. *Literature on the writers mentioned by
Jerome and Gennadius.* Any one who cares to follow up in English the
study of any of the writers mentioned in the Lives of illustrious men
will find tools therefor: 1. For the earlier writers to the time of
Eusebius, Eusebius Church History tr. M’Giffert (N. Y. Chr. Lit. Co.)
*notes.* 2. For the whole period: Smith and Wace Dict. of Christian
Biography, 4 vols. and more accessible to most (though a cheap reprint
of Smith and Wace is now threatened) Schaff. Church Hist. (N. Y.
Scribners) where at the end of each volume an account is given of the
chief writers of the period including admirable bibliographical
reference.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span>Of course the best source is the works
themselves: *The Ante-Nicene Fathers,* ed. Coxe, *The Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers* ed. Schaff and Wace. (N. Y. Christian Literature
Co.) For further research the student is referred to the list of
Patrologies and Bibliographies in the supplementary volume of the
Ante-Nicene Fathers, to the bibliography of Ante-Nicene Fathers in the
same volume, to Chevalier. Dict. des sources hist. and the memoranda by
Sittl, in the Jahresberichte ü. d. fortschr. d. class. Alterthwiss. 1887
sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Manuscripts.](2030377)
