[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030759)  [Next](2030761) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxii-p1"></span> 21. My brother Paulinian tells me
that our friend has impugned certain things in my commentary on the
Ephesians: some of these criticisms he committed to memory, and has
indicated the actual passages impugned. I must not therefore refuse to
meet his statements, and I beg the reader, if I am somewhat prolix in
the statement and the refutation of his charges, to allow for the
necessary conditions of the discussion. I am not accusing another but
endeavouring to defend myself and to refute the false accusation of
heresy which is thrown in my teeth. On the Epistle to the Ephesians
Origen wrote three books. Didymus and Apollinarius also composed works
of their own. These I partly translated, partly adapted; my method is
described in the following passage of my prologue: “This also I wish to
state in my Preface. Origen, you must know, wrote three books upon this
Epistle, and I have partly followed him. Apollinarius also and Didymus
published certain commentaries on it, from which I have culled some
things, though but few; and, as seemed to me right, I put in or took out
others; but I have done this in such a way that the careful reader may
from the very first see how far the work is due to me, how far to
others.” Whatever fault there is detected in the exposition given of
this Epistle, if I am unable to shew that it exists in the Greek books
from which I have stated it to have been translated into Latin, I will
acknowledge that the fault is mine <span id="page_494">p. 494</span>
<span id="vi.xii.i.xxii-Page_494"></span>and not another’s. However,
that I should not be thought to be raising quibbles, and by this
artifice of self-excuse to be escaping from boldly meeting him, I will
set out the actual passages which are adduced as evidences of my fault.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to the passage “He hath chosen us before the foundation of the
world.”](2030761)
