[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030048)  [Next](2030050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*The Council of
Tyre*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p2.1"></span>Arsenius</span> was a bishop of the
Meletian faction. The men of his party put him in a place of
concealment, and charged him to remain there as long as possible. They
then cut off the right hand of a corpse, embalmed it, placed it in a
wooden case, and carried it about everywhere, declaring that it was the
hand of Arsenius, who had been murdered by Athanasius. But the
all-seeing eye did not permit Arsenius to remain long in concealment. He
was first seen alive in Egypt; then in the Thebaid; afterwards he was
led by Divine Providence to Tyre, where the hand of tragic fame was
brought before the council. The friends of Athanasius hunted him up, and
brought him to an inn, where they compelled him to lie hid for a time.
Early in the morning the great Athanasius came to the council.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p3"></span>First of all a woman of lewd life
was brought in, who deposed in a loud and impudent manner that she had
vowed perpetual virginity, but that Athanasius, who had lodged in her
house, had violated her chastity. After she had made her charge, the
accused came forward, and with him a presbyter worthy of all praise, by
name Timotheus. The court ordered Athanasius to reply to the indictment;
but he was silent, as if he had not been Athanasius. Timotheus, however,
addressed her thus: “Have I, O woman, ever conversed with you, or have I
entered your house?” She replied with still greater effrontery,
screaming aloud in her dispute with Timotheus, and, pointing at him with
her finger, exclaimed, “It was you who robbed me of my virginity; it was
you who stripped me of my chastity;” adding other indelicate expressions
which are used by shameless women. The devisers of this calumny were put
to shame, and all the bishops who were privy to it, blushed.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p4"></span>The woman was now being led out of
the Court, but the great Athanasius protested that instead of sending
her away they ought to examine her, and learn the name of the hatcher of
the plot. Hereupon his accusers yelled and shouted that he had
perpetrated other viler crimes, of which it was utterly impossible that
he could by any art or ingenuity <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-Page_63"></span>be cleared; and that eyes, not ears,
would decide on the evidence. Having said this, they exhibited the
famous box and exposed the embalmed hand to view. At this sight all the
spectators uttered a loud cry. Some believed the accusation to be true;
the others had no doubt of the falsehood, and thought that Arsenius was
lurking somewhere or other in concealment. When at length, after some
difficulty, a little silence was obtained, the accused asked his judges
whether any of them knew Arsenius. Several of them replying that they
knew him well, Athanasius gave orders that he should be brought before
them. Then he again asked them, “Is this the right Arsenius? Is this the
man I murdered? Is this the man those people mutilated after his murder
by cutting off his right hand?” When they had confessed that it was the
same individual, Athanasius pulled off his cloak, and exhibited two
hands, both the right and the left, and said, “Let no one seek for a
third hand, for man has received two hands from the Creator and no
more.”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p5"></span>Even after this plain proof the
calumniators and the judges who were privy to the crime, instead of
hiding themselves, or praying that the earth might open and swallow them
up, raised an uproar and commotion in the assembly, and declared that
Athanasius was a sorcerer, and that he had by his magical incantations
bewitched the eyes of men. The very men who a moment before had accused
him of murder now strove to tear him in pieces and to murder him. But
those whom the emperor had entrusted with the preservation of order
saved the life of Athanasius by dragging him away, and hurrying him on
board a ship <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) .

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p7"></span>When he appeared before the emperor,
he described all the dramatic plot which had been got up to ruin him.
The calumniators sent bishops attached to their faction into Mareotis,
viz., Theognis, bishop of Nicæa, Theodorus, bishop of Perinthus, Maris,
bishop of Chalcedon, Narcissus of Cilicia <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) , with others of the same sentiments.
Mareotis is a district near Alexandria, and derives its name from the
lake Maria <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) . Here they invented
other falsehoods, and, forging the reports of the trial, mixed up the
charges which had been shown to be false with fresh accusations, as if
they had been true, and despatched them to the emperor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_435"></span>[63:436](2030049.htm#fr_435) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p6"></span> Here comes in the famous scene of
the sudden apparition of Athanasius before Constantine. “The Emperor is
entering Constantinople in state. A small figure darts across his path
in the middle of the square, and stops his horse. The Emperor,
thunderstruck, tries to pass on; he cannot guess who the petitioner can
be. It is Athanasius, who comes to insist on justice, when thought to be
leagues away at the Council of Tyre.” Stanley, Eastern Church, Lect.
VII.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[63:437](2030049.htm#fr_436) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p8"></span> Bishop of Neronias, or Irenopolis.
Cf. p. 44, note.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[63:438](2030049.htm#fr_437) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxix-p9"></span> Marea or Maria, a town and lake of
Lower Egypt, giving its name to the district: now lake Marrout.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Consecration of the Church of Jerusalem.--Banishment of St.
Athanasius.](2030050)
