[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030098)  [Next](2030100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_104">p. 104</span>
<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-Page_104"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Of the expedition
against the Persians*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>No</span> sooner had the Persians heard
of the death of Constantius, than they took heart, proclaimed war, and
marched over the frontier of the Roman empire. Julian therefore
determined to muster his forces, though they were a host without a God
to guard them. First he sent to Delphi, to Delos and to Dodona, and to
the other oracles <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648) and enquired
of the seers if he should march. They bade him march and promised him
victory. One of these oracles I subjoin in proof of their falsehood. It
was as follows. “Now we gods all started to get trophies of victory by
the river beast and of them I Ares, bold raiser of the din of war, will
be leader.” <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649) Let them that style
the Pythian a God wise in word and prince of the muses ridicule the
absurdity of the utterance. I who have found out its falsehood will
rather pity him who was cheated by it. The oracle called the Tigris
“beast” because the river and the animal bear the same name. Rising in
the mountains of Armenia, and flowing through Assyria it discharges
itself into the Persian gulf. Beguiled by these oracles the unhappy man
indulged in dreams of victory, and after fighting with the Persians had
visions of a campaign against the Galileans, for so he called the
Christians, thinking thus to bring discredit on them. But, man of
education as he was, he ought to have bethought him that no mischief is
done to reputation by change of name, for even had Socrates been called
Critias and Pythagoras Phalaris they would have incurred no disgrace
from the change of name—nor yet would Nireus if he had been named
Thersites <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) have lost the
comeliness with which nature had gifted him. Julian had learned about
these things, but laid none of them to heart, and supposed that he could
wrong us by using an inappropriate title. He believed the lies of the
oracles and threatened to set up in our churches the statue of the
goddess of lust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_648"></span>[104:649](2030099.htm#fr_648) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p3"></span> This is probably the last occasion
on which the moribund oracles were consulted by any one of importance.
Of Delphi, the “navel of the earth” (Strabo ix. 505) in Phocis, Cicero
had written some four centuries earlier “Cur isto modo jam oracula
Delphi non eduntur, non modo nostra ætate, sed jam diu, ut nihil possit
esse contemptius:” Div. ii. 57. Plutarch, who died about <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 120,
wrote already “de defectu oraculorum.”

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p4"></span>The oracle of Apollo at Delos was
consulted only in the summer months, as in the winter the god was
supposed to be at Patara: so Virgil (iv. 143) writes

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p5"></span>“Qualis ubi hibernam Lyciam
Xanthique fluenta

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p6"></span>Deserit, ac Delum maternam invisit
Apollo.”

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p7"></span>Dodona in Epirus was the most
ancient of the oracular shrines, where the suppliant went

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p8"></span>“——<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p8.2"></span>φρα θεοῖο</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p9.2"></span>κ δρυὸς ὑψικόμοιο Διὸς βουλὴν
ἐπακούσαι</span>.”

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p10"></span>Od. xiv. 327.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p11"></span>“The oracles” were potentially
“dumb,” “Apollo…with hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving,” as
Milton sings, at the Nativity, but it was not till the reign of
Theodosius that they were finally silenced.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[104:650](2030099.htm#fr_649) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p12.1"></span>νῦν πάντες ὡρμήθημεν θεοῖ νίκης
τρόπαια κομίσασθαι παρὰ θηρὶ ποταμῷ τῶν δ᾽ ἐγὼ ἡγεμονεύσω θοῦρος
πολεμόκλονος ῎Αρης</span>

<span id="fn_650"></span>[104:651](2030099.htm#fr_650) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p13"></span> These four illustrations,
occurring in a single sentence indicate a certain breadth of reading on
the part of the writer, and bear out his character for learning. (cf.
Gibbon and Jortin, remarks on Eccl. Hist. ii. 113.) Socrates, the best
of the philosophers, is set against Critias, one of the worst of the
politicians of Hellas; Pythagoras, the Samian sage of Magna Græcia,
against Phalaris, the Sicilian tyrant who

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p14"></span>“tauro violenti membra Perilli

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p15"></span>Torruit;” (Ovid. A. A. 1. 653)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p16"></span>but did not write the Epistles
once ascribed to him. Theodoretus probably remembered his Homer when he
cited Thersites as the ugliest man of the old world;—

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p17"></span>“He was squint-eyed, and lame of
either foot;

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p18"></span>So crook-back’d that he had no
breast; sharp-headed, where did shoot

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p19"></span>Here and there spersed, thin mossy
hair.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p20"></span>Il. ii. 219. Chapman’s Trans.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p21"></span>And the juxtaposition of
Pythagoras and Nireus suggests that it may possibly have been Horace who
suggested Nireus as the type of beauty:—

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p22"></span>“Nec te Pythagoræ fallant arcana
renati,

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p23"></span>Formaque vincas Nirea,” (Hor.
Epod. xv.)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p24"></span>though Nireus appears as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.xvi-p24.1"></span>κάλλιστος
ἀνήρ</span> in the same book of the Iliad as that in which Thersites is
derided, and Theodoret is said to have known no Latin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the boldness of speech of the decurion of Berœa.](2030100)
