[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030761)  [Next](2030763) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p1"></span> 23. I will deal shortly with the
second passage which my brother tells me has been marked for blame,
because the complaint is exceedingly frivolous, and bears on its face
its calumnious character. The passage <span
id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) is that in <span id="page_495">p.
495</span> <span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-Page_495"></span>which Paul declares
that God “made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places, far
above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and every name that
is named, not only in this world but also in that which is to come.”
After stating various expositions which have been given, I came to the
offices of the ministers of God, and spoke of the principalities and
powers, the virtues and dominions: and I add:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p3"></span>“They must assuredly have others who
are subject to them, who are under their power and serve them, and are
fortified by their authority: and this distribution of offices will
exist not only in the present world but in the world to come, so that
each individual will rise or fall from one step of advancement and
honour to another, some ascending and some descending, and will come
successively under each of these powers, virtues, principalities, and
dominions.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p4"></span>I then went on to describe the
various divine offices and ministries after the similitude of the palace
of an earthly king, which I fully described; and I added:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p5"></span>“Can we suppose that God the Lord of
lords and King of kings, is content with a single order of servants? We
speak of an archangel because there are other angels of whom he is
chief: and so there would be nothing said of Principalities, Powers and
Dominions unless it were implied that there were others of inferior
rank.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p6"></span>But, if he thinks that I became a
follower of Origen because I mentioned in my exposition these
advancements and honours, these ascents and descents, increasings and
diminishings; I must point out that to say, as Origen does, that Angels
and Cherubim and Seraphim are turned into demons and men, is a very
different thing from saying that the Angels themselves have various
offices allotted to them,—a doctrine which is not repugnant to that of
the church. Just as among men there are various degrees of dignity
distinguished by the different kinds of work, as the bishop, the
presbyter and the other Ecclesiastical grades have each their own order,
while yet all are men; so we may believe that, while they all retain the
dignity of Angels, there are various degrees of eminence among them,
without imagining that angels are changed into men, and that men are
new-made into angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[494:3047](2030762.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[Eph.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to the passage “That in the ages to come &c.“](2030763)
