[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030335)  [Next](2030337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p1"></span> *CXLVI. To John the Œconomus.* <span
id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p3"></span>Rest and a life free from care are very
grateful to me. I have therefore blocked the door of the monastery, and
decline intercourse with my friends.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p4"></span>But I have received information that
fresh attacks are being made against the Faith of the Gospels, and
therefore conclude that there may be danger in my silence. When wrong
has been done some mortal prince, not only <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_317"></span>the guilty authors of
the outrage but they also who have been standing by and made no effort
to drive off the assailants, are in peril of punishment: What penalty
then ought not to be undergone by men who can venture to look lightly on
the utterance of blasphemy against our God and Saviour? This is the fear
which has impelled me now to write and expose the innovations of which I
have been informed.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p5"></span>It is said that a common report in the
city represents that after certain presbyters had offered prayer, and
concluded it in the wonted manner, while some said “For to Thee belongs
glory and to thy Christ and to the Holy Ghost;” and others “Through
grace and loving kindness of thy Christ, with whom belongs glory to Thee
with thy holy Spirit,” the very wise archdeacon prohibited the use of
the expression, “the Christ” and said that the “only begotten” ought to
be glorified. If this is true it were impossible to exceed the impiety.
For he either divides the one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons and
regards the only begotten Son as lawful and natural, but the Christ as
adopted and spurious, and consequently unmeet for being honoured in
doxology; or else he is endeavouring to support the heresy which has now
burst in on us with the riot of wild revelry. Had a grievous tempest
been now oppressing us, any one might have supposed that the blasphemer
suited his blasphemy to the necessity of the moment, through fear of the
power of the originators of the heresy. But now that He who is
blasphemed has rebuked the winds and the sea, and blessed the
storm-tossed churches with a calm, while everywhere by land and sea the
proclamation of the apostles is preached, what room is there for the
blasphemy? While not even they who have lately basely inserted among the
doctrines of the Church that flesh and godhead are of one and the same
nature have ever forbidden the offering of praise to the Lord Christ.
This fact may be easily ascertained from those who have returned thence.
A man holding the foremost place in the ecclesiastical rank ought to
have known the divine Scripture, and to have learnt from it that just as
the heralds of the truth rank the only begotten Son with the Father, so
accordingly using the title of “the Christ” instead of that of “Son”
they number Him sometimes with the Father and sometimes with the Holy
Ghost; for the Christ is none other than the only begotten Son of God.
So we may quote the divine Paul writing to the Corinthians, but teaching
the world, that “There is one God the Father of whom are all things…and
one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things.” <span
id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) Thus he calls the same person,
Christ, Jesus, Lord, and Creator of all things. And writing to the
Thessalonians he says “Now God Himself and our Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ direct our way unto you.” <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) And in his second epistle to the
same he puts the Christ before the Father, not to invert the order, but
to teach that the order of the names does not indicate a distinction of
dignity and nature. His words are “Now our Lord Jesus Christ Himself,
and God, even our Father, which hath loved us, and hath given us
everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your
hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.” <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048) And at the end of his Epistle to
the Romans after certain exhortations he adds “I beseech you brethren
for the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake and for the love of the spirit.” <span
id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) Now if he had known the Christ as
being any other than the Son he would not have put Him before the Holy
Ghost. Writing to the Corinthians, at the very beginning of his letter,
he mentions the name of Christ as alone sufficient to influence the
faithful. “Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ that ye all speak the same thing” <span
id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) and when writing to them a second
time he thus concludes “The peace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love
of God the Father and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you
all.” <span id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) Here he puts the name
of Christ not only before the Spirit, but also before the Father and
this in all the churches is the beginning of the Liturgy of the Mystery.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p12"></span>According, then, to this extraordinary
regulation the august name of our God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, ought
to be omitted from the mystic writings. But it is unnecessary to say
more on this point. The opening of every one of his letters is
distinguished by the divine Apostle with this address. At one time it is
“Paul a servant of Jesus Christ called to be an apostle.” <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) At another “Paul called to be an
apostle of Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) At
another “Paul a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) And suiting his benediction to his
exordium he deduces it from the same source and links the title of the
Son with God the Father, saying “Grace to you and peace from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055) And he graces the conclusion of his
letters <span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_318"></span>with the blessing “The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, amen.” <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p18"></span>Copious additional evidence may be
found whereby it may be learnt without difficulty that our Lord Jesus
Christ is no other person than the Son which completes the Trinity. For
the same before the ages was only begotten Son and God the Word, and
after the resurrection He was called Jesus and Christ, receiving the
names from the facts. Jesus means Saviour; “Thou shalt call His name
Jesus for He shall save His people from their sins.” <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p20"></span>He is named Christ from being as man
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and called our High Priest, Apostle,
Prophet and King. Long ago the divine Moses exclaimed “The Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee a prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren, like unto me.” <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058) And
the divine David cries “The Lord hath sworn and will not repent, Thou
art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedek.” <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) This prophecy is confirmed by the
divine Apostle. <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060) And again
“seeing then that we have a great High Priest that has passed into the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.” <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p25"></span>That as God, He is king before the
ages that prophetic minstrelsy teaches us in the words “Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right
sceptre.” <span id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p27"></span>His majesty as man is also shown us.
For having the sovereignty of all things as God and Creator, He assumes
this majesty as man, wherefore it is added “Thou lovest righteousness
and hatest wickedness, therefore God thy God hath anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows.” <span
id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063) And in the second psalm the
anointed one himself says “Yet was I set as king by Him upon the holy
hill of Sion, I will declare the decree of the Lord. The Lord hath said
unto me ‘Thou art my Son this day have I begotten Thee; ask of me and I
shall give Thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession.’” <span
id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064) This He said as man, for as man He
receives what as God He possesses. And at the very beginning of the
psalm the gift of prophecy ranks Him with God the Father in the words
“Why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing. The kings
of the earth set themselves and the rulers take counsel together against
the Lord and against His anointed.” <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p31"></span>Let no one then foolishly suppose that
the Christ is any other than the only begotten Son. Let us not imagine
ourselves wiser than the gift of the Spirit. Let us hear the words of
the great Peter, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” <span
id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) Let us hear the Lord Christ
confirming this confession, for “On this rock,” He says, “I will build
my church and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.” <span
id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067) Wherefore too the wise Paul, most
excellent master builder of the churches, fixed no other foundation than
this. “I,” he says, “as a wise master builder have laid the foundation,
and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he
buildeth thereon. For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068) How
then can they think of any other foundation, when they are bidden not to
fix a foundation, but to build on that which is laid? The divine writer
recognises Christ as the foundation, and glories in this title, as when
he says, “I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I but
Christ liveth in me.” <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) And
again “To me to live is Christ and to die is gain,” <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) and again “For I determined not to
know anything among you save Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) And a little before he says, “But
we preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling-block and to the
Greeks foolishness, but unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.” <span
id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072) And in his Epistle to the Galatians
he writes, “But when it pleased God who separated me from my mother’s
womb and called me by His grace to reveal His Son in me that I might
preach Him among the heathen.” <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) But when writing to the Corinthians
he does not say we preach “the Son” but “Christ crucified,” herein doing
no violence to his commission, but recognising the same to be Jesus,
Christ, Lord, only begotten, and God the Word. For the same reason too
at the beginning of his letter to the Romans he calls himself “servant
of Jesus Christ” and describes himself as “separated unto the gospel of
God, which He had promised afore by His prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God <span
id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_319"></span>with
power” <span id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) and so on. He calls
the same both Jesus Christ, and Son of David, and Son of God, as God and
Lord of all, and yet in the middle of his epistle, after making mention
of the Jews, he adds, “whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning
the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever,
amen.” <span id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) Here he says that He
who according to the flesh derived His descent from the Jews is eternal
God and is praised by the right minded as Lord of all created things.
The same teaching is given us in the Apostle’s words to the excellent
Titus “Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) Here he calls the same both
Saviour, and great God, and Jesus Christ. And in another place he
writes, “In the kingdom of Christ and of God.” <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) Moreover the chorus of the angels
announced to the shepherds “Unto you is born this day in the city of
David…Christ the Lord.” <span id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p45"></span>But to men who meditate on God’s law
day and night, it is indeed needless to write all the proofs of this
kind; the above are sufficient to persuade even the most obstinate
opponents not to divide the divine titles. One point, however, I cannot
endure to omit. He is alleged to have said that there are many Christs
but one Son. Into this error I suppose he fell through ignorance. For if
he had read the divine Scripture, he would have known that the title of
the Son has also been bestowed by our bountiful Lord on many. The
lawgiver Moses, the writer of the ancient history, says “And the sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they took them
wives of them,” <span id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) and the God
of all Himself said to this Prophet “Thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Israel
is my son even my first-born.” <span
id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) In the great song he says “Rejoice
O ye nations with His people and let all the sons of God be strong in
Him;” <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) and by the mouth of the
prophet Isaiah He says “I have nourished and brought up sons (children)
and they have rebelled against me;” <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) and through the thrice blessed
David “I have said ye are gods and all of you are children of the Most
High,” <span id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) and to the Romans the
wise Paul wrote in this manner, “For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. For the Spirit itself beareth witness with
our spirit, that we are the children of God. And if children, then
heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer
with Him that we may be also glorified together;” <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) and to the Galatians he writes “And
because ye are sons God hath sent forth the spirit of His Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a
son; and if a son then an heir of God through Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) The lesson he gives to the
Ephesians is “in love having predestinated us into the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to Himself.” <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p54"></span>If then, because the name of the
Christ is common, we ought not to glorify the Christ as God, we shall
equally shrink from worshipping Him as Son, since this also is a name
which has been bestowed upon many. And why do I say the Son? The very
name of God itself has been given by God to many. “The Lord the God of
gods hath spoken and called the earth.” <span
id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) And “I have said Ye are
gods,” <span id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) and “Thou shalt not
revile the gods.” <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) Many too
have appropriated this name to themselves. The dæmons who have deceived
mankind have given this title to idols; whence Jeremiah exclaims, “The
gods that have not made the heavens and the earth even they shall perish
from the earth and from under these heavens;” <span
id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) and again “They made to themselves
gods of silver and gods of gold;” <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) and the prophet Isaiah when he had
mocked the making of the idols, and said “He burneth part thereof in the
fire with part thereof he eateth flesh he warmeth himself and saith Aha
I am warm I have seen the fire,” <span
id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) went on “and the residue thereof he
maketh a god and falleth down unto it and saith ‘Deliver me for thou art
my god’” <span id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) and so the prophet
laments over them and says “Know that their heart is ashes.” <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) And the Psalmist David has taught
us to sing “For all the gods of the nations are idols, but the Lord made
the heavens.” <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p64"></span>But this common use of titles gives no
offence to men who are instructed in true religion. We are aware that
the dæmons have falsely bestowed upon themselves and <span
id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_320"></span>on
idols the divine name, while the saints have received this honour of
free grace.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p65"></span>In reality and by nature it is the God
of all, and His only-begotten Son and the Holy Spirit which are God.
This is distinctly taught us by the admirable Paul in the words “For
though there be that are called gods whether in heaven or in earth, as
there are gods many and lords many, but to us there is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord by whom are
all things and we by Him.” <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096)
And the Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of God and so also is the soul
of man, for, it is written, “His breath goeth forth,” <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) and “O ye spirits and souls of the
righteous bless ye the Lord,” <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098)
and the Psalmist David called the angels spirits. “Who maketh His angels
spirits and His ministers a flame of fire.” <span
id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) Why indeed do I mention the angels
and the souls of men? Even the dæmons are so called by the Lord “He
shall take unto him seven other spirits more wicked than himself and
they shall enter in, and the last state of that man shall be worse than
the first.” <span id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) But even this
application of the name does not offend the pious reader, for the Father
and His only begotten Son and His Holy Spirit are one God by nature; and
the divine Word made man, our Lord Jesus Christ, is by nature one Son,
only begotten of the Father; and the Comforter who completes the number
of the Trinity is one Holy Ghost. Thus though many are named fathers, we
worship one Father, the Father before the ages, who Himself gave this
title to men, as the Apostle says, “For this cause I bow my knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every fatherhood in heaven
and earth is named.” <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) Let us
not then, because others are called christs, rob ourselves of the
worship of our Lord Jesus Christ. For just as though many are called
gods and fathers, there is one God and Father over all and before the
ages; and though many are called sons, there is one real and natural
Son; and though many are styled spirits there is one Holy Ghost; just so
though many are called christs there is one Lord Jesus Christ by Whom
are all things. And very properly does the Church cling to this name;
for she has heard Paul, escorter of the Bride, exclaiming “I have
espoused you to one husband that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ,” <span id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) and again “Husbands
love your wives as Christ also loved the Church,” <span
id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) and again “For this cause shall a
man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church.” <span
id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) Listen to him as he says “Christ
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us,” <span id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) and elsewhere “Know ye
not that so many of us as were baptized unto Jesus Christ were baptized
into His death,” <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) and in
another place, “For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ
have put on Christ,” <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) and
again “Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfil the lust thereof.” <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p79"></span>They who are blessed by the boons of
God and have learnt to know these passages and others like them, kindled
with warm love for their bountiful Master, constantly carry on their
lips this His dearest name and cry in the words of the Song of Songs “My
beloved is mine and I am his;” “I sat down under his shadow with great
delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.” <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) And besides all this that name of
ours which we love so well we have derived from the name of Christ. We
are called Christians. <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p82"></span>Of this name the Lord of all says,
“The Lord God shall call His servants by another name which shall be
blessed on the earth” <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) and the
following is the reason why the Church specially clings to this name.
When the only-begotten Son of God was made man, <span id="page_321">p.
321</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_321"></span>then He was named
Christ, then human nature received the beams of intellectual light; then
the heralds of the truth shed their beams upon the world. Teachers of
the Church, however, constantly used the names of the only begotten
without distinction; at one time they glorify the Father the Son and the
Holy Ghost; at another the Father with Christ and the Holy Ghost; yet as
far as the sense is concerned there is here no difference. Wherefore
after the Lord had commanded to baptize in the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost the blessed Peter said to them who
received his preaching and asked what they must do, “Believe and be
baptized every one of you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,” <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) as though this name contained in
itself all the potency of the divine command. The same teaching is
clearly given us by the great Basil, luminary of the Cappadocians, <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) or rather of the world. His words
are “the name of Christ is the confession of the whole.” It indicates at
once the Father, who anointed, the Son, who was anointed, and the Holy
Ghost whereby He was anointed. Furthermore the thrice blessed Fathers
assembled in council at Nicæa, after saying that we must believe in one
God, the Father, added “and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten
Son of God.” Thereby they teach that the Lord Jesus Christ is Himself
the only begotten Son of God.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p86"></span>To what has been said it must also be
added that we must not affirm that after the ascension the Lord Christ
is not Christ but only begotten Son. The divine Gospels and the history
of the Acts and the Epistles of the Apostle himself were, as we know,
written after the ascension. It is after the ascension that the divine
Paul exclaims “Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our
profession.” <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) And again, “For
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true; but into Heaven itself, now to appear in the
presence of God for us.” <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) And
again after speaking of our hope in God he adds “which hope we have as
an anchor both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within
the veil; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an
High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.” <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) And when, writing to the blessed
Titus about the second advent he says, “Looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) And to the
Thessalonians he wrote in similar terms “For they themselves show of us
what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how we turned to God
from idols to serve the living and true God; and to wait for His Son
from heaven, whom He raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered
us from the wrath to come.” <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118)
And again “And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one
toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: to the end
he may stablish your hearts unblamable in holiness before God, even our
Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
saints.” <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) And again when
writing to the same a second time he says, “Now we beseech you,
brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him.” <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) And a
little further on when predicting the destruction of antichrist he adds,
“Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming.” <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) And when exhorting the Romans to
concord he says, “But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou
set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ. For it is written, as I live, saith the Lord, every knee
shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.” <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) And the Lord Himself when
announcing His second advent besides other things says too this “Then if
any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it
not. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto
the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.” <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p97"></span>And after the immortality and
incorruptibility of His body He called Himself Son of Man, naming
Himself from the nature which was seen, inasmuch as the divine nature is
indeed invisible to angels, as the Lord Himself had said “No one hath
seen God at any time.” <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) And to
the great Moses He said “There shall no man see me and live.” <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p100"></span><span id="page_322">p. 322</span>
<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_322"></span>The words “Henceforth know we no
man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh;
yet now henceforth know we Him no more,” <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) were not written by the divine
Apostle in order to annul the assumed nature, but for the confirmation
of our own future incorruption, immortality, and spiritual life.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p102"></span>The Apostle therefore continues
“Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature; old things are
passed away; behold all things are become new.” <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) He speaks of what is to be in the
future as though it had already come to pass. We have not yet been
gifted with immortality, but we shall be; and when so gifted we shall
not become bodiless, but we shall put on immortality. “For” says the
divine Apostle, “we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life.” <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) And again “For this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.” <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) Thus he did not
speak of the Lord as bodiless, but taught us to believe that even the
visible nature is incorruptible, and glorified with the divine glory.
This instruction he has given us yet more clearly in the Epistle to the
Philippians; “For our conversation” he writes “is in heaven; from whence
also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body.” <span id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) By these words he
teaches us distinctly that the body of the Lord is a body, but a divine
body, and glorified with the divine glory.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p107"></span>Let us, then, not shun the name
whereby we enjoy salvation, and whereby all things are made new, as says
our teacher himself in his Epistle to the Ephesians,—“According to His
good pleasure which He hath purposed in Himself; that in the
dispensation of the fulness of time He might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even
in Him.” <span id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) Let us rather learn
from this blessed language how we are bound to glorify our benefactor,
by connecting the name of Christ with our God and Father. In his Epistle
to the Romans the Apostle says “my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus
Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the
scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the
everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith;
to God only will be glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) Writing to the Ephesians he thus
gives praise—“Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us,
unto Him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages,
world without end. Amen.” <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) And
a little before he says, “For this cause I bow my knee unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is
named.” <span id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) And considerably
farther on he says “Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the
Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) And when he requites with
benediction the liberality of the Philippians he says “But my God shall
supply all your need according to His riches in glory by Christ
Jesus.” <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) And for the Hebrews
he prayed, “Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood
of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do
His will, working in you that which is well pleasing in His sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) And not only when glorifying, but
also when exhorting and protesting, the Apostle conjoins the Christ with
God the Father. To the blessed Timothy he exclaims “I charge thee
therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) And again “I give thee charge in
the sight of God who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this
commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ; which in His times He shall shew, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords; who only hath
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom
no man hath seen, nor can see; to whom be honour and power everlasting.
Amen.” <span id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p117"></span>These are the lessons we have learnt
from the divine Apostles; this is the teaching given us by John and
Matthew, those mighty rivers of the gospel message. The latter says “The
book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of
Abraham;” <span id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140) and the former when
he shewed the things which were before the ages wrote, “In the <span
id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-Page_323"></span>beginning was the Word and the Word was
with God and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by Him.” <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[316:2046](2030336.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p2"></span> Cf. note on page 288. This letter, or
rather doctrinal statement is incomplete. Garnerius supposes it to have
been written during Theodoret’s retirement after the Council of
Chalcedon. There he cut himself off from society and wished to devote
himself to study and contemplation.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[317:2047](2030336.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p6.1"></span>[1
Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[317:2048](2030336.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p7"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p7.1"></span>[1
Thess. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[317:2049](2030336.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p8"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p8.1"></span>[2
Thess. 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#017)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[317:2050](2030336.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p9.1"></span>[Romans xv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[317:2051](2030336.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p10"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p10.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[317:2052](2030336.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p11.1"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[317:2053](2030336.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p13"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p13.1"></span>[Romans i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[317:2054](2030336.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[317:2055](2030336.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p15.1"></span>[Titus i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[317:2056](2030336.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p16.1"></span>[Romans i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[318:2057](2030336.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p17.1"></span>[Romans xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[318:2058](2030336.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p19"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p19.1"></span>[Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[318:2059](2030336.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p21"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p21.1"></span>[Deut. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[318:2060](2030336.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p22"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p22.1"></span>[Psalm cxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[318:2061](2030336.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p23"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p23.1"></span>[Hebrews vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[318:2062](2030336.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p24"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p24.1"></span>[Hebrews iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[318:2063](2030336.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p26"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p26.1"></span>[Psalm xlv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[318:2064](2030336.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p28"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p28.1"></span>[Psalm xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[318:2065](2030336.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p29"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p29.1"></span>[Ps.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p29.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[318:2066](2030336.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p30"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p30.1"></span>[Ps.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[318:2067](2030336.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p32"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p32.1"></span>[Matt. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[318:2068](2030336.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p33"></span> It will be observed that our author
omits the verse containing the famous paronomasia, and that what he
regards the Saviour as confirming is not any supposed authority on the
part of the speaker but the identification of Himself with the Christ
and of the Christ with the Son of the living God.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[318:2069](2030336.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p34"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p34.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[318:2070](2030336.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p35"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p35.1"></span>[Gal. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[318:2071](2030336.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p36"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p36.1"></span>[Phil. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[318:2072](2030336.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p37"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p37.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[318:2073](2030336.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p38"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p38.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[318:2074](2030336.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p39"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p39.1"></span>[Gal.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[319:2075](2030336.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p40"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p40.1"></span>[Romans i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[319:2076](2030336.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p41"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p41.1"></span>[Romans ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[319:2077](2030336.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p42"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p42.1"></span>[Titus ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[319:2078](2030336.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.1"></span>[Ephes. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.2"></span>.
Here the A.V. rather obscures the force of the original. The R.V. alters
to “in the kingdom of Christ and God,” but even this hardly brings out
Theodoret’s views of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.4"></span>ν τῆ βασιλεί& 139· τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ
Θεοῦ</span>, “in the kingdom of the Christ and God.” The <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.5"></span>mss.</span> do not vary.
At the same time it will be borne in mind that the anarthrous use of
“<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.6"></span>Θεός</span>” is
not infrequent, and that some commentators (cf. Alford *ad loc.*) would
hesitate to ground on this passage the argument of the text. The reading
of <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.7"></span>א and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.8"></span>Β</span> in <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.9"></span>[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.10"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.11"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.12"></span>μονογενὴς Θεός</span>” is significant.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[319:2079](2030336.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p43.13"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p44"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p44.1"></span>[Luke ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[319:2080](2030336.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p46"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p46.1"></span>[Gen. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[319:2081](2030336.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p47"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p47.1"></span>[Exodus iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[319:2082](2030336.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p48"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p48.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p48.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[319:2083](2030336.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p49"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p49.1"></span>[Is. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[319:2084](2030336.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p50"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p50.1"></span>[Psalm lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[319:2085](2030336.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p51"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p51.1"></span>[Romans viii.
14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[319:2086](2030336.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p52"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p52.1"></span>[Gal.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[319:2087](2030336.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p53"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p53.1"></span>[Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p53.2"></span>. Observe the position of “in love” which
agrees with the margin of R.V.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[319:2088](2030336.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p55"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p55.1"></span>[Psalm l.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p55.2"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[319:2089](2030336.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p56"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p56.1"></span>[Psalm lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[319:2090](2030336.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p57"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p57.1"></span>[Exodus ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#028)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[319:2091](2030336.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p58"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p58.1"></span>[Jeremiah x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[319:2092](2030336.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p59"></span> This seems to be an inaccurate
quotation of <span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p59.1"></span>Baruch vi. 11<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p59.2"></span>. cf. p. 165 n.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[319:2093](2030336.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p60"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p60.1"></span>[Isaiah xliv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[319:2094](2030336.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p61"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p61.1"></span>[Isaiah xliv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[319:2095](2030336.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p62"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p62.1"></span>[Isaiah xliv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p62.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[319:2096](2030336.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p63"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p63.1"></span>[Psalm xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[320:2097](2030336.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p66"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p66.1"></span>[1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[320:2098](2030336.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p67"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p67.1"></span>[Psalm cxlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[320:2099](2030336.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p68"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p68.1"></span>Song of the three holy children 63

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[320:2100](2030336.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p69"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p69.1"></span>[Psalm civ.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[320:2101](2030336.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p69.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p70"></span> [Matt.
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043), [Luke
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p70.1"></span>[Matt. xii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p70.2"></span>. [Luke xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p70.3"></span>. Observe difference of tense and
variation.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[320:2102](2030336.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p70.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p71"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p71.1"></span>[Ephes. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p71.2"></span>. R.V. marg. It will be seen that the
argument of Theodoret does not admit of the translation “whole family”
as in A.V.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[320:2103](2030336.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p72"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p72.1"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[320:2104](2030336.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p72.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p73"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p73.1"></span>[Ephes. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[320:2105](2030336.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p74"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p74.1"></span>[Eph.
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[320:2106](2030336.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p75"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p75.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[320:2107](2030336.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p76"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p76.1"></span>[Rom. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[320:2108](2030336.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p76.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p77"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p77.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[320:2109](2030336.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p77.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p78"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p78.1"></span>[Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[320:2110](2030336.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p80"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p80.1"></span>[Cant.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[320:2111](2030336.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p80.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.1"></span>[Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.2"></span>. “The word seems to have been in the
first instance a nickname fastened by the heathen populace of Antioch on
the followers of Christ, who still continued to style themselves the
‘disciples’ or the ‘saints’ or the ‘brethren’ or the ‘believers,’ and
the like. The biting gibes of the Antiochene populace which stung to the
quick successive emperors—Hadrian, M. Aurelius, Severus, Julian—would be
little disposed to spare the helpless adherents of this new
‘superstition.’ Objection indeed has been taken to the Antiochene origin
of the name on the ground that the termination is Roman, like
Pompeianus, Cæsarianus, and the like. But this termination, if it was
Latin, was certainly Asiatic likewise, as appears from such words as
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.4"></span>Ασιανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.5"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.6"></span>βακτριανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.7"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.8"></span>Σαρδιανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.9"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.10"></span>Τραλλιανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.11"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.12"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.13"></span>Αρειανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.14"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.15"></span>Μενανδριανός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.16"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.17"></span>Σαβελλιανός</span>.
The next occurrence of the word in a Christian document is on the
occasion of St. Paul’s appearance before Festus (<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.18"></span>a.d.</span> 60). It is not however put in
the mouth of a believer, but occurs in the scornful jest of Agrippa,
‘With but little persuasion thou wouldest fain make me a Christian’
(<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.19"></span>[Acts xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.20"></span>). The third and last example occurs a
few years later. In the first Epistle of St. Peter, presumably about
<span class="c14"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.21"></span>a.d.</span> 66 or
67, the Apostle writes ‘Let not any of you suffer as a murderer or a
thief…but if (he suffers) as a Christian, let him not be ashamed but
glorify God’ ([1 Pet. 4.15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p81.22"></span>). Here again the term is not the
Apostle’s own, but represents the charge brought against the believers
by their heathen accusers. In the New Testament there is no indication
that the name was yet adopted by the disciples of Christ as their own.
Thus Christian documents again confirm the statement of Tacitus that as
early as the Neronian persecution this name prevailed, and the same
origin also is indirectly suggested by those notices, which he directly
states—not *‘qui sese appellabant Christianos’* but *‘quos vulgus
appellabat Christianos.’* It was a gibe of the common people against
‘the brethren.’” Bp. Lightfoot Ap. Fathers, II. i. 417.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[320:2112](2030336.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p83"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p83.1"></span>[Isa.
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p83.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[321:2113](2030336.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p83.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p84"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p84.1"></span>[Acts ii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p84.2"></span>. “Believe” substituted for “repent.”

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[321:2114](2030336.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p84.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p85"></span> i.e. of Cæsarea. The Cappadocian
Cæsarea originally called Mazaca is still Kasaria.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[321:2115](2030336.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p87"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p87.1"></span>[Heb. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p87.2"></span>. On the opinion of the Pauline authorship
of the Epistle to the Hebrews cf. note on page 37. The Alexandrian view
is shewn to have affected the Eastern Church. For the reading “Jesus
Christ” instead of Jesus the Son of God on which Theodoret’s argument
depends there is no manuscript authority.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[321:2116](2030336.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p87.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p88"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p88.1"></span>[Heb. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[321:2117](2030336.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p88.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p89"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p89.1"></span>[Heb.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[321:2118](2030336.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p89.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.1"></span>[Titus ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.2"></span>. Cf. note on page 319 on the passage
<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.3"></span>[Ephes. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.4"></span>.
Here, however, the position of the article is in favour of the
interpretation “Jesus Christ, the great God and our Saviour” which was
generally adopted by the Greek orthodox Fathers in their controversy
with the Arians and by the majority of ancient and modern commentators.
But see Alford *ad loc.* for such arguments as may be adduced in favour
of taking <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.5"></span>σωτήρ</span> as anarthrous like <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.6"></span>Θεός</span>

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[321:2119](2030336.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p90.7"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p91"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p91.1"></span>[1 Thess.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[321:2120](2030336.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p92"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p92.1"></span>[1 Thess.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[321:2121](2030336.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p92.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p93"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p93.1"></span>[2 Thess. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[321:2122](2030336.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p93.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p94"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p94.1"></span>[2 Thess. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[321:2123](2030336.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p94.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p95"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p95.1"></span>[Rom.
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[321:2124](2030336.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p95.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p96"></span> [Matt.
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p96.1"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p96.2"></span>
and 27

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[321:2125](2030336.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p98"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p98.1"></span>[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p98.2"></span>. The “no *man*” of A.V. does not admit of
Theodoret’s argument.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[321:2126](2030336.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p98.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p99"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p99.1"></span>[Ex. xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p99.2"></span>, lxx. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p99.3"></span>οὐδεὶς ὄψεται</span>

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[322:2127](2030336.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p101"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p101.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[322:2128](2030336.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p103"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p103.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[322:2129](2030336.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p103.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p104"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p104.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[322:2130](2030336.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p104.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p105"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p105.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[322:2131](2030336.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p105.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p106"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p106.1"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[322:2132](2030336.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p108"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p108.1"></span>[Eph.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[322:2133](2030336.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p108.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p109"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p109.1"></span>[Rom.
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[322:2134](2030336.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p109.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p110"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p110.1"></span>[Eph.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p110.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[322:2135](2030336.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p110.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p111"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p111.1"></span>[Eph. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p111.2"></span>. A.V.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[322:2136](2030336.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p111.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p112"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p112.1"></span>[Eph. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[322:2137](2030336.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p112.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p113"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p113.1"></span>[Phil. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[322:2138](2030336.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p113.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p114"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p114.1"></span>[Heb.
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[322:2139](2030336.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p114.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p115"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p115.1"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[322:2140](2030336.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p115.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p116"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p116.1"></span>[1 Tim.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p116.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[322:2141](2030336.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p118"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p118.1"></span>[Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[323:2142](2030336.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p118.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvii-p119"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p119.1"></span>[John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvii-p119.2"></span>. Here this document abruptly terminates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop of Germanicia.](2030337)
