[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030039)  [Next](2030041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Epistle of the
Emperor Constantine against Eusebius and Theognis, addressed to the
Nicomedians*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p2"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p2.1"></span>Who</span> has taught these doctrines to
the innocent multitude? It is manifestly Eusebius, the co-operator in
the cruelty of the tyrants. For that he was the creature <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) of the tyrant has been clearly shown;
and, indeed, is proved by the slaughter of the bishops, and by the fact
that these victims were true bishops. The relentless persecution of the
Christians proclaims this fact aloud.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p4"></span>“I shall not here say anything of the
insults directed against me, by which the conspiracies of the opposite
faction were mainly carried out. But he went so far as to send spies to
watch me, and scarcely refrained from raising troops in aid of the
tyrant. Let not any one imagine that I allege what I am not prepared to
prove. I am in possession of clear evidence; for I have caused the
bishops and presbyters belonging to his following to be seized. But I
pass over all these facts. I only mention them for the purpose of making
these persons ashamed of their conduct, and not from any feeling of
resentment.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p5"></span>“There is one thing I fear, one thing
which causes me anxiety, and that is to see you charged as accomplices;
for you are influenced by the doctrines of Eusebius, and have thus been
led away from the truth. But your cure will be speedy, if, after
obtaining a bishop who holds pure and faithful doctrines, you will but
look unto God. This depends upon you alone; and you would, no doubt,
have thus acted long ago, had not the aforesaid Eusebius come here,
strongly supported by those then in power, and overturned all
discipline.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p6"></span>“As it is necessary to say something
more about Eusebius, your patience will remember that a council was held
in the city of Nicæa, at which, in obedience to my conscience, I was
present, being actuated by no other motive than the desire of producing
unanimity among all, and before all else of proving and dispelling the
mischief which originated from the infatuation of Arius of Alexandria,
and was straightway strengthened by the absurd and pernicious
machinations of Eusebius. But, beloved and much-honoured brethren, you
know not how earnestly and how disgracefully Eusebius, although
convicted by the testimony of his own conscience, persevered in the
support of the false doctrines which had been universally condemned. He
secretly sent persons to me to petition on his behalf, and personally
intreated my assistance in preventing his being ejected from his
bishopric, although his crimes had been fully detected. God, who, I
trust, will continue His goodness towards you and towards me, is witness
to the truth of what I say. I was then myself deluded and deceived by
Eusebius, as you shall well know. In everything he acted according to
his own desire, his mind being full of every kind of secret evil.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p7"></span>“Omitting the relation of the rest of
his misdeeds, it is well that you should be informed of the crime which
he lately perpetrated in concert with Theognis, the accomplice of his
folly. I had sent orders for the apprehension of certain individuals in
Alexandria who had deserted our faith, and by whose means the firebrand
of dissension was kindled. But these good gentlemen, forsooth, bishops,
whom, by the clemency of the council, I had reserved for penitence, not
only received them under their protection, but also participated in
their evil deeds. Hence I came to the determination to punish these
ungrateful men, by apprehending and banishing them to some far-distant
region.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p8"></span>“It is now your duty to look unto God
with that same faith which it is clear that you have ever held, and in
which it is fitting you should abide. So let us have cause of rejoicing
in the appointment of pure, orthodox, and beneficent bishops. If any one
should make mention of those destroyers, or presume to speak in their
praise, let him know that his audacity will be repressed by the
authority which has been committed to me as the servant of God. May God
preserve you, beloved brethren!”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p9"></span>The above-mentioned bishops were then
deposed and banished. Amphion <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405)
was entrusted with the church of Nicomedia, and Chrestus <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) with that of Nicæa. But the exiled
bishops, employing their customary artifices, abused the benevolence of
the emperor, renewed the <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-Page_57"></span>previous contests, and regained their
former power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_404"></span>[56:405](2030040.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p3.1"></span>πρόσφυξ</span>, originally a protected
“runaway,” then protégé or client.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[56:406](2030040.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p10"></span> Athanasius, *Disp Prima Cont. Ar.,*
mentions an Amphion, orthodox bishop of Epiphania in Cilicia Secunda.
That he is the same as the Amphion of the text is asserted by Baronius
and doubted by Tillemont. Dict. Christ. Biog. s.v.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[56:407](2030040.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p11"></span> In 328, Chrestus and Amphion retired
on the recantation of Theognis and Eusebius, whose <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xx-p11.1"></span>βιβλίον
μετανοίας</span>, or act of retractation, is given in Soc. i. xiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The artful Machinations of Eusebius and his followers against the
Holy Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch.](2030041)
