[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030357)  [Next](2030359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxix"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p1"></span> *CLXVIII. Third Demand of the same,
addressed from Chalcedon to the Sovereigns.*

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p2"></span>We never expected the summons of your
piety to meet with this result. We were honourably convoked, as priests
by prince; we were convoked to ratify the faith of the holy Fathers; and
therefore, in due obedience to a pious prince, we came. On our arrival
we were no less faithful to the Church, not less respectful to your
edict. From the day of our arrival at Ephesus till the present moment we
have without intermission followed your behests.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p3"></span>As it seems, however, our moderation, in
these times, has not been of the slightest use to us; nay, rather, so
far as we can see, it has stood very much in our way. We indeed who have
thus behaved have been up to the present time detained in Chalcedon; and
now we are told that we may go home. They however who have thrown
everything into confusion, who have filled the world with tumult, who
are striving to rend churches in twain, and who are the open assailants
of true religion, perform priestly functions, crowd the churches, and as
they imagine have authority to ordain, though in truth it is illegally
claimed by them, stir up seditions in the church, and what ought to be
spent upon the poor they throw away upon their bullies.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p4"></span>But you are not only their emperor; you
are ours too. For no small portion of your empire is the East, wherein
the right faith has ever shone, and, besides, the other provinces and
dioceses from which we have been convened.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p5"></span>Let not your majesty despise the faith
which is being corrupted, in which you and your forefathers have been
baptized; on which the Church’s foundations are laid; for which most
holy martyrs have rejoiced to suffer countless kinds of death; by aid of
which you have vanquished barbarians and destroyed tyrants; which you
are needing now in your war for the subjugation of Africa. For on your
side will fight the God of all if you struggle on behalf of His holy
doctrines and forbid the dismemberment of the body of the church: for
dismembered it will be if the opinion prevail which Cyril has introduced
into the Church and other heretics have confirmed.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p6"></span>To these truths we have often already
borne testimony before God both in Ephesus and in this place. I have
furnished information to your holiness, giving an account as before the
God of all. For this is required of us, as is taught in the divine
Scripture both by prophets and apostles; as says the blessed Paul “I
give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth the dead, and of
Lord Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession;” <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) and as God
charged Ezekiel to announce to the people, adding threats and saying,
“when thou givest him not warning,…his blood will I require at thine
hand.” <span id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279)

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p9"></span>In awe of this sentence, once again we
inform your majesty that they who have been permitted to hold churches,
and who teach the doctrines of Apollinarius, Arius, and Eunomius,
perform all sacred functions irregularly and in violation of the canons,
and destroy the souls of all who approach them; if, indeed, any shall be
found willing to listen to them. For by the grace of God <span
id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span id="iv.x.clxix-Page_341"></span>whose
Providence is over all, and who wishes all men to be saved, the more
part of the people is sound, and warmly attached to pious doctrines. It
is on their account that we grieve.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p10"></span>And in our anguish and alarm lest the
plague creeping on by little and little should attack more, and the evil
become general, we thus instruct your serenity, and continue to give you
exhortation; we implore your majesty to yield to our prayers and to
prohibit any addition to be made to the Faith of the holy Fathers
assembled in council at Nicæa.

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p11"></span>And if after this our entreaty your
piety reject this doctrine, which was given in the presence of God, we
will shake off the dust of our feet against you, and cry with the
blessed Paul, “We are pure from your blood.” <span
id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) For we cease not night and day from
the moment of our arrival at this distinguished council to bear witness
to prince, nobles, soldiers, priests and people, that we hold fast the
Faith delivered to us by the Fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[340:2279](2030358.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="iv.x.clxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p7"></span> <span id="iv.x.clxix-p7.1"></span>[1
Tim. vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.clxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[340:2280](2030358.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="iv.x.clxix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p8"></span> <span id="iv.x.clxix-p8.1"></span>[Ez.
iii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.x.clxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[341:2281](2030358.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="iv.x.clxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxix-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxix-p12.1"></span>[Acts xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)<span id="iv.x.clxix-p12.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter written by Theodoretus, Bishop of Cyrus, from Chalcedon to
Alexander of Hierapolis.](2030359)
