[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030016)  [Next](2030018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_25"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>The Anathemas of Cyril in Opposition to
Nestorius.</span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>(Mansi T. IV. p. 1067–1082, Migne Cat. 76,
col. 391. The anathemas of Nestorius against Cyril are to be found in
Hardouin i. 1297.)

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span>I. If any one refuses to confess that the
Emmanuel is in truth God, and therefore that the holy Virgin is Mother
of God (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>), for she gave birth after a
fleshly manner to the Word of God made flesh; let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span>II. If any one refuses to confess that the
Word of God the Father is united in hypostasis to flesh, and is one
Christ with His own flesh, the same being at once both God and man, let
him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span>III. If any one in the case of the one Christ
divides the hypostases after the union, conjoining them by the
conjunction alone which is according to dignity, independence, or
prerogative, and not rather by the concurrence which is according to
natural union, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span>IV. If any one divides between two persons or
hypostases the expressions used in the writings of evangelists and
apostles, whether spoken by the saints of Christ or by Him about
Himself, and applies the one as to a man considered properly apart from
the Word of God, and the others as appropriate to the divine and the
Word of God the Father alone, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span>V. If any one dares to maintain that the
Christ is man bearing God, and not rather that He is God in truth, and
one Son, and by nature, according as the Word was made flesh, and shared
blood and flesh in like manner with ourselves, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span>VI. If any one dares to maintain that the
Word of God the Father was God or Lord of the Christ, and does not
rather confess that the same was at once both God and man, the Word
being made flesh according to the Scriptures, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span>VII. If any one says that Jesus was
energized as man by God the Word, and that He was invested with the
glory of the only begotten as being another beside Him, let him be
anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span>VIII. If any one dares to maintain that the
ascended man ought to be worshipped together with the divine Word, and
be glorified with Him, and with Him be called God as one with another
(in that the continual rise of the preposition “with” in composition
makes this sense compulsory), and does not rather in one act of worship
honour the Emmanuel and praise Him in one doxology, in that He is the
Word made flesh, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>IX. If any one says that the one Lord Jesus
Christ is glorified by the Spirit, using the power that works through
Him as a foreign power, and receiving from Him the ability to operate
against unclean spirits, and to complete His miracles among men; and
does not rather say that the Spirit is His own, whereby also He wrought
His miracles, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span>X. Holy Scripture states that Christ is High
Priest and Apostle of our confession, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) and offered Himself on our behalf for
a sweet-smelling savour to God and our Father. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) If, then, any one says that He, the
Word of God, was not made our High Priest and Apostle when He was made
flesh and man after our manner; but as being another, other than
Himself, properly man made of a woman; or if any one says that He
offered the offering on His own behalf, and not rather on our behalf
alone; for He that knew no sin would not have needed an offering, let
him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span>XI. If any one confesses not that the Lord’s
flesh is giver of life, <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) and
proper to the Word of God Himself, but (states) that it is of another
than Him, united indeed to Him in dignity, yet as only possessing a
divine indwelling; and not rather, as we said, giver of life, because it
is proper to the Word of Him who hath might to engender all things
alive, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span>XII. If any one confesses not that the Word
of God suffered in flesh, and was crucified in flesh, and tasted death
in flesh, and was made firstborn of the dead, in so far as He is life
and giver of life, as God; let him be anathema.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[25:171](2030017.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span> <span id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>[Heb. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi-p14.2"></span>, R.V.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[25:172](2030017.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.vi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span> cf. <span id="iv.vi-p15.1"></span>[Eph. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="iv.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_172"></span>[25:173](2030017.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p17.1"></span>ζωοποιόν</span>. cf. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p17.2"></span>τὸ κύριον τὸ ζωοποιόν</span> of the Creed of
Constantinople.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Counter-statements of Theodoret.](2030018)
