[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030685)  [Next](2030687) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.ii-p1"></span> In the first book of my Apology I
have dealt with the accusations of dogmatic error which he endeavours
unjustly to fix upon others, and have, by producing his own testimony,
turned them back against him. In the second book, I shall be able, now
that I have settled and put aside the matters which have to do with
controversies of faith, more confidently to reply to him on the other
heads of his accusation. For there is another and a very grave
accusation, which has, like the former, to be cut down by the scythe of
truth. It is this. He says <span id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923)
that certain persons have joined themselves to Origen in a secret
society of perjury, and that the forms of initiation are to be found in
the Sixth book of his Miscellanies: <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) and that <span id="page_461">p.
461</span> <span id="vi.xi.iii.ii-Page_461"></span>this mystery has been
detected by no one but himself through all this space of time. I should
only excite his ridicule were I to declare, even with an oath, that I
was an entire stranger to such a secret society of perjury. The road by
which I propose to reach the declaration of the truth is more direct: it
is by proving, which I can do quite easily, that I have never possessed
those books nor borrowed them from others to read. Not only cannot I
defend myself from an accusation the meaning of which I do not know, but
I do not see how a matter can be made the subject of a charge against me
as to which I do not even know what it is, or whether it exists at all.
I only know that my accuser declares that either Origen wrote or his
disciples hold, that, when the Scripture says “He that speaketh truth
with his neighbour” the words apply to a neighbour only in the sense of
one of the initiated, a member of this secret society: and again that
the Apostle’s words “We speak wisdom among them that are perfect” and
the words of Christ “Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast
ye your pearls before swine,” imply that truth is not to be communicated
to all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[460:2924](2030686.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.ii-p2"></span> Letter lxxxiv. 3 (end).

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[460:2925](2030686.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.ii-p3"></span> Stromateis, meaning collections of
short essays on important subjects, disconnected, and thrown out like
things scattered or strewn on the ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome's commentaries on Ephesians follow Origen's interpretation
of the texts about a secret federation to whom higher truths are to be
told.](2030687)
