[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030104)  [Next](2030106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Of the heads
discovered in the palace at Antioch and the public rejoicings there*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is said that at Antioch a
number of chests were discovered at the palace filled with human heads,
and also many wells full of corpses. Such is the teaching of the evil
deities.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p3"></span><span id="page_107">p. 107</span>
<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-Page_107"></span>When Antioch heard of
Julian’s death she gave herself up to rejoicing and festivity; and not
only was exultant joy exhibited in the churches, and in the shrines of
martyrs, but even in the theatres the victory of the cross was
proclaimed and Julian’s vaticination held up to ridicule. And here I
will record the admirable utterance of the men at Antioch, that it may
be preserved in the memory of generations yet to come, for with one
voice the shout was raised, “Maximus, thou fool, where are thy oracles?
for God has conquered and his Christ.” This was said because there lived
at that time a man of the name of Maximus, a pretender to philosophy,
but really a worker of magic, and boasting himself to be able to
foretell the future. But the Antiochenes, who had received their divine
teaching from the glorious yokefellows Peter and Paul, and were full of
warm affection for the Master and Saviour of all, persisted in
execrating Julian to the end. Their sentiments were perfectly well known
to the object of them, and so he wrote a book against them and called it
“Misopogon.” <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p5"></span>This rejoicing at the death of the
tyrant shall conclude this book of my history, for it were to my mind
indecent to connect with a righteous reign the impious sovereignty of
Julian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_663"></span>[107:664](2030105.htm#fr_663) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p4"></span> “The residence of Julian at
Antioch was a disappointment to himself, and disagreeable to almost all
the inhabitants.” “He had anticipated much more devotion on the part of
the pagans, and much less force and resistance on that of the Christians
than he discovered in reality. He was disgusted at finding that both
parties regretted the previous reign. ‘Neither the Chi nor the Kappa’
(that is neither Christ nor Constantius) ‘did our city any harm’ became
a common saying (Misopogon p. 357). To the heathens themselves the
enthusiastic form of religion to which Julian was devoted was little
more than an unpleasant and somewhat vulgar anachronism. His cynic
asceticism and dislike of the theatre and the circus was unpopular in a
city particularly addicted to public spectacles. His superstition was
equally unpalatable. The short, untidy, long-bearded man, marching
pompously in procession on the tips of his toes, and swaying his
shoulders from side to side, surrounded by a crowd of abandoned
characters, such as formed the regular attendants upon many heathen
festivals, appeared seriously to compromise the dignity of the empire.
(Ammianus xxii. 14. 3. His words ‘stipatus mulierculis’ etc. go far to
justify Gregory’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xxii-p4.1"></span>δημοσί& 139· ταίς πορναίς
προὔπινε</span> in Orat. v. 22. p. 161, and Chrysostom’s more highly
coloured description of the same sort of scene, for the accuracy of
which he appeals to an eye witness still living, *de S. Babyla in
Julianum* §14. p. 667. The blood of countless victims flowed everywhere,
but, to all appearance, served merely to gorge his foreign soldiery,
especially the semi-barbarous Gauls, and the streets of Antioch were
disturbed by their revels and by drunken parties carrying one another
home to their barracks. (Amm. xxii. 12. 6.)” “More secret rumours were
spread of horrid nocturnal sacrifices, and of the pursuits of those arts
of necromancy from which the natural heathen conscience shrank only less
than the Christians.” “He discharged his spleen upon the general body of
the citizens of Antioch by writing one of the most remarkable satires
that has ever been published which he entitled the *Misopogon.* ‘He had
been insulted,’ says Gibbon, ‘by satire and libels; in his turn he
composed under the title of *The Enemy of the Beard,* an ironical
confession of his own faults, and a severe satire on the licentious and
effeminate manners of Antioch. The imperial reply was publicly exposed
before the gates of the palace, and the Misopogon still remains a
singular monument of the resentment, the wit, the inhumanity, and the
indiscretion of Julian. Gibbon, Chap. xxiv.’ It is of course Julian’s
own philosophic beard that gives the title to the pamphlet.” “This
pamphlet was written in the seventh month of his sojourn at Antioch,
probably the latter half of January.” (1. c. 364.) Bp. J. Wordsworth in
Dict. Ch. Biog. iii. 507., 509.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](2030106)
