[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030901)  [Next](2030903) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Rufinus’ Preface to the Translation of
Origen’s Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans.</span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>Addressed to Heraclius at Aquileia about <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xviii-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 407.</span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.xviii-p4"></span>My intention was to press the shore of the
quiet land in the little bark in which I was sailing, and to draw out a
few little fishes from the pools of Greece: but you have compelled me,
brother Heraclius, to give my sails to the wind and go forth into the
deep sea; you persuade me to leave the work which lay before me in the
translation of the homilies written by the Man of Adamant <span
id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) in his old age, and to open to you
the fifteen volumes in which he discussed the Epistle of Paul to the
Romans. In these books, while he aims at representing the Apostle’s
thoughts, he is carried away into a sea of such depth that one who
follows him into it may well be afraid of being drowned in the greatness
of his thoughts as in the vastness of the waves. Then also you do not
consider this, that my breath is but scanty for filling a grand trumpet
of eloquence like his. And beyond all these difficulties is this, that
the books themselves have been interpolated. In almost all the libraries
(I grant that no one can tell how it happened) some of the volumes are
absent from the body of the work; and to supply these, and to restore
the continuity of the work in the Latin version is beyond my talent, but
would be, as you must know when you make your demand, a special gift of
God. You add, however, so that nothing may be wanting to the labour I am
undertaking, that I had <span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="vi.xviii-Page_567"></span>better abbreviate this whole body of
fifteen volumes, which in the Greek reaches to the length of forty
thousand lines or more, and bring it within moderate compass. Your
injunctions are hard indeed, and might be thought to be imposed by one
who did not care to consider what the burden of such a work must be. I
will, however, attempt it, hoping that through your prayers, and the
favour of the Lord, what seems impossible to man may become possible.
But we will now, if you please, listen to the Preface which Origen
himself prefixes to the work on which he was entering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[566:3443](2030902.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p5"></span> Or man of steel: (it might also be
translated, The indomitable); a name given to Origen, an account of the
greatness of his labours. It is said by Westcott (Dict. of Xtn. Biog.
“Origen”) to have been adopted by Origen himself, and to form part of
his real name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Peroration of Rufinus Appended to His Translation of Origen's
Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans.](2030903)
