[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030777)  [Next](2030779) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.vi-p1"></span> 5. None of these answers will you
give us. You turn to other things, and by your tricks and shew of words
prevent us from paying close attention to the question. What! you will
say, was not the question about the resurrection of the flesh and the
punishment of the devil? True; and therefore I ask for a brief and
sincere answer. I raise no question as to your declaration that it is
this very flesh in which we live which rises again, without the loss of
a single member, and without any part of the body being cut off (for
these are your own words). But I want to know whether you hold, what
Origen denies, that the bodies rise with the same sex with which they
died; and that Mary will still be Mary and John be John; or whether the
sexes will be so mixed and confused that there will be neither man nor
woman, but something which is both or neither; and also whether you hold
that the bodies remain uncorrupt and immortal, and, as you acutely
suggest after the Apostle, spiritual bodies forever; and not only the
bodies, but the actual flesh, with blood infused into it, and passing by
channels through the veins and bones,—such flesh as Thomas touched; or
that little by little they are dissolved into nothing, and reduced into
the four elements of which they were compounded. This you ought either
to confess or deny, and not to say what Origen also says, but
insincerely, as if he were playing upon the weakness of fools and
children, “without the loss of a single member or the cutting off of any
part of the body.” Do you suppose that what we feared was that we might
rise without noses and ears, that we should find that our genital organs
would be cut off or maimed and that a city of eunuchs was built up in
the new Jerusalem?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His confession of faith is unsatisfactory. No one asked him about
the Trinity, but about Origen's doctrines of the Resurrection, the
origin of souls, and the salvability of Satan. As to the Resurrection
and to Satan he is ambiguous. As to souls he professes
ignorance.](2030779)
