[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030258)  [Next](2030260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxx"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxx-p1"></span> *LXX. To Eustathius, Bishop of
Ægæ.* <span id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714)

<span id="iv.x.lxx-p3"></span>The story of the noble Mary is one fit for
a tragic play. As she says herself, and as is attested by several
others, she is a daughter of the right honourable Eudæmon. In the
catastrophe which has overtaken Libya she has fallen from her father’s
free estate, and has become a slave. Some merchants bought her from the
barbarians, and have sold her to some of our countrymen. With her was
sold a maiden who was once one of her own domestic servants; so at one
and the same time the galling yoke of slavery fell on the servant and
the mistress. But the servant refused to ignore the difference between
them, nor could she forget the old superiority: in their calamity she
preserved her kindly feeling, and, after waiting upon their common
masters, waited upon her who was reckoned her fellow slave, washed her
feet, made her bed, and was mindful of other like offices. This became
known to the purchasers. Then through all the town was noised abroad the
free estate of the mistress and the servant’s goodness. On these
circumstances becoming known to the faithful soldiers who are quartered
in our city (I was absent at the time) they paid the purchasers their
price, and rescued the woman from slavery. After my return, on being
informed of the deplorable circumstances, and the admirable intention of
the soldiers, I invoked blessings on their heads, committed the noble
damsel to the care of one of the respectable deacons, and ordered a
sufficient provision to be made for her. Ten months had gone by when she
heard that her father was still alive, and holding high office in the
West, and she very naturally expressed a desire to return to him. It was
reported that many messengers from the West are on the way to the fair
which is now being held in your parts. She requested to be allowed to
set out with a letter from me. Under these circumstances I have written
this letter, begging your piety to take care of a noble girl, and charge
some respectable person to communicate with mariners, pilots, and
merchants, and commit her to the care of trusty men who may be able to
restore her to her father. There is no doubt that those who, when all
hope of recovery has been lost, bring the daughter to the father, will
be abundantly rewarded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[270:1715](2030259.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="iv.x.lxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxx-p2"></span> On the seaboard of Cilicia, now Ayas. The
date may be 443 or 444.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Zeno, General and Consul.](2030260)
