[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030659)  [Next](2030661) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. But now I will turn the tables
and put my accuser to the question. Tell me, O great master, if there is
anything to blame in a writer, is the blame to be laid on one who reads
or translates his works? Heaven forbid, he will say; certainly not; why
do you try to circumvent me by your enigmatical questions? Am not I
myself both a reader and a translator of Origen? Read my translations
and see if you can find any one of his peculiar doctrines in them;
especially any of those which I now mark for condemnation. When driven
to the point he says:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p2"></span>“If you wish thoroughly to see how
abhorent the very suggestion of such doctrines has always been to me,
read my Commentaries on the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, and you
will see from what I have written there what an opinion I formed of him
from reading and translating his works.” <span
id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857)

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p4"></span>I ask, can we accept this man as a
great and grave teacher, who in one of his works praises Origen and in
another condemns him? who in his Introductions calls him a master second
only to the Apostles, but now calls him a heretic? What heretic, I ask,
was ever called a master of the churches? “It is true, he replies, I was
wrong about this but why do you go on bringing up this unfortunate
Preface <span id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) against me? Read my
Commentaries, and especially those which I have designated.” Is there
any one who will think this satisfactory? He has composed a great many
books, in almost all of which he trumpets forth the praises of Origen to
the skies: these books through all these years have been read and are
being read by all men: many of these readers after accepting his
opinions have left this world and gone into the presence of the Lord.
They hold the opinion about Origen which they had learnt from the
statements of this man, and they departed in hope that, according to
this man’s assurance, they would find him there as a master second only
to the Apostles; but if we are to trust his present writings, they have
found him in a state of condemnation, among the impious heretics and the
heathen. Is this man now to turn round from his former contention, and
to say, “For some thirty years I have been, in my studies and in my
writings, praising Origen as equal to the Apostles, but now I pronounce
him a heretic?” How is this? Has he come upon some new books of his
which he had never read before? Not at all. It is from these same
sayings of Origen that he formerly called him an Apostle and now calls
him a heretic. But it is impossible that this should really have been
so. For either he was right in his former praises, and his judgment has
since been perverted by some kind of extreme ill feeling, and in that
case no attention is to be paid to him; or else his former praises were
mistaken, and he is now condemning himself, and in that case what
judgment does he think others will pass upon him, when, according to the
words of the Apostle, <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) he
passes condemnation on himself.

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p7"></span>22 (*a*). But, “Surely,” he says,
“this judgment is done away with since I have repented.” Not so fast! We
all err, it is true, and especially in word; and we all may repent of
our errors. But can a man do penance, and accuse others, and judge and
condemn them, all in the same moment? That would be as if a harlot who
had abstained from her harlotry for a night or two, should feel called
upon to begin writing laws in favour of chastity, and not only to enact
these laws, but to proceed to throw down the monuments of all the women
who have died, because she suspected that they had led lives like her
own. You do penance for having formerly been a heretic, and you do
right. But what has that to do with me who never was a heretic at all?
You are right in doing penance for your error: but the true way of doing
penance is, not by accusing others but by crying for mercy, not by
condemning but by weeping. For what sincerity can there be in penitence
when the penitent makes a decree of indulgence for himself? He who
repents of what he has spoken ill does not cure his <span
id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-Page_447"></span>wound by speaking ill again, but by
keeping silence. For thus it is written: <span
id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) “Thou hast sinned, be at peace.”
But now you first bring yourself in a criminal, then you absolve
yourself from your crime, and forthwith change yourself from a criminal
into a judge. This may be no trouble to you who thus mock at us, but it
is a trouble to us if we suffer ourselves to be mocked by you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[446:2858](2030660.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> The words are not quoted literally
from Jerome’s letter to Pammachius and Oceanus (Ep. lxxxiv.<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span> c. 2) the passage referred to; but they
give the sense fairly well. See also the letter to Vigilantius (lxi. c.
2).

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[446:2859](2030660.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p5"></span> *Prœfati unculam*. That is, the
Preface to Origen’s Song of Songs, in which he says that Origen has not
only surpassed every one else, but also in this work has surpassed
himself.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[446:2860](2030660.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p6"></span> Perhaps from [1 Cor.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029), [Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>, or [Rom. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[447:2861](2030660.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> Possibly a kind of paraphrase of
our Lord’s words to the woman taken in adultery. <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[John viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome has not really changed his mind about Origen.](2030661)
