[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030351)  [Next](2030353) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_336">p. 336</span>
<span id="iv.x.clxiii-Page_336"></span>*CLXII. Letter of Theodoretus to
Andreas, Bishop of Samosata, written from Ephesus.* <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267)

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p4"></span>Writing from Ephesus I salute your
holiness, I congratulate you on your infirmity, and deem you dear to
God, in that you have known what evil deeds have been going on here by
report, and not by personal experience. Evil indeed! They transcend all
imagination and all incidents of history; they compel a continual
downpour of tears. The body of the Church is in peril of
dismemberment;—nay, rather I may say it has received the first
incision;—unless the wise Healer restore and re-connect the unsound and
severed limbs. Once again the Egyptian is raging against God, and
warring with Moses and Aaron His servants, and the more part of Israel
are on the side of the foe; for all too few are the sound who willingly
suffer for true religion’s sake. Ancient principles are trodden under
foot. Deposed men perform priestly functions, and they who have deposed
them sit sighing at home. Men excommunicated by the same sentence as the
deposed have relieved the deposed of their deposition of their own free
will. Such is the mockery of a synod held by Egyptians, by Palestinians,
by men from the Pontic and Asian dioceses, and by the West in their
company. <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268)

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p6"></span>What players in a pantomime, in the
days of paganism, even in any farce so held up religion to ridicule?
Indeed what farce-writer ever performed such a play? What dramatist ever
wrote so sad a tragedy? Such and so great are the troubles that have
beset God’s Church, whereof I have narrated but a very small part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[336:2268](2030352.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="iv.x.clxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p2"></span> This letter may be dated “towards the
end of July or in the beginning of August 431, after the restitution of
Cyril and Memnon on July 16, and before the departure of Theodoret from
Ephesus on August 20.” Garnerius. Andrew of Samosata wrote objections to
Cyril’s Chapters in the name of the bishops of the East. He was
prevented by illness from being present at Ephesus in 431, as he was
also from the synod assembled at Antioch in 444 to hear the cause of
Athanasius of Perrha. He was a warm supporter of Nestorius.

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p3"></span>This letter exists only in the Latin
Version, and is to be found also in Mansi Collect. Conc. ix. 293.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[336:2269](2030352.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="iv.x.clxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxiii-p5"></span> In Ep. CLXI, the numbers are
specified;—“Of Egyptians fifty; of Asiani under Memnon, leader of the
tyranny, forty; of the heretics in Pamphylia called Messalianitæ,
twelve; besides those attached to the same metropolitan” (i.e.
Amphilochius of Side) “and others deposed and excommunicated in divers
places by synods or bishops, who constitute nothing but a mere turbulent
and disorderly mob, entirely ignorant of the divine decrees.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Letter of the Commissioners of the East, sent to Chalcedon,
among whom was Theodoretus.](2030353)
