[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030763)  [Next](2030765) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxvi-p1"></span> 25. The fourth ground of his censure
is in the beginning of my Second Book, in which I expounded the
statement which St. Paul makes “For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of
Jesus Christ for you Gentiles.” The passage in itself is perfectly
plain; and I give, therefore, only that part of the comment on it which
lends itself to malevolent remark:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxvi-p2"></span>“The words which describe Paul as the
prisoner of Jesus Christ for the Gentiles may be understood of his
martyrdom, since it was when he was <span id="page_496">p. 496</span>
<span id="vi.xii.i.xxvi-Page_496"></span>thrown into chains at Rome that
he wrote this Epistle, at the same time with those to Philemon and the
Colossians and the Philippians, as we have formerly shewn. Certainly we
might adopt another sense, namely, that, since we find this body in
several places called the chain of the soul, in which it is held as in a
close prison, Paul may speak of himself as confined in the chains of the
body, and so that he could not return and be with Christ; and that thus
he might perfectly fulfil his office of preaching to the Gentiles. Some
commentators, however, introduce another idea, namely, that Paul, having
been predestinated and consecrated from his mother’s womb, and before he
was born, to be a preacher to the Gentiles, afterwards took on the
chains of the flesh.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxvi-p3"></span>Here also, as before, I gave a three
fold exposition of the passage: in the first my own view, in the second
the one supported by Origen, and the third the opinion of Apollinarius
going contrary to his doctrine. Read over the Greek commentaries. If you
do not find the fact to be as I state it, I will confess that I was
wrong. What is my fault in this passage? The same, I presume, as that to
which I made answer before, namely, that I did not name those whose
views I quoted. But it was needless at each separate statement of the
Apostle to give the names of the writers whose works I had declared in
the Preface that I meant to translate. Besides, it is not an absurd way
of understanding the passage, to say that the soul is bound in the body
until Christ returns and, in the glory of the resurrection, changes our
corruptible and mortal body for incorruption and immortality: for it is
in this sense that the Apostle uses the expression, “O wretched man that
I am; who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” calling it the
body of death because it is subject to vices and diseases, to disorders
and to death; until it rises with Christ in glory, and, having been
nothing but fragile clay before, becomes baked by the heat of the holy
Spirit into a jar of solid consistency, thus changing its grade of
glory, though not its nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to “The body fitly framed &c.”](2030765)
