[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030128)  [Next](2030130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Of the holy
monk Aphraates*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span>On</span> the north of the river
Orontes lies the palace. On the South a vast two storied portico is
built on the city wall with lofty towers on either side. Between the
palace and the river lies a public way open to passengers from the town,
through the gate in this quarter, and leading to the country in the
suburbs. The godly Aphraates was once passing along this thoroughfare on
his way to the soldiers’ training ground, in order to perform the duty
of serving his flock. The emperor happened to be looking down from a
gallery in the palace, and saw him going by wearing a cloak of undressed
goat’s skin, <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) and walking
rapidly, though of advanced age. On its being remarked that this was
Aphraates to whom all the town was then attached, the emperor cried out
“Where are you going? Tell us.” Readily and cleverly he answered “To
pray for your empire.” “You had better stop at home” said the emperor
“and pray alone like a monk.” “Yes,” said the divine man, “so I was
bound to do and so I always did till now, as long as the Saviour’s sheep
were at peace; but now that they are grievously disturbed and in great
peril of being caught by beasts, I needs must leave no means untried to
save the nurslings. For tell me, sir, had I been a girl sitting in my
chamber, and looking after the house, and had seen a flash of flame fall
and my father’s house on fire, what ought I to do? Tell me; sit within
and never mind the house being on fire, and wait for the flame to
approach? or bid my bower good bye and run up and down and get water and
try to quench the flame? Of course you will say the latter, for so a
quick and spirited girl would do. And that is what I am doing now, sir.
You have set fire to our Father’s house and we are running about in the
endeavour to put it out.” So said Aphraates, and the emperor threatened
him and said no more. One of the grooms of the imperial bedchamber, who
threatened the godly man somewhat more violently, met with the following
fate. He was entrusted with the charge of the bath, and immediately
after this conversation he came down to get it ready for the emperor. On
entering he lost his wits, stepped into the boiling water before it was
mixed with the cold, and so met his end. The emperor sat waiting for him
to announce that the bath was ready for him to enter, and after a
considerable time had gone by he sent other officers to report the cause
of the delay. After they had gone in and looked all about the room they
discovered the chamberlain <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-Page_128"></span>slain by the heat, and lying dead
in the boiling water. On this becoming known to the emperor they
perceived the force of the prayers of Aphraates. Nevertheless they did
not depart from the impious doctrines but hardened their heart like
Pharaoh, and the infatuated emperor, though made aware of the miracle of
the holy man, persisted in his mad rage against piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_769"></span>[127:770](2030129.htm#fr_769) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span> The word Sisura was used for a
common upper garment, but according to the grammarian Tzetzes (Schol.
Ad. Lyc. 634) its accurate meaning is the one given in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the holy monk Julianus.](2030130)
