[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030753)  [Next](2030755) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xvi-p1"></span> 15. This abandonment of friendship
gives no claim to my confidence; and open enmity brings with it the
suspicion of falsehood. Still I will be bold enough to go to meet him,
and to ask what heretical doctrine I have expressed, so that I may
either, like him, express my regret and swear that I never knew the bad
doctrines of Origen, and that his infidelity has now for the first time
been made known to me by the Pope Theophilus; or that I may at least
prove that my opinions were sound and that he, as his habit is, had not
understood them. It is impossible that in my Commentaries on the
Ephesians which I hear he makes the ground of his accusation, I should
have spoken both rightly and wrongly; that from the same fountain should
have proceeded both sweet water and bitter; and that whereas throughout
the work I condemned those who believe that souls have been created out
of angels, I should suddenly have forgotten myself and have defended the
opinion which I condemned before. He can hardly raise an objection to me
on the score of folly, since he has proclaimed me in his works as a man
of the highest culture and eloquence; otherwise such silly verbosity as
he imputes is the part, one would think, of a pettifogger and a babbler
rather than of an eloquent man. What is the point of his written
accusations I do not know, for it is only report of them, not the
writings, which has reached me; and, as the Apostle tells us it is a
foolish thing to beat the air. However, I must answer in the uncertainty
till the certainty reaches me: and I will begin by teaching my rival in
my old age a lesson which I learned in youth, that there are many forms
of speech, and that, according to the subject matter not only the
sentences but the words also of writings vary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The office of a commentator.](2030755)
