[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030765)  [Next](2030767) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxviii-p1"></span> 27. I wonder that you with your
consummate wisdom have not understood my method of exposition. When I
say, ‘But not in such a way that, as held by another heresy, all should
be placed in one rank, that is, all by a reforming process become
angels,’ I clearly shew that the things which I put forward for
discussion are heretical, and that one heresy differs from the other.
Which (do you ask?) are the two heresies? The one is that which says
that all reasonable creatures will by a reforming process become angels;
the other, that which asserts that in the restitution of the world each
thing will become what it was originally created; as for instance that
devils will again become angels, and that the souls of men will become
such as they were originally formed; that is, by the reforming process
will become not angels but that which God originally made them, so that
the just and the sinners will be on an equality. Finally, to shew you
that it was not my own opinion which I was developing but two heresies
which I was comparing with one another, both of which I had found stated
in the Greek, I completed my discussion with this ending:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxviii-p2"></span>“These things, as I have said
before, are more obscure in our tongue because they are put in a
metaphorical form in Greek; and in every metaphor, when a translation is
made word for word from one language into another, the budding sense of
the word is choked as it were with brambles.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxviii-p3"></span>If you do not find in the Greek the
very thought which I have expressed, I give you leave to treat all that
I say as my own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to “Men loving their wives as their own bodies.”](2030767)
