[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030265)  [Next](2030267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p1"></span> *LXXVII. To Eulalius, Bishop of
Persian Armenia.* <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724)

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p3"></span>I know that Satan has sought to sift
you as wheat, <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) and that the
Lord has allowed him so to do that He may shew the wheat, and prove the
gold, crown the athletes, and proclaim the victors’ names. Nevertheless
I fear and tremble, not indeed distressed for the sake of you who are
noble champions of the truth, but because I know that it comes to pass
that some men are of feebler heart. If among twelve apostles one was
found a traitor, there is no doubt that among a number many times as
great any one might easily discover many falling short of perfection.
Thus reflecting I have been confounded and filled with much
discouragement, for, as says the divine Apostle, “whether one member
suffer all the members suffer with it.” <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) We are members one of
another,” <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) and form one body,
having the Lord Christ for head.” <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) Yet one consolation I have in my
anxiety, when I bethink me of your holiness. For brought up as you have
been in the divine oracles, and taught by the arch-shepherd what are the
good shepherd’s marks, there is no doubt that you will lay down your
life for the sheep. For, as the Lord says, “he that is an hireling” when
he sees “the wolf coming,” “fleeth because he is an hireling, and careth
not for the sheep,” but “the good shepherd giveth his life for the
sheep.” <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) Just so it is not in
peace that the best general shews his inborn valour, but in time of war,
by at once stimulating others and himself exposing himself to peril for
his men. For it would be preposterous that he should enjoy the dignity
of his command, and, in the hour of need, run out of danger’s way. Thus
the thrice blessed prophets ever acted, making light of the safety of
their bodies, and, for the sake of the Jews who hated and rejected them,
underwent all kinds of peril and toil. Of them the divine apostle <span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="iv.x.lxxvii-Page_273"></span>says
“they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain by
the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy; they
wandered in deserts and mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth.” <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) Thus the divine
apostles travelled preaching over all the world, without home, bed,
bedding, board, or any of the necessaries of life, but scourged, racked,
imprisoned, and undergoing countless kinds of death. And all this they
underwent, not for the sake of their friends, but voluntarily facing
these perils for the sake of the men who were persecuting them. A far
stronger claim is made on you now to accept the peril at present
assailing you, for the sake of fellow-believers and brothers and
children. This affection is shown even by unreasoning animals, for
sparrows may be seen fighting with all their force in behalf of their
brood, and putting out in their defence all the strength they have;
other kinds of birds moreover undergo danger for their young. But why do
I speak of birds? Bears too, and leopards, wolves, and lions,
voluntarily suffer any pain for the safety of their offspring, for
instead of fleeing from the hunter they will await his attack and do
battle for their young.

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p10"></span>I have adduced these instances not as
though anointing your piety for endurance and courage by the example of
brute beasts, but to console myself in my despondency, and to be assured
that you will not leave Christ’s flock without a shepherd when wolves
make their attack, but will invoke the Lord of the flock to help you and
will heartily do battle in its behalf. A crisis like this proves who is
a shepherd and who a hireling; who diligently feeds the flock and who on
the other hand feeds on the milk and thinks little of the safety of the
sheep. “But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape
that ye may be able to bear it.” <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) But one thing I do beseech your
reverence, and that is to have greater heed of the unsound; and not only
to strengthen the unstable but also to raise the fallen, for shepherds
by no means neglect those of their flock who have fallen sick, but keep
them apart from the rest, and try in every possible way to restore them,
and so must we do. We must make them that are slipping stand up, and
give them a helping hand and a word of encouragement. When they are
bitten we must heal them; we must not give up the attempt to save them
nor leave them in the devil’s maw. Thus ever acted the divine Apostle
Paul; and when the Galatians, after receiving the baptism of salvation,
and the gift of the divine Spirit, fell away into the sickness of
Judaism, and received circumcision, he wailed and lamented more
exceedingly than the most affectionate mother, and tended them and freed
them from that infirmity. We can hear him exclaiming, “My little
children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in
you.” <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) So too the teacher of
the Corinthians, who had committed that abominable fornication, he both
chastised as might a father, and very skilfully treated, and after
cutting him off in the first Epistle, readmitted him in the second and
says, “So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort
him lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow.” <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) And again, “Lest
Satan should get an advantage of us for we are not ignorant of his
devices.” <span id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) In the same manner
too those who partook of things offered to idols he properly rebuked,
suitably exhorted, and freed from their grievous error.

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p15"></span>Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ
permitted the first of the apostles, whose confession He had fixed as a
kind of groundwork and foundation of the Church, to waver to and fro,
and to deny Him, and then raised Him up again. And thus He gave us two
lessons: not to be confident in our own strength, and to strengthen the
unstable. Reach out, therefore, I beseech you, a hand to them that are
fallen, “draw them out of the horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and
set their feet upon a rock,” and “put a new song into their mouth, even
praise unto our God,” <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) that
their example of life may become an example of salvation, that “many
shall see it and fear and shall trust in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) Let them be prevented from
participating in the holy mysteries, but let them not be kept from the
prayer of the catechumens, nor from hearing the divine Scriptures and
the exhortation of teachers, <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737)
and let them be prohibited from partaking of the sacred mysteries, not
till death, but during a given <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-Page_274"></span>time, till they recognise their
ailment, covet health, and are properly contrite for having abandoned
their true Prince and deserted to a tyrant, and for having left their
benefactor and gone over to their foe.

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p19"></span>The same lessons are given us by the
precepts of the holy and blessed Fathers. I write as I do, not to teach
you piety, but to remind you as a brother might, knowing well that even
the best of pilots in the moment of the storm needs monition even from
his men. So the great and famous Moses, renowned throughout the world,
who did those mighty works of wonder, did not refuse the counsel of
Jethro, a man still sunk in idolatrous error; for he did not regard his
impiety, but acknowledged the soundness of his advice. Moreover I
implore your piety to offer earnest prayer to God in my behalf that for
the remaining days of my life I may live in accordance with His laws.

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p20"></span>Thus have I written by the most
honourable and religious presbyter Stephanus, whom on account of the
goodness of his character I have seen with great pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[272:1725](2030266.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p2"></span> On the persecution in Persia see page
157.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[272:1726](2030266.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke xxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[272:1727](2030266.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p5"></span> <span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p5.1"></span>[1
Cor. xii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[272:1728](2030266.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p6"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p6.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[272:1729](2030266.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p7"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p7.1"></span>[Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[272:1730](2030266.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p8"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p8.1"></span>[John
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[273:1731](2030266.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p9.1"></span>[Heb.
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[273:1732](2030266.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p11.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[273:1733](2030266.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p12.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[273:1734](2030266.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p13"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p13.1"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[273:1735](2030266.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p14.1"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[273:1736](2030266.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p16"></span> [Ps.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p16.1"></span>[Psalm xl.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p16.2"></span>
and 3

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[273:1737](2030266.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p17.1"></span>[Ps. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[273:1738](2030266.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvii-p18"></span> “It is noticeable that with
systematic discipline as to the persons taught, there was no order of
teachers. It was part of the pastoral office to watch over the souls of
those who were seeking admission to the Church, as well as those who
were in it, and thus bishops, priests, deacons, or readers might all of
them be found, when occasion required, doing the work of a Catechist.
The Doctor Audientium of whom Cyprian speaks, was a Lector in the Church
of Carthage. Augustine’s Treatise *de Catechizandis Rudibus,* was
addressed to Deogratias as a deacon; the *Catecheses* of Cyril of
Jerusalem were delivered by him partly as a deacon, partly as a
presbyter. The word *catechist* implies accordingly a function, not a
class.” Dean Plumptre in Dict. Christ. Ant. i. 319.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, Bishop of Persian Armenia.](2030267)
