[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030233)  [Next](2030235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlv-p1"></span> *XLV. To the Patrician Anatolius.* <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691)

<span id="iv.x.xlv-p3"></span>Your greatness knows full well how all the
inhabitants of the East feel towards your magnificence, as sons feel
towards an affectionate father. Why then have you shewn hate to them
that love you, deprived them of your kindly care, and driven them all to
weeping and lamentation by putting your own advantage before the service
of others? In truth I think there is not one of them that fear the Lord
who is not much grieved at losing your official sway, and I think that
even all the rest, although they have not right knowledge about divine
things, when they reflect on the kindnesses you have conferred, share in
these sentiments of distress. I for my part am specially sorry when I
bethink me of your dignity and your unaffected character, and I pray the
God of all ever to bestow on you the bulwark of His invincible right
hand, and supply you with abundance of all kinds of blessings. We
beseech your excellency no less when absent than when present to extend
to us your accustomed protection, and to undo the rage of that unworthy
bishop of ours whose purposes are perfectly well known to your
greatness. He is endeavouring, as I am informed, to work the entire ruin
of our district, and has accepted the part of an informer to culumniate
the recent visitation, and this when all in a word know that the
taxation of our district is very heavy, and that in consequence many
estates have been abandoned by the husbandmen. But this man, in contempt
of his excommunication, and in flight from the holy synod, has thrust
out his tongue against the unhappy poor. May your magnificence then
consent to look to it that the truth be not vanquished by a lie. And I
bring the same supplication about the Cilicians. For we cease not to
wail till the iniquity be undone. The Lord, who promises to reward even
a drop of water, will requite you for this trouble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[265:1692](2030234.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="iv.x.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlv-p2"></span> Anatolius, consul in 440, was Magister
militum in the East. He was a true friend to Theodoret. This letter may
be placed in 444.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Learned Petrus.](2030235)
