[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030124)  [Next](2030126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Narrative of events
at Alexandria in the time of Lucius the Arian, taken from a letter of
Petrus, Bishop of Alexandria*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>Palladius</span> governor of the
province, by sect a heathen, <span id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) and
one who habitually prostrated himself before the idols, had frequently
entertained the thought of waging war against Christ. After collecting
the forces already enumerated he set out against the Church, as though
he were pressing forward to the subjugation of a foreign foe. Then, as
is well known, the most shocking deeds were done, and at the bare
thought of telling the story, its recollection fills me with anguish. I
have shed floods of tears, and I <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-Page_122"></span>should have long remained thus
bitterly affected had I not assuaged my grief by divine meditation. The
crowds intruded into the church called Theonas <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) and there instead of holy words were
uttered the praises of idols; there where the Holy Scriptures had been
read might be heard unseemly clapping of hands with unmanly and indecent
utterances; there outrages were offered to the Virgins of Christ which
the tongue refuses to utter, for “it is a shame even to speak of
them.” <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) On only hearing of these
wrongs one of the well disposed stopped his ears and prayed that he
might rather become deaf than have to listen to their foul language.
Would that they had been content to sin in word alone, and had not
surpassed the wickedness of word by deed, for insult, however bad it be,
can be borne by them in whom dwells Christ’s wisdom and His holy
lessons. But these same villains, vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction, <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) screwed up their
noses and poured out, if I may so say, as from a well-head, foul noises
through their nostrils, and rent the raiment from Christ’s holy virgins,
whose conversation gave an exact likeness of saints; they dragged them
in triumph, naked as when they were born, through all the town; they
made indecent sport of them at their pleasure; their deeds were
barbarous and cruel. Did any one in pity interfere and urge to mercy he
was dismissed with wounds. Ah! woe is me. Many a virgin underwent brutal
violation; many a maid beaten on the head, with clubs lay dumb, and even
their bodies were not allowed to be given up for burial, and their
grief-stricken parents cannot find their corpses to this day. But why
recount woes which seem small when compared with greater? Why linger
over these and not hurry on to events more urgent? When you hear them I
know that you will wonder and will stand with us long dumb, amazed at
the kindness of the Lord in not bringing all things utterly to an end.
At the very altar the impious perpetrated what, as it is written, <span
id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) neither happened nor was heard of in
the days of our fathers.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p8"></span>A boy who had forsworn his sex and
would pass for a girl, with eyes, as it is written, smeared with
antimony, <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) and face reddened with
rouge like their idols, in woman’s dress, was set up to dance and wave
his hands about and whirl round as though he had been at the front of
some disreputable stage, on the holy altar itself where we call on the
coming of the Holy Ghost, while the by-standers laughed aloud and rudely
raised unseemly shouts. But as this seemed to them really rather
decorous than improper, they went on to proceedings which they reckoned
in accordance with their indecency; they picked out a man who was very
famous for utter baseness, made him strip off at once all his clothes
and all his shame, and set him up as naked as he was born on the throne
of the church, and dubbed him a vile advocate against Christ. Then for
divine words he uttered shameless wickedness, for awful doctrines wanton
lewdness, for piety impiety, for continence fornication, adultery, foul
lust, theft; teaching that gluttony and drunkenness as well as all the
rest were good for man’s life. <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737)
In this state of things when even I had withdrawn from the church <span
id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) —for how could I remain where troops
were coming in—where a mob was bribed to violence—where all were
striving for gain—where mobs of heathen were making mighty
promises?—forth, forsooth, is sent a successor in my place. It was one
named Lucius, who had bought the bishopric as he might some dignity of
this world, eager to maintain the bad character and conduct of a
wolf. <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) No synod of orthodox
bishops had chosen him; <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) no vote
of genuine clergy; no laity had demanded him; as the laws of the church
enjoin.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p14"></span>Lucius could not make his entrance
into the city without parade, and so he was appropriately escorted not
by bishops, not by presbyters, not by deacons, not by multitudes of the
laity; no monks preceded him chanting psalms from the Scriptures; but
there was Euzoius, once a deacon of our city of Alexandria, and long
since degraded along with Arius in the great and holy synod of Nicæa,
and more recently raised to rule and ravage the see of Antioch, and
there, too, was Magnus the treasurer, <span
id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) notorious for every kind of impiety,
leading a vast body of troops. In the reign of Julian this Magnus had
burnt the church at Berytus, <span id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742)
<span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-Page_123"></span>the famous city of Phœnicia; and, in
the reign of Jovian of blessed memory, after barely escaping
decapitation by numerous appeals to the imperial compassion, had been
compelled to build it up again at his own expense.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p17"></span>Now I invoke your zeal to rise in
our vindication. From what I write you ought to be able to calculate the
character and extent of the wrongs committed against the Church of God
by the starting up of this Lucius to oppose us. Often rejected by your
piety and by the orthodox bishops of every region, he seized on a city
which had just and righteous cause to regard and treat him as a foe. For
he does not merely say like the blasphemous fool in the psalms “Christ
is not true God.” <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743) But, corrupt
himself, he corrupted others, rejoicing in the blasphemies uttered
continually against the Saviour by them who worshipped the creature
instead of the Creator. The scoundrel’s opinions being quite on a par
with those of a heathen, why should he not venture to worship a new-made
God, for these were the phrases with which he was publicly greeted
“Welcome, bishop, because thou deniest the Son. Serapis loves thee and
has brought thee to us.” So they named their native idol. Then without
an interval of delay the afore-named Magnus, inseparable associate in
the villainy of Lucius, cruel body-guard, savage lieutenant, collected
together all the multitudes committed to his care, and arrested
presbyters and deacons to the number of nineteen, some of whom were
eighty years of age, on the charge of being concerned in some foul
violation of Roman law. He constituted a public tribunal, and, in
ignorance of the laws of Christians in defence of virtue, endeavoured to
compel them to give up the faith of their fathers which had been handed
down from the apostles through the fathers to us. He even went so far as
to maintain that this would be gratifying to the most merciful and
clement Valens Augustus. “Wretched man” he shouted “accept, accept the
doctrine of the Arians; God will pardon you even though you worship with
a true worship, if you do this not of your own accord but because you
are compelled. There is always a defence for irresponsible compulsion,
while free action is responsible and much followed by accusation.
Consider well these arguments; come willingly; away with all delay;
subscribe the doctrine of Arius preached now by Lucius,” (so he
introduced him by name) “being well assured that if you obey you will
have wealth and honour from your prince, while if you refuse you will be
punished by chains, rack, torture, scourge and cruel torments; you will
be deprived of your property and possessions; you will be driven into
exile and condemned to dwell in savage regions.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p19"></span>Thus this noble character mixed
intimidation with deceit and so endeavoured to persuade and compel the
people to apostatise from true religion. They however knew full well how
true it is that the pain of treachery to right religion is sharper than
any torment; they refused to lower their virtue and noble spirit to his
trickery and threats, and were thus constrained to answer him. “Cease,
cease trying to frighten us with these words, utter no more vain words.
We worship no God of late arrival or of new invention. Foam at us if you
will in the vain tempest of your fury and dash yourselves against us
like a furious wind. We abide by the doctrines of true religion even
unto death; we have never regarded God as impotent, or as unwise, or
untrue, as at one time a Father and at another not a Father, as this
impious Arian teaches, making the Son a being of time and transitory.
For if, as the Ariomaniacs say, the Son is a creature, not being
naturally of one substance with the Father, the Father too will be
reduced to non-existence by the nonexistence of the Son, not being as
they assert at one period a Father. But if He is ever a Father, his
offspring being truly of Him, and not by derivation, for God is
impassible, how is not he mad and foolish who says of the Son through
whom all things came by grace into existence, “there was a time when he
was not.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p20"></span>These men have truly become
fatherless by falling away from our fathers throughout the world who
assembled at Nicæa, and anathematized the false doctrine of Arius, now
defended by this later champion. They laid down that the Son was not as
you are now compelling us to say, of a different substance from the
Father, but of one and the same. This their pious intelligence clearly
perceived, and so from an adequate collation of divine terms they owned
Him to be consubstantial.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p21"></span>Advancing these and other similar
arguments, they were imprisoned for many days in the hope that they
might be induced to fall away from their right mind, but the rather,
like the noblest of the athletes in a Stadium, they crushed all fear,
and from time to time as it were anointing themselves <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-Page_124"></span>with the thought of the bold deeds
done by their fathers, through the help of holy thoughts maintained a
nobler constancy in piety, and treated the rack as a training place for
virtue. While they were thus struggling, and had become, as writes the
blessed Paul, a spectacle to angels and to men, <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) the whole city ran up to gaze at
Christ’s athletes, vanquishing by stout endurance the scourges of the
judge who was torturing them, winning by patience trophies against
impiety, and exhibiting triumphs against Arians. So their savage enemy
thought that by threats and torments he could subdue and deliver them to
the enemies of Christ. Thus therefore the savage and inhuman tyrant
evilly entreated them by inflicting on them the tortures that his cruel
ingenuity devised, while all the people stood wailing and shewing their
sorrow in various ways. Then he once more mustered his troops, who were
disciplined in disorder, and summoned the martyrs to trial, or as it
might rather be called, to a foregone condemnation, by the seaport,
while after their fashion hired cries were raised against them by the
idolaters and the Jews. On their refusal to yield to the manifest heresy
of the Ariomaniacs they were sentenced, while all the people stood in
tears before the tribunal, to be deported from Alexandria to the
Phœnician Heliopolis, <span id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) a place
where none of the inhabitants, who are all given over to idols, can
endure so much as to hear the name of Christ.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p24"></span>After giving them the order to
embark, Magnus stationed himself at the port, for he had delivered his
sentence against them in the neighbourhood of the public baths. He
showed them his sword unsheathed, thinking that he could thus strike
terror into men who had again and again smitten hostile demons to the
ground with their two-edged blade. So he bade them put out to sea,
though they had got no provisions on board, and were starting without
one single comfort for their exile. Strange and almost incredible to
relate, the sea was all afoam; grieved, I think, and unwilling, if I may
so say, to receive the good men upon its surface, and so have part or
lot in an unrighteous sentence. Now even to the ignorant was made
manifest the savage purpose of the judge and it may truly be said “at
this, the heavens stood astonished.” <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p26"></span>The whole city groaned, and is
lamenting to this day. Some men beating on their breast with one hand
after another raised a mighty noise; others lifted up at once their
hands and eyes to heaven in testimony of the wrong inflicted on them,
and so saying in all but words, “Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O
earth,” <span id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) what unlawful deeds are
being done. Now all was weeping and wailing; singing and sighing sounded
through all the town, and from every eye flowed a river of tears which
threatened to overwhelm the very sea with its tide. There was the
aforesaid Magnus on the port ordering the rowers to hoist the sails, and
up went a mingled cry of maids and matrons, old men and young, all
sobbing and lamenting together, and the noise of the multitude
overwhelmed the roar raised by the waves on the foaming sea. So the
martyrs sailed off for Heliopolis, where every man is given over to
superstition, <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) where flourish the
devil’s ways of pleasure, and where the situation of the city,
surrounded on all sides by mountains that approach the sky, is fitted
for the terrifying lairs of wild beasts. All the friends they left
behind now alike in public in the middle of the town and each in private
apart groaned and uttered words of grief, and were even forbidden to
weep, at the order of Palladius, prefect of the city, who happened
himself to be a man quite given over to superstition. Many of the
mourners were first arrested and thrown into prison, and then scourged,
torn with carding combs, tortured, and, champions as they were of the
church in their holy enthusiasm, were despatched to the mines of
Phennesus <span id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) and Proconnesus. <span
id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p31"></span>Most of them were monks, devoted to
a life of ascetic solitude, and were about twenty-three in number. Not
long afterwards the deacon who had been sent by our beloved Damasus,
bishop of Rome, to bring us letters of consolation and communion, was
led publicly through the town by executioners, with his hands tied
behind his back like some notorious criminal. After sharing the tortures
inflicted on murderers, he was terribly scourged with stones and bits of
lead about his very neck. <span id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) He
went on board ship to sail, like the rest, with the <span
id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-Page_125"></span>mark of the sacred cross upon his
brow; with none to aid and none to tempt him he was despatched to the
copper mines of Phennesus. During the tortures inflicted by the
magistrate on the tender bodies of little boys, some have been left
lying on the spot deprived of holy rites of burial, though parents and
brothers and kinsfolk, and indeed the whole city, begged that this one
consolation might be given them. But alas for the inhumanity of the
judge, if indeed he can be called judge who only condemns! They who had
contended nobly for the true religion were assigned a worse fate than a
murderer’s, their bodies lying, as they did, unburied. The glorious
champions were thrown to be devoured by beasts and birds of prey. <span
id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) Those who were anxious for conscience’
sake to express sympathy with the parents were punished by decapitation,
as though they had broken some law. What Roman law, nay what foreign
sentiment, ever inflicted punishment for the expression of sympathy with
parents? What instance is there of the perpetration of so illegal a deed
by any one of the ancients? The male children of the Hebrews were indeed
once ordered to be slain by Pharaoh, but his edict was suggested by envy
and by fear. How far greater the inhumanity of our day than of his. How
preferable, if there be a choice in unrighteousness, their wrongs to
ours. How much better; if what is illegal can be called good or bad,
though in truth iniquity is always iniquity.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p37"></span>I am writing what is incredible,
inhuman, awful, savage, barbarous, pitiless, cruel. But in all this the
votaries of the Arian madness pranced, as it were, with proud
exultation, while the whole city was lamenting; for, as it is written in
Exodus, “there was not a house in which there was not one dead.” <span
id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p39"></span>The men whose appetite for iniquity
was never satisfied planned new agitation. Ever wreaking their evil will
in evil deeds, they darted the peculiar venom of their iniquity at the
bishops of the province, using the aforesaid treasurer Magnus as the
instrument of their unrighteousness.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p40"></span>Some they delivered to the Senate,
some they trapped at their good pleasure, leaving no stone unturned in
their anxiety to hunt in all from every quarter to impiety, going about
in all directions, and like the devil, the proper father of heresy, they
sought whom they might devour. <span id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p42"></span>In all, after many fruitless
efforts, they drove into exile to Dio-Cæsarea, <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) a city inhabited by Jews, murderers of
the Lord, eleven of the bishops of Egypt, all of them men who from
childhood to old age had lived an ascetic life in the desert, had
subdued their inclinations to pleasure by reason and by discipline, had
fearlessly preached the true faith of piety, had imbibed the pious
doctrines, had again and again won victory against demons, were ever
putting the adversary out of countenance by their virtue, and publicly
posting the Arian heresy by wisest argument. Yet like Hell, <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) not satisfied with the death of their
brethren, fools and madmen as they were, eager to win a reputation by
their evil deeds, they tried to leave memorials in all the world of
their own cruelty. For lo now they roused the imperial attention against
certain clerics of the catholic church who were living at Antioch,
together with some excellent monks who came forward to testify against
their evil deeds. They got these men banished to Neocæsarea <span
id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) in Pontus, where they were soon
deprived of life in consequence of the sterility of the country. Such
tragedies were enacted at this period, fit indeed to be consigned to
silence and oblivion, but given a place in history for the condemnation
of the men who wag their tongues against the Only begotten, and infected
as they were with the raving madness of blasphemy, strive not only to
aim their shafts at the Master of the universe, but further waged a
truceless war against His faithful servants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_731"></span>[121:732](2030125.htm#fr_731) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3.2"></span>θνικός</span>, “foreigner” a “gentile.”
Another common term for “heathen” in ecclesiastical Greek is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3.3"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3.4"></span>Ελλην</span>, but
neither “Gentile” nor “Greek” expresses the required sense so well as
“Heathen,” which, like the cognate “Pagan,” simply denotes a countryman
and villager, and marks the age when Christianity was found to be mainly
in towns.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[122:733](2030125.htm#fr_732) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p4"></span> Vide note on page 120.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[122:734](2030125.htm#fr_733) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p5"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>[Eph. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_734"></span>[122:735](2030125.htm#fr_734) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p6"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>[Romans ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_735"></span>[122:736](2030125.htm#fr_735) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p7"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>[Joel i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_736"></span>[122:737](2030125.htm#fr_736) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9"></span> I adopt the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>στιβῇ</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.2"></span>στίμμι</span>.
cf. <span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.3"></span>[Ez. xxiii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.4"></span> (Sept.). <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.6"></span>στίβιζον τοῦς ὀφθαλμόυς σου</span>

<span id="fn_737"></span>[122:738](2030125.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p9.7"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p10"></span> cf. Greg. Naz. Orat. xxv. 12. p.
464 Ed. Migne.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[122:739](2030125.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p11"></span> cf. Soc. 21.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[122:740](2030125.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p12"></span> Observe the pun.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[122:741](2030125.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p13"></span> On the subject of episcopal
election, vide Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 335.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[122:742](2030125.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p15.1"></span>ὀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p15.2"></span>τῶν κομητατησίων δὲ λαργιτιόνων
κόμης</span>. Valesius says, “thesauri principis, qui vulgo sacræ
largitiones dicebantur, alii erant per singulas diœceses quibus prœerant
comites. Alii erant in comitatu una cum principe, qui comitatenses
largitiones dicebantur. His præerat comes largitionum comitatensium.”

<span id="fn_742"></span>[122:743](2030125.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p16"></span> Beyrout, between the ancient
Byblus and Sidon. Near here St. George killed the dragon, according to
the legend. Our patron saint’s dragon does not seem to have been, as may
possibly have been the case in some similar stories, a surviving
Saurian, but simply a materialization of some picture of George
vanquishing the old dragon, the Devil.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[123:744](2030125.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p18.1"></span>[Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p18.2"></span>. The Sept. reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p18.3"></span>Εἶπεν ἄφρων ἐν
καρδία αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἔστι Θεός</span>, which admits of the translation “He
is not God.”

<span id="fn_744"></span>[124:745](2030125.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p22"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p22.1"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_745"></span>[124:746](2030125.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p23"></span> In Cœle-Syria, near the sources of
the Orontes, where the ruins of the temple of the sun built by Antoninus
Pius are known by the modern equivalent of the older title—Baal-Bek,
“the city of the sun.”

<span id="fn_746"></span>[124:747](2030125.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p25"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p25.1"></span>[Jer. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p25.2"></span>. A.V. “Be astonished, O ye heavens.”
But in Sept. as in text <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p25.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p25.4"></span>ξέστη ὁ οὐρανὸς ἐπὶ τούτῳ</span>

<span id="fn_747"></span>[124:748](2030125.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p27"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p27.1"></span>[Isaiah i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_748"></span>[124:749](2030125.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p28"></span> Here the obvious sense of <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p28.1"></span>δεισιδαιμονῶν</span> matches the
“superstitious” of A.V. in <span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p28.2"></span>[Acts
xvii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p28.3"></span>

<span id="fn_749"></span>[124:750](2030125.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p28.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p29"></span> Valesius identifies Phennesus with
Phynon in Arabia Petræa, now Tafileh.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[124:751](2030125.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p30"></span> The island of Marmara in the sea
of that name.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[124:752](2030125.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p32"></span> The Roman “Flagellum” was a
frightful instrument of torture, and is distinguished from the
“scutica,” or whip, and “virga,” or rod. It was knotted with bones and
bits of metal, and sometimes ended in a hook. Horace (Sat. I. iii. 119)
calls it “horribile.”

<span id="fn_752"></span>[125:753](2030125.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p33"></span> cf. Soph. Ant. 30, Where the
corpse of Polyneikes is described as left

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p34"></span>——“unwept unsepulchred

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p35"></span>A prize full rich for birds.”
(Plumptre.)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p36"></span>Christian sentiment is still
affected by the horror felt by the Greeks at deprivation of the rites of
burial which finds striking expression in the dispute between Teucer and
Menelaos about the burial of Ajax.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[125:754](2030125.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p38"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p38.1"></span>[Ex. xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_754"></span>[125:755](2030125.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p41"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p41.1"></span>[1 Peter v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="fn_755"></span>[125:756](2030125.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p43"></span> Now Sefurieh, anciently Sepphoris;
an unimportant place till erected by Herod Antipas into the capital of
Galilee.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[125:757](2030125.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p44"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p44.1"></span>[Proverbs xxvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="fn_757"></span>[125:758](2030125.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p45"></span> Now Niksar, on the river Lykus,
the scene of two councils; (i.) <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p45.1"></span>a.d.</span> 315, when the first canon
ordered every priest to forfeit his orders on marriage (Mansi ii. 539)
(ii.) <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xix-p45.2"></span>a.d.</span> 350, when Eustathius of
Sebaste was condemned (Mansi, iii. 291).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Mavia, Queen of the Saracens, and the ordination of Moses the
monk.](2030126)
