[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030080)  [Next](2030082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Of the Council
of Antioch and what was done there against the holy Meletius*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time, <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) Constantius was residing at Antioch.
The Persian war was over; there had been a time of peace, and he once
again gathered bishops together with the object of making them all deny
both the formula “of one substance” and also the formula “of different
substance.” On the death of Leontius, Eudoxius had seized the see of
Antioch, but on his expulsion and illegal establishment, after many
synods, at Constantinople, the church of Antioch had been left without a
shepherd. Accordingly the assembled bishops, gathered in considerable
numbers from every quarter, asserted that their primary obligation was
to provide a pastor for the flock and that then with him they would
deliberate on matters of faith. It fell out opportunely that the divine
Meletius who was ruling a certain city of Armenia <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) had been grieved with the
insubordination of the people under his rule and was now living without
occupation elsewhere. The Arian faction imagined that Meletius was of
the same way of thinking as themselves, and an upholder of their
doctrines. They therefore petitioned Constantius to commit to his hands
the reins of the Antiochene church. Indeed in the hope of establishing
their impiety there was no law that they did not fearlessly transgress;
illegality was becoming the very foundation of their blasphemy; nor was
this an isolated specimen of their irregular proceedings. On the other
hand the maintainers of apostolic doctrine, who were perfectly well
aware of the soundness of the great Meletius, and had clear knowledge of
his stainless character and wealth of virtue, came to a common vote, and
took measures to have their resolution written out and subscribed by all
without delay. This document both parties as a bond of compromise
entrusted to the safe keeping of a bishop who was a noble champion of
the truth, Eusebius of Samosata. And when the great Meletius had
received the imperial summons and arrived, forth to meet him came all
the higher ranks of the priesthood, forth came all the other orders of
the church, and the whole population of the city. There, too, were Jews
and Gentiles all eager to see the great Meletius. Now the emperor had
charged both Meletius and the rest who were able to speak to expound to
the multitude the text “The Lord formed me in the beginning of his way,
before his works of old” (<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>[Prov.
viii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>. lxx), and he ordered skilled writers
to take down on the spot what each man said, with the idea that in this
manner their instruction would be more exact. First of all Georgius of
Laodicea gave vent to his foul heresy. After him Acacius <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) of Cæsarea propounded a doctrine <span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-Page_93"></span>of
compromise far removed indeed from the blasphemy of the enemy, but not
preserving the apostolic doctrine pure and undefiled. Then up rose the
great Meletius and exhibited the unbending line of the canon of the
faith, for using the truth as a carpenter does his rule he avoided
excess and defect. Then the multitude broke into loud applause and
besought him to give them a short summary of his teaching. Accordingly
after showing three fingers, he withdrew two, left one, and uttered the
memorable sentence, “In thought they are three but we speak as to
one.” <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p7"></span>Against this teaching the men who
had the plague of Arius in their hearts whetted their tongues, and
started an ingenious slander, declaring that the divine Meletius was a
Sabellian. Thus they persuaded the fickle sovereign who, like the well
known Euripus, <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) easily shifted
his current now this way and now that, and induced him to relegate
Meletius to his own home.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p9"></span>Euzoius, an open defender of Arian
tenets, was promptly promoted to his place; the very man whom, then a
deacon, the great Alexander had degraded at the same time as Arius. Now
the part of the people who remained sound separated from the unsound and
assembled in the apostolic church which is situated in the part of the
city called the Palæa. <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p11"></span>For thirty years indeed after the
attack made upon the illustrious Eustathius they had gone on enduring
the abomination of Arianism, in the expectation of some favourable
change. But when they saw impiety on the increase, and men faithful to
the apostolic doctrines both openly attacked and menaced by secret
conspiracy, the divine Meletius in exile, and Euzoius the champion of
heresy established as bishop in his place, they remembered the words
spoken to Lot, “Escape for thy life”; <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) and further the law of the gospel
which plainly ordains “if thy right eye offend thee pluck it out and
cast it from thee.” <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) The Lord
laid down the same law about both hand and foot, and added, “It is
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that
thy whole body should be cast into hell.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p14"></span>Thus came about the division of
the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_585"></span>[92:586](2030081.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p3"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 361.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[92:587](2030081.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p4"></span> According to Sozomen, Sebaste;
but Socrates (II. 44) makes him bishop of the Syrian Berœa. Gregory of
Nyssa (Orat: In Fun: Mag: Meletii) puts on record “the sweet calm look,
the radiant smile, the kind hand seconding the kind voice.”

<span id="fn_587"></span>[92:588](2030081.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p5"></span> On Acacius of Cæsarea vide note
on page 70. At the Synod of Seleucia in 359 he started the party of the
Homœans, and was deposed. In the reign of Jovian they inclined to
Orthodoxy; in that of Valens to Arianism (cf. Soc. iv. 2). Acacius was a
benefactor to the Public Library of Cæsarea (Hieron. Ep. ad Marcellam
(141). Baronius places his death in 366.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[93:589](2030081.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>Τρία τὰ νοουμένα, ὡς ἑνὶ δὲ
διαλεγόμεθα</span> “Tria sunt quæ intelliguntur, sed tanquam unum
alloquimur.” The narrative of Sozomen (iv. 28) enables us to supply what
Theodoret infelicitously omits. It was when an Arian archdeacon rudely
put his hand over the bishop’s mouth that Meletius indicated the
orthodox doctrine by his fingers. When the archdeacon at his wits’ end
uncovered the mouth and seized the hand of the confessor, “with a loud
voice he the more clearly proclaimed his doctrine.”

<span id="fn_589"></span>[93:590](2030081.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p8"></span> The Euripus, the narrow channel
between Eubœa and the mainland, changes its current during eleven days
in each month, eleven to fourteen times a day. cf. Arist. Eth. N. ix.
6.3. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>μεταῤρει ὥσπερ Εὔριπος</span>.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[93:591](2030081.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p10"></span> cf. p. 34.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[93:592](2030081.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>[Gen. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_592"></span>[93:593](2030081.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p13"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>[Matt. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxvii-p13.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: About Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.](2030082)
