[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030808)  [Next](2030810) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p1"></span> 6. I will follow the order of your
letter, and subjoin your very words as you spoke them. “I admit, that,
as you say, I praised your eloquence in my Preface; and I would praise
it again now were it not that contrary to the advice of your Tully, you
make it hateful by excessive boastfulness.” Where have I boasted of my
eloquence? I did not even accept willingly the praise which you bestowed
on it. Perhaps your reason for saying this is that you do not wish,
yourself, to be flattered by public praise given in guile. Rest assured
you shall be accused openly; you reject one who would praise you; you
shall have experience of one who openly arraigns you. I was not so
foolish as to criticize your illiterate style; no one can expose it to
condemnation so strongly as you do whenever you write. I only wished to
show your fellow-disciples who shared your lack of literary training
what progress you had made during your thirty years in the East, an
illiterate writer, who takes impudence for eloquence, and universal evil
speaking a sign of a good conscience. I am not going to administer the
ferule; I do not assume, as you put it, to apply the strokes of the
leather thong to teach an aged pupil his letters. But the fact is your
eloquence and teaching is so sparkling that we mere tract-writers cannot
bear it, and you dazzle our eyes with the acuteness of your talents to
such an extent that we must all seem to be envious of you; and we must
really join in the attempt to suppress you, for, if once you obtain the
primacy among us as a writer, and stand on the summit of the rhetorical
arch, all of us who profess to know anything will not be allowed to
mutter a word. I am, according to you, a philosopher and an orator,
grammarian, dialectician, one who knows Hebrew, Greek and Latin, a
‘trilingual’ man. On this estimate, you also will be ‘bilingual,’ who
know enough Latin and Greek to make the Greek think you a Latin scholar
and the Latin a Greek: and the bishop Epiphanius will be a
‘pentaglossic <span id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167) man’ since he
speaks in five languages against you and your favorite. <span
id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) But I wonder at the rashness which
made you dare to say to one so accomplished as you profess to think me:
“You, whose accomplishments give you so many watchful eyes, how can you
be pardoned if you go wrong? How can you fail to be buried in the
silence of a never ending shame?” When I read this, and reflected that I
must somewhere or other have made a slip in my words (for <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) “if any man does not go wrong in
word, the same is a perfect man”) and was expecting that he was about to
expose some of my faults; all of a sudden I came upon the words: “Two
days before the carrier of this letter set out your declamation against
me was put into my hands.” What became then of those threats of yours,
and of your words: “How can you be pardoned if you go wrong? How can you
fail to be covered with the silence of a never ending shame?” Yet
perhaps, notwithstanding the shortness of the time, you were able to put
this in order; or else you were intending to hire in one of the learned
sort, who would expect to find in my works the ornaments and gems of an
eloquence like yours. You wrote before this: “Accept the document which
I send which you wished to buy at a great price;” but now you speak with
the pretence of humility. “I intended to follow your example; but, since
the messenger who was returning to you was hurrying back again I thought
it better to write shortly to you than at greater length to others.” In
the meantime you boldly take pleasure in your illiteracy. Indeed you
once confessed it, declaring that ‘it was superfluous to notice a few
faults of style, when it was acknowledged that there were faults in
every part.’ I will not therefore find fault with you for putting down
that a document was acquired when you meant that it was bought; though
acquiring is said of things like in kind, whereas buying implies the
<span id="page_523">p. 523</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-Page_523"></span>counting out of money: nor for such
a sentence as “as he who was returning to you was hurrying back again”
which is a redundancy worthy of the poorest style of diction. I will
only reply to the arguments, and will convict you, not of solæcisms and
barbarisms, but of falsehood, cunning and impudence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[522:3168](2030809.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p2"></span> Five tongued.

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[522:3169](2030809.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p3"></span> Amasium, sweetheart; namely,
Origen.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[522:3170](2030809.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p4"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>[Jas. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xii.iii.vii-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You wish first to praise, then to amend me, but both with
fisticuffs; and make it impossible for me to keep silence.](2030810)
