[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030648)  [Next](2030650) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xii-p1"></span> 11. Some time ago, Macarius, a man of
distinction from his faith, his learning, his noble birth and his
personal life, had in hand a work against fatalism or, as it is called,
Mathesis, <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838) and was spending
much necessary and fruitful toil on its composition; but he could not
decide many points, especially how to speak of the dispensations of
divine Providence. He found the matter to be one of great difficulty.
But in the visions of the night the Lord, he said, had shown him the
appearance of a ship far off upon the sea coming towards him, which
ship, when it entered the port, was to solve all the knotty points which
had perplexed him. When he arose, he began anxiously to ponder the
vision, and he found, as he said, that that was the very moment of my
arrival; so that he forthwith made known to me the scope of his work,
and his difficulties, and also the vision which he had seen. He
proceeded to inquire what were the opinions of Origen, whom he
understood to be the most renowned among the Greeks on the points in
question, and begged that I would shortly explain his views on each of
them in order. I at first could only say that the task was one of much
difficulty: but I told him that that saintly man the Martyr Pamphilus
had to some extent dealt with the question in a work of the kind he
wished, that is in his Apology for Origen. Immediately he begged me to
translate this work into Latin. I told him several times that I had no
practice in this style of composition, and that my power of writing
Latin had grown dull through the neglect of nearly thirty years. He,
however, persevered in his request, begging earnestly that by any kind
of words that might be possible, the things which he <span
id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xii-Page_440"></span>longed to know should be placed within
his reach. I did what he wished in the best language in my power; but
this only inflamed him with greater desire for the full knowledge of the
work itself from which, as he saw, the few translations which I had made
had been taken. I tried to excuse myself; but he urged me with
vehemence, taking God to witness of his earnest request to me not to
refuse him the means which might assist him in doing a good work. It was
only because he insisted so earnestly, and it seemed clear that his
desire was according to the will of God, that I at length acquiesced,
and made the translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[439:2839](2030649.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xii-p2"></span> This word originally meant simply
learning. It was then applied in a special sense to mathematics. But the
mathematici under the later Roman Empire became identified with
astrologers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pamphilus Apology for Origen.](2030650)
