[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030017)  [Next](2030019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iv.vii-Page_26"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Counter-statements of Theodoret.</span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span>(Opp. Ed. Schulze. V. I. seq. Migne, Lat.
76. col. 391.)

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span>*Against I.*—But all we who follow the words
of the evangelists state that God the Word was not made flesh by nature,
nor yet was changed into flesh; for the Divine is immutable and
invariable. Wherefore also the prophet David says, “Thou art the same,
and thy years shall not fail.” <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)
And this the great Paul, the herald of the truth, in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, states to have been spoken of the Son. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) And in another place God says through
the Prophet, “I am the Lord: I change not.” <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) If then the Divine is immutable and
invariable, it is incapable of change or alteration. And if the
immutable cannot be changed, then God the Word was not made flesh by
mutation, but took flesh and tabernacled in us, according to the word of
the evangelist. This the divine Paul expresses clearly in his Epistle to
the Philippians in the words, “Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to
be equal with God: but made Himself of no reputation and took upon Him
the form of a servant.” <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) Now it
is plain from these words that the form of God was not changed into the
form of a servant, but, remaining what it was, took the form of the
servant. So God the Word was not made flesh, but assumed living and
reasonable flesh. He Himself is not naturally conceived of the Virgin,
fashioned, formed, and deriving beginning of existence from her; He who
is before the ages, God, and with God, being with the Father and with
the Father both known and worshipped; but He fashioned for Himself a
temple in the Virgin’s womb, and was with that which was formed and
begotten. Wherefore also we style that holy Virgin <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p8.3"></span>θεοτόκος</span>, not because
she gave birth in natural manner to God, but to man united to the God
that had fashioned Him. Moreover if He that was fashioned in the
Virgin’s womb was not man but God the Word Who is before the ages, then
God the Word is a creature of the Holy Ghost. For that which was
conceived in her, says Gabriel, is of the Holy Ghost. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) But if the only begotten Word of God
is uncreate and of one substance and co-eternal with the Father it is no
longer a formation or creation of the Spirit. And if the Holy Ghost did
not fashion God the Word in the Virgin’s womb, it follows that we
understand the form of the servant to have been fashioned, formed,
conceived, and generated. But since the form was not stripped of the
form of God, but was a Temple containing God the Word dwelling in it,
according to the words of Paul “For it pleased the Father that in him
should all fulness dwell” “bodily,” <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) we call the Virgin not mother of man
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p10.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p10.4"></span>νθρωποτόκος</span>) but
mother of God (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p10.5"></span>θεοτόκος</span>), applying the former title to
the fashioning and conception, but the latter to the union. For this
cause the child who was born is called Emmanuel, neither God separated
from human nature nor man stripped of Godhead. For Emmanuel is
interpreted to mean “God with us”, according to the words of the
Gospels; and the expression “God with us” at once manifests Him Who for
our sakes was assumed out of us, and proclaims God the Word Who assumed.
Therefore the child is called Emmanuel on account of God Who assumed,
and the Virgin <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p10.6"></span>θεοτόκος</span> on account of the union of the
form of God with the conceived form of a servant. For God the Word was
not changed into flesh, but the form of God took the form of a servant.

<span id="iv.vii-p11"></span>*Against II.*—We, in obedience to the
divine teaching of the apostles, confess one Christ; and, on account of
the union, we name the same both God and man. But we are wholly ignorant
of the union according to hypostasis <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) as being strange and foreign to the
divine Scriptures and the Fathers who have interpreted them. And if the
author of these statements means by the union according to hypostasis
that there was a mixture of flesh and Godhead, we shall oppose his
statement with all our might, and shall confute his blasphemy, for the
mixture is of necessity followed by confusion; and the admission of
confusion destroys the individuality of each nature. Things that are
undergoing mixture do not remain what they were, and to assert this in
the case of God the Word and of the seed of <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_27"></span>David would be most absurd.
We must obey the Lord when He exhibits the two natures and says to the
Jews, “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.” <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) But if there had been mixture then God
had not remained God, neither was the temple recognised as a temple;
then the temple was God and God was temple. This is involved in the
theory of the mixture. And it was quite superfluous for the Lord to say
to the Jews, “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.”
He ought to have said, Destroy me and in three days I shall be raised,
if there had really been any mixture and confusion. As it is, He
exhibits the temple undergoing destruction and God raising it up.
Therefore the union according to hypostasis, which in my opinion they
put before us instead of mixture, is superfluous. It is quite sufficient
to mention the union, which both exhibits the properties of the natures
and teaches us to worship the one Christ.

<span id="iv.vii-p14"></span>*Against III.*—The sense of the terms used
is misty and obscure. Who needs to be told that there is no difference
between conjunction and concurrence? The concurrence is a concurrence of
the separated parts; and the conjunction is a conjunction of the
distinguished parts. The very clever author of the phrases has laid down
things that agree as though they disagreed. It is wrong, he says, to
conjoin the hypostases by conjunction; they ought to be conjoined by
concurrence, and that a natural concurrence. Possibly he states this not
knowing what he says; if he knows, he blasphemes. Nature has a
compulsory force and is involuntary; as for instance, if I say we are
naturally hungry, we do not feel hunger of free-will but of necessity;
and assuredly paupers would have left off begging if the power of
ceasing to be hungry had lain in their own will; we are naturally
thirsty; we naturally sleep; we naturally breathe; and all these
actions, I repeat, belong to the category of the involuntary, and he who
is no longer capable of them necessarily ceases to exist. If then the
concurrence in union of the form of God and the form of a servant was
natural, then God the Word was united to the form of the servant under
the compulsion of necessity, and not because He put in force His loving
kindness, and the Lawgiver of the Universe will be found to be a
follower of the laws of necessity. Not thus have we been taught by the
blessed Paul; on the contrary, we have been taught that He took the form
of a servant and “emptied Himself;” <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) and the expression “emptied Himself”
indicates the voluntary act. If then He was united by purpose and will
to the nature assumed from us, the addition of the term natural is
superfluous. It suffices to confess the union, and union is understood
of things distinguished, for if there were no division an union could
never be apprehended. The apprehension then of the union implies
previous apprehension of the division. How then can he say that the
hypostases or natures ought not to be divided? He knows all the while
that the hypostasis of God the Word was perfect before the ages; and
that the form of the servant which was assumed by It was perfect; and
this is the reason why he said hypostases and not hypostasis. If
therefore either nature is perfect, and both came together, it is
obvious that after the form of God had taken the form of a servant,
piety compels us to confess one son and Christ; while to speak of the
united hypostases or natures as two, so far from being absurd, follows
the necessity of the case. For if in the case of the one man we divide
the natures, and call the mortal nature body, but the immortal nature
soul, and both man, much more consonant is it with right reason to
recognise the properties alike of the God who took and of the man who
was taken. We find the blessed Paul dividing the one man into two where
he says in one passage, “Though our outward man perish yet the inward
man is renewed,” <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) and in another
“For I delight in the law of God after the inward man.” <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) And again “that Christ may dwell in
the inner man.” <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) Now if the
apostle divides the natural conjunction of the synchronous natures, with
what reason can the man who describes the mixture to us by means of
other terms indite us as impious when we divide the properties of the
natures of the everlasting God and of the man assumed at the end of
days?

<span id="iv.vii-p19"></span>*Against IV.*—These statements, too, are
akin to the preceding. On the assumption that there has been a mixture,
he means that there is a distinction of terms as used both in the holy
Gospels and in the apostolic writings. And he uses this language while
glorifying himself that he is at war at once with Arius and Eunomius and
the rest of the heresiarchs. Let then this exact professor of theology
tells us how he would confute the blasphemy of the heretics, while
applying to God the Word what is uttered humbly and appropriately by the
form of the servant. They indeed while thus doing lay down that the Son
of God is inferior, a creature, made, and a servant. To whom then are
we, hold<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="iv.vii-Page_28"></span>ing as we do the opposite opinion to theirs,
and confessing the Son to be of one substance and co-eternal with God
the Father, Creator of the Universe, Maker, Beautifier, Ruler, and
Governor, All-wise, Almighty, or rather Himself, Power, Life and Wisdom,
to refer the words “My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me;” <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) or “Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me;” <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) or “Father
save me from this hour;” <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) or
“That hour no man knoweth, not even the Son of Man;” <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) and all the other passages spoken and
written in lowliness by Him and by the holy apostles about Him? To whom
shall we apply the weariness and the sleep? To whom the ignorance and
the fear? Who was it who stood in need of angelic succour? If these
belong to God the Word, how was wisdom ignorant? How could it be called
wisdom when affected by the sense of ignorance? How could He speak the
truth in saying that He had all that the Father hath, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) when not having the knowledge of the
Father? For He says, “The Father alone knoweth that day.” <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) How could He be the unchanged image of
Him that begat Him if He has not all that the Begetter hath? If then He
speaks the truth when saying that He is ignorant, any one might suppose
this of Him. But if He knoweth the day, but says that He is ignorant
with the wish to hide it, you see in what a blasphemy the conclusion
issues. For the truth lies and could not properly be called truth if it
has any quality opposed to truth. But if the truth does not lie, neither
is God the Word ignorant of the day which He Himself made, and which He
Himself fixed, wherein He purposes to judge the world, but has the
knowledge of the Father as being unchanged image. Not then to God the
Word does the ignorance belong, but to the form of the servant who at
that time knew as much as the indwelling Godhead revealed. The same
position may be maintained about other similar cases. How for instance
could it be reasonable for God the Word to say to the Father, “Father if
it be possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will but
as Thou wilt”? <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) The absurdities
which necessarily thence follow are not a few. First it follows that the
Father and the Son are not of the same mind, and that the Father wishes
one thing and the Son another, for He said, “Nevertheless not as I will
but as Thou wilt.” Secondly we shall have to contemplate great ignorance
in the Son, for He will be found ignorant whether the cup can or cannot
pass from Him; but to say this of God the Word is utter impiety and
blasphemy. For exactly did He know the end of the mystery of the œconomy
Who for this very reason came among us, Who of His own accord took our
nature, Who emptied Himself. For this cause too He foretold to the Holy
Apostles, “Behold we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of Man shall be
betrayed…into the hands of the Gentiles to mock and to scourge and to
crucify Him, and the third day He shall rise again.” <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) How then can He Who foretold these
things, and, when Peter deprecated their coming to pass, rebuked him,
Himself deprecate their coming to pass, when He clearly knows all that
is to be? Is it not absurd that Abraham many generations ago should have
seen His day and have been glad, <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)
and that Isaiah in like manner, and Jeremiah, and Daniel, and Zechariah,
and all the fellowship of the prophets, should have foretold His saving
passion, and He Himself be ignorant, and beg release from and deprecate
it, though it was destined to come to pass for the salvation of the
world? Therefore these words are not the words of God the Word, but of
the form of the servant, afraid of death because death was not yet
destroyed. <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) Surely God the Word
permitted the utterance of these expressions allowing room for fear,
that the nature of Him that had to be born may be plain, and to prevent
our supposing the Son of Abraham and David to be an unreality or
appearance. The crew of the impious heretics has given birth to this
blasphemy through entertaining these sentiments. We shall therefore
apply what is divinely spoken and acted to God the Word; on the other
hand what is said and done in humility we shall connect with the form of
a servant, lest we be tainted with the blasphemy of Arius and Eunomius.

<span id="iv.vii-p30"></span>*Against V.*—We assert that God the Word
shared like ourselves in flesh and blood, and in immortal soul, on
account of the union relating to them; but that God the <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.vii-p30.1"></span>Word</span> was made flesh by
any change we not only refuse to say, but accuse of impiety those who
do, and it may be seen that this is contrary to the very terms laid
down. For if the Word was <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iv.vii-Page_29"></span>changed into flesh He did not share with us
in flesh and blood: but if He shared in flesh and blood He shared as
being another besides them: and if the flesh is anything other besides
Him, then He was not changed into flesh. While therefore we use the term
sharing <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) we worship both Him that
took and that which was taken as one Son. But we reckon the distinction
of the natures. We do not object to the term man bearing God, as
employed by many of the holy Fathers, one of whom is the great Basil,
who uses this term in his argument to Amphilochius about the Holy Ghost,
and in his interpretation of the fifty-ninth psalm. But we call Him man
bearing God, not because He received some particular divine grace, but
as possessing all the Godhead of the Son united. For thus says the
blessed Paul in his interpretation, “Beware lest any man spoil you
through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after
the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For in Him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.” <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)

<span id="iv.vii-p33"></span>*Against VI.*—The blessed Paul calls that
which was assumed by God the Word “form of a servant,” <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) but since the assumption was prior to
the union, and the blessed Paul was discoursing about the assumption
when he called the nature which was assumed “form of a servant,” after
the making of the union the name of “servitude” has no longer place. For
seeing that the Apostle when writing to them that believed in Him said,
“So thou art not a servant but a son” <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) and the Lord said to His disciples,
“Henceforth I will not call you servants but friends;” <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) much more the first fruits of our
nature, through whom even we were guerdoned with the boon of adoption,
would be released from the title of servant. We therefore confess even
“the form of the servant” to be God on account of the form of God united
to it; and we bow to the authority of the prophet when he calls the babe
also Emmanuel, and the child which was born, “Angel of great counsel,
wonderful Counsellor, mighty God, powerful, Prince of peace, and Father
of the age to come.” <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) Yet the
same prophet, even after the union, when proclaiming the nature of that
which was assumed, calls him who is of the seed of Abraham “servant” in
the words “Thou art my servant O Israel and in thee will I be
glorified;” <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) and again, “Thus
says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant;” <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) and a little further on, “Lo I have
given thee for a covenant of the people, for a light to the Gentiles,
that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.” <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) But what was formed from the womb was
not God the Word but the form of the servant. For God the Word was not
made flesh by being changed, but He assumed flesh with a rational soul.

<span id="iv.vii-p41"></span>*Against VII.*—If the nature of man is
mortal, and God the Word is life and giver of life, and raised up the
temple which had been destroyed by the Jews, and carried it into heaven,
how is not the form of the servant glorified through the form of God?
For if being originally and by nature mortal it was made immortal
through its union with God the Word, it therefore received what it had
not; and after receiving what it had not, and being glorified, it is
glorified by Him who gave. Wherefore also the Apostle exclaims,
“According to the working of His mighty power which he wrought in Christ
when He raised Him from the dead.” <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)

<span id="iv.vii-p43"></span>*Against VIII.*—As I have often said, the
doxology which we offer to the Lord Christ is one, and we confess the
same to be at once God and man, as the method of the union has taught
us; but we shall not shrink from speaking of the properties of the
natures. For God the Word did not undergo change into flesh, nor yet
again did the man lose what he was and undergo transmutation into the
nature of God. Therefore we worship the Lord Christ, while we maintain
the properties of either nature.

<span id="iv.vii-p44"></span>*Against IX.*—Here he has plainly had the
hardihood to anathematize not only those who at the present time hold
pious opinions, but also those who were in former days heralds of truth;
aye even the writers of the divine gospels, the band of the holy
Apostles, and, in addition to these, Gabriel the archangel. For he
indeed it was who first, even before the conception, announced the birth
of the Christ according to the flesh; saying in reply to Mary when she
asked, “How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?” “The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee;
therefore also that holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God.” <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) And to
Joseph he said, “Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) And the Evangelist says, “When as his
mother Mary was espoused to Joseph…she was found with child of the Holy
Ghost.” <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_30"></span>And the Lord Himself when He
had come into the synagogue of the Jews and had taken the prophet
Isaiah, after reading the passage in which he says, “The spirit of the
Lord is upon me because He hath anointed me” and so on, added, “This day
is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.” <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) And the blessed Peter in his sermon to
the Jews said, “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy
Ghost.” <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) And Isaiah many ages
before had predicted, “There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots; and the spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
the Lord;” <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) and again, “Behold my
servant whom I uphold, my beloved in whom my soul delighteth. I will put
my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles.” <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) This testimony the
Evangelist too has inserted in his own writings. And the Lord Himself in
the Gospels says to the Jews, “If I with the spirit of God cast out
devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.” <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) And John says, “He that sent me to
baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost.” <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) So this
exact examiner of the divine decrees has not only anathematized
prophets, apostles, and even the archangel Gabriel, but has suffered his
blasphemy to reach even the Saviour of the world Himself. For we have
shewn that the Lord Himself after reading the passage “The spirit of the
Lord is upon me because He hath anointed me,” said to the Jews, “This
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.” And to those who said
that He was casting out devils by Beelzebub He replied that He was
casting them out by the Spirit of God. But we maintain that it was not
God the Word, of one substance and co-eternal with the Father, that was
formed by the Holy Ghost and anointed, but the human nature which was
assumed by Him at the end of days. We shall confess that the Spirit of
the Son was His own if he spoke of it as of the same nature and
proceeding from the Father, and shall accept the expression as
consistent with true piety. But if he speaks of the Spirit as being of
the Son, or as having its origin through the Son we shall reject this
statement as blasphemous and impious. For we believe the Lord when He
says, “The spirit which proceedeth from the Father;” <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) and likewise the very divine Paul
saying, “We have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of God.” <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215)

<span id="iv.vii-p56"></span>*Against X.*—The unchangeable nature was
not changed into nature of flesh, but assumed human nature and set it
over the common high priests, as the blessed Paul teaches in the words,
“For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices
for sins: who can have compassion on the ignorant and on them that are
out of the way; for that he himself also is encompassed with infirmity.
And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people so also for
himself.” <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) And a little further
on interpreting this he says, “As was Aaron so also was the
Christ.” <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) Then pointing out the
infirmity of the assumed nature he says, “Who in the days of His flesh,
when He had offered up prayers and supplication with strong crying and
tears unto Him that was able to save Him from death, and was heard for
His godly fear, though He was a son yet learned obedience by the things
that He suffered: and having been made perfect He became unto all that
obey Him the author of eternal salvation; named of God a high priest of
the order of Melchisedec.” <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) Who
then is He who was perfected by toils of virtue and who was not perfect
by nature? Who is He who learnt obedience by experience, and before his
experience was ignorant of it? Who is it that lived with godly fear and
offered supplication with strong crying and tears, not able to save
Himself but appealing to Him that is able to save Him and asking for
release from death? Not God the Word, the impassible, the immortal, the
incorporeal, whose memory is joy and release from tears, “For he has
wiped away tears from off all faces,” <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) and again the prophet says, “I
remembered God and was glad,” <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)
Who crowneth them that live in godly fear, “Who knoweth all things
before they be,” <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) “Who hath all
things that the Father hath;” <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)
Who is the unchangeable image of the Father, <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) “Who sheweth the Father in
himself.” <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) It is on the contrary
that which was assumed by Him of the seed of David, mortal, passible,
and afraid of death; although this itself afterwards destroyed the power
of death through union with the God who had assumed it; <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) which walked through all righteousness
and said to John, “Suffer it to be so now for thus it becometh us to
fulfil all righteousness.” <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_31"></span>This took the
name of the priesthood of Melchisedec, for it put on infirmity of
nature;—not the Almighty God the Word. Wherefore also, a little before,
the blessed Paul said, “We have not a high priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted like as we are yet without sin.” <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) It was the nature taken from us for
our sakes which experienced our feelings without sin, not He that on
account of our salvation assumed it. And in the beginning of this part
of his subject he teaches us in the words “Consider the apostle and high
priest of our profession, Jesus, who was faithful to Him that appointed
Him as also Moses was faithful in all His house.” <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) But no one holding the right faith
would call the unmade the uncreate, God the Word coeternal with the
Father, a creature; but on the contrary, Him of David’s seed Who being
free from all sin was made our high priest and victim, after Himself
offering Himself on our behalf to God having in Himself the Word, God of
God, united to Himself and inseparably conjoined.

<span id="iv.vii-p70"></span>*Against XI.*—In my opinion he appears to
give heed to the truth, in order that, by concealing his unsound views
by it, he may not be detected in asserting the same dogmas as the
heretics. But nothing is stronger than truth, which by its own rays
uncovers the darkness of falsehood. By the aid of its illumination we
shall make his heterodox belief plain. In the first place he has nowhere
made mention of intelligent flesh, nor confessed that the assumed man
was perfect, but everywhere in accordance with the teaching of
Apollinarius he speaks of flesh. Secondly, after introducing the
conception of the mixture under other terms, he brings it into his
arguments; for there he clearly states the flesh of the Lord to be
soulless. For, he says, if any one states that the flesh of the Lord is
not proper flesh of the very Word who is of God the Father, but that it
is of another beside Him, let him be anathema. Hence it is plain that he
does not confess God the Word to have assumed a soul, but only flesh,
and that He Himself stands to the flesh in place of soul. We on the
contrary assert that the flesh of the Lord having in it life <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) was life-giving and reasonable, on
account of the life-giving Godhead united to it. And he himself
unwillingly confesses the difference between the two natures, speaking
of flesh, and “God the Word” and calling it “His own flesh.” Therefore
God the Word was not changed into nature of flesh, but has His own
flesh, the assumed nature, and has made it life-giving by the union.

<span id="iv.vii-p72"></span>*Against XII.*—Passion is proper to the
passible; the impassible is above passions. It was then the form of the
servant that suffered, the form of God of course dwelling with it, and
permitting it to suffer on account of the salvation brought forth of the
sufferings, and making the sufferings its own on account of the union.
Therefore it was not the Christ <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)
who suffered, but the man assumed of us by God. Wherefore also the
blessed Isaiah exclaims in his prophecy, “A man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief.” <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) And the
Lord Christ Himself said to the Jews, “Why seek ye to kill me, a man
that hath told you the truth?” <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)
But what is threatened with death is not the very life, but he that hath
a mortal nature. And giving this lesson in another place the Lord said
to the Jews, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
up.” <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) Therefore what was
destroyed was the (temple descended) from David, and, after its
destruction, it was raised up by the only begotten Word of God
impassibly begotten of the Father before the ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[26:174](2030018.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p5.1"></span>[Ps. ci.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#028)<span id="iv.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_174"></span>[26:175](2030018.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.vii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p6.1"></span>[Heb. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#012)<span id="iv.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_175"></span>[26:176](2030018.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iv.vii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p7.1"></span>[Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_176"></span>[26:177](2030018.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iv.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p8.1"></span>[Phil.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_177"></span>[26:178](2030018.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iv.vii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p9"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p9.1"></span>[Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="iv.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_178"></span>[26:179](2030018.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.vii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p10"></span> [Col.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019), [Col.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii-p10.2"></span>, and
ii. 9

<span id="fn_179"></span>[26:180](2030018.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iv.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p12"></span> cf. n. p. 72.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[27:181](2030018.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p13"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p13.1"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_181"></span>[27:182](2030018.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p15"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p15.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_182"></span>[27:183](2030018.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.vii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p16"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p16.1"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="iv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_183"></span>[27:184](2030018.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.vii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p17"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p17.1"></span>[Rom. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)<span id="iv.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_184"></span>[27:185](2030018.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.vii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p18"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p18.1"></span>[Ephes.
iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.vii-p18.2"></span>. Greek as in A.V. “in your hearts.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[28:186](2030018.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iv.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p20"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p20.1"></span>[Matt.
xxvii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)<span
id="iv.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_186"></span>[28:187](2030018.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iv.vii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p21"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p21.1"></span>[Matt.
xxvi. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="iv.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_187"></span>[28:188](2030018.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iv.vii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p22"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p22.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="iv.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_188"></span>[28:189](2030018.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv.vii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p23"></span> [Matt.
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036), [Mark
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#022)<span
id="iv.vii-p23.1"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span id="iv.vii-p23.2"></span> and
[Mk. xiii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#022)<span
id="iv.vii-p23.3"></span>. There is no manuscript authority for the
variation Son “of Man.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[28:190](2030018.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv.vii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p24"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p24.1"></span>[John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_190"></span>[28:191](2030018.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv.vii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p25"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p25.1"></span>[Matt.
xxiv. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span
id="iv.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_191"></span>[28:192](2030018.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iv.vii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p26"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p26.1"></span>[Matt.
xxvi. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="iv.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_192"></span>[28:193](2030018.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv.vii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p27"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p27.1"></span>[Matt.
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_193"></span>[28:194](2030018.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.vii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p28"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p28.1"></span>[John viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026)<span id="iv.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_194"></span>[28:195](2030018.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.vii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p29"></span> For the view that the cup deprecated by
the Saviour was death there is no direct Scriptural authority and to
adopt the exegesis of Theodoret and of many others would be to place the
divine humanity of the Messiah on a lower level than that not merely of
many a martyr and patriot but of many men unconscious of martyr’s or
patriot’s high calling, who have nevertheless faced death and pain with
calm and cheerful fortitude. The bitterness of the cup which the Saviour
prayed might if possible pass from Him seems rather to have lain in the
culmination of the sin of the race and nation with which His love for
men had identified Him; the greed, the treachery, the meanness, the
cruelty, the disloyalty, shewn by the Sons of Israel to the Son of
David, by the sons of men to the Son of Man.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[29:196](2030018.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p31.1"></span>κοινωνία</span>, in the sense of participation.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[29:197](2030018.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.vii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p32"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p32.1"></span>[Col.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="iv.vii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_197"></span>[29:198](2030018.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iv.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p34"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p34.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_198"></span>[29:199](2030018.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iv.vii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p35"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p35.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_199"></span>[29:200](2030018.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iv.vii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p36"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p36.1"></span>[John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_200"></span>[29:201](2030018.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iv.vii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p37"></span> [Isa.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), [Isa.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vii-p37.1"></span>[Isaiah vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p37.2"></span> and
ix. 6, lxx. Alex.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[29:202](2030018.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iv.vii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p38"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p38.1"></span>[Isaiah
xlix. 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003)<span id="iv.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_202"></span>[29:203](2030018.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iv.vii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p39"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p39.1"></span>[Isaiah
xlix. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005)<span id="iv.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="fn_203"></span>[29:204](2030018.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iv.vii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p40"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p40.1"></span>[Isaiah
xlix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii-p40.2"></span>
“covenant of the people” being imported from [Isa.
62.6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="fn_204"></span>[29:205](2030018.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iv.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p42"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p42.1"></span>[Eph.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)<span id="iv.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="fn_205"></span>[29:206](2030018.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iv.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p45"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p45.1"></span>[Luke
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="iv.vii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="fn_206"></span>[29:207](2030018.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iv.vii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p46"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p46.1"></span>[Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020)<span id="iv.vii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="fn_207"></span>[29:208](2030018.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iv.vii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p47"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p47.1"></span>[Matt. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="iv.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="fn_208"></span>[30:209](2030018.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iv.vii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p48"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p48.1"></span>[Luke
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021)<span id="iv.vii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="fn_209"></span>[30:210](2030018.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iv.vii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p49"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p49.1"></span>[Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span id="iv.vii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="fn_210"></span>[30:211](2030018.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iv.vii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p50"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p50.1"></span>[Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="iv.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="fn_211"></span>[30:212](2030018.htm#fr_211) <span
id="iv.vii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p51"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p51.1"></span>[Isaiah
xlii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)<span id="iv.vii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="fn_212"></span>[30:213](2030018.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iv.vii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p52"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p52.1"></span>[Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="iv.vii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="fn_213"></span>[30:214](2030018.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iv.vii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p53"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p53.1"></span>[John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="iv.vii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="fn_214"></span>[30:215](2030018.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iv.vii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p54"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p54.1"></span>[John
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#026)<span id="iv.vii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="fn_215"></span>[30:216](2030018.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iv.vii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p55"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p55.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="iv.vii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="fn_216"></span>[30:217](2030018.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iv.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p57"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p57.1"></span>[Hebrews v.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)<span id="iv.vii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="fn_217"></span>[30:218](2030018.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.vii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p58"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p58.1"></span>[Heb.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span id="iv.vii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="fn_218"></span>[30:219](2030018.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.vii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p59"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p59.1"></span>[Heb.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="fn_219"></span>[30:220](2030018.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.vii-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p60"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p60.1"></span>[Isaiah
xxv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)<span id="iv.vii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="fn_220"></span>[30:221](2030018.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iv.vii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p61"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p61.1"></span>[Psalm
lxxvii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003)<span
id="iv.vii-p61.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[30:222](2030018.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iv.vii-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p62"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p62.1"></span>Susann. 42

<span id="fn_222"></span>[30:223](2030018.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iv.vii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p63"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p63.1"></span>[John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="fn_223"></span>[30:224](2030018.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iv.vii-p63.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p64"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p64.1"></span>[Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="fn_224"></span>[30:225](2030018.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iv.vii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p65"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p65.1"></span>[John xiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="fn_225"></span>[30:226](2030018.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iv.vii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p66"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p66.1"></span>[Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="fn_226"></span>[30:227](2030018.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iv.vii-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p67"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p67.1"></span>[Matt. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="fn_227"></span>[31:228](2030018.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iv.vii-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p68"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p68.1"></span>[Heb. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="iv.vii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="fn_228"></span>[31:229](2030018.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.vii-p68.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p69"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p69.1"></span>[Heb. iii.
1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)<span id="iv.vii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="fn_229"></span>[31:230](2030018.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.vii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p71.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p71.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p71.3"></span>μψυχον</span>

<span id="fn_230"></span>[31:231](2030018.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iv.vii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p73"></span> For “the Christ” we might expect here “the
Word,” for that the Christ suffered is the plain statement of Scripture
(<span id="iv.vii-p73.1"></span>[1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="iv.vii-p73.2"></span>).
But Theodoret uses the name Christ of the eternal word, e.g. *de
Providentia* x. 661. “When you hear Christ mentioned, understand the
only begotten Son the Word, begotten of His Father before the ages, clad
in human nature.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[31:232](2030018.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iv.vii-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p74"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p74.1"></span>[Is. liii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="iv.vii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="fn_232"></span>[31:233](2030018.htm#fr_232) <span
id="iv.vii-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p75"></span> [John
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019), [John
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span
id="iv.vii-p75.1"></span>[John vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii-p75.2"></span>. d.
viii. 40

<span id="fn_233"></span>[31:234](2030018.htm#fr_233) <span
id="iv.vii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p76"></span> <span id="iv.vii-p76.1"></span>[John ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009)<span id="iv.vii-p76.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ecclesiastical History of Theodoret.](2030019)
