[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030839)  [Next](2030841) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxviii-p1"></span> 37. But what defence can you
make in reference to the Apology which you have written for the works of
Origen, or rather in reference to the book of Eusebius, though you have
altered much, and translated the work of a heretic under the title of a
martyr, yet you have set down still more which is incompatible with the
faith of the church. You as well as I turn Latin books into Greek; can
you prohibit me from giving the works of a foreigner to my own people?
If I had made my answer in the case of some other work of yours in which
you had not attacked me, it might have been thought that, in translating
what you had already translated, I was acting in hostility to you, and
wishing to prove you inaccurate or untrustworthy. But this is a new kind
of complaint, when you take it amiss that an answer is made you on a
point on which you have accused me. All Rome was said to have been upset
by your translation; every one was demanding of me a remedy for this;
not that I was of any account, but that those who asked this thought me
so. You say that you who had made the translation were my friend. But
what would you have had me do? Ought we to obey God or man? To guard our
master’s property or to conceal the theft of a fellow-servant? Can I not
be at peace with you unless I join with you in committing acts which
bring reproach? If you had not mentioned my name, if you had not tricked
me out in your flatteries, I might have had some way of escape, and have
made many excuses for not translating what had already been translated.
But you, my friend, have compelled me to waste a good many days on this
work, and to bring out before the public eye what should have been
engulfed in Charybdis; yet still, though I had been injured, I observed
the laws of friendship, and as far as possible defended myself without
accusing you. It is a too suspicious and complaining temper which you
shew when you take home to yourself as a reproach what was spoken
against the heretics. If it is impossible to be your friend unless I am
the friend of heretics, I shall more easily put up with your enmity than
with their friendship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: My friendly letter was to prevent discord: the other to crush
false opinions.](2030841)
