[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030138)  [Next](2030140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII</span>.—*How the Goths
became tainted by the Arian error*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>To</span> those ignorant of the
circumstances it may be worth while to explain how the Goths got the
Arian plague. After they had crossed the Danube, and made peace with
Valens, the infamous Eudoxius, who was on the spot, suggested to the
emperor to persuade the Goths to accept communion with him. They had
indeed long since received the rays of divine knowledge and had been
nurtured in the apostolic doctrines, “but now,” said Eudoxius,
“community of opinion will make the peace all the firmer.” Valens
approved of this counsel and proposed to the Gothic chieftains an
agreement in doctrine, but they replied that they would not consent to
forsake the teaching of their fathers. At the period in question their
Bishop Ulphilas was implicitly obeyed by them and they received his
words as laws which none might break. Partly by the fascination of his
eloquence and partly by the bribes with which he baited his proposals
Eudoxius succeeded in inducing him to persuade the barbarians to embrace
communion with the emperor, so Ulphilas won them over on the plea that
the quarrel between the different parties was really one of personal
rivalry and involved no difference in doctrine. The result is that up to
this day the Goths assert that the Father is greater than the Son, but
they refuse to describe the Son as a creature, although they are in
communion with those who do so. Yet they cannot be said to have
altogether abandoned their Father’s teaching, since Ulphilas in his
efforts to persuade them to join communion with Eudoxius and Valens
denied that there was any difference in doctrine and that the difference
had arisen from mere empty strife. <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_807"></span>[131:808](2030139.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span> Christianity is first found
among the Goths and some German tribes on the Rhine about <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 300,
the Visigoths taking the lead, and being followed by the Ostrogoths.
They were converted under Arian influences, and simply accepted an Arian
creed. So Salvian writes of them with singular charity, in a passage
partly quoted by Milman (Lat. Christ. I. p. 349.) “Hæretici sunt sed non
scientes. Denique apud nos sunt hæretici, apud se non sunt. Nam in
tantum se catholicos esse judicant ut nos ipsos titulo hæreticæ
appellationis infament. Quod ergo illi nobis sunt, hoc nos illis. Nos
eos injuriam divinæ generationis facere certi sumus quod minorem patre
filium dicant. Illi nos injuriosos patri existimant, quia æquales esse
credamus. Veritas apud nos est. Sed illi apud se esse prœsumunt. Honor
Dei apud nos est, sed illi hoc arbitrantur honorem divinitatis esse quod
credunt. Inofficiosi sunt; sed illis hoc est summum religionis officium.
Impii sunt; sed hoc putant veram esse pietatem. Errant ergo, sed bono
animo errant, non odio, sed affectu Dei, honorare se dominum atque amare
credentes.” (Salvianus de Gub. Dei V. p. 87.) The spirit of this good
Presbyter of Marseilles of the 5th century might well have been more
often followed in Christian controversy.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span>“Of the early Arian missionaries
the Arian Records, if they ever existed, have almost entirely perished.
The church was either ignorant of or disdained to preserve their memory.
Ulphilas alone,”—himself a semi-Arian, and accepter of the creed of
Ariminum,—“the apostle of the Goths, has, as it were, forced his way
into the Catholic records, in which, as in the fragments of his great
work, his translation of the Scriptures into the Mœso-Gothic language,
this admirable man has descended to posterity.” “While in these two
great divisions, the Ostrogoths and Visigoths, the nation gathering its
descendants from all quarters, spread their more or less rapid conquests
over Gaul, Italy, and Spain, Ulphilas formed a peaceful and populous
colony of shepherds and herdsmen on the pastures below Mt. Hæmus. He
became the primate of a simple Christian nation. For them he formed an
alphabet of twenty-four letters, and completed all but the fierce books
of Kings”—which he omitted, as likely to whet his wild folks’ warlike
passions,—“his translation of the Scriptures.” Milman Lat. Christ. III.
Chap. ii.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p5"></span>The fragments of the work of
Ulphilas now extant are (1) Codex Argenteus, at Upsala. (2) Codex
Carolinus. (3) Ambrosian fragments published by Mai. cf. Philost. ii. 5,
Soc. ii. 41 and iv. 33.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxxiii-p6"></span>On Eudoxius, who baptized Valens,
and was “the worst of the Arians,” cf. note on page 86.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](2030140)
