[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030795)  [Next](2030797) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> 23. After all this you dare to say
in your Apology, that you are not the defender nor the champion of
Origen, though you think that Eusebius and Pamphilus said all too little
in his defence. I shall try to write a reply to those works in another
treatise if God grants me a sufficient span of life. For the present let
it suffice that I have met your assertions, and that I have set the
careful reader on his guard by stating that I never saw in writing the
book which was known as the work of Pamphilus till I read it in your own
manuscript. It was no great concern of mine to know what was written in
favour of a heretic, and therefore I always took it that the work of
Pamphilus was different from that of Eusebius; but, after the question
had been raised, I wished to reply to their works, and with this object
I read what each of them had to say in Origen’s behalf; and then I
discerned clearly that the first of Eusebius’ six books was the same
which you had published both in Greek and Latin as the single book of
Pamphilus, only altering the opinion about the Son and the Holy Spirit,
which bore on their face the mark of open blasphemy. It was thus that,
when my friend, Dexter, who held the office of prætorian prefect, asked
me, ten years ago, to make a list for him of the writers of our
faith, <span id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128) placed among the
various treatises assigned to various authors this book as composed by
Pamphilus, supposing the matter to be as it had been brought before the
public by you and by your disciples. But, since Eusebius himself says
that Pamphilus wrote nothing except some short letters to his friends,
and the first of his six books contains the precise words which are
fictitiously given by you under the name of Pamphilus, it is plain that
your object in circulating this book was to introduce heresy under the
authority of a martyr. I cannot allow you to make my mistake a cloak for
your fraud, when you first pretend that the book is by Pamphilus and
then pervert many of its passages so as to make them different in Latin
from what they are in Greek. I believed the book to be by the writer
whose name it bore, just as I did in reference to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>,
and many other of the works of Origen and of other Greek writers, which
I never read till now, and am now compelled to read, because the
question of heresy has been raised, and I wish to know what ought to be
avoided and what opposed. In my youth, therefore, I translated only the
homilies which he delivered in public, and in which there are fewer
causes of offence; and this in ignorance and at the request of others: I
did not try to prejudice men by means of the parts which they approved
in favour of the acceptance of those which are evidently heretical. At
all events, to cut short a long discussion, I can point out whence I
received the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, namely, from those
who copied it from your manuscript. We want in like manner to know
whence your copy of it came; for if you are unable to name any one else
as the source from which it was derived, you will yourself be convicted
of falsifying it. <span id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129) “A good man
from the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth what is good.” A tree
of a good stock is known by the sweetness of its fruit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[514:3129](2030796.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span> The Catalogue of Illustrious Men
translated in this volume forms the response to this request.

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[514:3130](2030796.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>[Luke vi.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#045)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>, [Matt. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiv-p3.3"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The letter falsely circulated in Africa as mine, and expressing
regret for my translation of the Old Test. from the Hebrew bears the
mark of your hand. I have always honoured the Seventy
Translators.](2030797)
