[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030719)  [Next](2030721) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxvi-p1"></span> 31. But I must come to that head
of his inculpation of me which is most injurious and full of ill-will;
nay, not of ill-will only but of malice. He says: Which of all the wise
and holy men before us has dared to attempt the translation of these
books which you have translated? I myself, he adds, though asked by many
to do it, have always refused. But the fact is, the excuse to be made
for those holy men is easy enough; for it by no means follows because a
man of Latin race is a holy and a wise man, that he has an adequate
knowledge of the Greek language; it is no slur upon his holiness that he
is wanting in the knowledge of a foreign tongue. And further, if he has
the knowledge of the Greek language, it does not follow that he has the
wish to make translations. Even if he has such a wish, we are not to
find fault with him for not translating more than a few works, and for
translating some rather than others. Every man has power to do as he
<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxvi-Page_475"></span>likes in such matters according to
his own free will or according to the wish of any one who asks him to
make the translation. But he brings forward the case of the saintly men
Hilary and Victorinus, the first of whom, though well-known as a
commentator, translated nothing, I believe, from the Greek; while the
other himself tells us that he employed a learned presbyter named
Heliodorus to draw what he needed from the Greek sources, while he
himself merely gave them their Latin form because he knew little or
nothing of Greek. There is therefore a very good reason why these men
should not have made this translation. That you should have acted in the
same way is, I admit, a matter for wonder. For what further audacity,
what larger amount of rashness, would have been required to translate
those books of Origen, after you had put almost the whole of their
contents into your other works, and, indeed, had already published in
books bearing your own name all that is said in those which you now
declare worthy of blame?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome's translation of the Scriptures impugned.](2030721)
