[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030657)  [Next](2030659) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxi-p1"></span> 20. I remember indeed that one of
these people, when he was convicted of having falsified this passage,
answered me that it was so in the Greek, but that I had, of purpose,
changed it in the Latin. I do not indeed, treat this as a serious
accusation because, though what they say is untrue yet, even supposing
that the words did stand so in the Greek, and I had changed them in the
Latin, this is nothing more than I had said in my Preface that I should
do. If I had done this with the view of making an expression which in
the Greek was calculated to make men stumble run more suitably in the
Latin, I should have been acting only according to my expressed purpose
and plan. But I say to my accusers You certainly did not find these
words in the Latin copies of my work. Whence then did it come into the
papers from which he was reading? I, the translator, did not so write
it. Whence then came the words which you who have got no such words of
mine turn into a ground of accusation? Am I to be accused on the ground
of your forgeries? I put the matter in the plainest possible way. There
are four books of the work which I translated; and in these books
discussions about the Trinity occur in a scattered way, almost as much
as one in each page. Let any man read the whole of these and say whether
in any passage of my translation such an opinion concerning the Trinity
can be found as that which they calumniously represent as occurring in
this chapter. If such an opinion can be found, then men may believe that
this chapter also is composed in the sense which they pretend. But if in
the whole body of these books no such difference of the persons of the
Trinity exists anywhere, would not a critic be mad or fatuous if he
decided, on the strength of a single paragraph, that a writer had given
his adherence to a heresy which in the thousand or so other paragraphs
of his work he had combated? But the circumstances of the case are by
themselves sufficient to shew the truth to any one who has his wits
about him. For if this man had really found the passage in question in
my papers, and had felt a difficulty in what he read, he would of course
have brought the documents to me and have at once asked for
explanations, since, as you well know, we were living as neighbours in
Rome. Up to that time we often saw one another, greeted one another as
friends, and joined together in prayer; and therefore he would certainly
have conferred with me about the points which appeared to him
objectionable; he would have asked me how I had translated them, and how
they stood in the Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome's method of translation was the same as mine.](2030659)
