[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030332)  [Next](2030334) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxliv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p1"></span> *CXLIII. To Andrew, Monk of
Constantinople.* <span id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993)

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p3"></span>I have never seen your piety nor have we
ever communicated by letter, but I have become warmly attached to you.
What has wrought the charm and continues to inflame it is the report
unanimously brought by the tasters of your honey. All express admiration
of the orthodoxy of your faith, the brightness of your life, the
constancy of your soul, the harmoniousness of your character, the
attractiveness and sweetness of your society and all the other
characteristics of the true foster child of philosophy. For all these
reasons I am attached to your godliness, and my longing has made me even
begin a correspondence; but, my dear sir, grant me as soon as possible
what I desire and let me have written communication from you. For when
friends are at a distance considerable comfort is given them by
epistolary communication. You will write to no man of heterodox
opinions, but to one nurtured in the teaching of the apostles and
preacher not of a quaternity but of a Trinity, for in reality I see
little difference in the impiety of those who have the hardihood to
endeavour to contract into one the two natures of the Only-begotten and
those who endeavour to divide our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the
living God, God the Word made man, into two sons; if such indeed there
be; I cannot think so; but Arians, Eunomians, and Apollinarians too have
ever shamelessly fabricated this slander against the Church, and indeed
laborious students may easily perceive that our far famed Fathers, <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994) lights of the churches, laboured at
the hands of the foes of the truth under this accusation which is now
levelled against me by the most excellent champions of the new fangled
heresy. Our wise Lord has laid bare their impiety, for He could not
endure to confirm the unholy heresy by His long suffering.

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p5"></span>Be sure then, sir, that you will be
writing to one of like sentiments with your own; and of this you can
easily assure yourself from my copious writings.

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p6"></span>Write then to me in return, and again
your letter, by God’s leave, shall serve to kindle affection. And before
you write, give me the help of your prayers, and beseech our good Lord
to guide my feet into the right road, that I may travel the rest of my
journey in accordance with His laws. You who have won right of access
from your unstained life will easily persuade Him Who is eager to give
us His good gifts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[310:1994](2030333.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="iv.x.cxliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p2"></span> Garnerius identifies this Andrew with
an archimandrite who was in favour of the deposition of Eutyches at
Flavian’s Constantinopolitan Council in 448.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[310:1995](2030333.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="iv.x.cxliv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxliv-p4"></span> “No one,” says Garnerius “will have any
doubt as to the reference being to Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodorus of
Mopsuestia who compares the words used with Letter XVI, with the end of
Dialogue I, and with expressions in both the ecclesiastical and
religious history.” Cf. pp. 256, 175, 133, and 136.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Soldiers.](2030334)
