[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030822)  [Next](2030824) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxi-p1"></span> 20. In the matter of the letter of
the pope Anastasius, you seem to have come on a slippery place; you walk
unsteadily, and do not see where to plant your feet. At one moment you
say that it must have been written by me; at another that it ought to
have been transmitted to you by him to whom it was sent. Then again you
charge the writer with injustice; or you protest that it matters nothing
to you whether he wrote it or not, since you hold his predecessor’s
testimonial, and, while Rome was begging you to give her the honor of
your presence, you disdained her through love of your own little town.
If you have any suspicion that the letter was forged by me, why do you
not ask for it in the chartulary of the Roman See and then, when you
discover that it was not written by the bishop, hold me manifestly
guilty of the crime? You would then instead of trying to bind me with
cobwebs, hold me fast bound in a net of strong cords. But if it is as
written by the Bishop of Rome, it is an act of folly on your part to ask
for a copy of the letter from one to whom it was not sent, and not from
him who sent it, and to send to the East for evidence the source of
which you have in your own country. You had better go to Rome and
expostulate with him as to the reproach which he has directed against
you when you were both absent and innocent. You might first point out
that he had refused to accept your exposition of faith, which, as you
say, all Italy has approved, and that he made no use of your literary
cudgel against the dogs you spoke of. Next, you might complain that he
had sent to the East a letter aimed at you which branded you with the
mark of heresy, and said that by your translation of Origen’s books
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span> the Roman church which had received the work in its
simplicity was in danger of losing the sincerity of faith which it had
learned from the Apostle; and that he had raised yet more ill will
against you by daring to condemn this very book, though it was fortified
by the attestation of your Preface. It is no light thing that the
pontiff of so great a city should have fastened this charge upon you or
have rashly taken it up when made by another. You should go about the
streets vociferating and crying over and over again, “It is not my book,
or, if it is, the uncorrected sheets were stolen by Eusebius. I
published it differently, indeed I did not publish it at all; I gave it
to nobody, or at all events to few; and my enemy was so unscrupulous and
my friends so negligent, that all the copies alike were falsified by
him.” This, my dearest brother, is what you ought to have done, not to
turn your back upon him and to direct the arrows of your abuse across
the sea against me; for how can it cure your wounds that I should be
wounded? Does it comfort a man who is stricken for death to see his
friend dying with him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Siricius who is dead may have written in your favour; Anastasius
who is living writes to the East against you.](2030824)
