[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030797)  [Next](2030799) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> 25. All my prefaces to the books of
the Old Testament, some specimens of which I subjoin, are witnesses for
me on this point; and it is needless to state the matter otherwise than
it is stated in them. I will begin therefore with Genesis. The Prologue
is as follows:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>I have received letters so long and
eagerly desired from my dear Desiderius <span
id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) who, as if the future had been
foreseen, shares his name with Daniel, <span
id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137) entreating me to put our friends in
possession of a translation of the Pentateuch from Hebrew into Latin.
The work is certainly hazardous and it is exposed to the <span
id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) attacks of my calumniators, who
maintain that it is through contempt of the Seventy that I have set to
work to forge a new version to take the place of the old. They thus test
ability as they do wine; whereas I have again and again declared that I
dutifully offer, in the Tabernacle of God what I can, and have pointed
out that the great gifts which one man brings are not marred by the
inferior gifts of another. But I was stimulated to undertake the task by
the zeal of Origen, who blended with the old edition Theodotion’s
translation and used throughout the work as distinguishing marks the
<span id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-Page_516"></span>asterisk \* and the obelus †, that
is the star and the spit, the first of which makes what had previously
been defective to beam with light, while the other transfixes and
slaughters all that was superfluous. But I was encouraged above all by
the authoritative publications of the Evangelists and Apostles, in which
we read much taken from the Old Testament which is not found in our
manuscripts. For example, ‘Out of Egypt have I called my Son’ (<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>[Matt. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>): ‘For he shall be called a Nazarene’
(*Ibid.* 23): and ‘They shall look on him whom they pierced’ (<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.3"></span>[John xix.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.4"></span>): and ‘Rivers of living water shall
flow out of his belly’ (<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.5"></span>[John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.6"></span>): and ‘Things which eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, which God hath
prepared for them that love him’ (<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.7"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.8"></span>), and many other passages which lack
their proper context. Let us ask our opponents then where these things
are written, and when they are unable to tell, let us produce them from
the Hebrew. The first passage is in Hosea, ([Hos.
11.1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.9"></span>), the second in Isaiah ([Isa.
11.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.10"></span>), the third in Zechariah ([Zech.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.11"></span>), the fourth in Proverbs ([Prov.
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.12"></span>), the fifth also in Isaiah ([Isa.
64.4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.13"></span>). Being ignorant of all this many
follow the ravings of the Apocrypha, and prefer to the inspired books
the melancholy trash which comes to us from Spain. <span
id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) It is not for me to explain the
causes of the error. The Jews say it was deliberately and wisely done to
prevent <span id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) Ptolemy who was a
monotheist from thinking the Hebrews acknowledged two deities. And that
which chiefly influenced them in thus acting was the fact that the king
appeared to be falling into Platonism. In a word, wherever Scripture
evidenced some sacred truth respecting Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
they either translated the passage differently, or passed it over
altogether in silence, so that they might both satisfy the king, and not
divulge the secrets of the faith. I do not know whose false imagination
led him to invent the story of the <span
id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) seventy cells at Alexandria, in
which, though separated from each other, the translators were said to
have written the same words. Aristeas, <span
id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) the champion of that same Ptolemy,
and Josephus, long after, relate nothing of the kind; their account is
that the Seventy assembled in one basilica consulted together, and did
not prophesy. For it is one thing to be a prophet, another to be a
translator. The former through the Spirit, foretells things to come; the
latter must use his learning and facility in speech to translate what he
understands. It can hardly be that we must suppose Tully was inspired
with oratorical spirit when he translated Xenophon’s Œconomics, Plato’s
Protagoras, and the oration of Demosthenes in defence of Ctesiphon.
Otherwise the Holy Spirit must have quoted the same books in one sense
through the Seventy Translators, in another through the Apostles, so
that, whereas they said nothing of a given matter, these falsely affirm
that it was so written. What then? Are we condemning our predecessors?
By no means; but following the zealous labours of those who have
preceded us we contribute such work as lies in our power in the name of
the Lord. They translated before the Advent of Christ, and expressed in
ambiguous terms that which they knew not. We after His Passion and
Resurrection write not prophecy so much as history. For one style is
suitable to what we hear, another to what we see. The better we
understand a subject, the better we describe it. Hearken then, my rival:
listen, my calumniator; I do not condemn, I do not censure the Seventy,
but I am bold enough to prefer the Apostles to them all. It is the
Apostle through whose mouth I hear the voice of Christ, and I read that
in the classification of spiritual gifts they are placed before prophets
(<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>; [Eph. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p9.3"></span>), while interpreters occupy almost the
lowest place. Why are you tormented with jealousy? Why do you inflame
the minds of the ignorant against me? Wherever in translation I seem to
you to go wrong, ask the Hebrews, consult their teachers in different
towns. The words which exist in their Scriptures concerning Christ your
copies do not contain. The case is different if they have <span
id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143) rejected passages which were
afterward used against them by the Apostles, and the Latin texts are
more correct than the Greek, the Greek than the Hebrew.

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p11"></span>\[Chapters 26 to 32 are taken up
with the quotation, almost in full, of the Preface to the Vulgate
translation of the books of the Old Testament. It is unnecessary to give
them here. They have all the same design as the Preface to Genesis
already given, namely to meet the objections of those who represented
the work as a reproach to the LXX which was then supposed to have almost
the authority of inspiration. The same arguments, illustrations, and
even words, are reiterated. Readers who may desire to go more fully into
Jerome’s statements will find these Prefaces translated at length in his
works, Vol. VI of this Series.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[515:3137](2030798.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> In the original there is a play
upon words—*Desiderit desideratas.*

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[515:3138](2030798.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> That is, *Man of desires,* <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>[Dan. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>, Margin.

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[515:3139](2030798.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5"></span> Lit. *barkings.*

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[516:3140](2030798.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p5.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p6"></span> The passage is explained by
Jerome’s own words in the commentary on [Is.
lxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#000)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p6.1"></span> “Certain silly women in Spain, and
especially in Lusitania, have been deceived into accepting as truth the
marvels of Basilides and Balsaneus’ treasury, and even of Barbelo and
Leusiboras.” Jerome goes on to add that Irenæus in explaining the origin
of many heresies pointed out that the Gnostics deceived many noble women
of the parts of Gaul about the Rhone, and afterwards those of Spain,
framing a system partly of myths partly of immorality, and calling their
folly by the name of philosophy. See also, Ep. Jer. Letter 120 to
Hedibia, and Com. on Amos cf. III.

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[516:3141](2030798.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p7"></span> That is Ptolemy commonly known as
the son of Lagus, but the reputed son of Philip of Macedon by Arsinoë
Philip’s concubine. He reigned over Egypt from <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>b.c.</span> 323–285. He was a great
patron of learning, and, according to traditions current among the
fathers, wishing to adorn his Alexandrian library with the writings of
all nations, he requested the Jews of Jerusalem to furnish him with a
Greek version of their Scriptures, and thus originated the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[516:3142](2030798.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p8"></span> Irenæus, Justin Martyr, Epiphanius,
and Augustine among the Latins, adhere to the inspiration of the
translators which Jerome here rejects.

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[516:3143](2030798.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p9"></span> Aristeas was an officer of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, son and successor of Ptolemy Lagus. The so-called letter
of Aristeas to his brother Philocrates is still extant in Hody’s *De
Bibliorum Textibus Originalbus,* etc. (Oxon. 1705), and separately in a
small volume published at Oxford 1692.

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[516:3144](2030798.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvi-p10"></span> Reading *reprobaverunt.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](2030799)
