[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030327)  [Next](2030329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p1"></span> *CXXXVIII. To Anatolius the
Patrician.* <span id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p3"></span>I have cordially welcomed the rest
which has fallen to my lot, and am harvesting its beneficial and
pleasant results. Our Christ-loving Emperor, <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) after reaping the empire as fruit
of his true piety, has offered as first-fruits of his sovereignty to Him
that bestowed it, the calm of the storm-tossed churches, the triumph of
the invaded faith, the victory of the doctrines of the Gospel. To these
he has added the righting of the wrong done to me. Of a wrong so great
and of such a kind who ever heard? What murderer was ever doomed in his
absence? What violator of wedlock was ever condemned without a hearing?
What burglar, grave-breaker, wizard, church-robber, or doer of any other
unlawful deed, was ever prevented, when eager to appeal to the law, and
slain when far away by the sentence of his judge? In their cases nothing
of the kind was ever known. For, by our law, plaintiff and defendant are
bidden to stand face to face before the judge, while the judge has to
wait for the production of plain truth, and then and not till then,
either dismiss the accused as innocent, or punish him as being reached
by the indictment. In my case the course pursued has been just the
opposite. The emperor’s letter forbade me to approach the far-famed
synod, and the most righteous judges condemned me in my absence, not
after fair trial, but after extravagant laudation of the documents which
were produced to incriminate me. Neither the law of God nor shame of man
staved the deed of blood. Orders were given by the president, <span
id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981) flinging the truth to the winds,
and courting the power of the hour. He was obeyed by men who think as I
do, whose doctrines are my doctrines, and who had expressed admiration
of me and mine. None the less did that day convict some men of
treachery; some of cowardice; while to me a ground of confidence was
given by my sufferings for the truth’s sake. And to me our master Christ
hath granted the boon “not only of believing on Him but also of
suffering for His sake.” <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) For
the greatest of all gifts of grace are sufferings for the Master’s sake,
and the divine Apostle puts them even before great marvels.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p7"></span>In these boons I too glory, humble and
insignificant as I am, and having no other ground of boasting. And I
beseech your excellency to offer on behalf of my poor self expressions
of thanksgiving to the emperor, lover of Christ, and to the most pious
Augusta, <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) dear to God,
instructress of the good, for that she has requited our generous Lord
with such gifts, and has made her zeal for true religion the foundation
and groundwork of her sway. Besides this, beg their godly majesties to
complete the work that has been so well marked out, and to summon a
council, not, like the last, composed of a turbulent rabble, but—kept
quite clear of all of these—of men who decide on and highly value divine
things, and esteem all human affairs as of less account than the truth.
If their majesties wish to bring about the ancient peace for the
churches, and I am sure that they do, beg their pious graces to take
part in the proceedings, that their presence may overawe those of a
contrary mind and the truth may have none to gainsay her, but may
herself by her own unaided powers examine into the position of affairs,
and the character of the apostolic doctrines.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p9"></span>I make this request to your excellency,
not because I long to see Cyrus again, for your lordship knows what a
solitary town it is, and how I have somehow or other managed to conceal
its ugliness by my great expenditure on all kinds of buildings, but to
the end that what I preach may be shewn to be in agreement with
apostolic doctrines <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-Page_308"></span>while the inventions of my opponents
are counterfeit and base. Once let this come to pass, by God’s help be
it spoken, and I shall pass the remainder of my days in cheerful
contentment, wherever the Master may bid me dwell. To you who have been
brought up in the true religion, and are dowered with the wealth of
goodness it is becoming to make this effort, and by your urgent counsel
to render yet more zealous our most pious emperor and the Christ-loving
Augusta, zealous already as they are to strengthen their glorious empire
by laudable and rightful energy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[307:1980](2030328.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p2"></span> This is the last of the series of
Theodoret’s letters to his illustrious friend. It expresses his
gratitude for his restitution by Marcian and begs Anatolius to use his
best endeavours to get a council called to settle the difficulties of
the Church. The letter thus dates itself in the year 451 and indicates
that the calling of the council of Chalcedon was to some extent due to
Theodoret’s initiative. At the earlier sessions at Chalcedon Marcian was
represented by Anatolius, and it was partly the authority of Anatolius
which overbore the protests of Dioscorus and his party against the
admission of Theodoret.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[307:1981](2030328.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p4"></span> Marcian was crowned Emperor on August
the 24th 450. Theodosius II. had died on the preceding 28th of July.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[307:1982](2030328.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p5"></span> “Dioscorus presided, and next to him
Julian, or Julius, the representative of the ‘most holy bishop of the
Roman Church’ then Juvenal of Jerusalem, Domnus of Antioch, and, his
lowered position indicating what was to come, Flavian of
Constantinople.” Canon Bright in Dict. Christ. Biog. i. 856; Mansi. vi.
607.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[307:1983](2030328.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p6"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p6.1"></span>[Phil. i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[307:1984](2030328.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxix-p8"></span> cf. p. 155 n. “A sudden and total
revolution at once took place. The change was wrought,—not by the
commanding voice of ecclesiastical authority,—not by the argumentative
eloquence of any great writer, who by his surpassing abilities awed the
world into peace,—not by the reaction of pure Christian charity, drawing
the conflicting parties together by evangelic love. It was a new dynasty
on the throne of Constantinople. The feeble Theodosius dies; the
masculine Pulcheria, the champion and the pride of orthodoxy, the friend
of Flavianus and Leo ascends the throne, and gives her hand, with a
share of the empire, to a brave soldier Marcianus.” Milman, Lat. Christ.
1. 264.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Aspar, Consular and Patrician.](2030329)
