[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030185)  [Next](2030187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-Page_245"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p1.1"></span>Demonstrations by Syllogisms.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p2"></span><span class="c57"><span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p2.1"></span>That God the Word is Immutable.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p3"></span>1. <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p3.1"></span>We</span> have confessed one substance of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and have agreed that it is
immutable. If then there is one substance of the Trinity, and it is
immutable, then the only begotten Son, who is one person of the Trinity,
is immutable. And, if He is immutable, He was not made flesh by
mutation, but is said to have been made flesh after taking flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p4"></span>2. If God the Word was made flesh by
undergoing mutation into flesh, then He is not immutable. For no one in
his senses would call that which undergoes alteration immutable. And if
He is mutable He is not of one substance with Him that begat Him. How
indeed is it possible for one part of an uncompounded substance to be
mutable and the other immutable? If we grant this we shall fall headlong
into the blasphemy of Arius and Eunomius, who assert that the Son is of
another substance.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p5"></span>3. If the Lord is consubstantial with the
Father, and the Son was made flesh by undergoing change into flesh, then
the substance is at once mutable and immutable, which blasphemy if any
one has the hardihood to maintain, he will no doubt make it worse by his
blasphemy against the Father, for inasmuch as the Father shares the same
substance, he will assuredly call Him mutable.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p6"></span>4. It is written in the divine Scriptures
that God the Word took flesh, and also a soul. And the most divine
Evangelist says the Word was made flesh. <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574) We must therefore perforce do one
of two things: either we must admit the mutation of the Word into flesh,
and reject all divine Scripture, both Old and New, as teaching lies, or
in obedience to the divine Scripture, we must confess the assumption of
the flesh, banishing mutation from our thoughts, and piously regarding
the word of the Evangelist. This latter we must do inasmuch as we
confess the nature of God the Word to be immutable, and have countless
testimonies to the assumption of the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p8"></span>5. That which inhabits a tabernacle is
distinct from the tabernacle which is inhabited. <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575) The Evangelist calls the flesh a
tabernacle, and says that God the Word tabernacled therein. “The Word,”
he says, “was made flesh and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) Now if He was made flesh by
mutation, He did not dwell in flesh. But we have been taught that He
dwelt in flesh; for the same Evangelist in another place calls His body
a temple. <span id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) We must therefore
believe the Evangelist’s explanation and interpretation of what to some
seemed ambiguous.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p12"></span>6. If when the Evangelist wrote “the
Word was made flesh” he had added nothing which could remove the
ambiguity, perhaps the controversy about the passage might have had some
reasonable excuse, from the obscurity of the terms used. But since he
immediately went on to say “and dwelt in us,” the combatants contend to
no purpose. The former clause is explained by the latter.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p13"></span>7. The immutability of God the Word is
plainly proclaimed by the most wise Evangelist, for after saying “the
Word was made flesh and dwelt among us,” he immediately adds, “And we
beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth.” <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578) But if,
according to the foolish, He had undergone mutation into flesh, He would
not have remained what He was, but if even when enveloped in the flesh
He emitted the rays of His Father’s nobility, it follows that the nature
which He has is immutable, and it shines even in the body and sends
abroad the brightness of the nature which is unseen. For that light
nothing can dim. “For the light shineth in the darkness, and the
darkness comprehendeth it not,” <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579) as saith the very divine John.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p16"></span>8. The illustrious Evangelist was
desirous of explaining the glory of the only-begotten, but was unable to
carry out his purpose. He therefore shews it by His fellowship with the
Father. For he says He is of that nature; just as though any one to
persons beholding Joseph sunk in a slavery inconsistent with his rank,
and unaware of the splendour of his descent, were to point out that
Jacob was his father, and his forefather Abraham. So in this sense the
Evangelist said that when He dwelt among us He did not dim the glory of
His nature, “For we beheld His glory, the <span id="page_246">p.
246</span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-Page_246"></span>glory as of the
only-begotten of the Father.” So if even when He was made flesh it was
plain who He was, then He remained who he was, and did not undergo the
mutation into flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p17"></span>9. We have confessed that God the Word
took not a body only but also a soul. Why then did the divine Evangelist
omit in this place mention of the soul and mention the flesh alone? Is
it not plain that he exhibited the visible nature and by its means
signified the nature united to it? For the mention of the soul is
understood of course in that of the flesh. For when we hear the prophet
saying “Let all flesh bless His holy name,” <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580) we do not understand the prophet to
be exhorting bodies of flesh without souls, but believe the whole to be
summoned to give praise in the summoning of a part.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p19"></span>10. The words “the Word was made flesh”
are plainly indicative not of mutation, but of His unspeakable
loving-kindness. For after the illustrious Evangelist had said “in the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God and the Word was God,”
and had declared Him to be Creator of the visible and invisible, and had
called Him life and true light, adding other similar expressions, and
had spoken concerning the Godhead in such terms as human reason can take
in and the language at its command can express, he went on “And the Word
was made flesh,” as though smitten with amazement and astounded at the
boundless loving-kindness. His existence is eternal; He is God; He made
all things; He is source of eternal life and of true light; and on
account of the salvation of men He put about Him the tabernacle of
flesh. And He was supposed to be only that which He appeared. So for
this reason he did not even mention a soul but only the perishable and
mortal flesh. Of the soul as being immortal he said nothing in order to
exhibit the boundlessness of the kindness.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p20"></span>11. The divine Apostle calls <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) the Lord Christ seed of Abraham.
But if this is true, as true it is, then God the Word was not changed
into flesh, but took on Him the seed of Abraham, according to the
teaching of the Apostle himself.

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p22"></span>12. God swore to David that of the fruit
of his loins, according to the flesh, He would raise up the Christ, as
the prophet <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) said and as the
great Peter interpreted. <span id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) But
if God the Word was called Christ after mutation into flesh, we shall
nowhere find the truth in the oaths. Yet we have been taught that God
cannot lie; nay rather is Himself the truth. Therefore God the Word did
not undergo change into flesh, but in accordance with the promise, took
firstfruits of David’s seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[245:1575](2030186.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p7"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p7.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[245:1576](2030186.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p9.1"></span>σκηνοῦν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p9.2"></span>σκηνούμενον</span>

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[245:1577](2030186.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p10"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p10.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p10.2"></span>. The argument rather requires the rendering
“dwelt *in* us,” which is that of the Rheims Version. *“In nobis qui
caro sumus.”* Bengel. But see Alford *in loc.*

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[245:1578](2030186.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p11"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p11.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[245:1579](2030186.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p14"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p14.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[245:1580](2030186.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p15"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p15.1"></span>[John
i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[246:1581](2030186.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p18"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p18.1"></span>[Ps.
cxlv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[246:1582](2030186.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p21"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p21.1"></span>[Hebrews ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[246:1583](2030186.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p23"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p23.1"></span>[Psalm cxxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[246:1584](2030186.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v.i-p24"></span> <span id="iv.ix.v.i-p24.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.v.i-p24.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proofs that the Union was without Confusion.](2030187)
