[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030339)  [Next](2030341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cli"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cli-p1"></span> *CL. Letter of Theodoretus, Bishop of
Cyrus, to Joannes, Bishop of Antioch.* <span
id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151)

<span id="iv.x.cli-p3"></span>I have been much distressed at reading the
anathematisms which you have sent to request me to refute in writing,
and to make plain to all their heretical sense. I have been distressed
at the thought that one appointed to the shepherd’s office, entrusted
with the charge of so great a flock and appointed to heal the sick among
his sheep, is both himself unsound, and that to a terrible degree, and
is endeavouring to infect his lambs with his disease and treats the
sheep of his folds with greater cruelty than that of wild beasts. They,
indeed, tear and rend the sheep that are dispersed and separated from
the flock; but he in its very midst, and while thought to be its saviour
and its guardian introduces secret error among the victims of their
confidence in him. Against an open assault it is possible to take
precautions, but when an attack is made in the guise of friendship, its
victim is found off his guard and hurt is easily done him. Hence foes
who make war from within are far more dangerous than those who attack
from without.

<span id="iv.x.cli-p4"></span>I am yet more grieved that it should be in
the name of true religion and with the dignity of a shepherd that he
should give utterance to his heretical and blasphemous words, and renew
that vain and impious teaching of Apollinarius which was long ago
stamped out. Besides all this there is the fact that he not only
supports these views but even dares to anathematize those who decline to
participate in his blasphemies;—if he is really the author of these
productions and they have not proceeded from some enemy of the truth who
has composed them in his name and, as the old story has it, flung the
apple of discord <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) in the
midst, and so fanned the flame on high.

<span id="iv.x.cli-p6"></span>But whether this composition comes from
himself or from some other in his name, I, for my part, by the aid of
the light of the Holy Ghost, in the investigation of this heretical and
corrupt opinion, according to the measure of the power given me, have
refuted them as best I could. I have confronted them with the teaching
of evangelists and apostles. I have exposed the monstrosity of the
doctrine, and proved how vast is its divergence from divine truth. This
I have done by comparing it with the words of the Holy Spirit, and
pointing out what strange and jarring discord there is between it and
the divine.

<span id="iv.x.cli-p7"></span>Against the hardihood of this
anathema<span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span
id="iv.x.cli-Page_325"></span>tizing, thus much I will say, that Paul,
the clear-voiced herald of truth, anathematized those who had corrupted
the evangelic and apostolic teaching and boldly did so against the
angels, not against those who abided by the laws laid down by
theologians; these he strengthened with blessings, saying, “And as many
as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy and on the
Israel of God.” <span id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153) Let then the
author of these writings reap from the Apostle’s curse the due rewards
of his labours and the harvest of his seeds of heresy. We will abide in
the teaching of the holy Fathers.

<span id="iv.x.cli-p9"></span>To this letter I have appended my counter
arguments, that on reading them you may judge whether I have effectively
destroyed the heretical propositions. Setting down each of the
anathematisms by itself, I have annexed the counter statement that
readers may easily understand, and that the refutation of the dogmas may
be clear. <span id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[324:2152](2030340.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="iv.x.cli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cli-p2"></span> This letter may be dated in February 431.
Celestine and Cyril had written to John of Antioch in relation to the
condemnation of Nestorius by the western bishops at Rome in August 430.
Theodoret was at Antioch on the arrival of these letters and hence
additional probability is given to the theory that he wrote the reply
referred to in the preceding note. Then came the publication of Cyril’s
chapter or anathemas which Theodoret undertook to refute. Letter CL. is
prefixed to his remarks on them.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[324:2153](2030340.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="iv.x.cli-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cli-p5"></span> The “old story” is a comparatively late
addition to the myth of the marriage of Peleus.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[325:2154](2030340.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="iv.x.cli-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cli-p8"></span> <span id="iv.x.cli-p8.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)<span id="iv.x.cli-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[325:2155](2030340.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="iv.x.cli-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cli-p10"></span> The Refutation of the anathematisms of
Cyril is to be found in Migne Pat. lxxvi. Col. 393<span
id="iv.x.cli-p10.1"></span>. Vide also the prolegomena.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter or Address of Theodoret to the Monks of the Euphratensian,
the Osrhoene, Syria, Phœnicia, and Cilicia.](2030341)
