[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030171)  [Next](2030173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII</span>.—*Of the demand
made by Gainas and of John Chrysostom’s reply*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p2.1"></span>One</span> Gainas, a Scythian, but
still more barbarous in character, and of cruel and violent disposition,
was at that time a military commander. He had under him many of his own
fellow-countrymen, and with them commanded the Roman cavalry and
infantry. He was an object of terror not only to all the rest but even
to the emperor himself, who suspected him of aiming at usurpation.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p3"></span>He was a participator in the Arian
pest, and requested the emperor to grant him the use of one of the
churches. Arcadius replied that he would see to it and have it done. He
then sent for the divine John, told him <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-Page_153"></span>of the request
that had been made, reminded him of the power of Gainas, hinted at the
usurpation which was being aimed at, and besought him to bridle the
anger of the barbarian by this concession. <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) “But,” said that noble man, “attempt,
sir, no such promise, nor order what is holy to be given to the
dogs. <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) I will never suffer the
worshippers and praisers of the Divine Word to be expelled and their
church to be given to them that blaspheme Him. Have no fear, sir, of
that barbarian; call us both, me and him, before you; listen in silence
to what is said, and I will both curb his tongue and persuade him not to
ask what it is wrong to grant.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p6"></span>The emperor was delighted with what
Chrysostom said, and on the next day summoned both the bishop and the
general before him. Gainas began to request the fulfilment of the
promise, but the great John said in reply that the emperor, who
professed the true religion, had no right to venture on any act against
it. Gainas rejoined that he also must have a place to pray in. “Why,”
said the great John, “every church is open to you, and nobody prevents
you from praying there when you are so disposed.” “But I,” said Gainas,
“belong to another sect, and I ask to have one church with them, and
surely I who undergo so many toils in war for Romans may fairly make
such a request.” “But,” said the bishop, “you have greater rewards for
your labours, you are a general; you are vested in the consular robe,
and you must consider what you were formerly and what you are now—your
indigence in the past and your present prosperity; what kind of raiment
you wore before you crossed the Ister, and what you are robed in now.
Consider, I say, the littleness of your labours and the greatness of
your rewards, and be not unthankful to them who have shewn you honour.”
With these words the teacher of the world silenced Gainas, and compelled
him to stand dumb. In process of time, however, he made known the
rebellion which he had long had at heart, gathered his forces in Thrace,
and went out ravaging and plundering in very many directions. At news of
this there arose an universal panic among both princes and subjects, and
no one was found willing to march against him; no one thought it safe to
approach him with an ambassage, for every one suspected his barbarous
character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_920"></span>[153:921](2030172.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p4"></span> The three great officials,
Aurelianus, Saturninus, and the Count John had already surrendered
themselves to the arrogant Goth, and their lives had only been spared at
the entreaty of Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[153:922](2030172.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p5"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p5.1"></span>[Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxii-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the ambassage of Chrysostom to Gainas.](2030173)
