[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030160)  [Next](2030162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Of Marcellus, bishop
of Apamea, and the idols’ temples destroyed by him.*

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p2.1"></span>The</span> first of the bishops to put
the edict in force and destroy the shrines in the city <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-Page_147"></span>committed to his care was Marcellus,
trusting rather in God than in the hands of a multitude. The occurrence
is remarkable, and I shall proceed to narrate it. On the death of John,
bishop of Apamea, whom I have already mentioned, the divine Marcellus,
fervent in spirit, <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) according to
the apostolic law, was appointed in his stead.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p4"></span>Now there had arrived at Apamea the
prefect of the East <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) with two
tribunes and their troops. Fear of the troops kept the people quiet. An
attempt was made to destroy the vast and magnificent shrine of Jupiter,
but the building was so firm and solid that to break up its closely
compacted stones seemed beyond the power of man; for they were huge and
well and truly laid, and moreover clamped fast with iron and lead. <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p7"></span>When the divine Marcellus saw that
the prefect was afraid to begin the attack, he sent him on to the rest
of the towns; while he himself prayed to God to aid him in the work of
destruction. Next morning there came uninvited to the bishop a man who
was no builder, or mason, or artificer of any kind, but only a labourer
who carried stones and timber on his back. “Give me,” said he, “two
workmen’s pay; and I promise you I will easily destroy the temple.” The
holy bishop did as he was asked, and the following was the fellow’s
contrivance. Round the four sides of the temple went a portico united to
it, and on which its upper story rested. <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) The columns were of great bulk,
commensurate with the temple, each being sixteen cubits in
circumference. The quality of the stone was exceptionally hard, and
offering great resistance to the masons’ tools. In each of these the man
made an opening all round, propping up the superstructure with olive
timber before he went on to another. After he had hollowed out three of
the columns, he set fire to the timbers. But a black demon appeared and
would not suffer the wood to be consumed, as it naturally would be, by
the fire, and stayed the force of the flame. After the attempt had been
made several times, and the plan was proved ineffectual, news of the
failure was brought to the bishop, who was taking his noontide sleep.
Marcellus forthwith hurried to the church, ordered water to be poured
into a pail, and placed the water upon the divine altar. Then, bending
his head to the ground, he besought the loving Lord in no way to give in
to the usurped power of the demon, but to lay bare its weakness and
exhibit His own strength, lest unbelievers should henceforth find excuse
for greater wrong. With these and other like words he made the sign of
the cross over the water, and ordered Equitius, one of his deacons, who
was armed with faith and enthusiasm, to take the water and sprinkle it
in faith, and then apply the flame. His orders were obeyed, and the
demon, unable to endure the approach of the water, fled. Then the fire,
affected by its foe the water as though it had been oil, caught the
wood, and consumed it in an instant. When their support had vanished the
columns themselves fell down, and dragged other twelve with them. The
side of the temple which was connected with the columns was dragged down
by the violence of their fall, and carried away with them. The crash,
which was tremendous, was heard throughout the town, and all ran to see
the sight. No sooner did the multitude hear of the flight of the hostile
demon than they broke out into a hymn of praise to God.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p9"></span>Other shrines were destroyed in like
manner by this holy bishop. Though I have many other most admirable
doings of this holy man to relate,—for he wrote letters to the
victorious martyrs, and received replies from them, and himself won the
martyr’s crown,—for the present I hesitate to narrate them, lest by over
prolixity I weary the patience of those into whose hands my history may
fall.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p10"></span>I will therefore now pass to another
subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_889"></span>[147:890](2030161.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p3"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Romans xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_890"></span>[147:891](2030161.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p5"></span> Valesius points out that this was
Cynegius, prefect of the East, who was sent by Theodosius to effect the
closing of the idol’s temples. cf. Zos. iv.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[147:892](2030161.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p6.1"></span>καὶ σιδήρῳ καὶ μολίβδῳ
προσδεδεμένοι</span>. We are reminded of the huge cramps which must at
one time have bound the stones of the Colosseum,—the ruins being pitted
all over by the holes made by the middle-age pillagers who tore them
away.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[147:893](2030161.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p8"></span> I do not understand the description
of this temple and its destruction precisely as Gibbon does. “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxi-p8.1"></span>διορύττων</span>”
does not seem to mean “undermining the foundations”; St. Matthew and St.
Luke use it of the thieves who “dig through” or “break in.” The word =
dig through, and so into.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, and what happened at the
demolition of the idols in that city.](2030162)
