[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030829)  [Next](2030831) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxviii-p1"></span> 27. In reference to your
alternate praise and disparagement of me, you argue with great acuteness
that you have the same right to speak good and evil of me that I have to
find fault with Origen and Didymus whom I once praised. I must instruct
you, then, wisest of men and chief of Roman dialecticians, that there is
no fault of logic in praising a man in certain respects while you blame
him in others, but only in approving and disapproving one and the same
thing. I will take an example, so that, though you may not understand,
the wise reader may join me in understanding the point. In the case of
Tertullian we praise his great talent, but we condemn his heresy. In
that of Origen we admire his knowledge of the Scriptures, but
nevertheless we do not accept his false doctrine. As to Didymus,
however, we extol both his powers of memory, and the purity of his faith
in the Trinity, while on the other point in which he erred in trusting
to Origen we withdraw from him. The vices of our teachers are not to be
imitated, their virtues are. There was a man at Rome who had an African,
a very learned man, as his grammar teacher; and he thought that he was
rising to an equality with his teacher because he copied his strident
voice and his faulty pronunciation. You in your Preface to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span> speak of me as your brother and call me your most eloquent
colleague, and proclaim my soundness in the faith. From these three
points you cannot draw back; carp at me on all other points as you
please, so long as you do not openly contradict this testimony which you
bear to me; for in calling me friend and colleague, you confess me
worthy of your friendship; when you proclaim me an eloquent man, you
cannot go on accusing me of ignorance; and when you confess that I am in
all points a catholic, you cannot fix on me the guilt of heresy. Beyond
these three points you may charge me with anything you like without
openly contradicting yourself. From all this calculation the net result
is that you are wrong in blaming in me what you formerly praised; but
that I am not in fault when, in the case of the same men, I praise what
is laudable and blame what is censurable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: My ignorance of many natural phenomena is no excuse for your
ignorance as to the origin of souls. You ought, according to your
boasting dream to know everything. The thing of most importance was
forgotten in your cargo of Eastern wares.](2030831)
