[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030074)  [Next](2030076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Of the Second
Council of Nicæa*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>On</span> receipt of these despatches
Constantius wrote to the Antiochenes denying that he had committed the
see of Antioch to Eudoxius, as Eudoxius had publicly announced. He
ordered that Eudoxius be banished, and be punished for the course he had
taken at the Bithynian Nicæa, where he had ordered the synod to
assemble. Eudoxius himself had persuaded the officers entrusted with
authority in the imperial household to fix Nicæa for the Council. But
the Supreme Ruler and Governor, who knows the future like the past,
stopped the assembly by a mighty earthquake, whereby the greater part of
the city was overthrown, and most of the inhabitants destroyed. On
learning this the assembled bishops were seized with panic, and returned
to their own churches. But I regard this as a contrivance of the divine
wisdom, for in that city the doctrine of the faith of the apostles had
been defined by the holy Fathers. In that same city the bishops who were
assembling on this later occasion were intending to lay down the
contrary. The sameness of name would have been sure to furnish a means
of deception to the Arian crew, and trick unsophisticated souls. They
meant to call the council “the Nicene,” and identify it with the famous
council of old. But He who has care for the churches disbanded the
synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Council held at Seleucia in Isauria.](2030076)
