[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030722)  [Next](2030724) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix-p1"></span> 34. But let us grant that the
Apostle Peter was unable to do what our friend has lately done. Was Paul
illiterate? we ask; He who was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, touching the law
a Pharisee, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel? Could not he, when he
was at Rome, have supplied any deficiencies of Peter? Is it conceivable
that they, who prescribed to their disciples that they should give
attention to reading, <span id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) did not
give them correct and true reading? These men who bid us not attend to
Jewish fables and genealogies, which minister questioning rather than
edification; and who, again, bid us beware of, and specially watch,
those of the circumcision; is it conceivable that they could not foresee
through the Spirit that a time would come, after nearly four hundred
years, when the church would find out that the Apostles had not
delivered to them the truth of the old Testament, and would send an
embassy to those whom the apostles spoke of as the circumcision, begging
and beseeching them to dole out to them some small portion of the truth
which was in their possession: and that the Church would through this
embassy confess that she had been for all those four hundred years in
error; that she had indeed been called by the Apostles from among the
Gentiles to be the bride of Christ, but that they had not decked her
with a necklace of genuine jewels; that she had fondly thought that they
were precious stones, but now had found out that those were not true
gems which the Apostles had put upon her, so that she felt ashamed to go
forth in public decked in false instead of true jewels, and that she
therefore begged that they would send her Barabbas, even him whom she
had once rejected to be married to Christ, so that in conjunction with
one man chosen from among her own people, he might restore to her the
true ornaments with which the Apostles had failed to furnish her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[476:2987](2030723.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>[1 Tim. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Danger of altering the Versions of Scripture.](2030724)
