[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030754)  [Next](2030756) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xvii-p1"></span> 16. For instance, Chrysippus and
Antipater occupy themselves with thorny questions: Demosthenes and
Æschines speak with the voice of thunder against each other; Lysias and
Isocrates have an easy and pleasing style. There is a wonderful
difference in these writers, though each of them is perfect in his own
line. Again: read the book of Tully *To Herennius*; read his
*Rhetoricians*; or, since he tells us that these books fell from his
hands in a merely inchoate and unfinished condition, look through his
three books *On the orator,* in which he introduces a discussion between
Crassus and Antony, the most eloquent orators of that day; and a fourth
book called *The Orator* <span id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xvii-Page_491"></span>which he wrote to Brutus when already
an old man; and you will realize that History, Oratory, Dialogue,
Epistolary writing, and Commentaries, have, each of them, their special
style. We have to do now with Commentaries. In those which I wrote upon
the Ephesians I only followed Origen and Didymus and Apollinarius,
(whose doctrines are very different one from another) so far as was
consistent with the sincerity of my faith: for what is the function of a
Commentary? It is to interpret another man’s words, to put into plain
language what he has expressed obscurely. Consequently, it enumerates
the opinions of many persons, and says, Some interpret the passage in
this sense, some in that; the one try to support their opinion and
understanding of it by such and such evidence or reasons: so that the
wise reader, after reading these different explanations, and having many
brought before his mind for acceptance or rejection, may judge which is
the truest, and, like a good banker, may reject the money of spurious
mintage. Is the commentator to be held responsible for all these
different interpretations, and all these mutually contradicting opinions
because he puts down the expositions given by many in the single work on
which he is commenting? I suppose that when you were a boy you read the
commentaries of Asper upon Virgil and Sallust, those of Vulcatius upon
Cicero’s Orations, of Victorinus upon his Dialogues and upon the
Comedies of Terence, and also those of my master Donatus on Virgil, and
of others on other writers such as Plautus, Lucretius, Flaccus, Persius
and Lucan. Will you find fault with those who have commented on these
writers because they have not held to a single explanation, but
enumerate their own views and those of others on the same passage?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: We must distinguish methods of writing, and not expect a vulgar
simplicity in the various compositions of cultured men.](2030756)
