[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030230)  [Next](2030232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p1"></span> *XLII. To Constantius the
Prefect.* <span id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680)

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p3"></span>Did no necessity compel me to address a
letter to your greatness, I might haply be found guilty of presumption,
for neither taking due measure of myself nor recognising the greatness
of your power. But now that all that is left of the city and district
which God has committed to my charge is in peril of utterly perishing,
and certain men have dared to bring calumnious charges against the
recent visitation, I am sure your magnificence will pardon the boldness
of my letter when you enquire into the necessity of the case, my own
object in writing. I groan and lament at being compelled to write
against a man over whose errors one ought to throw a veil, because he is
of the clerical order. Nevertheless I write to defend the cause of the
poor whom he is wronging. After being charged with many crimes and
excluded from the Communion, pending the assembly of the sacred Synod,
in alarm at the decision of the episcopal council he has made his escape
from this place, thereby trampling, as he supposed, on the laws of the
Church, and, by his contempt of the sentence of excommunication has laid
bare his motive. He has undertaken an accusation not even fit for men of
mean crafts, and in consequence of his ill-feeling towards the
illustrious Philip has proceeded against the wretched tax-payers. I feel
that it is quite needless for me to mention his character, his course of
life from the beginning and the greatness of his wrong-doings, but this
one thing I do beseech your Excellency, not to believe his lies, but to
ratify the visitation, and spare the wretched tax-payers. Aye, spare the
thrice wretched decurions who cannot exact the moneys demanded of them.
Who indeed is ignorant of the severity of the taxation of the acres
among us? On this account most of our landowners have fled, our hinds
have run away, and the greater part of our lands are deserted. In
discussing the land there will be no impropriety in our using
geometrical terms. Of our coun<span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iv.x.xlii-Page_264"></span>try the length is forty milestones, and
the breadth the same. It includes many high mountains, some wholly bare,
and some covered with unproductive vegetation. Within this district
there are fifty thousand free jugers, <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) and besides that ten thousand which
belong to the imperial treasury. Now only let your wisdom consider how
great is the wrong. For if none of the country had been uncultivated,
and it had all furnished easy husbandry for the hinds, they would
nevertheless have sunk under the tribute, unable to endure the severity
of the taxation. And here is a proof of what I say. In the time of
Isidorus <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) of glorious memory,
fifteen thousand acres were taxed in gold, but the exactors of the
Comitian assessment, unable to bear the loss, frequently complained, and
by offerings besought your high dignity to let them off two thousand
five hundred for the unproductive acres, and your excellency’s
predecessors in this office ordered the unproductive acreage to be taken
off the unfortunate decurions, and an equivalent number to be
substituted for the Comitian; and not even thus are they able to
complete the tale.

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p6"></span>So with many words I ask your favour, and
beseech your magnificence to put aside the false accusations that are
made against the wretched tax-payers, to stem the tide of distress in
this unhappy district, and let it once more lift its head. Thus you will
leave an imperishable memory of honour to future generations. I am
joined in my supplication to you by all the saints of our district, and
especially by that right holy and pious man of God, the Lord
Jacobus, <span id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) who holds silence in
such great esteem that he cannot be induced to write, but he prays that
our city, which is made illustrious by having him as neighbour and is
protected by his prayers, may receive the boon which I ask.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[263:1681](2030231.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="iv.x.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p2"></span> This and the five following letters may
be placed in 446, after the promulgation of the law of Theodosius *“de
relevatis, adæratis, vel donatis possessionibus”* late in 445.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[264:1682](2030231.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="iv.x.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p4"></span> i.e., 28,800 sq. ft. *“jugum vocant quod
juncti boves uno die exarare possint.”* Varro R. R. i. 10.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[264:1683](2030231.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="iv.x.xlii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p5"></span> For many years Prefect of the East.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[264:1684](2030231.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="iv.x.xlii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlii-p7"></span> Presumably the Jacobus of Relig. Hist.
XXI, an ascetic disciple of Maro.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Augusta Pulcheria.](2030232)
