[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030196)  [Next](2030198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.viii-p1"></span> *VIII. To Eugraphia.*

<span id="iv.x.viii-p2"></span>It is needless for me to bring once more
to bear upon your grief the spells of the spirit. The mere mention of
the sufferings that wrought our salvation is enough to quench distress,
even at its worst. Those sufferings were all undergone for humanity. Our
Lord did not destroy death to make one body victorious over death, but
through that one body to effect our common resurrection, and make our
hope of it a sure and certain hope. And if even while our holy
celebrations are bringing you manifold refreshment of soul, you cannot
overcome your sense of sorrow, let me beg you, my honoured friend, to
read the very words of the marriage contract which follow on the mention
of the dowry, and to see how the wedding is preceded by the reminder of
death. Knowing as we do that men are mortal, and bethinking us of the
peace of survivors, it is customary to lay down what are called
conditions, and for no hesitation to be shewn at the mention of death
before the joining together in marriage. These are the plain words “If
the husband should die first it is agreed that so and so be done; if
this lot should first fall to the wife, so and so.” We knew all this
before the wedding; we are waiting for it so to say everyday. Why then
take it amiss? The union must needs be broken either by the death of the
husband or the departure of the wife. Such is the course of life. You
know, my excellent friend, alike God’s will and human nature; dispel
then your despondency and wait for the fulfilment of the common hope of
the just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To an Anonymous Correspondent.](2030198)
