[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030085)  [Next](2030087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Of the number and
character of the deeds done by Pagans against the Christians when they
got the power from Julian*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>When</span> Julian had made his impiety
openly known the cities were filled with dissensions. Men enthralled by
the deceits of idolatry took heart, opened the idols’ shrines, and began
to perform those foul rites which ought to have died out from the memory
of man. Once more they kindled the fire on the altars, befouled the
ground with victims’ gore, and defiled the air with the smoke of their
burnt sacrifices. Maddened by the demons they served they ran in
corybantic <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) frenzy round about
the streets, attacked the saints with low stage jests, and with all the
outrage and ribaldry of their impure processions.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p4"></span>On the other hand the
partizans <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) of piety could not
brook their blasphemies, returned insult for insult, and tried to
confute the error which their opponents honoured. In their turn the
workers of iniquity took it ill; the liberty allowed them by the
sovereign was an encouragement to audacity and they dealt deadly blows
among the Christians.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p6"></span>It was indeed the duty of the
emperor to consult for the peace of his subjects, but he in the depth of
his iniquity himself maddened his peoples with mutual rage. The deeds
dared by the brutal against the peaceable he overlooked and entrusted
civil and military offices of importance to savage and impious men, who
though they hesitated publicly to force the lovers of true piety to
offer sacrifice treated them nevertheless with all kinds of indignity.
All the honours moreover conferred on the sacred ministry by the great
Constantine Julian took away.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p7"></span>To tell all the deeds dared by the
slaves of idolatrous deceit at that time would require a history of
these crimes alone, but out of the vast number of them I shall select a
few instances. At Askalon and at Gaza, cities of Palestine, men of
priestly rank and women who had lived all their lives in virginity were
disembowelled, filled with barley, and given for food to swine. At
Sebaste, which belongs to the same people, the coffin of John the
Baptist was opened, his bones burnt, and the ashes scattered
abroad. <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="page_97">p. 97</span>
<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-Page_97"></span>Who too could tell without a
tear the vile deed done in Phœnicia? At Heliopolis <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) by Lebanon there lived a certain
deacon of the name of Cyrillus. In the reign of Constantine, fired by
divine zeal, he had broken in pieces many of the idols there worshipped.
Now men of infamous name, bearing this deed in mind, not only slew him,
but cut open his belly and devoured his liver. Their crime was not,
however, hidden from the all-seeing eye, and they suffered the just
reward of their deeds; for all who had taken part in this abominable
wickedness lost their teeth, which all fell out at once, and lost, too,
their tongues, which rotted away and dropped from them: they were
moreover deprived of sight, and by their sufferings proclaimed the power
of holiness.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p11"></span>At the neighbouring city of
Emesa <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) they dedicated to
Dionysus, the woman-formed, the newly erected church, and set up in it
his ridiculous androgynous image. At Dorystolum, <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) a famous city of Thrace, the
victorious athlete Æmilianus was thrown upon a flaming pyre, by
Capitolinus, governor of all Thrace. To relate the tragic fate of
Marcus, however, bishop of Arethusa, <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) with true dramatic dignity, would
require the eloquence of an Æschylus or a Sophocles. In the days of
Constantius he had destroyed a certain idol-shrine and built a church in
its place; and no sooner did the Arethusians learn the mind of Julian
than they made an open display of their hostility. At first, according
to the precept of the Gospel, <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613)
Marcus endeavoured to make his escape; but when he became aware that
some of his own people were apprehended in his stead, he returned and
gave himself up to the men of blood. After they had seized him they
neither pitied his old age nor reverenced his deep regard for virtue;
but, conspicuous as he was for the beauty alike of his teaching and of
his life, first of all they stripped and smote him, laying strokes on
every limb, then they flung him into filthy sewers, and, when they had
dragged him out again, delivered him to a crowd of lads whom they
charged to prick him without mercy with their pens. <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) After this they put him into a basket,
smeared him with pickle <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) and
honey, and hung him up in the open air in the height of summer, inviting
wasps and bees to a feast. Their object in doing this was to compel him
either to restore the shrine which he had destroyed, or to defray the
expense of its erection. Marcus, however, endured all these grievous
sufferings and affirmed that he would consent to none of their demands.
His enemies, with the idea that he could not afford the money from
poverty, remitted half their demand, and bade him pay the rest; but
Marcus hung on high, pricked with pens, and devoured by wasps and bees,
yet not only shewed no signs of pain, but derided his impious tormentors
with the repeated taunt, “You are groundlings and of the earth; I,
sublime and exalted.” At last they begged for only a small portion of
the money; but, said he, “it is as impious to give an obole as to give
all.” So discomfited they let him go, and could not refrain from
admiring his constancy, for his words had taught them a new lesson of
holiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_606"></span>[96:607](2030086.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p3"></span> Corybantes, the name of the
priests of Cybele, whose religious service consisted in noisy music and
wild armed dances, is a word of uncertain origin. The chief seat of
their rites was Pessinus in Galatia.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[96:608](2030086.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>Θιασῶται</span>. lit. The
“club-fellows,” or “members of a religious brotherhood.”

<span id="fn_608"></span>[96:609](2030086.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p8"></span> Sebaste was a name given to
Samaria by Herod the Great in honour of Augustus. cf. Rufinus H. E. xi.
28 and Theophanes, *Chronographia* i. 117. Theodoretus claims to have
obtained some of the relics of the Baptist for his own church at Cyrus
(Relig. Hist. 1245). On the development of the tradition of the relics,
cf. Dict. Christ. Ant. i. 883. A magnificent church was built by
Theodosius (Soz. vii. 21 and 24) in a suburb of Constantinople, to
enshrine a head discovered by some unsound monks. The church is said by
Sozomen (vii. 24) to be “at the seventh milestone,” on the road out of
Constantinople, and the place to be called Hebdomon or “seventh.” I am
indebted to the Rev. H. F. Tozer for the suggestion that Hebdomon was a
promontory on the Propontis, to the west of the extreme part of the
city, where the Cyclobion was, and where the Seven Towers now are; and
that the Seven Towers being about six Roman miles from the Seraglio
Point, which is the apex of the triangle formed by the city, the phrase
at the seventh milestone is thus accounted for. Bones alleged to be
parts of the scull are still shewn at Amiens. The same emperor built a
church for the body on the site of the Serapeum at Alexandria.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[97:610](2030086.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p10"></span> Heliopolis, the modern Baalbec,
the “City of the Sun,” was built at the west foot of Anti-Libanus, near
the sources of the Orontes.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[97:611](2030086.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p12"></span> On the Orontes; now Homs. Here
Aurelian defeated Zenobia in 273.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[97:612](2030086.htm#fr_611) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p13"></span> Durostorum, now Silistria, on the
right bank of the Danube.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[97:613](2030086.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p14"></span> Valesius (note on Soz. v. 10)
would distinguish this Marcus of Arethusa from the Arian Marcus of
Arethusa, author of the creed of Sirmium (Soc. H. E. ii. 30), apparently
on insufficient grounds (Dict. Christ. Biog. s.v.). Arethusa was a town
not far from the source of the Orontes.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[97:614](2030086.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>[Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_614"></span>[97:615](2030086.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p16"></span> The sharp iron stilus was capable
of inflicting severe wounds. Cæsar, when attacked by his murderers,
“caught Casca’s arm and ran it through with his pen.” Suetonius.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[97:616](2030086.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>γάρον</span>, garum, was a
fish-pickle. cf. the barbarous punishment of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.iii-p17.2"></span>σκάφευσις</span>,
inficted among others on Mithridates, who wounded Cyrus at Cunaxa.
(Plut. *Artaxerxes.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the laws made by Julian against the Christians.](2030087)
