[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030030)  [Next](2030032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*The daily wants of the
Church supplied by the Emperor, and an account of his other virtues*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xi-p2.1"></span>Thus</span> did the emperor write to the
absent. To those who attended the council, three hundred and eighteen in
number, he manifested great kindness, addressing them with much
gentleness, and presenting them with gifts. He ordered numerous couches
to be prepared for their accommodation and entertained them all at one
banquet. Those who were most worthy he received at his own table,
distributing the rest at the others. Observing that some among them had
had the right eye torn out, and learning that this mutilation had been
undergone for the sake of religion, he placed his lips upon the wounds,
believing that he would extract a blessing from the kiss. After the
conclusion of the feast, he again presented other gifts to them. He then
wrote to the governors of the provinces, directing that provision-money
should be given in every city to virgins and widows, and to those who
were consecrated to the divine service; and he measured the amount of
their annual allowance more by the impulse of his own generosity than by
their need. The third part of the sum is distributed to this day. Julian
impiously withheld the whole. His successor <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) conferred the sum which is now
dispensed, the famine which then prevailed having lessened the resources
of the state. If the pensions were formerly triple in amount to what
they are at present, the generosity of the emperor can by this fact be
easily seen.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xi-p4"></span>I do not account it right to pass over
the following circumstance in silence. Some quarrelsome individuals
wrote accusations against <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xi-Page_49"></span>certain bishops, and presented their
indictments to the emperor. This occurring before the establishment of
concord, he received the lists, formed them into a packet which he
sealed with his ring, and ordered them to be kept safely. After the
reconciliation had been effected, he brought out these writings, and
burnt them in their presence, at the same time declaring upon oath that
he had not read a word of them. He said that the crimes of priests ought
not to be made known to the multitude, lest they should become an
occasion of offence, and lead them to sin without fear. It is reported
also that he added that if he were to detect a bishop in the very act of
committing adultery, he would throw his imperial robe over the unlawful
deed, lest any should witness the scene, and be thereby injured. Thus
did he admonish all the priests, as well as confer honours upon them,
and then exhorted them to return each to his own flock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_363"></span>[48:364](2030031.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xi-p3"></span> Jovian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Eusebius on the effrontery of the Arians](2030032)
