[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030342)  [Next](2030344) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cliv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cliv-p1"></span> *CLIII. Report of the same to the
Empresses Pulcheria and Eudoxia.*

<span id="iv.x.cliv-p2"></span>We had expected to be able to report to
your pious majesties in different terms, but we are now compelled to
make known to you the following facts, forced as we are by the irregular
exercise of despotic power by Cyril of Alexandria and Memnon of Ephesus.
The proper course to have been pursued, in accordance with the laws of
the Church, and the command of your pious majesties, would have been to
wait for the arrival of the godly bishops on the road, and in common
with them to examine into the questions at issue concerning the true
faith, and investigate the point offered for discussion, and, after
exact enquiry, to confirm the doctrines of the apostles. They had
written to me that they would wait for our arrival. They heard that we
were only three stages off. Then they assembled an unconstitutional
council by themselves, and have ventured on proceedings iniquitous,
irregular, and bristling with absurdities. And this they have done
though the most honourable count Candidianus, sent by your pious and
Christian majesties for good order’s sake, expressly charged them, alike
in writing and by word of mouth, to wait for the arrival of the godly
bishops who had been convened, and to attempt no innovation on the true
faith, but to take their stand on the directions of our godly-minded
sovereigns. Now in spite of their having heard the imperial letter and
the advice of the most honourable count Candidianus, they have
nevertheless made naught of due order. As the prophet says “They hatch
cockatrice’ eggs, and weave the spider’s web; and he that would eat of
their eggs when he breaks them findeth rottenness, and therein is a
viper,” <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) Wherefore we
confidently cry “Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall
they cover themselves with their works.” <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259)

<span id="iv.x.cliv-p5"></span>They have shut the churches and the
martyrs’ shrines; they have forbidden the celebration of the holy feast
of Pentecost; besides this <span id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="iv.x.cliv-Page_334"></span>they have sent the minions of their
disorderly despotism into bishops’ private houses, uttering shocking
threats, and forcing them to affix their signatures to illegal acts. We
therefore considering all their preposterous conduct, have deposed the
aforenamed Cyril and Memnon, and deprived them of their episcopate.
Their associates in irregularity, whether influenced by sycophancy or by
fear, we have excommunicated, until, coming to a knowledge of their own
wounds, they shall heartily repent, shall anathematize the heretical
Chapters of Cyril, which are tainted with the heresy of Apollinarius,
Arius, and Eunomius, shall recover the faith of the Fathers in Council
at Nicæa, and, in obedience to the pious commands of our Christian
sovereigns, shall, peacefully and without any tumult, assemble in synod,
be willing to examine with care the questions submitted to them, and
honestly protect the purity of the faith of the Gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[333:2259](2030343.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="iv.x.cliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cliv-p3"></span> <span id="iv.x.cliv-p3.1"></span>[Is.
lix. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)<span
id="iv.x.cliv-p3.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[333:2260](2030343.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="iv.x.cliv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cliv-p4"></span> <span id="iv.x.cliv-p4.1"></span>[Is.
lix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#006)<span
id="iv.x.cliv-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Report of the same to the Senate of Constantinople.](2030344)
