[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030640)  [Next](2030642) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.iv-p1"></span> 3. But, before I begin to clear up
these points, there is one in which I confess that he has spoken the
truth in an eminent degree; namely, when he says that he is not
rendering evil speaking for evil speaking. This, I say, is quite true;
for it is not for evil speaking but for speaking well of him and
praising him that he has rendered reproach and evil speaking. But it is
not true, as he says, that he turns the left cheek to one who smites him
on the right. It is on one who is stroking him and caressing him on the
cheek that he suddenly turns and bites him. I praised his eloquence and
his industry in the work of translating from the Greek. I said nothing
in derogation of his faith; but he condemns me on both these points. He
must therefore pardon me if I say some things rather roughly and rudely;
for he has challenged to a reply a man who has no great rhetorical
skill, and who has not, as he knows, the power to make one whom he
wishes to injure and to wound appear to have received neither wounds nor
injuries. Those who love this kind of eloquence must seek it in a man
whom every light report stirs up to fault-finding and vituperation, and
who thinks himself bound, as if he were the censor, to be always coming
up to set things to rights. A man who desires to clear himself from the
stains which have been cast upon him, does not trouble himself, in the
answer which he is compelled to make, about the elegance and neat turns
of his reply, but only about its truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I am no heretic, but declare my faith, that of my
baptism.](2030642)
