[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030668)  [Next](2030670) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxii-p1"></span> 31. But let this pass, for what
follows is of more importance. I thank God that he has relieved me from
a very serious burden of suspicion. Perhaps I seemed to some people to
be acting contentiously and calumniously when I insinuated that,
according to a figure of rhetoric, when he spoke of ‘another’ he meant
himself. But to prevent all further doubt from resting in the minds of
his hearers, he has himself declared that it is so. Like a truly good
teacher, who would not wish any ambiguity about his sayings to remain in
the minds of his pupils, he has been so good as to shew quite clearly
who that ‘other’ was of whom he had spoken before. He therefore says,
“But, as it stands, the addition of the preposition ‘before’ leads us to
explain it according to the ideas which we argued in a former place to
be necessary.” You see, he means that it is we, and not some other, no
one knows who, as you may have thought, who in the former place argued
thus, when we were expounding the words “Who hath blessed us with every
spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ.” It was to meet the
case of the less intelligent persons, who might think that what was
there said was spoken by some one else, to prevent any error on the
point remaining in the minds of those whom he had begged to read these
books so that they might see what his opinion of Origen was, that he now
acknowledges this opinion as his own, and, no longer speaking of
‘another,’ says what we have quoted before; namely, that, as God had
before blessed us with all spiritual blessing in Christ in the heavenly
places, and had chosen us before the foundation of the world; so also we
are said to have trusted in Christ at that former time in which we were
elected and predestinated and blessed in heaven. He himself therefore,
as it seems to me, has by his own testimony, absolved me from all
suspicion of speaking a calumny when I say that that ‘other’ is no
‘other’ than himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30(a)](2030670)
