[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030370)  [Next](2030372) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p1"></span> *CLXXXI. Letter to Abundius, Bishop
of Como*. <span id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316)

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p3"></span>To my dear lord and very holy brother
Abundius Theodoretus sends greeting in the Lord. I have discovered that
your piety religiously preserves the true and apostolic faith; and I
have thanked Almighty God that the truth which was in peril has been
renewed and brought to light by your holiness.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p4"></span>Of old, after the flood, it came to
pass that Noah and his sons were left for seed of the human race. Just
so in our own day are reserved the fathers of the West, that by them the
holy churches of the East may be able to preserve that true religion
which has been threatened with devastation and destruction by a new and
impious heresy. Well may we quote those words of the prophet “Except the
Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant we should have been
as Sodom and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.” <span
id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) So upon us from this impious heresy
the wrath of God has fallen like a flood and invasion.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p6"></span>Now we acknowledge the presence of our
<span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxxii-Page_348"></span>Saviour in a human body, and one Son
of God, His perfect Godhead and His perfect manhood. We do not divide
our one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons for He is one; but we recognise
the distinction between God and man; we know that one is of the Father,
the other of the seed of David and Abraham, according to the divine
Scriptures, and that the divine nature is free from passion, the body
which was before subject to passion being now itself too free from
passion; for after the resurrection it is plainly delivered from all
passion.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p7"></span>This we have learnt from the letter of
the very holy and religious Archbishop our lord Leo. For we have read
what he wrote to Flavianus, of holy and blessed memory, and have thanked
the loving-kindness of the Lord because we have found an advocate and
defender of the truth. To this letter I have given my adhesion, and have
subjoined a copy of it to my present epistle, which I have also
subscribed and have thereby proved that I obey the apostolic rules, that
is true doctrines; that I abide in them to this day, and am suffering in
their cause.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p8"></span>Assent has also been given by my lord
Ibas and my lord Aquilinus against whom the inventors of the new heresy
have armed the imperial power.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p9"></span>It remains for you with your very holy
colleagues to bring aid to the sacred Church, and to drive away the war
that threatens it. Banish the impious party which has been roused
against the truth; give back the churches their ancient peace; so will
you receive from the Lord, Who has promised to grant this boon, the
fruits of your apostolic labours.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p10"></span>All the very religious and godly
presbyters and reverend deacons and brethren by your holiness I greet;
and I and all who are with me salute your reverence. <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[347:2317](2030371.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p2"></span> This letter may be dated from Nicerte
in the autumn of 450 when Abundius was at Constantinople on a mission
from Leo, after the failure to get Theodosius to agree to the summary of
the Council in the West. Theodosius died a few days after the arrival of
the envoys at Constantinople. Theodoret is anxious to encourage the
Roman Legates to support the orthodox cause in the Imperial city, to
repair the mischief caused by the Latrocinium, and to show the court
that he and his friends Ibas and Aquilinus had the support of Leo.
Abundius, fourth bishop of Como (450–469) represented Leo at Chalcedon.
Manzoni, in the Promessi Sposi, reminds us of the local survival of the
name.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[347:2318](2030371.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p5"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxxii-p5.1"></span>[Isaiah i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[348:2319](2030371.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxii-p11"></span> After all the storms of controversy
and quarrel which we have followed in the course of the dialogues and
letters of the Blessed Bishop of Cyrus; after the lurid leap of grim
pleasantry which, if not actually penned by Theodoret, indicates a
temper that must have often shown itself in these troubled times; there
is something pathetic and encouraging in the conciliatory conclusion of
this last letter. Cyril has been dead for years, and his weaknesses are
forgotten in a confession which his more moderate opponents could
accept. The subscription of Theodoret to the tome of Leo is an earnest
of harmony and concord. The calmer wisdom of the West asserts the truth
which underlay the furious disputes of the subtler East. The last word
of the drama is Peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome and Gennadius. Lives of Illustrious Men.](2030372)
