[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030277)  [Next](2030279) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxxix"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxix-p1"></span> *LXXXIX. To Florentius the
Patrician.* <span id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxix-p3"></span>In sending a letter to your greatness I
am daring what is beyond me, but the cause of my daring is not
self-confidence, but the slanders of my calumniators. I have thought it
well worth while to instruct your righteous ears how openly the
impugners of my opinions are calumniating me. I have been guilty, I own,
of many errors, but up to now I have ever kept the faith of the apostles
undefiled, and on this account alone I have cherished the hope that I
shall meet with mercy on the day of the Lord’s appearing. On behalf of
this faith I continue to contend against every kind of heresy; this
faith I am ever giving to the nurslings of piety; by means of this faith
I have metamorphosed countless wolves into sheep, and have brought them
to the Saviour who is the Arch-shepherd of us all. So have I learnt not
only from the apostles and prophets but also from the interpreters of
their writings, Ignatius, Eustathius, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory, John,
and the rest of the lights of the world; and before these from the holy
Fathers in council at Nicæa, whose confession of the faith I preserve in
its integrity, like an ancestral inheritance, styling corrupt and
enemies of the truth all who dare to transgress its decrees. I invoke
your greatness, now that you have heard from me in these terms, to shut
the mouths of my calumniators. It is in my opinion wholly unreasonable
to accept as true what is charged against men in their absence; rather
is it lawful and right that those who wish to appear as prosecutors
should accuse the defendants in their presence, and endeavour to convict
them face to face. Under these conditions the judges will without
difficulty be able to arrive at the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[283:1798](2030278.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxix-p2"></span> Florentius, Præfect of the Imperial
Guard, and already six times Præfect of the East, was present as a lay
commissioner at the trial of Eutyches in 449 and at Chalcedon in 451.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Lupicinus the Master.](2030279)
