[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030622)  [Next](2030624) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span> <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i-Page_405"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Prolegomena</span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p2.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Life and Works of Rufinus.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p5.1"></span>Note.</span>—The References (where a simple
number is given) are to the pages in this Volume.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p6.1"></span>Tyrannius Rufinus</span> is chiefly known from
his relation to Jerome, first as an intimate friend and afterwards as a
bitter enemy. The immense influence of Jerome, through all the ages in
which criticism was asleep, has unduly lowered his adversary. But he has
some solid claims of his own on our recognition. His work on the Creed,
besides its intrinsic merits, must always be an authority as a witness
to the state of the creed as held in the Italian churches in the
beginning of the 5th century, as also to the state of the Canon and the
Apocrypha at that time. And it is to his translations that we are
indebted for our knowledge of many of the works of Origen, including the
greatest of them all, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p6.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. We are the more grateful
for his services because they were so opportune. The works of Origen,
which had been neglected in the West for a century and to such an extent
that the Pope Anastasius says (433) that he neither knows who he was nor
what he wrote, came suddenly into notice in the last quarter of a
century before Alaric’s sack of Rome <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p6.3"></span>a.d.</span> 385–410: and it was at this moment
that Rufinus appeared, according to his friend Macarius’ dream (439)
like a ship laden with the merchandize of the East, an Italian who had
lived some 25 years in Greek lands, and sufficiently equipped for the
work of a translator. Through his labours during the last 13 years of
that eventful time a considerable part of the works of the great
Alexandrian have floated down across the ocean of the Dark Ages, and,
while lost in their native Greek, have in their Latin garb come to
enrich the later civilization of the West.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 344–5: Rufinus was born at
Concordia (Jer. [Ep. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.2"></span>. comp. with Ep. x.<span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.3"></span> and De Vir. Ill. §53) between Aquileia and
Altinum, a place of some importance, which was destroyed by the Huns in
452 but afterwards rebuilt. His birth was about the year 344 or 345, he
being slightly older than Jerome. Nothing is known of his education or
the events of his youth; but that he was early acquainted with Jerome
and was interested in sacred literature is seen from the fact that in
368 when Jerome went with Bonosus to Gaul, Rufinus begged him to copy
for him the works of Hilary on the Psalms and on the Councils of the
Church (Jer. [Ep. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.4"></span>).

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 372–3: His mother did not die till
the year 397, as is seen from Jerome’s mention of her (Letter LXXXI, 1),
and it would appear that both his parents were Christians. But he was
not baptized till about his 28th year. He was at that time living at
Aquileia, where he had embraced the monastic state, and was a member of
the company of young ascetics to which Jerome and Bonosus belonged. The
presence among them of Hylas (Jerome Letter III, 3) the freedman of
Melania, the wealthy and ascetic Roman matron, shows that that relation
had already begun which was afterwards of such importance in the life of
Rufinus. It must have been just before the breaking up of that company
that he was baptized, for Jerome, writing of him ([Ep. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)<span id="vi.ii.i-p8.2"></span>) in
374 from Antioch says “He has but lately been washed and is as white as
snow.” He himself gives a full account of his baptism in his Apology
(436).

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 373: When this company of friends
was scattered, Rufinus joined the noble Roman lady, Melania, in her
pilgrimage to the East (Jer. Letter iv. 2). He visited the monasteries
of Egypt, and apparently desired to remain there; but a persecution
arose against the orthodox monks from Lucius the Arian bishop of
Alexandria, seconded by the governor, both being prompted by the Arian
Emperor Valens: the monasteries were in many cases broken up (Sozomen,
vi, 19, Socrates iv, 21–3, Rufinus Eccl. <span id="page_406">p.
406</span> <span id="vi.ii.i-Page_406"></span>Hist. ii, 3), and Rufinus
himself for a while suffered imprisonment and was then banished from
Egypt (430 Eccl. Hist. ii, 4). Rufinus probably on coming out of prison
joined Melania who had then settled at Diocæsarea (Pallad. Hist. Laus.
§117) on the coast of Palestine for the purpose of making a home for the
Egyptian exiles on their way to their various destinations. He states in
his Apology (466) that he was 6 years in Egypt, and that he returned
there again, after an interval, for two years more. He was a pupil both
of Didymus, then head of the catechetical school, who wrote for him a
treatise on the death of infants (534), and of Theophilus, afterward
Bishop of Alexandria (528), and that he saw many of the well-known
hermits (466), such as Serapion and Macarius, whom he describes in his
History of the Monks. Whether Melania returned with him to Egypt, or
whether she went to Jerusalem, we do not know: it is also uncertain
whether a journey which he made (Eccl. Hist. ii. 8) to Edessa was
undertaken at this time. The date of the settlement of Melania on the
Mount of Olives according to Jerome’s Chronicle is 379, or, according to
our present reckoning of dates, 377. We may suppose that Rufinus joined
her in 379. This was his home for eighteen years, till the year 397.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386: Rufinus was ordained at
Jerusalem, probably about the time when John, with whom he was closely
connected, succeeded Cyril in the Bishopric. The great resources of
Melania were added to his own which seem to have been not
inconsiderable. He built habitations for monks on the Mount of Olives,
and employed them in learned pursuits, and in copying manuscripts. On
the arrival of Jerome at Bethlehem, the old friendship was renewed,
though not apparently with all its former warmth. Jerome certainly at
times visited Rufinus and once at least stayed with him (465), and he
and his friends brought <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p10.2"></span>mss.</span> to be copied by the monks of the
Mount of Olives (465). He gave lectures on Christian writers and
doctrine, of which a satirical account is given at a later period by
Jerome <span id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755) in his letter to
Rusticus (cxxv, §18). The nick-name Grunnius which he there gives him
was probably caused by some trick of the voice. But we may gather from
Jerome that he read the Greek church writers diligently and lectured
upon them, a study which enabled him to do much good work at a later
time. It is probable that he lectured in Greek, since he says in 397
that his Latin was weak through disuse (439). We may set against
Jerome’s depreciatory description the account given by Palladius (Hist.
Laus. §118). “Rufinus, who lived with Melania, was a man of congenial
spirit, and of great nobility and strength of character. No man has ever
been known of greater learning or of gentler disposition.” Palladius
also speaks of the princely hospitality of Melania and Rufinus: “They
received,” he says, “bishops and monks, virgins and matrons and helped
them out of their own funds: They passed their life offending none and
being helpers of the whole world.” It is said by Palladius that he had
heard from Melania that she had been present at the death of Pambas in
Egypt which took place in the year 385, and it is probable that Rufinus
accompanied her on this occasion. He himself records <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756) a journey which he made to Edessa
and Charrhoe, when he saw settlements of the monks like those which he
had previously seen in Egypt. But the date of this journey does not
appear. It may have been undertaken in order to visit some of the exiles
from Egypt before his establishment on the Mt. of Olives. He records
also the visits of the remarkable men who were entertained by him;
Bacurius, who had been king of the Ubii, and afterwards count of the
Domestics under Theodosius, and was governor or duke of Palestine when
Rufinus settled there; and Ædesius the companion of Frumentius the
Missionary to the tribes in the N. W. of India. But his chief interest
and occupation throughout seems to have been with his monks at Mt.
Olivet with perhaps some connection with the diocesan work of his friend
John, the Bp. of Jerusalem. Palladius records that Rufinus and Melania
were the means of restoring to the communion of the church 400 monks.
What was this schism, which Palladius describes as being “on account of
Paulinus”? It is probable that the words relate to the monks of
Bethlehem whose alienation from the Church of Jerusalem had been due to
the ordination of Paulinian, Jerome’s brother, by Epiphanius. We know
that Rufinus before leaving Palestine was reconciled to Jerome (Jer.
[Rev. 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#026),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#033)<span id="vi.ii.i-p12.2"></span>);
and we know also that Jerome’s book against John, Bishop of Jerusalem,
which describes the schism was suddenly broken off; <span
id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) <span id="page_407">p. 407</span>
<span id="vi.ii.i-Page_407"></span>and that he remained from that time
forward at one with his Bishop. We may be allowed to believe that the
influence of Melania as well as Rufinus had been exerted for some time
previously to bring about this happy result.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 382<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p14.2"></span>:</span> Rufinus’ part in the controversy thus
terminated is partly known and partly the subject of inference. The
original source of discord is not known. It is possible that Rufinus,
who had been mentioned by Jerome in his Chronicle (<span
class="c14"><span id="vi.ii.i-p14.3"></span>a.d.</span> 378) as being,
together with Florentius and Bonosus, a specially distinguished monk,
did not find himself included in his friend’s Catalogue of Church
writers (De Vir. III.) published at Bethlehem.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p15.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p15.2"></span>:</span> When Aterbius began the Origenist
troubles at Jerusalem, Rufinus, who treated him with merited scorn (Jer.
Ap. iii, 33) probably felt some resentment at Jerome who, by “giving
satisfaction” to the heresy hunter, had countenanced his proceedings.
Rufinus appears as Bishop John’s adviser during the visit of Epiphanius
(Jer. Letter li, 2, 6), as the chief of a chorus of presbyters who
applauded their own bishop and derided Epiphanius as a “silly old
man;” <span id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) and as present when
Epiphanius remonstrated with his brother-bishop. He is also mentioned by
Epiphanius in his letter to John (Jer. Letter li. 6) as holding an
important place in the Church, “May God free you and all about you,
especially the presbyter Rufinus, from the heresy of Origen, and all
others.” This sentence will suggest to all who are familiar with
church-controversies a whole series of scenes in the schism which
continued between Bethlehem and Jerusalem during the next five years.
Jerome believed Rufinus to have injured him at every turn, to have
procured the abstraction of a Manuscript of his from the house occupied
by Fabiola on her visit to Bethlehem (Apol. iii, 4) perhaps to have been
in league with Vigilantius (Comp. Jer. Ep. lxi, 3 with Apol. iii, 4,
19). But such insinuations have the appearance rather of the suspicions
prompted by anger than of actual fact. In any case they were condoned
when the two old companions who had been so long parted by
ecclesiastical strife met together at the Church of the Resurrection at
a solemn eucharistic feast, and joined hands in token of reconciliation,
and when Jerome accompanied his friend some way on his journey before
their final parting (Jer. Vol. iii, 24).

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397: He arrived in Italy, in
company with Melania, early in the spring of 397. They were there
received by Paulinus of Nola with great honour. <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) Melania went on at once to Rome;
but Rufinus stopped at the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina. His
welcome by the Abbot Urseius and the philosopher Macarius, and their
request to him to translate various Greek books, amongst others the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p18.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>
of Origen, are described in his Prefaces to the Benedictions of the
Patriarchs, the Apology of Pamphilus and the translations of Origen
(417, 418, 420, 439). The preface to Origen’s chief work (427) had the
worst and most lasting results. He says that, being aware of the odium
attaching to the name of Origen, he had feared to translate the work:
but that the example of Jerome (whom he does not name but whose great
ability he extols) in translating Origen encourages him to follow in his
steps. This Preface, with this translation of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p18.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, was
published in Rome early in the year 398, Rufinus having moved there to
stay with Melania.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p19"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400–403: At Rome he lived in the
circle of Melania, her son Publicola and his wife Albina, with their
daughter the younger Melania and her husband Pinianus, to whom we may
probably add the Pope Siricius, and certainly Apronianus, a young noble
whom he speaks of as his son in the faith (435, 564). Jerome’s friend
Eusebius of Cremona was also in Rome, and on friendly terms with him
(445). But on the appearance of the work of Origen with Rufinus’
Preface, a great ferment arose leading to the violent controversy
between Rufinus and Jerome which is described in the Preface to their
Apologies (434, 482).

<span id="vi.ii.i-p20"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p20.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398: Meanwhile, Rufinus had left
Rome probably in 398, having obtained the usual Literæ Formatæ from the
Pope Siricius, who died that year, to introduce him to other
churches. <span id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) We hear of him at
Milan, where in the presence of the Bishop, Simplicianus, <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) he met Eusebius of Cremona, and
heard him read out a letter of Theophilus containing some passages from
the <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p22.3"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>, against which he vehemently protested (490).

<span id="vi.ii.i-p23"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span> 399–408: He then, having probably
visited his native city of Concordia, where his mother, <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) possibly his father also (430, 502)
was still living, took up his abode at Aquileia. There he was welcomed
by the bishop, Chromatius, by whom he had been baptized some 26 or 27
years before. Rufinus probably arrived at Aquileia in the beginning of
399, and remained <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i-Page_408"></span>there 9 or 10 years. It was during this
period that all his principal works except the Commentary on the
Benedictions of the patriarchs, the translation of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p24.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> and
Pamphilus’ Apology, and the book on adulterations of Origen were
composed. It was soon after his settlement at Aquileia that he heard
from Apronianus of the letter of Jerome to Pammachius and Oceanus <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) expressing his anger against him
for the mention he had made of Jerome in the Preface to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p25.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. The
conciliatory letter to Rufinus which accompanied this and which was an
answer to a friendly one from Rufinus <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) was not sent on by Jerome’s friends
(489); and Rufinus, thinking that his old friend had completely turned
against him, composed his Apology (434–482) which drew forth Jerome’s
reply (482–541). This controversy is placed in full before the reader of
this volume in an English translation, with prefatory notes. It may
therefore be treated very shortly here.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p27"></span>Rufinus’ Apology is an answer to Jerome’s
letter to Pammachius and Oceanus. It is addressed to Apronianus of Rome.
He makes a profession of his Christian standing and faith, especially on
the points raised by the Origenistic controversy; he describes the
circumstances which had led him to translate the books of Origen, and
defends his method of translation, which, he says, has been
misrepresented by men sent from the East to lay snares for him. His
method, he declares, was the same which had been used by Jerome, who
boasted that through him the Latins knew all that was good in Origen and
nothing of the bad. Where he found passages in Origen’s writings, in
flagrant contradiction to the orthodox opinion he had maintained
elsewhere, he concluded that the passage had been falsified by heretics,
and restored the more orthodox statement which he believed to have been
originally there. He then turns round upon Jerome and points out that,
in his Commentaries on the Ephesians, written some 10 years before, to
which he specially referred in his Letter as showing his freedom from
heresy, he had practically adopted the opinions now imputed to Origen as
heretical, such as the fall of souls from a previous state into the
prison house of earthly bodies, and the universal restoration of
spiritual beings.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p28"></span>In the second book he clears himself from
the imputation of following Origen and Plato in believing in the
lawfulness of using occasional falsehood in the government and training
of men. But he imputes to his adversary a systematic use of falsehood in
reference to his reading heathen authors, while he professed in his
letter to Eustochium (Jer. Ep. xxii) to have solemnly promised never
even to possess them. He then takes a wider view of Jerome’s writings,
showing how, in this Letter to Eustochium, his books against Jovinian,
etc., he had by his satirical pictures held up to ridicule the various
classes of Christians, clergy, monks, virgins: how he had praised Origen
indiscriminately as a teacher second only to the Apostles: how he had
defamed men like Ambrose, and therefore his present accusations were
little worth: how he boasted of having taken as his teachers not only
Origenists like Didymus or heretics like Apollinarius, but heathen like
Porphyry, and had made his translation of the Old Testament under the
influence of the Jew Baranina (whose name Rufinus perverts into
Barabbas). He concludes by summarizing his accusations and calling upon
the reader to choose between him and his opponent.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p29"></span>This Apology was only sent to a few
friends of Rufinus (530); but portions of it became known to Jerome’s
friends and his brother Paulinian (493) carried them to Bethlehem,
together with Rufinus’ Apology addressed to Pope Anastasius. Jerome had
also before him the letter of Anastasius to John Bishop of Jerusalem
(509) showing his dislike of Rufinus’ proceedings. On these he grounds
his own Apology, which was originally in two books and was addressed to
Pammachius and Marcella <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p29.1"></span>a.d.</span> 402.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p30"></span>In the first book he blames Rufinus’
breach of friendship after the reconciliation which had taken place at
Jerusalem; he then shows that he was compelled to translate the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p30.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> in
order to show what it really was. He declares that the Apology of Origen
translated by Rufinus as the work of Pamphilus was really written by
Eusebius; that Origen had been condemned by Theophilus and Anastasius,
by East and West alike, and by the decree of the Emperors. He defends
himself for having used heathen and heretical teachers, and help of a
Jewish scholar in translating the Old Testament. As to his Commentaries
on the Ephesians he declares that he merely put side by side the
opinions of various commentators, indicating at times his knowledge that
some were heretical: and as to his anti-Ciceronian dream, he ridicules
the idea that a man can be bound by his night visions.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p31"></span>In the second book he criticizes Rufinus’
Apology addressed to Anastasius as to both its style and its matter, and
blames him for his treatment of Epiphanius, and endeavours to implicate
him in the imputation of heresy. He then defends his translation of the
Old Testament, showing by copious quotations from the Prefaces to the
Books that he had done nothing condemnatory of the Septuagint, whose
version he had himself translated into Latin and constantly used in
familiar expositions.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p32"></span>This Apology was brought to Rufinus at
Aquileia by a merchant who was leaving again in two days (522).
Chromatius no doubt urged him, as he urged Jerome (520) not to continue
the controversy and he yielded. He wrote, however, a private letter to
Jerome, which has been lost, sending him an accurate copy of his
Apology, and while declining public controversy, yet declaring that he
could have said even more than before, and divulged things which would
have been worse to Jerome than death. Jerome in his answer written <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.ii.i-p32.1"></span>a.d.</span> 403, which forms
B. iii of his Apology, declares that the controversy is Rufinus’ fault,
and defends his friends for their conduct towards him, even in holding
back the conciliatory letter written in 399; but shows how a way might
still be open for friendship. He touches again upon most of the points
dwelt on in the previous books, defending himself and accusing Rufinus,
and ends by declaring that his bitter reply was necessitated first by
Rufinus’ threats, and secondly by his abhorrence of heresy, from all
complicity with which he must at any price clear himself.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p33"></span><span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i-Page_409"></span>This book closed the controversy. Rufinus
did not reply, Jerome did not relent. Nothing in Rufinus’ subsequent
writings reflects on Jerome; but Jerome is never weary of expressing his
hatred of Rufinus, speaking of him after his death as “the
Scorpion” <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) and writing
malignant satirical descriptions of him like that in his letter to
Rusticus. <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p36"></span>It may be observed, however, that
notwithstanding the violent words used on both sides, it was possible
for eminent churchmen to esteem and befriend both parties. Augustine, on
receiving Jerome’s Apology, laments, in words which must have been felt
by Jerome as a severe reproach, that two such men, so loved by the
churches, should thus tear each other to pieces. Chromatius, while he
kept up communications with Jerome, and supplied him with funds for his
literary work, was also the friend and adviser of Rufinus.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p37"></span>Rufinus’ friends at Aquileia, like those
at the Pinetum and at Rome, were anxious to gain from him a knowledge of
the great church-writers of the East, and especially of Origen. No one
at Aquileia seems to have known Greek. He makes excuses in his Prefaces
(430, 563, 565, etc.) for the difficulty of the task and his own
short-comings which seem to be partly conventional, partly genuine. But
he did a work which he alone or almost alone at that period was
qualified to do. His translations of Origen and Pamphilus were already
known. We learn from Jerome (536) that Rufinus had translated parts of
the LXX. He now translated Eusebius’ Church History, and added to it two
books of his own; he translated the so-called Recognitions of Clement,
which till then were almost unknown in Italy. He wrote a History of the
Monks of the East, partly from personal knowledge, partly from what he
had heard or read of them. And he translated the Commentaries of Origen
upon the Heptateuch or 1st seven books of Scripture, except Numbers and
Deuteronomy; and those on the Epistle to the Romans. He also wrote his
exposition of the Creed (541–563), and probably some other works which
have not come down to us.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p38"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p38.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400–402: The first part of his
stay at Aquileia was troubled by the controversy with Jerome. He also
received from his friends at Rome the intelligence that his Preface and
translation of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p38.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> had been brought to the
notice of the Pope Anastasius, by Pammachius and Marcella (430); and
probably the letter of the Pope to Venerius Bishop of Milan, which is
quoted in Anastasius’ letter to John of Jerusalem (433) was also brought
to his knowledge.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p39"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p39.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400: Though there is no reason to
suppose, as has been often done, that the Pope passed sentence upon him,
still less that he summoned him to Rome. Rufinus was so far affected by
what he heard of the adverse feeling excited in the Pope’s mind toward
him that he thought it desirable to write an explanation or apology
(430–2) vindicating his action in the translation of Origen, and giving
an exposition of his own belief on some of the principal points dealt
with in the <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.i-p39.2"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>. From the letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem we
gather that John had written to him in the interest of Rufinus, and had
blamed Jerome’s friends at Rome, perhaps also Jerome himself, for the
part they had taken in reference to him. It is a curious fact that this
letter was known to Jerome but not to Rufinus during the controversy
(509); but it can hardly be inferred with any certainty from this that
John had changed sides and favoured Jerome at Rufinus’ expense.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p40"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.ii.i-p40.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408: After 8 or 9 years at
Aquileia Rufinus returned to Rome. His friend Chromatius of Aquileia had
died in 405. Anastasius of Rome had also passed away (<span
class="c14"><span id="vi.ii.i-p40.2"></span>a.d.</span> 402), and his
successor Innocentius was without prejudice against Rufinus. Melania was
either there or with Paulinus at Nola. Her son Publicola had died in
406, but his widow Albina was with her, and her granddaughter the
younger Melania with her husband Pinianus. The siege of Rome by Alaric
was impending, and the whole party were starting by way of Sicily and
Africa, in both of which Melania had property, intending eventually to
reach Palestine. He joined their “religious company” as he tells us in
the Preface to Origen on Numbers (568) which, according to Palladius
(Hist. Laus. 119) formed a vast caravan with slaves, virgins and
eunuchs; and he was with them in Sicily when Alaric burned Rhegium (568)
the flames of which they saw across the straits.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p41"></span>This translation of Numbers was his last
work. He was at that time suffering in his eyes; and he died soon
afterwards in Sicily, as we learn from Jerome’s malicious words “The
Scorpion now lies underground between Enceladus and Porphyrion.” <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) The undying hatred of Jerome
towards him has unduly lowered him in the estimation of the Church. He
was far below Jerome in literary ability, but in their great controversy
he displayed more magnanimity than his rival, being willing to forego a
public answer to his provoking <span id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i-Page_410"></span>apology. He was highly esteemed by the
eminent churchmen of his time and the Bishops near whom he lived.
Chromatius of Aquileia was his friend; for Petronius of Bologna he wrote
his monastic history, for Gaudentius of Brixia he translated the
Clementine Recognitions, for Laurentius (perhaps of his native
Concordia) he composed his work on the Creed. Paulinus of Nola continued
his friendship for him to the end. Above all Augustine speaks of him as
the object of love and of honour; and, in his reply to Jerome <span
id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768) who had sent him his Apology, says:
“I grieved, when I had read your book, that such discord should have
arisen between persons so dear and so intimate, bound to all the
churches by a bond of affection and of renown.”

<span id="vi.ii.i-p44"></span>We may conclude this notice by two
quotations from writers who lived shortly after the death of Rufinus;
the first of which shows how unfairly the fame of Jerome has pressed on
the memory of his antagonist, while the second may be taken as the
verdict of unprejudiced history. Pope Gelasius, at a Council at Rome in
494, drew up a list of books to be received in the church, in which he
says of Rufinus: “He was a religious man, and wrote many books of use to
the Church, and many commentaries on the Scripture; but, since the most
blessed Jerome infamed him on certain points, we take part with him
(Jerome) in this and in all cases in which he has pronounced a
condemnation.” (Migne’s Patrologia vol. lix. col. 175). On the other
hand Gennadius, in his list of Ecclesiastical writers (c. 17) says:
“Rufinus, the presbyter, of Aquileia, was not the least of the
church-teachers, and showed an elegant genius in his translations from
Greek into Latin;” and, after giving a list of his writings, he
continues: “He also replied in two volumes to him who decried his works,
showing convincingly that he had exercised his powers through the might
which God had given him, and for the good of the church, and that it was
through a spirit of rivalry that his adversary had employed his pen in
defaming him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[406:2756](2030623.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span> “He came in with a slow and stately step;
he spoke with a broken utterance, sometimes with a kind of disjointed
sobs rather than words. He had a pile of tomes upon the table; and then,
with a frown and a contraction of the nostrils, and his forehead
wrinkled up, he snapped his fingers to call the attention of his
audience. What he said had no depth in it; but he criticized others, and
pointed out their defects, as though he would exclude them from the
Senate of Christian teachers. He was rich, and entertained freely, and
many flocked round him in his public appearances. He was as luxurious as
Nero at home, as stern as Cato abroad; as full of contradictions as the
Chimæra.”

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[406:2757](2030623.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span> Hist. [Eccl. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#008)<span id="vi.ii.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[406:2758](2030623.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span> For the date of this work, see the Note
prefixed to it in the translation of Jerome’s works, Vol. vi. of this
series.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[407:2759](2030623.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span> See Jerome’s expressions in his book
*“Against John of Jerusalem”* c. 11, which evidently refer to Rufinus:
“grinning like a dog and turning up his nose.”

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[407:2760](2030623.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p18"></span> Paulinus Ep. xxix, 12.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[407:2761](2030623.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p21"></span> Jer. Ep. cxxvii, 9 [Ap. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021)<span id="vi.ii.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[407:2762](2030623.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p22"></span> Successor of Ambrose, and Bishop <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.ii.i-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397–400. See the
Letter of Anastasius to him. Jer. Ep. xcv.<span
id="vi.ii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[407:2763](2030623.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p24"></span> She died soon after. See Jerome Ep.
lxxxi, 1.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[408:2764](2030623.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p25"></span> Jer. Ep. lxxxiv.<span
id="vi.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[408:2765](2030623.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p25.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p26"></span> See Jer. Ep. lxxxi, 1.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[409:2766](2030623.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p34"></span> Jer. Ep. cxxvii. 10<span
id="vi.ii.i-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[409:2767](2030623.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p35"></span> Jer. Ep. cxxv.<span
id="vi.ii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[409:2768](2030623.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p42"></span> Jer. Pref. to Comm. on Ezek. B. I.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[410:2769](2030623.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p43"></span> Aug. Letter 73 (In Jerome’s Letters No.
110).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Works of Rufinus.](2030624)
