[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030356)  [Next](2030358) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p1"></span> *CLXVII. Second Petition of the same,
sent from Chalcedon to Theodosius Augustus.*

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p2"></span>Your piety has been informed on
several occasions, both by ourselves in person and by our emissaries,
that the doctrine of the true faith seems to stand in danger of being
corrupted, and that the body of the Church is apparently being rent
asunder by men who are turning everything upside down, trampling upon
all church order, and all imperial law, and throwing everything into
confusion that they may confirm the heresy propounded by Cyril of
Alexandria. For when we were first summoned by your piety to Ephesus, to
enquire into the question which had arisen and to confirm the evangelic
and apostolic faith laid down by the holy Fathers, before the arrival of
all the bishops who had been convened, the holders of their own private
Council confirmed in writing the heretical Chapters, which are at one
with the impiety of Arius, Eunomius and Apollinarius. Some they
deceived; some they terrified; others already charged with heresy, they
received into communion; and others who had not communicated with them
were bribed into so doing; others again were fired with the hope of
dignities for which they were unfit; so these men gathered round them a
great crowd of adherents, as though they had no idea that true religion
is shewn not by numbers, but by truth.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p3"></span>The dispatch of your piety was read a
second time by the most honourable Count Candidianus, ordering that the
questions recently raised be examined in a quiet and brotherly manner.
When however all the pious bishops were assembling, the reading had no
effect.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p4"></span>Then came the noble Palladius
Magistrianus, bringing another dispatch from your majesty, to the effect
that all enactments passed privately and apart must be rescinded; that
the Council must be assembled afresh and the true doctrine ratified;
but, as usual, this your pious mandate was treated with contempt by
these unscrupulous persons.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p5"></span>Then again arrived the right
honourable Master John, at that time “Comes Largitionum,” bringing
another pious letter to the effect that the depositions of the three had
been decreed, that the offences which had sprung up were to be removed,
and the faith laid down at Nicæa by the holy and blessed Fathers was to
be ratified by all. As usual these universal mockers transgressed this
law too.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p6"></span>For after hearing the letter they did
not change their mode of action; they held communion with the deposed;
spoke of them as bishops, and refused to allow the Chapters, which had
been propounded to the loss and corruption of the pious faith to be
rejected; notwithstanding their having been frequently summoned by us to
discussion. For we had ready to hand a plain refutation of the heretical
Chapters.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p7"></span>In evidence of these statements we
have the right honourable Master, who when both sides had been summoned
a third and a fourth time, not venturing to make this conduct an excuse
on account of their disobedience, thought it worth while to summon us
hither.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p8"></span>We came at once; on our arrival we
allowed ourselves no rest making our petition, both before your piety
and before the illustrious assembly, that they would take up the quarrel
for the Chapters and enter into discussion concerning them, or on the
other hand reject them as contrary to the right faith, abiding by the
faith as laid down by the blessed fathers in council at Nicæa.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p9"></span>They refused to do anything of the
kind; they persisted in their heretical procedure; yet they were allowed
to attend the churches, and to perform their priestly functions. We,
however, alike at Ephesus and here, have been for a long time deprived
of communion; alike there and here we have undergone innumerable perils;
and while we were being stoned and all but slain by slaves dressed up as
monks, we took it all for the best, as willingly enduring such treatment
in the cause of the truth.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p10"></span>Afterwards it seemed good to your
majesty that we and the opposite party should assemble once again, that
the recalcitrant might be compelled to examine the doctrines. While we
were waiting for this to come to pass your piety set out for the city,
and ordered the very men who were being accused of heresy and had been
therefore some of them deposed by us, and others excommunicated and
thereafter to be subjected to the discipline of the Church, to come to
the city and perform priestly functions, and ordain. <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) We however who in the cause of true
religion have undertaken a struggle so tremendous; we who have shrunk
from no peril in our battle for right doctrine, have neither been bidden
to enter the city to serve the cause of the imperilled Faith and strive
for orthodoxy; nor have we been permitted to return home; <span
id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) <span id="page_340">p. 340</span>
<span id="iv.x.clxviii-Page_340"></span>but here we are in Chalcedon
distressed and groaning for the Church oppressed by schism.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p13"></span>Wherefore since we are in receipt of
no reply we have thought it necessary to inform your piety by this
present letter, before God and Christ and the Holy Ghost, that if any
one shall have been ordained (before the settlement of right doctrines)
by these men of heretical opinions, he must necessarily be cut off from
the whole church, as well from the clergy as the dissentient laity. For
none of the pious will endure that communion be granted to heretics, and
their own salvation be nullified.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p14"></span>And when this shall have come to
pass, then your piety shall be compelled to act against your will. For
the schism will grow beyond all expectation, and thereby the champions
of true religion will be saddened, unable to endure the loss of their
own souls, and the establishment of those impious doctrines of Cyril
which the contentious are desirous of defending.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p15"></span>Many indeed of the supporters of true
religion will never allow the acceptance of Cyril’s doctrines; we shall
never allow it, who all are of the diocese of the East of your province,
of the diocese of Pontus, of Asia, of Thrace, of Illyricum and of the
Italies, and who also sent to your piety the treatise of the most
blessed Ambrose, written against this nascent superstition.

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p16"></span>To avoid all this, and the further
troubling of your piety, we beg, beseech, and implore you to issue an
edict that no ordination take place before the settlement of the
orthodox faith, on account of which we have been convened by your
Christ-loving highness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[339:2277](2030357.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="iv.x.clxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p11"></span> i.e. Maximianus, in succession to
Nestorius, Oct. 25, 431.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[339:2278](2030357.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="iv.x.clxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxviii-p12"></span> Nestorius was permitted to return to
his old monastery at Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Demand of the same, addressed from Chalcedon to the
Sovereigns.](2030358)
