[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030112)  [Next](2030114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Letters of the
Emperors Valentinianus and Valens, written to the diocese* <span
id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680) *of Asia about the* *<span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>Homoüsion, on hearing that some men in
Asia and in Phrygia were in dispute about the divine decree.*

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>Valentinian</span> ordered a council to
be held in Illyricum <span id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) and sent to
the disputants the decrees ratified by the bishops there assembled. They
had decided to hold fast the creed put forth at Nicæa and the emperor
himself wrote to them, associating his brother with him in the dispatch,
urging that the decrees be kept.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p5"></span>The edict clearly proclaims the
piety of the emperor and similarly exhibits the soundness of Valens in
divine doctrines at that time. I shall therefore give it in full. The
mighty emperors, ever august, augustly victorious, Valentinianus,
Valens, and Gratianus, <span id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) to the
bishops of Asia, Phrygia, Carophrygia Pacatiana, <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) greeting in the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p8"></span>A great council having met in
Illyricum, <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) after much discussion
concerning the word of salvation, the thrice blessed bishops have
declared that the Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is of one
substance. <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) This Trinity they
worship, in no wise remitting the service which has duly fallen to their
lot, the worship of the great King. It is our imperial will that this
Trinity be preached, so that none may say “We accept the religion of the
sovereign who rules this world without regard to Him who has given us
the message of salvation,” for, as says the gospel of our God which
contains this judgment, “we should render to Cæsar the things that are
Cæsar’s and to God the things that are God’s.” <span
id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p12"></span>What say you, ye bishops, ye
champions of the Word of salvation? If these be your professions, thus
then continue to love one another, and cease to abuse the imperial
dignity. No longer persecute those who diligently serve God, by whose
prayers both wars cease upon the earth, and the assaults of apostate
angels are repelled. These striving through supplication to repel all
harmful demons both know how to pay tribute as the law enjoins, and do
not gainsay the power of their sovereign, but with pure minds both keep
the commandment of the heavenly King, and are subject to our laws. But
ye have been shewn to be disobedient. We have tried every expedient but
you have given yourselves up. <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) We
<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-Page_112"></span>however wish to be pure from you, as
Pilate at the trial of Christ when He lived among us, was unwilling to
kill Him, and when they begged for His death, turned to the East, <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) asked water for his hands and washed
his hands, saying I am innocent of the blood of this righteous
man. <span id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p17"></span>Thus our majesty has invariably
charged that those who are working in the field of Christ are not to be
persecuted, oppressed, or ill treated; nor the stewards of the great
King driven into exile; lest to-day under our Sovereign you may seem to
flourish and abound, and then together with your evil counsellor trample
on his covenant, <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) as in the case
of the blood of Zacharias, <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) but
he and his were destroyed by our Heavenly King Jesus Christ after (at)
His coming, being delivered to death’s judgment, they and the deadly
fiend who abetted them. We have given these orders to Amegetius, to
Ceronius to Damasus, to Lampon and to Brentisius by word of mouth, and
we have sent the actual decrees to you also in order that you may know
what was enacted in the honourable synod.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p20"></span>To this letter we subjoin the
decrees of the synod, which are briefly as follows.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p21"></span>In accordance with the great and
orthodox synod we confess that the Son is of one substance with the
Father. And we do not so understand the term ‘of one substance’ as some
formerly interpreted it who signed their names with feigned adhesion;
nor as some who now-a-days call the drafters of the old creed Fathers,
but make the meaning of the word of no effect, following the authors of
the statement that “of one substance” means “like,” with the
understanding that since the Son is comparable to no one of the
creatures made by Him, He is like to the Father alone. For those who
thus think irreverently define the Son “as a special creation of the
Father,” but we, with the present synods, both at Rome and in Gaul, hold
that there is one and the same substance of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in three persons, that is in three perfect essences. <span
id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) And we confess, according to the
exposition of Nicæa, that the Son of God being of one substance, was
made flesh of the Holy Virgin Mary, and hath tabernacled among men, and
fulfilled all the economy <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) for
our sakes in birth, in passion, in resurrection, and in ascension into
Heaven; and that He shall come again to render to us according to each
man’s manner of life, in the day of judgment, being seen in the flesh,
and showing forth His divine power, being God bearing flesh, and not man
bearing Godhead.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p24"></span>Them that think otherwise we damn,
as we do also them that do not honestly damn him that said that before
the Son was begotten He was not, but wrote that even before He was
actually begotten He was potentially in the Father. For this is true in
the case of all creatures, who are not for ever with God in the sense in
which the Son is ever with <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-Page_113"></span>the Father, being begotten by
eternal generation.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p25"></span>Such was the short summary of the
emperor. I will now subjoin the actual dispatch of the synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_680"></span>[111:681](2030113.htm#fr_680) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p2"></span> The twelve dioceses of the Empire,
as constituted under Diocletian, were (1) Oxiens; (2) Pontica; (3)
Asiana; (4) Thracia; (5) Mœsia; (6) Pannonia; (7) Britanniæ; (8) Galliæ;
(9) Viennensis; (10) Italiciana; (11) Hispaniæ; (12) Africa.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[111:682](2030113.htm#fr_681) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p4"></span> Under Constantine Illyricum
Occidentale included Dalmatia, Pannonia, Noricum, and Savia; Illyricum
Orientale, Dacia, Mœsia, Macedonia and Thrace.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[111:683](2030113.htm#fr_682) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p6"></span> Eldest son of Valentinian I. Born
<span class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359.
Named Augustus 367. Succeeded his father 375; his uncle Valens 378.
Murdered 383. The synod was convoked in the year of Valentinian’s death.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[111:684](2030113.htm#fr_683) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p7"></span> Phrygia Pacatiana was the name
given in the fourth century to the province extending from Bithynia to
Pamphylia. “Cum in veterum libris non nisi duæ Phrygiæ occurrant,
Pacatiana et salutaris, mavult Valesius h. l. scribere, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>καριας φρυγίας
πακατιανῆς</span>. Sed consentientibus in vulgata lectione omnibus
libris mallem servare <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p7.2"></span>καραφρυγίας πακατιανῆς</span>, quam
Pacatianam <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p7.3"></span>καροφρυγίαν</span> dictam esse putaverim
quod Cariæ proxime adhæresceret.” Schulze.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[111:685](2030113.htm#fr_684) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p9"></span> The date of this Council is
disputed. “Pagi contending for 373, others for 375, Cave for 367.” Dict.
Ch. Ant. i. 813.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[111:686](2030113.htm#fr_685) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p10.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>

<span id="fn_686"></span>[111:687](2030113.htm#fr_686) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_687"></span>[111:688](2030113.htm#fr_687) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p13.2"></span>μεις ἐχρησάμεθα τῷ ἅλφα ἕως τοῦ ὠ ὑμεῖς
δὲ ἑαυτοὺς ἀπεδώκατε</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p14"></span>The passage is obscure and perhaps
corrupt. Schulze’s note is “Nisi mendosus sit locus, quod quidem
suspicabatur Camerarius, sensus talis esse videtur: *‘Nos quidem primis
usi sumus ad extrema,’* h.e. omnia adhibuimus et tentavimus ad pacem
restituendam et cohibendas vexationes, *‘vos vero impotentiæ obsecuti
estis.’* Alias interpretationes collegit suamque addidit Valesius.” The
note of Valesius is as follows: hic locus valde obscurus est. Et
Epiphanius quidem scholasticus ita eum vertit: et nos quidem subjicimur
ei qui primus est et novissimus: vos autem vobismet arrogatis. Quæ
interpretatio, meo quidem iudicio, ferri non potest. Camerarius vero sic
interpretatur: nos quidem ordine a primo ad ultimum processimus
tractatione nostra: ipsi vero vosmet ipsos abalienastis. At
Christophersonus ita vertit: nos patientia semper a principio usque ad
finem usi sumus: vos contra animi vestri impotentiæ obsecuti estis…mihi
videtur verbum <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>χρῆσθαι</span> hoc loco idem
significari quod communicare et commercium habere. Cujus modi est illud
in Evangelio: non coütuntur Judæi Samaritanis. (Johon IV. 9.)

<span id="fn_688"></span>[112:689](2030113.htm#fr_688) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p15"></span> The turning to the East is not
mentioned in the Gospel of St. Matthew or in the Apocryphal Acts of
Pilate; and the Imperial Decree seems here to import a Christian
practice into the pagan Procurators tribunal. Orientation was sometimes
observed in Pagan temples and the altar placed at the east end; perhaps
in connexion with the ancient worship of the sun. cf. Æsch. Ag. 502;
Paus. V. 23. i; Cic. Cat. iii. §43. In. Virg. Æn. viii. 68 Æneas turns
to the East when he prays to the Tiber. cf. Liv 1. 18. But praying
towards the East is specially a primitive Christian custom, among the
earliest authorities being Tertullian (Apol. XVI.) and Clemens Al.
(Stromat. VII. 7).

<span id="fn_689"></span>[112:690](2030113.htm#fr_689) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>[Matthew xxvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_690"></span>[112:691](2030113.htm#fr_690) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18"></span> “Locus densis,” says Valesius,
“tenebris obvolutus”…The note of Schulze is “primum <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.2"></span>παρακεκλημένος</span> videtur malus
genius esse (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.3"></span>φθοριμαῖος δαίμων</span> postea
dicitur) qui excitaverat (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.4"></span>παρεκάλεσε</span>) episcopos ad
dissentientes vexandos plane ut crudeles Judæi excitaverant Pilatum ut
Christum interimerent; sic enim in superioribus Valentinianus dixerat.
Porro Valent. non modo ad historiam Zachariæ a Judæis in templo
interfecti alludit, sed, si quid video, etiam ad verba ea quibus utitur
Paulus, [Heb. x. 29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.6"></span>τον υἱ& 232·ν τοῦ Θεοῦ καταπατεῖν καὶ
τὸ αἷμα τῆς διαθήκης κοινὸν ἡγήσασθαι</span>, quare placet conjectura
Valesii <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.7"></span>πατεῖν</span>” (the reading adopted in
the translation above), “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.8"></span>τὰ τῆς διαθήκης αὐτοῦ ὡς ἐπὶ τοῦ
Ζαχαρίου τοῦ αἵματος</span>, ut tota sententia sit: *ne hodie sub nostro
imperio incrementa capiatis et cum eo qui vos incitat conculcetis
sanguinem fœderis, fere ut Zachariæ tempore* factum est a Judæis.”

<span id="fn_691"></span>[112:692](2030113.htm#fr_691) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p18.9"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p19"></span> It is to be observed that the
imperial letter does not add the probably interpolated words “son of
Barachias” which are a difficulty in <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p19.1"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p19.2"></span>, and do not appear in the Codex
Sinaiticus.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[112:693](2030113.htm#fr_692) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22"></span> Here for the first time in our
author we meet with the word Hypostasis to denote each distinct person.
Compare note on page 36. “Origen had already described Father, Son and
Holy Spirit as three <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.2"></span>ποστάσεις</span> or Beings, in
opposition to the Monarchians, who saw in them only three modes of
manifestation of one and the same Being. And as Sabellius had used the
words <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.3"></span>τρία
πρόσωπα</span> for these modes of manifestation, this form of expression
naturally fell into disfavour with the Catholics. But when Arius
insisted on (virtually) three different hypostases in the Holy Trinity,
Catholics began to avoid applying the word hypostases to the Persons of
the Godhead. To this was added a difficulty arising from the fact, that
the Eastern Church used Greek as the official language of its theology,
while the Western Church used Latin, a language at that time much less
well provided with abstract theological terms. Disputes were caused,
says Gregory of Nazianzus (Orat. xxi. p. 395), <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.4"></span>διὰ στενότητα τῆς παρὰ τοῖς ᾽Ιτάλοις
γλώττης καὶ ὀνομάτων πενίαν</span>. (Compare Seneca Epist. 58.) The
Latins used essentia and substantia as equivalent to the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.5"></span>οὐσία</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.6"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.7"></span>πόστασις</span>,
but interchanged them, as we have seen in the translation of the Nicene
Creed with little scruple, regarding them as synonyms. They used both
expressions to describe the Divine Nature common to the Three. It
followed that they looked upon the expression “Three Hypostases” as
implying a division of the substance of the Deity, and therefore as
Arian. They preferred to speak of “tres Personæ.” Athanasius also spoke
of <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.8"></span>τρία
πρόσωπα</span>, and thus the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.9"></span>πρόσωπα</span> and Personæ became
current among the Nicene party. But about the year 360, the Neo-Nicene
party, or Meletians, as they are sometimes called, became scrupulous
about the use of such an expression as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.10"></span>τρία πρόσωπα</span>, which seemed to
them to savour of Sabellianism. Thus a difference arose between the old
Athanasian party and the Meletians.” Archd. Cheetham in Dict. Christ.
Biog. Art. “Trinity.”

<span id="fn_693"></span>[112:694](2030113.htm#fr_693) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p22.11"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vii-p23"></span> Compare note on page 72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodical Epistle of the Synod in Illyricum concerning the
Faith.](2030114)
