[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030852)  [Next](2030854) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xiii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p1"></span> 4. “I <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii.v-p1.1"></span>Believe in God the Father Almighty</span>.”

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p2"></span>The Eastern Churches almost universally
deliver the article thus, “I believe in <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii.v-p2.1"></span>One</span> God the Father Almighty;” and
again in the next article, where we say, “And in Christ Jesus, His only
Son, our Lord,” they deliver it., “And in <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii.v-p2.2"></span>One</span> (Lord) our Lord Jesus Christ, His
only Son;” confessing, that is, “one God,” and “one Lord,” in accordance
with the authority of the Apostle Paul. But we shall return to this
by-and-by. For the present, let us turn our attention to the words, “In
God the Father Almighty.”

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p3"></span>“God,” so far as the human mind can form
an idea, is the name of that nature <span id="page_544">p. 544</span>
<span id="vi.xiii.v-Page_544"></span>or substance which is above all
things. “Father” is a word expressive of a secret and ineffable mystery.
When you hear the word “God,” you must understand thereby a substance
without beginning, without end, simple, uncompounded, invisible,
incorporeal, ineffable, inappreciable, which has in it nothing which has
been either added or created. For He is without cause who is absolutely
the cause of all things. When you hear the word “Father,” you must
understand by this the Father of a Son, which Son is the image of the
aforesaid substance. For as no one is called “Lord” unless he have a
possession or a servant whose lord he is, and as no one is called
“master” unless he have a disciple, so no one can possibly be called
“father” unless he have a son. This very name of “Father,” therefore,
shews plainly that, together with the Father there subsists a Son also.

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p4"></span>But I would not have you discuss how God
the Father begat the Son, nor intrude too curiously into the profound
mystery, lest haply, by prying too eagerly into the brightness of light
inaccessible, you should lose the faint glimpse which, by the gift of
God, has been vouchsafed to mortals. Or, if you suppose that this is a
subject to be investigated with all possible scrutiny, first propose to
yourself questions which concern ourselves, and then, if you are able to
deal satisfactorily with them, speed on from earthly things to heavenly,
from visible to invisible. Determine first, if you can, how the mind,
which is within you, generates a word, and what is the spirit of the
memory which is in it; and how these, though diverse in reality and in
operation, are yet one in substance or nature; and though they proceed
from the mind, yet are never separated from it. And if these, though
they are in us and in the substance of our own soul, yet seem to be
hidden from us in proportion as they are invisible to our bodily sight,
let us take for our enquiry things which are more open to view. How does
a spring generate a river from itself? By what spirit is it borne into a
rapidly flowing stream? How happens it that, while the river and the
spring are one and inseparable, yet neither can the river be understood
to be, or can be called, the spring, nor the spring the river, and yet
he who has seen the river has seen the spring also? Exercise yourself
first in explaining these, and explain, if you are able, things which
you have under your hands; and then you may come to loftier matters. Do
not think, however, that I would have you ascend all at once from the
earth above the heavens: I would first, with your leave, draw your
attention to this firmament which our eyes behold, and ask you to
explain, if you can, the nature of this visible luminary,—how that
celestial fire generates from itself the brightness of light, how it
also produces heat; and though these are three in reality, how they are
yet one in substance. And if you are capable of investigating each of
these, even then you must acknowledge that the mystery of the Divine
generation is by so much the more diverse and the more transcendent as
the Creator is more powerful than the creatures, as the artificer is
more excellent than his work, as He who ever is more noble than that
which had its beginning out of nothing.

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p5"></span>That God then is the Father of His only
Son our Lord is to be believed, not discussed; for it is not lawful for
a servant to dispute about the nativity of his lord. The Father hath
borne witness from heaven, saying, <span
id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258) “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I
am well pleased: hear Him.” The Father saith that He is His Son and bids
us hear Him. The Son saith, “He who seeth Me seeth the Father
also,” <span id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) and “I and the Father
are one,” <span id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) and “I came forth
from God and am come into the world.” <span
id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) Where is the man who can thrust
himself as a disputant between these words of Father and Son, who can
divide the Godhead, separate its volition, break asunder the substance,
cut the spirit in parts, and deny that what the Truth speaks is true?
God then is a true Father as the Father of the Truth, not begetting
extrinsically, but generating the Son from that which Himself is; that
is, as the All-wise He generates Wisdom, as the Just Justice, as the
Everlasting the Everlasting, as the Immortal Immortality, as the
Invisible the Invisible; because He is Light, He generates Brightness,
because He is Mind, He generates the Word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[544:3259](2030853.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="vi.xiii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p6"></span> <span id="vi.xiii.v-p6.1"></span>[Matt.
xvii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xiii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[544:3260](2030853.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="vi.xiii.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p7"></span> <span id="vi.xiii.v-p7.1"></span>[John
xiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xiii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[544:3261](2030853.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="vi.xiii.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p8"></span> <span id="vi.xiii.v-p8.1"></span>[John
x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="vi.xiii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[544:3262](2030853.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="vi.xiii.v-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.v-p9"></span> <span id="vi.xiii.v-p9.1"></span>[John
xvi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xiii.v-p9.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](2030854)
