[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030126)  [Next](2030128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xxi-p2.1"></span>At</span> Constantinople the Arians
filled a boat with pious presbyters and drove her without ballast out to
sea, putting some of their own men on another craft with orders to set
the presbyters boat on fire. So, fighting at the same time against both
sea and flames, at last they were delivered to the deep, and won the
martyrs crown.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xxi-p3"></span>At Antioch Valens spent a
considerable time, and gave complete license to all who, under cover of
the Christian name, pagans, Jews and the rest, preached doctrines
contrary to those of the gospel. The slaves of this error even went so
far as to perform pagan rites, and thus the deceitful fire which, after
Julian, had been quenched by Jovian, was now rekindled by permission of
Valens. The rites of Jews, of Dionysus, and of Demeter were now no
longer performed in a corner, as they would be in a pious reign, but by
revellers running wild in the forum. Valens was a foe to none but them
that held the apostolic doctrine. First he drove them from their
churches, the illustrious Jovian having given them also the new built
church. And when they assembled close up to the mountain cliff to honour
their Master in hymns, and enjoy the word of God, putting up with all
the assaults of the weather, now of rain, now of snow and cold, and now
of violent heat, they were not even suffered this poor protection, and
troops were sent to scatter them far and wide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Flavianus and Diodorus gathered the church of the orthodox in
Antioch.](2030128)
