[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030173)  [Next](2030175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV</span>.—*Of the events
which happened on account of Chrysostom*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>At</span> this part of my history I
know not what sentiments to entertain; wishful as I am to relate the
wrong inflicted on Chrysostom, I yet regard in other respects the high
character of those who wronged him. I shall therefore do my best to
conceal even their names. <span id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) These
persons had different reasons for their hostility, and were unwilling to
contemplate his brilliant virtue. They found certain wretches who
accused him, and, perceiving the openness of the calumny, held a meeting
at a distance from the city and pronounced their sentence. <span
id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p8"></span>The emperor, who had confidence in
the clergy, ordered him to be banished. So Chrysostom, without having
heard the charges brought against him, or brought forward his <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-Page_154"></span>defence, was forced as though
convicted on the accusations advanced against him to quit
Constantinople, <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) and departed to
Hieron at the mouth of the Euxine, for so the naval station is named.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p10"></span>In the night there was a great
earthquake and the empress <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) was
struck with terror. Envoys were accordingly sent at daybreak to the
banished bishop beseeching him to return without delay to
Constantinople, and avert the peril from the town. After these another
party was sent and yet again others after them and the Bosphorus was
crowded with the couriers. When the faithful people learned what was
going on they covered the mouth of the Propontis with their boats, and
the whole population lighted up waxen torches and came forth to meet
him. For the time indeed his banded foes were scattered. <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p13"></span>But after the interval of a few
months they endeavoured to enact punishment, not for the forged
indictment, but for his taking part in divine service after his
deposition. The bishop represented that he had not pleaded, that he had
not heard the indictment, that he had made no defence, that he had been
condemned in his absence, that he had been exiled by the emperor, and by
the emperor again recalled. Then another Synod met, and his opponents
did not ask for a trial, but persuaded the emperor that the sentence was
lawful and right. Chrysostom was then not merely banished, but relegated
to a petty and lonely town in Armenia of the name of Cucusus. Even from
thence he was removed and deported to Pityus, a place at the extremity
of the Euxine and on the marches of the Roman Empire, in the near
neighbourhood of the wildest savages. But the loving Lord did not suffer
the victorious athlete to be carried off to this islet, for when he had
reached Comana he was removed to the life that knows nor age nor
pain. <span id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p18"></span>The body that had struggled so
bravely was buried by the side of the coffin of the martyred Basiliscus,
for so the martyr had ordained in a dream.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p19"></span>I think it needless to prolong my
narrative by relating how many bishops were expelled from the church on
Chrysostom’s account, and sent to live in the ends of the earth, or how
many ascetic philosophers were involved in the same calamities, and all
the more because I think it needful to curtail these hideous details,
and to throw a veil over the ill deeds of men of the same faith as our
own. Punishment however did fall on most of the guilty, and their
sufferings were a means of good to the rest. This great wrong was
regarded with special detestation by the bishops of Europe, who
separated themselves from communion with the guilty parties. In this
action they were joined by all the bishops of Illyria. In the East most
of the cities shrank from participation in the wrong, but did not make a
rent in the body of the church.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p20"></span>On the death of the great teacher
of the world, the bishops of the West refused to embrace the communion
of the bishops of Egypt, of the East, of the Bosphorus, and in Thrace,
until the name of that holy man had been inserted among those of
deceased bishops. Arsacius his immediate successor they declined to
acknowledge, but Atticus the successor of Arsacius, after he had
frequently solicited the boon of peace, was after a time received when
he had inserted the name in the roll. <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_923"></span>[153:924](2030174.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p3"></span> The foes of Chrysostom were

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p4"></span>(i) The empress Eudoxia, jealous of
his power;

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p5"></span>(ii) The great ladies on whose
toilettes of artifice and extravagant licentiousness he had poured his
scorn; among them being Marsa, Castricia, and Eugraphia;

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p6"></span>(iii) The baser clergy whom his
simplicity of life shamed, notably Acacius of Berœa, whose hostility is
traced by Palladius to the meagre hospitality of the archiepiscopal
palace at Constantinople, when the hungry guest exclaimed “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>γὼ αὐτῷ ἀρτύω
χυτραν</span>”—“I’ll pepper a pot for him!” (Pall. 49.) and Theophilus
of Alexandria, who had never forgiven his elevation to the see, and
Gerontius of Nicomedia whom he had deposed.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[153:925](2030174.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p7"></span> i.e. at the suburb of Chalcedon
known as “the Oak.” The charges included his calling the Empress
Jezebel, and eating a lozenge after the Holy Communion. Pallad. 66.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[154:926](2030174.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p9"></span> For three days the people
withstood his removal. At last he slipped out by a postern, and, when a
nod would have roused rebellion, submitted to exile. But he was only
deported a very little way.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[154:927](2030174.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p11"></span> Eudoxia was the daughter of
Banto, a Frankish general. Philostorgius (xi. 6), says that she “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>οὐ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ
ἀνδρὸς διέκειτο νωθείαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνῆν αὐτῇ τοῦ βαρβαρικοῦ θράσους οὐκ
ὀλίγον</span>.”

<span id="fn_927"></span>[154:928](2030174.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p12"></span> The proceedings of “the Oak” were
declared null and void, and the bishop was formally reinstated. 403.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[154:929](2030174.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p14"></span> Theodoret omits the second
offence to Eudoxia—his invectives on the dedication of her silver statue
in front of St. Sophia in Sept. 403. (Soc. vi. 18. Soz. viii. 20) “Once
again Herodias runs wild; once again she dances; once again she is in a
hurry to get the head of John on a charger.” Or does the description of
Herodias, and not Salome, as dancing, indicate that the calumnious
sentence was not really uttered by Chrysostom, but said to have been
uttered by informers whose knowledge of the Gospels was incomplete?

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p15"></span>The discourse *“in decollationem
Baptistæ Joannis”* is in Migne Vol. viii. 485, but it is generally
rejected as spurious.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p16"></span>The circumstances of the
deposition will be found in Palladius, and in Chrysostom’s Ep. ad
Innocent. The edict was issued June 5, 404. Cucusus (cf. p. ii. 4) is on
the borders of Cilicia and Armenia Minor. Gibbon says the three years
spent here were the “most glorious of his life,” so great was the
influence he wielded.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p17"></span>In the winter of 405 he was driven
with other fugitives from Cucusus through fear of Isaurian banditti, and
fled some 60 miles to Arabissus. Early in 406 he returned. Eudoxia was
dead (†Oct. 4, 404) but other enemies were impatient at the old man’s
resistance to hardship. An Edict was procured transferring the exile to
Pityus, in the N.E. corner of the Black Sea (now Soukoum in
Transcaucasia) but Chrysostom’s strength was unequal to the cruel
hardships of the journey. Some five miles from Comana in Pontus (Tokat),
clothed in white robes, he expired in the chapel of the martyred bishop
Basiliskus, Sept. 14, 407. Basiliskus was martyred in 312.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[154:930](2030174.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxiv-p21"></span> Atticus (Bp. of Constantinople
405–426) was forced by fear alike of the mob and the Emperor to consent
to the restitution. His letters to Peter and Ædesius, deacon of Cyril of
Alexandria, and Cyril’s reply, (Niceph. xiv. 26–27) are interesting.
Cyril “would as soon put the name of Judas on the rolls as that of
Chrysostom.” Dict. Christ. Biog. i. 209.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Alexander, bishop of Antioch.](2030175)
