[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030725)  [Next](2030727) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-p1"></span> 37. This action is yours, my
brother, yours alone. It is clear that no one in the church has been
your companion or confederate in it, but only that Barabbas whom you
mention so frequently. What other spirit than that of the Jews would
dare to tamper with the records of the church which have been handed
down from the Apostles? It is they, my brother, you who were most dear
to me before you were taken captive by the Jews, it is they who are
hurrying you into this abyss of evil. It is their doing that those books
of yours are put forth in which you brand your Christian brethren, not
sparing even the martyrs, and heap up accusations speakable and
unspeakable against Christians of every degree, and mar our peace, and
cause a scandal to the church. It is they who cause you to pass sentence
upon yourself and your own writings as upon words which you once spoke
as a Christian. We all of us have become worthless in your eyes, while
they and their evil acts are all your delight. If you had but listened
to Paul where he says in his Epistle: <span
id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991) “If any brother be overtaken in a
fault ye who are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness,” you would never have let your passions swell up so as
altogether to break through the order of our spiritual discipline. <span
id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-Page_478"></span>Suppose that I had written something
which was injurious to you; suppose that I had done some injustice to
you a man of the highest eloquence, who were my brother and my brother
presbyter, whom also I had pronounced worthy of imitation in your method
of translation: even so, this was the first complaint which you had
received of any injury on my part since friendship had been restored
between us, and that with difficulty and much trouble. But suppose that
you had reason to be offended at the fact that, in my translation of
Origen, I passed over some things which appeared to me unedifying in
point of doctrine—though in this I only did what you had done. Possibly
I was deserving of blame and correction for this. You say that some of
the brethren sent letters to you demanding that the faults of the
translator should be pointed out. What then did you do, you who are a
man of spiritual attainments? What a model, what an example of conduct
in such matters is this which you have given! You not only blazen forth
the shame of your brother’s nakedness to those who are without, but you
yourself tear away the covering of his nakedness. Suppose even that what
I did was not done as you had done it, suppose that, through some access
of drunkenness creeping unawares upon me, I had laid bare my own shame
as the Patriarch did; would it have been a curse which you would have
incurred if you had walked backward and made your reply like a soft
cloak to cover my reproach, if the letter of the brother who was
wide-awake had veiled the brother who lay exposed through his own
drowsiness in writing?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[477:2992](2030726.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-p2.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlii-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Jerome should have replied to Pammachius.](2030727)
