[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030726)  [Next](2030728) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xliii-p1"></span> 38. But you will say, It was
impossible for me to reply otherwise than I did. The letter which I
received was such that, if I had not replied and retranslated literally
the books which you had translated paraphrastically, I should myself
have been thought to be a follower of Origen. I will not at present say
anything as to the character of that letter, except that it bears the
name of a man of high rank, Pammachius: but I ask, would there have been
anything uncourteous in such a reply as this: “My brothers we ought not
readily to judge of other men’s works. You remember what you did when I
had sent my books against Jovinian to Rome, <span
id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992) and when some persons understood
them in a different sense from that in which, if my memory serves me, I
had composed them. They were read by a great many people, and almost
every one was offended by them, you yourself, as was believed, amongst
them. Did you not on that occasion withdraw from circulation the copies
which had been exposed to sale publicly in the forum, and send them, not
to some one else, but to me, at the same time pointing out the grounds
on which you thought so many had been offended? And I, as you remember,
wrote an Apology in new terms, so as to give a sounder meaning, as far
as I could, to expressions to which a different sense had been
attributed. Well, it is but fair that as we would that men should do to
us so we should do to them: and therefore, as you sent me back my books
for correction, so do now with these books: send them back to their
author, and hint to him what you think blameable in them, so that, if in
anything he has gone wrong, he may correct it. Besides, though I have
exercised my talents on many subjects, and laboured out many works, this
is almost the first work which he has attempted, and possibly even this
he has done under compulsion, so that it is not strange if he has not
gone quite straight at first. We should not seize upon opportunities for
disparaging men who are Christians, but seek their advantage by
correcting what they have done wrong.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[478:2993](2030727.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xliii-p2"></span> See Jerome’s letter to Pammachius
(Letter xlviii) describing his friend’s remonstrance, and defending
himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Books against Jovinian.](2030728)
