[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce01)  [Next](sce03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# KIRK'S

# SECRET COMMONWEALTH.

## INTRODUCTION.

### 1. THE HISTORY OF THE BOOK AND AUTHOR.

THE bibliography of the following little tract is extremely obscure. The
title-page of the edition of 1815, which we reproduce, gives the date as
1691. Sir Walter Scott says in his *Demonology and Witchcraft*, (1830,
p. 163, note), "It was printed with the author's name in 1691, and
reprinted, in 1815, for Longman & Co." But was there really a printed
edition of 1691? Scott says that he never met with an example. Research
in our great libraries has discovered none, and there is none save that
of 1815 at Abbotsford. The reprint, of one hundred copies, was made, as
it states, from no printed text, but from "a manuscript copy preserved
in the Advocates' Library." On page 45 of the edition of 1815,

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

at the end of the comments on Lord Tarbott's Letters, there is a "Note
by the Transcriber"--that is, the person who wrote out the manuscript in
the Advocates' Library: "See the rest in a little manuscript belonging
to Coline Kirk." Now Coline or Colin Kirk, Writer to the Signet, was the
son of the Rev. Mr. Kirk, author of the tract. If the son had his
father's book only in manuscript, it seems very probable that it was not
printed in 1691; that the title-page is only the title-page of a
manuscript. Till some printed text of 1691 is discovered, we may doubt,
then, whether the hundred copies published in 1815, and now somewhat
rare, be not the original printed edition. The editor has a copy of
1815, but it is the only one which he has met with for sale.

The Rev. Robert Kirk, the author of *The Secret Commonwealth*, was a
student of theology at St. Andrews: his Master's degree, however, he
took at Edinburgh. He was (and this is notable) the youngest and
*seventh* son of Mr. James Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, the place
familiar to all readers of *Rob Roy*. As a seventh son, he was, no
doubt, specially gifted, and in *The Secret Commonwealth* he lays some
stress on

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

the mystic privileges of such birth. There may be "some secret virtue in
the womb of the parent, which increaseth until the seventh son be borne,
and decreaseth by the same degree afterwards." It would not surprise us
if Mr. Kirk, no less than the Rev. Robert Blair of St. Andrews
(1650-60), could heal scrofula by the touch, like royal persons--Charles
III. in Italy, for example. As is well known to all, the House of
Brunswick has no such powers. However this may have been, Mr. Kirk was
probably drawn, by his seventh sonship, to a more careful study of
psychical phenomena than most of his brethren bestowed. Little is known
of his life. He was minister originally of Balquidder, whence, in 1685,
he was transferred to Aberfoyle. This was no Covenanting district, and
there is no bigotry in Mr. Kirk's dissertation. He was employed on an
"Irish" translation of the Bible, and he published a Psalter in Gaelic
(1684). He married, first, Isobel, daughter of Sir Colin Campbell of
Mochester, who died in 1680, and, secondly, the daughter of Campbell of
Fordy: this lady survived him. From his connection with Campbells, we
may misdoubt him for a Whig. By his first wife he

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

had a son, Colin Kirk, W.S.; by his second wife, a son who was minister
of Dornoch. He died (if he did die, which is disputed) in 1692, aged
about fifty-one; his tomb was inscribed--

ROBERTUS KIRK, A.M.  
Linguæ Hiberniæ Lumen.

The tomb, in Scott's time, was to be seen in the cast end of the
churchyard of Aberfoyle; but the ashes of Mr. Kirk *are not there*. His
successor, the Rev. Dr. Grahame, in his *Sketches of Picturesque
Scenery*, informs us that, as Mr. Kirk was walking on a *dun-shi*, or
fairy-hill, in his neighbourhood, he sunk down in a swoon, which was
taken for death. " After the ceremony of a seeming funeral," writes
Scott (*op. cit.*, p. 105), "the form of the Rev. Robert Kirk appeared
to a relation, and commanded him to go to Grahame of Duchray. 'Say to
Duchray, who is my cousin as well as your own, that I am not dead, but a
captive in Fairyland; and only one chance remains for my liberation.
When the posthumous child, of which my wife has been delivered since my
disappearance, shall be brought to baptism, I will appear in the room,
when, if Duchray shall throw over my

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

head the knife or dirk which he holds in his hand, I may be restored to
society; but if this is neglected, I am lost for ever.'" True to his
tryst, Mr. Kirk did appear at the christening and "was visibly seen;"
but Duchray was so astonished that he did not throw his dirk over the
head of the appearance, and to society Mr. Kirk has not yet been
restored. This is extremely to be regretted, as he could now add matter
of much importance to his treatise. Neither history nor tradition has
more to tell about Mr. Robert Kirk, who seems to have been a man of good
family, a student, and, as his book shows, an innocent and learned
person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Secret Commonwealth](sce03)
