[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce24)  [Next](sce26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

15\. AMONG other Inƒtances of undoubted Verity, proving in theƒe the
Being of ƒuch aerial People, or Species of Creatures not vulgarly known,
I add the ƒubƒequent Relations, ƒome whereof I have from my Acquaintance
with the Actors and Patients, and the Reƒt from the Eye-witneƒƒes to the
Matter of Fact. The firƒt whereof ƒhall be of the Woman taken out of her
Child-bed, and having a lingring Image of her ƒubƒtituted Bodie in her
Roome, which Reƒemblance decay'd, dy'd, and was bur'd. But the Perƒon
ƒtollen returning to her Huƒband after two Years Space, he being
convinced by many undenyable Tokens that ƒhe

was

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

was his former Wyfe, admitted her Home, and had diverƒe Children by her.
Among other Reports ƒhe gave her Huƒband, this was one: That ƒhe
perceived litle what they did in the ƒpacious Houƒe ƒhe lodg'd in,
untill ƒhe anointed one of her Eyes with a certain Unction that was by
her; which they perceaving to have acqainted her with their Actions,
they fain'd her blind of that Eye with a Puff of their Breath. She found
the Place full of Light, without any Fountain or Lamp from whence it did
ƒpring. This Perƒon lived in the Countrey nixt to that of my laƒt
Reƒidence, and might furniƒh Matter of Diƒpute amongƒt Caƒuiƒts, whither
if her Huƒband had been mary'd in the Interim of her two Years Abƒence,
he was oblidged to divorƒe from the ƒecond Spouƒe at the Return of the
firƒt. There is ane Airt, appearingly without Superƒtition, for
recovering of ƒuch as are ƒtolen, but think it ƒuperfluous to inƒert it.

I SAW a Woman of fourtie Years of Age, and examined her (having another
Clergie Man in my Companie) about a Report that paƒt of

her

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

her long faƒting, \[*her Name is not intyre*.\] <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) It was told by them of the Houƒe, as well
as her ƒelfe, that ƒhe tooke verie little or no Food for ƒeverall Years
paƒt; that ƒhe tarried in the Fields over Night, ƒaw and converƒed with
a People ƒhe knew not, having wandered in ƒeeking of her Sheep, and
ƒleep't upon a Hillock, and finding her ƒelf tranƒported to another
Place before Day. The Woman had a Child ƒince that Time, and is ƒtill
prettie melanchollyous and ƒilent, hardly ever ƒeen to laugh. Her
natural Heat and radical Moiƒture ƒeem to be equally balanced, lyke ane
unextinguiƒhed Lamp, and going in a Circle, not unlike to the faint Lyfe
of Bees, and ƒome Sort of Birds, that ƒleep all the Winter over, and
revive in the Spring.

IT is uƒuall in all magicall Airts to have the Candidates prepoƒƒeƒƒit
with a Believe of their Tutor's Skill, and Ability to perform their
Feats, and act their jugling Pranks and Legerdemain; but a Perƒon called
Stewart, poƒƒeƒƒed with a prejudice at that was ƒpoken of the 2d Sight,

and

 

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and living near to my Houƒe, was ƒoe put to it by a Seer, before many
Witneƒƒes, that he loƒt his Speech and Power of his Legs, and breathing
exceƒƒively, as if expyring, becauƒe of the many fearfull Wights that
appeared to him. The Companie were forced to carrie him into the Houƒe.

IT is notoriouƒly known what in Killin, within Perthƒhire, fell
tragically out with a Yeoman that liv'd hard by, who coming into a
Companie within ane Ale-houƒe, where a Seer ƒat at Table, that at the
Sight of the Intrant Neighbour, the Seer ƒtarting, roƒe to go out of the
Hous; and being aƒked the Reaƒon of his haƒt, told that the intrant Man
ƒhould die within two Days; at which News the named Intrant ƒlabb'd the
Seer, and was himƒelf executed two Days after for the Fact.

A MINISTER, verie intelligent, but miƒbelieving all ƒuch Sights as were
not ordinar, chanceing to be in a narrow Lane with a Seer, who
perceaving a Wight of a known Viƒage furioƒlie to encounter them, the
Seer deƒired the Miniƒter to turn out of the Way; who ƒcorning his

Reaƒon

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Reaƒon, and holding him ƒelfe in the Path with
them, when the Seer was going haƒtily out of the Way, they were both
violently caƒt a ƒide to a good Diƒtance, and the Fall made them lame
for all their Lyfe. A little after the Miniƒter was carried Home, one
came to tol the Bell for the Death of the Man whoƒe Repreƒentation met
them in the narrow Path ƒome Halfe ane Hour before.

ANOTHER Example is: A Seer in Kintyre, in Scotland, ƒitting at Table
with diverƒe others, ƒuddenly did caƒt his Head aƒide. The Companie
aƒking him why he did it, he anƒwered, that ƒuch a Friend of his, by
Name, then in Ireland, threatened immediately to caƒt a Diƒhfull of
Butter in his Face. The Men wrote down the Day and Hour, and ƒent to the
Gentleman to know the Truth; which Deed the Gentleman declared he did at
that verie Time, for he knew that his Friend was a Seer, and would make
ƒport with it. The Men that were preƒent, and examined the Matter
exactly, told me this Story; and with all, that a Seer would with all
his Opticks perceive no other Object ƒo readily as this, at ƒuch a
Diƒtance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35:1](sce25.htm#fr_35) Thus in the manuscript,
which is only a Transcript of Mr. Kirk's Original. Perhaps M'Intyre?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Succint Accompt Of My Lord Tarbott's Relations](sce26)
