[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce23)  [Next](sce25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

14\. A WOMAN (it ƒeems ane Exception from the generall Rule,)
ƒingularlie wiƒe in theƒe Matters of Foirƒight, living in Colaƒnach, ane
Iƒle of the Hebrides, (in the Time of the Marqueƒs of Montroƒe his Wars
with the States in Scotland,) being notorious among many; and ƒo
examined by ƒome that violently ƒeazed that Iƒle, if ƒhe ƒaw them coming
or not? She ƒaid, ƒhe ƒaw them coming many Hours before they came in
View of the Iƒle. But earneƒtly looking, ƒhe ƒome times took them for
Enemyes, ƒometime for Friends; and morover they look't as if they went
from the Iƒle, not as Men approaching it, which made her not put the
Inhabitants on their Guard. The Matter was, that the Barge wherein the
Enemie ƒailed, was a little befoir taken from the Inhabitants of that
fame Iƒle, and the Men had their Backs towards the Iƒle, when they were
plying the oares towards it. Thus this old Scout and Delphian Oracle was
at leaƒt deceived, and did deceave. Being aƒked who gave her ƒuch Sights

and

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and Warnings, ƒhe ƒaid, that as ƒoon as ƒhe ƒet three Croƒƒes of Straw
upon the Palm of her Hand, a great ugly Beaƒt ƒprang out of the Earth
neer her, and flew in the Air. If what ƒhe enquired had Succeƒs
according to her Wiƒh, the Beaft would deƒcend calmly, and lick up the
Croƒƒes. If it would not ƒucceid, the Beaft would furiouƒly thruƒt her
and the Croƒƒes over on the Ground, and ƒo vaniƒh to his Place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](sce25)
