[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml01)  [Next](yml03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# Introduction

NO THOROUGH collection or study has been made of the folk traditions of
the Yaquis. Only about a score of Yaqui stories are to be found in
published form. Alfonso Fabila has printed five stories and three songs
(Fabila 1940: 202-205, 212-243). Spicer reviews a half-dozen stories and
notes the existence of animal tales among the Yaquis of Arizona (Spicer
1940b: 197, 240-241, 254, 261-262). Beals has published a few Yaqui
traditions about serpents (Beals 1933: 78-81) and thirteen myths and
tales identified as Cahita (Beals 1945: 215-224). A brief resume of
Yaqui tradition by one of their leaders has been printed in an appendix
to a work by Holden, *et al* (1936: 216-231). In manuscript form,
Johnson has recorded the Spanish and Yaqui texts of a small, well
rounded collection of stories (Johnson 1940) and Wilder has contributed
a collection and study of the Yaqui deer-songs from Pascua village,
Arizona (Wilder 1940).

It is known that Yaqui society has been influenced strongly by Spanish
and Mexican culture, judging from indications in historical records and
from studies of the modern Yaquis.

In making this collection of stories it was the objective to illustrate
two things: (1) the nature of the folk literature of the Yaquis and (2)
the influences which successive foreign contacts have exerted upon Yaqui
folklore.

Collections were made in Potam, Sonora from February through April of
1942 and during regular visits to Pascua and Barrio Libre near Tucson,
Arizona from May to September of the same year. The notes on the
narrators refer to this period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cultural Setting](yml03.md)
