[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml18)  [Next](yml20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### Five Friends of Takochai

THERE lived in the land of the Yaqui an Indian called Teta Hiapsi and he
was very industrious. He enjoyed building good things. For this reason,
he talked one day with a large group of Yaquis to see if they would work
for him if he paid them a fair salary. In those days, there were no
dollars, or half-dollars. Instead, the Yaquis used for money some silver
discs, lacking any stamp, discs about four inches in diameter and an
inch thick. They called them *te'okita*, which means pure silver. They
also used similar discs of gold which they called *sawai tomi*, which is
the same as saying yellow money.

All of the Indians wanted to work with Teta Hiapsi, so he put them to
work cutting sticks and branches to make a *serco*, or fence. This
*serco* was twenty-four kilometers in circumference and in its center, a
little creek ran all the time. In this corral there were lions, bears,
tigers, and snakes of many sizes. In fact, Teta Hiapsi's *serco*
surrounded an immense forest containing in it a number of water-holes.

Thus Teta Hiapsi considered himself very rich indeed. Also he had a
cave, quite wide and deep, full of *te'okita* and *sawai tomi*. From it
he paid his workers every Saturday.

One Saturday arrived and he paid all of his workers except one Yaqui
whose name was Takochai. To Takochai he said, "You didn't get any money.
So you may do anything you want to me to get even." Teta Hiapsi was a
very curious man. He enjoyed jokes and pranks, and he knew that Takochai
was a clever trickster. He knew that something would happen.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Well, Takochai went away to think of something to do to Teta Hiapsi to
get even.

To a little stream which lies west of Cumuripa among some low hills, to
a little valley fertile and picturesque, Takochai took his bow and
arrows. In this place he met a big Indian. This Indian was so strong
that to amuse himself he walked along tearing up mesquite trees by the
roots as if they were onions. He would give one jerk and the tree with
all its root would come up and he would toss it off into the distance.
He did the same with sahuaros. This Yaqui was very strong.

Takochai came up to him and said, "What are you doing?"

"Oh, I'm just pulling up these little sticks," answered the Indian, Hoso
Hoseli.

"May I go along with you?" asked Takochai.

"Why yes, it would give me pleasure," said Hoso Hoseli, and the two
walked on a little distance together. It was late and they stopped to
sleep under a tree.

The next day they took to the road again. They had only traveled a
little distance when they met a Yaqui who was pointing an arrow at a
mountain range which was so far away that it could hardly be seen.

"What are you doing?" asked Takochai.

"I wanted to kill a deer that was over there in those mountains, but you
disturbed me and the deer has gone."

"Oh, but how distant are those mountains!" exclaimed Takochai. "They are
barely visible."

"More distant deer have I killed," responded the hunter whose name was
Mekkata'obia, which

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

means Light that Illumines the Distance. Takochai invited Mekkata'obia
to come along with him and Hoso Hoseli, and the three adventurers went
off.

They soon met a tall, thin Indian. He was standing on one foot holding a
rope made of hide and tying the other leg which was doubled up. They
saluted him and asked, "What are you doing, tying up your leg like
that?"

He answered, "I am tying up this leg so I won't walk so fast. With two
legs I run as fast as the wind, and with one tied I can walk about as
fast as a light breeze." This Yaqui was called Yuku Beo'oti, or
Lightning. Takochai and Hoso Hoseli and Mekkata'obia invited Yuku
Beo'oti to accompany them, and the four went on together. They went on
until it was late and they stopped to sleep.

The next day they again took to the road. After walking only a short
distance they met a very short little Yaqui who wore a skin cap. One
side of this cap was decorated with red feathers and the other side with
green ones. When he put it on with the red feathers to the right the
weather became hot, and when he put it on with the green feathers to the
right it became cold. He kept making this change every minute, never
stopping. This little fellow was called Tasa'a Bali, which means Cool
Summer. He is called this because he made heat and cold by moving his
headdress of two colors.

The four companions invited Tasa'a Bali to come along with them, and now
there were five.

The next day they encountered a man on top of a little hill. He stood
with his feet upon a rock and one hand against a tree. With the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

other hand he stopped up one of his nostrils. Through the other nostril
he blew mightily, a volcano of air. The travelers came up to him and
asked him what he was doing.

The man on the hill said that over on the other side of the green monte
were many Yaquis milling earth and rock to take out the gold. "I make
the mills run by blowing with this nostril. There are four mills for the
stone and three to draw up water. When I stop blowing, those windmills
stop. Right now while I am chatting, they are quiet."

His name was Hekkateni'a.

Takochai and his companions invited this great blower to come along with
them.

So the six companions all went on to the *serco* of Teta Hiapsi.

Takochai greeted Teta Hiapsi and said, "I have come to bet with you,
Teta Hiapsi, to win from you all that you own."

And Teta [Hiapsi](errata.htm#2.md) agreed to run a race.

Now, Teta Hiapsi had a daughter who was something of a witch woman. It
was known that she knew how to fly like a bird. But Takochai was now the
chief of five clever men.

Many Indians, men and women and boys, gathered to see the race between
the witch and the swiftest of the companions, Yuku Beo'oti. Since
Takochai had no money, he put up his life against this witch whose name
was Sochik, meaning Bat.

The race was to be from *ili bakam* to *bemela ba'am*, such a great
distance that a man on a good horse traveling at a run does not arrive
there in one long summer day.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

The people gathered and the racers were ready. Someone gave the shout to
start. Sochik flew off through the air as fast as she could, and Yuku
Beo'oti disappeared like the wind. He soon arrived at *bemela ba'am*,
filled his canteen with water and started back. This was the agreement.
He who should arrive there and fill his canteen and be the first back in
*ili bakam* was to win the race.

When Yuku Beo'oti was about half way back, he lay down to sleep, putting
his head on a stump.

Sochik had hardly started for *bemela ba'am*. When she came upon Yuku
Beo'oti and saw him sleeping, she threw the water out of his canteen and
went on her way toward the waterhole. Then Mekkata'obia, from the great
distance saw that the water had been thrown out and he shot an arrow
into the tree trunk that served Yuku Beo'oti as a pillow. Yuku Beo'oti
awoke and noticed that his water had been thrown out. Taking his
canteen, he ran past Sochik to the waterhole, filled it, and returned to
*ili bakam* with the water. Thus Yuku Beo'oti won the race and Sochik
lost, for she arrived very late.

"I have lost," said Teta Hiapsi pleasantly. And he gave Takochai half of
a cave full of silver and gold. "Now, in order for you to win from me
all that I own, you and your men must sleep inside of that oven all
night."

The oven was big and square. It was used to cook large animals in. There
were no windows in it. It was on top of four big flat stones.

Takochai looked at the oven and said, "Very well, we shall all sleep
there. And tomorrow you must give me all of. your money and your well
and your animals."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Takochai and his five companions entered the oven, and Teta Hiapsi, with
the help of other Indians, covered it. They put firewood below and above
and lit the fire and it burned all night.

When the men inside began to feel the heat, Tasa'a Bali put his cap on
with the green side to the right and they felt no more heat.

Dawn came and Teta Hiapsi thought that they must be well cooked. But
when he opened the door they all stepped out, alive and shivering from
cold.

Thus Teta Hiapsi had to give all of the gold and silver in his cave to
Takochai. The companions made a huge purse of many skins. In it they put
the money and Hoso Hoseli tossed it up on his shoulders as if it were
nothing. He was very strong, Hoso Hoseli, that man who pulls up mesquite
trees.

"Now, let us go," said Takochai to his companions. "We will come back
for the rest later." And they marched away in triumph.

Teta Hiapsi then gathered together some six hundred Yaquis to follow and
kill Takochai and his men. But Mekkata'obia, who could see far,
discovered them. The friends stopped at the foot of a little hill above
a large plain.

When the Yaquis of Teta Hiapsi came across the plain, Takochai ordered
Hekkateni'a, he of the great wind, to blow at them. Hekkateni'a covered
one nostril and blew so strongly that the Yaquis were blown high into
the air, very high. Then he stopped blowing and the Yaquis fell to the
earth like stones. Here ends this tale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Man Who Became a Buzzard](yml20.md)
