[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml10)  [Next](yml12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### When Badger Named the Sun

<span id="img_03400"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/03400.jpg) |

AT THE BEGINNING of the era of the Surem, nobody knew the name of the
sun and they wanted a name for it. For this reason they held a council
on the bank of the Surem river. Everyone gave his opinion but no name
was found for the sun. Every day they studied the matter. They did not
know if it were man or woman and so they couldn't decide whether it
would be best to give it a male or a female name. The Surem could not
agree. They finally invited all the animals of the world to come to a
council.

Once they were all present, before the sun came up, at the edge of the
river, they made a great group of men and animals. When the sun
appeared, a badger came out of a hole where he lived in the ground.

The badger came to the council and said in a strong voice, "The sun
being a man, comes out of a hole in the earth as I do." Speaking thus,
he ran away.

Everyone ran after him, wishing to pay him honor for his great
intelligence. They wanted to give a fiesta for him and to pay him well
with abundant food.

But the badger ran away and went into his hole and would not come out.
He thought they wanted to punish him. From that time on the badger
rarely goes out on the plains. He is still afraid that they might punish
him for something.

Two other versions of this incident were encountered. In one, the
tortilla fish knew the name of the sun; in another it was the rooster
who knew. The Huichol Indians have a similar story in which the turkey
names the sun (Zingg 1938: 517).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mochomo](yml12.md)
