[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml25)  [Next](yml27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span id="img_08100"></span> ![](img/08100.jpg)

### The Big Bird

THIS is Yaqui belief.

A great bird lived on the hill of Otam Kawi. Every morning he would fly
out in search of food. He caught men, women and little children and
carried them back to Otam Kawi to eat. In those days the people always
were watchful. They couldn't have fiestas because when they had
pascolas, always two or three of the people were carried away by the big
bird. The Yaquis lived in *hu'ukis*, little houses made of mud and
branches that looked like the house of a pack-rat, because they were
afraid of the great bird.

There was an old man who earned his livelihood by hunting deer. He did
nothing else. He had only one daughter. She was big with a child

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

who was soon to be born, when the bird carried away her husband. The old
hunter, his wife and the daughter only remained, and the daughter
pregnant. The baby came in the afternoon.

It was a man child that the girl had. And the old grandfather continued
hunting deer.

About a year later the grandmother went out early one morning to bring
in water. The bird came by and carried her away. So the grandfather and
the girl went on bringing up the child.

The next year the bird carried away the mother, and the grandfather
brought the child up on cow's milk. There were cows in those days, but
no animals of the claw.

When the little boy was old enough to walk, he went everywhere with his
grandfather. He walked all over the monte hunting. This little boy never
grew very big. When he was ten, he was still very small.

One afternoon he was seated outside of the house and he said, "I have no
mother."

"Ah," said the grandfather, "The big bird carried her away. First he
took your father, then your grandmother, then your mother."

"Where is that bird? I am going to grow up and kill that bird."

The old man laughed.

When the boy was older, his grandfather made him a bow and some arrows,
and every day he went out practicing. He became very strong. But he was
still small. When he was fifteen years old, he measured no more than
three and a half feet in stature. He went everywhere with the old
deer-hunter, his grandfather.

One day the boy said, "I am going to hunt out

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

that bird. I am angry." When he was still not full-grown, he went about
alone, walking through the monte and looking up into the sky.

There is a level plain east of Potam called *maretabo'oka'apo*. There
the little boy walked. He had been hunting for three days. He carried
many arrows in his quiver of javelina hide. Then he saw the bird.
Quickly he jumped into a hole. The big bird sat down in a mesquite tree,
waiting for him to come out of the hole. The boy stayed there all day
long, watching the big bird in the mesquite tree. He saw everything; the
size, the colors of the feathers, the big eyes, and all. At night he
went farther back in the hole and fell asleep. Late at night he awoke.
The bird had gone with the coming of night.

Three days later, the boy returned to his home, very late. His
grandfather was not there. The boy carried two dark sticks on which he
had placed many pitahayas. He hung them near the door where his
grandfather would enter. The boy was inside cooking deer meat when the
old man returned and saw the pitahayas.

As he entered he asked, "My son, where have you been?"

"Over in the hills."

"Weren't you afraid of the big bird?"

The little boy said, "I saw him. I saw all of his colored feathers and
his big eyes. I climbed into a hole. I return only to ask permission to
kill the bird. This bow would never kill him. It is too little. I wish
you would make me one of that wood called *kunwo*. And I need another
kind of arrow, made of *wo'i baka*. I will go as soon as you make me
these."

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

"But you are so little. That bird will kill you," said the old man.

Many Yaquis lived in the neighborhood and they all came over that night
to talk. They asked the little boy if he had really seen the big bird.

"Yes, I saw it. It has feathers of many colors, a big body, and long
claws. I am going to make a lot of little animals out of that bird."

"This boy is crazy," said an old man. And many of the elders believed
that he was. "But we'll see," said these older men. And they went back
to their homes.

The old grandfather then made three kinds of pinol. The little boy had
asked him to. He made pinol of corn, of wheat, and of garbanzas. When
the little boy had this and his bow and arrows, he said, "Call the
people together."

All of the people gathered, *kobanaom*, soldiers, women and children.
Everybody came, from all of the eight pueblos. They said, "Are you the
boy who is going to kill the big bird?"

"Are you the man?" laughed a *kobanao*.

"Yes," said the little boy.

Then an old man who lived near to Otam Kawi spoke. "Wait for this bird
near Otam Kawi. He lives there. He only goes away to catch the people.
He always comes back there. You will see there a great pile of bones."

The people bade the boy good-by that night, and he said to his
grandfather, "Now I know I can kill that bird. I will be back in three
days."

Everybody was content. "If you kill him, we can have pascolas again!"

The next day, before dawn, the boy and the grandfather left. At dawn,
they saw the bird

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

fly over. But they were safe below the mesquite trees. They walked
through the monte toward Otam Kawi. "No farther than this," said the
boy, Leave me here. I'm going to find out where the big bird roosts."

All day long the boy waited. At last he saw the bird come in and alight
in a large tree. Night fell and the bird went to sleep. Then the boy
softly approached the tree. There, he knelt and prayed for a long time.
Then he began to measure. He measured twenty-five feet from the foot of
the mesquite tree toward the west. There he made a deep hole, ten feet
deep. When dawn came, he was still hunting poles and branches with which
to cover it.

The bird saw him and was angry. The boy went down into the hole. He
prepared his bow well. The bird came down from the mesquite tree and
went to the cave. The boy was inside, looking out. He shot the big bird
in the eye with an arrow.

The bird flew to the top of the mesquite tree. The boy shot three more
arrows. The bird fell.

For a long time the boy did not come out of the cave. He waited to be
sure that the bird was dead. When he was sure, he came out and went over
to the big dead bird.

He pulled out a handful of its feathers and threw them into the air and
the feathers became owls. With another handful of feathers he made
smaller owls. With four handfuls of feathers, he made four classes of
owls.

In the same way, with other handfuls of feathers, he made birds of every
kind, crows and roadrunners. He threw the feathers and they became birds
of different colors.

When he had finished all of the feathers, he

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

cut off a piece of meat from the dead bird. He threw this and it became
a mountain lion. He cut another piece and made another kind of lion,
which is a little braver. With another he made the *topol*, and with
another, a spotted cat. Thus, the boy made four classes of big cats.
After that he made four smaller kinds of cats.

With more meat the boy made foxes and racoons and also four types of
coyotes. He made snakes and all kinds of animals that have claws.

When all of the meat was gone, only bones remained. He dragged the bones
under the mesquite tree and started home. He arrived there in two days.
He came in very happily, dressed in a suit of feathers he had made from
the bird, and he wore four feathers in his hat, two on either side.

He entered and his grandfather was frightened to see him covered with
blood from the meat of the animal.

The old man was afraid, and he said, "What happened to you?"

"I killed the big bird. Now you may walk about the world."

The old man rushed out of the house. He talked with his neighbors who
ran to advise those in other pueblos, and the people of those pueblos
spread the news to others.

People came from all the eight pueblos. They still walked at night as
before, because they didn't believe the big bird was dead. The governor
came, and when all of the people were gathered the old men talked. "You
really did kill it?" they asked.

"Yes, sirs. I made many little animals out of the feathers and the meat.
I made owls of four kinds. I made four kinds of coyotes, four kinds

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of small cats, four kinds of lions, all animals of the claw."

"Well, let us see if this is true. We will send men from each pueblo,
from Potam, from Vicam, from Torim, from Bacum, from Cocorit, Rajum,
Juirivis and Belen to see the proof."

"The bones are there," said the little boy. "If they aren't you may cut
my neck." And he led off on horseback. They all arrived and the boy
showed them the hole he had dug. "From here I shot and hit him in the
eye."

Along the road the people saw many animals, and little birds flying. The
boy talked to the people, saying "These little birds don't do any harm
to us. But those animals I made from the meat of the big bird, you must
take care about those. From today on they are not going to be gentle. We
no longer have danger from above. Now we must take care from below.
These animals aren't much good for food, only for clothing. The birds
are valuable only for their pretty feathers."

The men and the soldiers saw the bones of the big bird, and they went
away contented, and in every pueblo began to make great fiestas. MT

<span id="img_08700"></span> ![](img/08700.jpg)

The Papago and Pima Indians tell of the slaying of a man-eating eagle
which has some aspects in common with this myth (Densmore 1929: 45-54).
The Cochiti also have a story about a cannibal eagle (Benedict 1931:
211).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wars Against the Mexicans](yml27.md)
