[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml23)  [Next](yml25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span id="img_06900"></span> ![](img/06900.jpg)

### The Boy Who Became a King

THREE BOYS decided to leave their mother and father and go away to work.
Their mother made a lunch for each of them and they left. They came to a
place where there were some fig trees; here, they ate lunch. At this
place the road branched three ways. After lunch, the: oldest boy said
that he would take the road that went straight ahead. "In one year from
now we will meet at this fig tree." The oldest boy cut the tree saying,
"When blood comes out of a cut in this tree, it means bad luck; if milk
flows, it is good luck."

The oldest boy found good work, and married a fine girl, the daughter of
his boss. The next oldest boy married a good girl, and he had good luck.
But the youngest encountered very bad luck indeed.

Although the country was full of all kinds of animals, he hunted all day
long but found no game for his supper. That night he hunted a place in
which he could sleep, and he found a cave. In the cave was a lion. And
the lion said to him, "Don't you have any bad luck in your travels about
this country?"

"No," said the youngest boy.

The lion then said, "Don't you want to be my captain?"

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

"Good," said the boy, "but I don't know how to talk your language very
well."

"That is all right," answered the lion. "You'll learn soon." The lion
took out a horn, blew it, and called all the animals together. When the
animals of all the world were there together, the lion talked with them
about making this boy their captain. They all said that they would like
him for a captain.

Then the lion taught the boy how to talk with every kind of animal. When
the boy had been there a month a crow came to see him, and she said,
"Listen, my friend, I have two little crows. I want them to be
baptized."

"Very well," said the boy. "Bring them here. I will baptize them." So
now the boy had two little crow god-children. The father crow brought to
the boy an egg. "Take this egg, compadre," he said, "and whatever you
want, ask the egg for it--it doesn't matter what it is, you'll get it."

So the boy took the egg and set out for a big pueblo. He arrived there
very late at night. He took the egg out of his pocket and asked it to
make him into a negro, and to give him a guitar. In his black attire,
carrying the guitar, he stopped at the house of a lady. He greeted her,
"Good evening."

"Good evening, young negro," she answered.

"I would like to sleep here," he said.

The lady said, "That's all right." She gave him a supper of tortillas,
meat, and beans. When he had eaten, she asked him to play and sing. He
did. He knew many songs not known to other singers. The lady was so
delighted she wanted to dance.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

He slept all night on a mat on the floor. Early in the morning the lady
arose. She told him to get up. After breakfast she told him to remain
there looking after the house while she went out. This lady knew the
king in that pueblo very well.

She went to the king and told him that she had a negro who was very good
at playing the guitar and singing.

"Where is he?" asked the king.

"He is in my house." So the king sent a man to bring the negro to him.
This man arrived at the house and said to the boy, "The king wants you."
The boy was surprised. "Don't be afraid," said the man. "Let's go."

When the king saw the negro and heard him play he was very pleased and
said, "What size shoe do you wear?"

"Six," he answered. So the king ordered shoes and a whole set of new
clothes made for the negro. Before putting on these new, clean clothes,
the negro went to a place where he could bathe himself.

Now, the king had a daughter who was very pretty. This girl wanted to
see the negro boy when he had no clothes on, so she looked through a
crack at him when he was bathing. The boy had taken off his outer, black
skin and she saw him as a very beautiful boy. She said nothing of this
to anyone.

After bathing, the boy put on his black skin and his new clothes and
went to supper. Afterwards, the king asked him to sing. He took his
guitar and played and sang. They all enjoyed it very much. But the
daughter knew about him. She said, "That guitar is old. He should have a

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

new one." The king told the negro that he should have a new guitar.

But the boy said, "No, this is just as good as a new one."

A week later the girl told her father that she would like to get
married. So her father sent out notices that he who should have one peso
more than the king himself would be allowed to marry his daughter. Many
rich dukes came and talked to the king, but not one of them had the
necessary wealth. The king was always ahead.

When they had all gone away, the little negro went alone to a small hill
outside of the pueblo. Here he took out his egg and talked to it. He
said he would like to have a palace, better than all the palaces in the
world. Before him, inside the hill arose a palace of pure gold. He then
asked for it to be furnished completely with tables and chairs of pure
gold. And it was. He ordered pigs and horses to be put in the stables
and yards. These also were of gold, and they ate golden grains of corn.
The boy went out and commanded that a huge iron gate be put across at
the entrance. Then he went to visit the lady who had taken him to the
king. He did not speak of his palace, but said that he had come to see
her. She was pleased and asked him to sing for her.

The next day the negro asked the king, "Why didn't your daughter marry
one of those rich men who came here?"

"Because they didn't have any more money than I have," answered the
king.

"I have more money than you have," said the negro.

"Where?" asked the king.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

"Do you see that hill over there?" The king thought that there must be a
rich mine in the hill.

"Yes, I see the hill," said the king. "Let's go see it closer." The girl
wanted to go along too, so the king ordered a big coach for her. They
came to the hill and the king said, "Where is your money?"

The negro, dismounting, took out a huge iron key. Everyone was surprised
as he went to open the gate. They looked in, then covered their faces
with their hands because of the brilliance of the treasure inside. But
the girl said to her father, "Go in, go in, go in."

They all entered and saw the palace all made of gold. "Look at my pigs,"
said the boy. They were also of gold.

"You beat me by one pig!" said the king.

"Let's go see my horses," said the negro. The king didn't need more to
convince him, but he was always interested in horses, so they went to
the stables. The horses were also of gold.

"That's enough. I want to see no more. You can marry my daughter," said
the king. The next day the boy married the king's daughter.

The king loved his son-in-law very much. It didn't matter if he was a
negro; he was rich. At the wedding everybody danced. The girl danced
until she perspired very much. The boy took out a huge handkerchief and
wiped her face for her. The next day they went to their palace in the
hill.

They were very happy. He talked to her about his two crow god-children.
"But," he said, "I must leave you for a while. It is nearly a year since
I left home and I must go see my father."

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

He ordered ten mules loaded down with money and five men to care for
them. The girl warned him that he would have to pass a place where there
were many thieves. "Take care," she said, "when you pass that place."

"Very well," he replied, and he set out. Tile next day he arrived where
the thieves were. They asked him to stop and play at *barratas* with
them. He did, and they won from him all of his mules, with their loads.
Next, he lost his fine clothes and had to put on the old clothes of one
of the thieves. He sent his five muleteers away, saying there was no
more work. Then he set out on foot toward his home.

Since that day had marked a year since he had taken leave of his
brothers, he arrived late at the fig tree. He cut the tree, and it
indicated good luck by weeping milk. So he went on.

He arrived at his home looking like a vagabond. On seeing him, his
parents did not want to admit that he was of their family. His father
said to him, "You are no longer my son. Your brothers have done well,
but look at you."

That evening they handed him his supper out of the window. They didn't
want him in the house. He was told that he could care for the chickens
and pigs. If he wanted to stay there, he must sleep in the chicken
house.

"Take care that the chickens don't drop on you," said his father.

He went to the chicken house where he was to sleep. When he got there,
he talked to the chickens. "If one of you makes a single dropping during
the whole night, I'll wring your neck and throw you outside!" he warned
them. They all listened attentively.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

One chicken said, "This captain is very strict, so be careful."

About midnight, the boy heard a chicken make a dropping. He knew that it
was an old, old rooster, but he asked, "Who did that?"

"Not I." said the nearest hen.

"Not I," said the next. And so on down the roost each answered, "Not I."
When the question came to the old rooster, he said nothing. The others
said that he had done it, and, finally, he admitted it. The boy twisted
his neck and threw him outside, a good lesson to the chickens, who did
not make a dropping all that night.

The boy's father came the next morning and saw the chicken house clean.
"How could this be?" he wondered.

He had some three hundred pigs who were very dangerous and unmanageable.
"You are going to take the pigs out today. Be careful, for they are
broncos," he said to the boy.

The boy went to the pig sty. There he talked with a big white pig. The
pig recognized him as a leader. The boy told this pig to tell the rest
of the pigs not to act up that day. And the white pig did so.

The father wanted to count the pigs as they left, so the boy ordered
them to pass the gate of the sty in pairs, marching as if in an army.
The father was astounded. The pigs marched in pairs out into the
country.

The boy said to the white pig, "Tell your companions not to wander far,
for I am going to take a nap." They minded him, for they were very
contented with their captain. In the afternoon, they returned, marching
home to the sty.

The boy thought often of his wife and the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

golden palace he had left. In a suit at home he had left the crow's egg.
After about a month his wife began to wonder what could have happened to
her husband.

One day the boy saw a crow flying overhead.

"Stop a minute, compadre." he called to the crow. The crow turned about
and came back. It was, indeed, his compadre.

"What happened to you?" asked the crow.

The boy told him all that had passed. "If I had paper and pen, I would
write to my wife," he added, for he knew how to write very well.

The white pig had a suggestion. He told the crow to fly out to a trash
pile and bring back a piece of paper. Then the pig told the crow to pull
out a feather. "Make a little hole in the back of my neck and use my
blood for ink."

Thus the boy wrote a letter to his wife telling her where the egg was,
and asking her to bring it to him.

The crow took the note and flew to the palace of gold. The girl was
seated in the door, sadly thinking. She saw the crow fly low over her
and suddenly remembered that her husband had a crow compadre. When the,
crow said "Crak, crak," she called it to come on down. It turned about
and brought her the note.

She went to the suit and found the egg in the pocket. She then ordered
ten mules loaded with money. She put on clothes of a man, took her
pistol, and set out, accompanied by five men. She arrived at the house
of the boy's father, where she was received most graciously, for they
thought she was a rich man. At dinner the father of the boy talked of
the tramp who was caring for the pigs and chickens. He didn't know quite
what

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

kind of a person he was, for the chickens never soiled the floor of
their house at night when this man slept there, and the wild pigs were
now very tame and marched like soldiers for him.

The woman, who was dressed as a man, watched at the window and saw the
boy come for his dinner. As he went to the chicken house, she joined
him. She sat with him while he ate. She said nothing of who she was. "If
I show you something I have here, perhaps you will remember me," she
said and reached in her pocket and pulled out the handkerchief with
which he had wiped her face at their wedding. At that, he recognized his
wife. She had brought him a suit of fine clothes, and some women's
clothes for herself. They were very happy. They spent the night in the
chicken house.

The next morning the father complained that it was very late and that
tramp had not yet got up to feed the chickens. He went out and knocked
at the door. "Get up!" he said. "The chickens are hungry and it is
late."

"Excuse me a moment, I'll be out in a little while," the boy answered.

At last he and his wife appeared, dressed in all their finery.

The old man said, "Of course, of course, you are my son."

But the boy, by means of the egg, destroyed his father, the house and
everything but the animals. With his wife he went home to their palace
of gold in the hill. RL

<span id="img_07700"></span> ![](img/07700.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kaiman](yml25.md)
