[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml29)  [Next](yml31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="img_09500"></span> ![](img/09500.jpg)

### Malinero'okai

THE SPANIARDS had just entered the Yaqui sierra. It was just when they
battled the Indians in the heights of the Batachim sierra that
Malinero'okai, with her little girl, descended into the depths of a
canyon at the foot of the hill where they were fighting.

Malinero'okai was frightened because never in her life had she heard the
sound of fire-arms which now echoed in the heart of the hills. Quickly
she took up her baby girl whom she carried in a cradle of skins made
from the wolves her husband had hunted. The valiant Ta'a Himsi, her
husband, also was in battle. Malinero'okai was afraid and alone with her
little girl, the beautiful Aaki Sewa. She wrapped the little one in
wildcat skin and put her on her shoulders. She took a long stick and she
walked down the rocky, waterless arroyo. As she traveled thus she
contemplated the cliffs and occasional fronds of *kauchunam*. These
enchanting trees reminded her that she and her husband had passed by
here two weeks before.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

She traveled thus, out of the Batachim sierra in the morning of that
day. It was the hot month of August, and she traveled without stopping
even a moment to take a drop of the fresh cool shade of the leafy trees.
In the afternoon, Malinero'okai arrived where there was a bit of water,
at a place where the arroyo made a sharp turn.

Taking the child from her shoulders, she placed her in the shade of a
tree. She, herself, took some water and then cut some grass and branches
for a bed. She lay down beside her little girl and, together, they
passed the rest of the afternoon. Later she again set out and walked
until night had come. In the midst of darkness she found refuge under
some branches and spent the night there. She was accompanied by the
songs of birds of night, the howl of coyotes and the cry of the tiger as
she quietly fed her child. Those animals did not cause her to fear for
she was used to hearing them all her life.

The following morning very early she hunted some fruits and roots and
ate them with good appetite. The little girl, Aaki Sewa, who was
scarcely three months old, rested as her mother ate. The mother said to
her, "Would you like to eat some fruit?" And she offered it to her, but
at the same time she added, "No, you may not eat them because you are
very little and it might do you some harm and your father would be
angry."

That morning, with the freshness, Malinero'okai took to the road at a
good pace. She was young and strong, agile at climbing and descending
the heights and depths of the trail. At midday she found herself at the
waterhole which is both enchanting and enchanted. It lies at the foot of

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

some cliffs called the pillars. The Spanish call it *pilares*. But the
Yaquis call this water-hole *pilaesi'im*. It is a great eye of water,
profoundly deep and it never goes dry. The Yaquis say that it is really
an enchanted pueblo which was converted into water. Here, Malinero'okai
came, and she encountered some families she knew. They were all very
glad to see her. They offered her atole of pechitas and of mesquites. As
she rested, she talked with an intimate friend of hers, "You who are an
old woman and know something, tell me, Wiru Masa, is it certain that
this waterhole is an enchanted pueblo?"

"Yes, it is the pueblo of the oldest Indians. I don't know if they were
Yaquis or Surem. But your disbelief will be dispersed."

Effectively, at seven in the evening they heard noises. They heard the
calls of little boys and the sound of a violin. The two women went down
to the shore of the pool but they saw nothing there except a gourd and
some watermelons. They heard the sound of the *teneboim* worn by
pascolas as they danced. And many laughs. Then all at once all stopped.

"Now you know," said Wiru Masa.

"Yes," said Malinero'okai.

The two women retired to their camping place. They were chatting like
friends when they heard the word. It was quite late at night. The word
was spoken softly, "*Dios'em chani'abu*."

"*Dios'em chi'okwe*," answered the women. The recently arrived ones were
two Yaqui men who had been fighting in the Batachim sierra. Having been
greeted, they were allowed to come up to the women's camp

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Malinero'okai asked about her husband, Ta'a Himsi. And the others asked
about their husbands.

"Ta'a Himsi was killed," said one of the men whose name was Wikoa Wikia.
"Ta'a Himsi died out there in the afternoon. That is all we know."

"The Spaniards we chased to Otam Kaki. They turned back on us and killed
some Yaquis. But on that hill and on the other hill also we killed many
of them."

"This I knew, my Dios told me," said [Malinero'okai](errata.htm#5.md). "My
man, so young and valiant." With profound sadness the young girl spoke.

On the following morning Wikoa Wikia said to the women, "It would be
better if all of you left here for Wicho'em or returned to Tabero Ba'am.
Or, we could take you to Nabo Hakia or to Sibam. It is very pretty
country there, more beautiful than here. There is much grass and wild
food. Here are many dangers. Those who live in these water-holes are
evil. Only wizards and devil-makers live here and if they should awake
in bad humor they would harm you. They may turn into animals, or they
may strike at you from the depths of the water. Also there is another
very sure danger here," added Wikoa Wikia. "When it rains this arroyo
fills with water. If you stay here you risk all these dangers. So tell
me to which place you would like to go."

"Take us to Sibam."

Thus they set out, leaving [Pilaesi'im](errata.htm#6.md). In order to reach
Sibam they traveled three days. It is quite distant, Sibam, away to the
north.

In three days they arrived at another waterhole, new homes, new
surroundings, happy and

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

enjoyable, for now they had time to make homes and they had many new
neighbors.

All was beautiful except for Malinero'okai. For her all was sad. Every
day she became sadder. She didn't want to eat. She cried for Ta'a Himsi.
The valiant Ta'a Himsi. Finally she died.

Her little girl, Aaki Sewa, was taken over by her friends who brought
her up until she was a grown and beautiful girl.

Colorin colorado

<span id="img_09900"></span> ![](img/09900.jpg)

Castro says, "This bit of history was told me by an old lady named Mayo
Juriana who is a direct descendant of Malinero'okai."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Deer Hunter](yml31.md)
