[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yml32)  [Next](yml34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span id="img_10600"></span> ![](img/10600.jpg)

### The Flood and the Prophets

HERE PRESENTED is what was adopted for the martyrology of the period of
the universal flood. Out of this catastrophe were saved those from whom
sprang the generations of Yaitowi, a just and perfect man.

Yaitowi, in his time, walked with Dios when came to pass the days when
waters rose over the earth to destroy all living things, alike beneath
the sky, on the earth, and living in the water--even the birds who fly
over the earth in the open expanse of the sky. It so happened that on
the seventh day of February the flood waters covered the earth. In this
time of Yaitowi, in the year 614, the day of the 17th of that same month
of February, it rained all over the world. This continued for fourteen
days and fourteen nights. Since the blessed end, every thing that had
been alive, and all life substance was thus finished. The waters
increased hugely over all the earth, destroying all living things, after
the days of men and women were terminated.

And on the seventeenth of the month of July the waters were receding
until the first of October, when the tops of the hills showed. And the
first day of November, the water retired from the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

world's surface. Yaitowi and thirteen others as well as eleven women
were saved on the hill of Parbus, which today is called Maatale. And on
the hill of Jonas, eleven souls and one woman called Emac Dolores were
saved. The woman disappeared in the seventh year, turning into a statue
of stone, now Mount Matuakame.

On Egosin hill, now called Tosalkawi, six were saved, and three from
Mount Tohowai, called today Rehepakawi.

On Golgota, now named Te'etpa'aria, Fou Emac and two more were saved.
From Otameahui and the Sinaii sierra, now called Samawaaka, a man named
Vaculo and a woman, Domicilia who is an angel, seven birds, and seven
asses, and seven little dogs were saved. Also from the sierra of Vaber,
now Totoitakuse'epo, a man called Ekitoyis and a woman, Paresenobix
survived.

After these events, it came to pass that two angels arrived at the hills
of Sinai at the break of dawn. Vaculo and Fou Emac were seated on a
stone, singing the Holy Hymn. On seeing the angels, they arose to
receive them, bowing toward the ground and toward the sky. They
addressed the angels, "Well, gentlemen, sent by your God to this valley
of tears, we beg that you defend us."

The angels said, "All difficult things may be done by Dios. At the
assigned time one comes after who has made the road of Dios straight.
And we will return here according to the time of your lives."

And on the seventh day, when morning came, there was thunder and
lightning and thick clouds all over the hills. It was seen that in those
days the angel San Gabriel came, sent by Dios, saying

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

to Vaculo and Fou Emac and Serafina, "Repent, for the reign of the king
of the heavens, of the holies, of the altar is close. For this is the
one of whom was spoken by the prophet. *Indomin patricin* and go by the
way of our Dios and Father." They went.

And they arrived at the place called Venedici. And they heard the voice
of Dios, "And I, Dios, bless Vaculo, Fou Emac and Serafina, and I will
spread the blood of man because man is made in the image of Dios. Now
there will be no more flood to destroy the earth, which is a sign. For
centuries I will put my arch in the clouds. When I cause clouds to come
over the earth, I will allow my arch to be seen. Remember me, and today
my arch will be on the altar and in the second tabernacle of Dios, to
remind me of my pact between myself and all living souls."

And they said to Dios, "What do you want us to do?" And they said, "Give
us some of your glory in our holy altar."

And Dios spoke to them. "You may drink from the glass from which I
drink." And he commenced to speak, "Take care that no one deceives you.
This is my house of prayer. You will be called by all kinds of men who
are false prophets. There are many caves of thieves. If one speaks to
you, saying, J am Dios,' do not believe him. They carry false testimony.
Brothers against brothers, parents against children will kill one
another. And the false prophets will read you signs to deceive you. And
at a time foretold, Rahbonix will come."

These are our ancient, chronological generations, the years which
completed the end, the known deeds to which we refer in this general

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

table of ancient law and letters as told by Ynexselci deo mamfin.

The correctness of the Holy Trinity, garden of Dios (which is now
Potam), is known. In Eden, now Bacum, our Mother, Saint Rosalie, was the
marvelous apparition of the year 707.

And likewise in the year 902 was seen the marvelous vision of the Holy
Cross in Venedicit, which today is Abascaure. Finally comes the
incarnate birth of our Father, Jesucristo, redeemer of the world.

After these things, in the year 1414 to 1417, Andreas Kowame, Isiderio
Sinsai, Andres Quizo, and Rabdi Kowame appeared. Rabdi Kowame preached
to those who accompanied him that day, the sixth of the first month of
the innocent children of 1414. "Travel over all of the forests, hills,
and villages to come out at a place called Takalaim. Preach the holy
division line and announce the gospel of the reign of God." And he said,
"Go ahead, do honor, and preach the Holy Hymn."

Passing on from there a little farther, they arrived at Cocoraqui, where
they taught the holy doctrine and commandments of Dios. Leaving
Cocoraqui, en route to Cabora, Rabdi Kowame says, "*Eli Eli lama
sabactani*," which means, "My Lord, come forth and do honor."

Proceeding from there, and farther on, arriving at Cabora, he speaks
again to those who accompany him, "Watch that no one deceives you, for
many men will come, and he will deceive you, 'I am he, sent by Dios,'
and he will deceive many of you and our children. Do not hear those who
come after this. War will be seen, and we will be upset, and there will
be no end." JV

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Pedro and Cristo](yml34)
