[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yml45)  [Next](yml47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span id="img_12900"></span> ![](img/12900.jpg)

### The Cat and the Monkey

AMONG the Yaquis there was one who had as curious pets an educated cat
and a very intelligent monkey. The man's name was Oname'a. He understood
the language of the animals. One day the cat and the monkey were
quarreling.

The monkey said to the cat, "You aren't worth anything. You don't divert
the master. You don't play with him. I amuse him with my intelligence
and he pets me."

The cat replied, "Well, I take care of his house. When I am about, the
rats don't come into the kitchen. And those which do come never leave,
because I kill them."

In the middle of this talk a rat came out of a hole and stopped near a
table, wanting to get up on top of it. The cat jumped. But the rat
escaped. It ran around the table and benches a few times and hid under a
stone in the corner.

The monkey laughed and made fun of the cat, telling him that he was
stupid and incapable.

"All right, let's see if you are any better."

The monkey went over to the corner where the rat was hidden and moved
the rock. The rat ran out and up on top of the table. The monkey pursued
it. The rat ran around a water jug and some pottery plates, and ran into
a hole.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

The monkey circled all of the dishes but so stupidly that he knocked
them all over with his tail, breaking them all. He didn't catch the rat,
and he was very ashamed.

Then the cat said, "You think yourself more lively than I. You want to
catch the rat, but you don't. Instead, you break all of the plates and
the water-jug from which my master drinks. When he comes home and sees
this, then you will get the punishment you deserve!"

The monkey could not answer. All he could do was bite his nails.

Señor Oname'a came in. He saw things spread all over the floor. "What
went on here?" he asked.

The cat was stretched out watching the hole where the rat had
disappeared.

"Well, who broke the dishes on the table?" asked Oname'a.

"I broke them," said the monkey. But he didn't lift his head.

"So you were playing around with the cat? Is that it?"

"No, Sir," said the cat, "We weren't playing. A rat came out but I
couldn't catch him. Then the monkey called me stupid and incapable. So I
said to him, 'You catch the rat if you think that you are better than I
am.' He couldn't, but he tumbled over all the plates."

The monkey was punished for making fun of the cat. Later the rat came
out and the cat gave him a blow with his left paw and killed him. He
took the rat to his master who gave the rat back to the cat for his
supper.

This fable is finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Rabbit's House](yml47)
