[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml57)  [Next](yml59.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span id="img_14800"></span> ![](img/14800.jpg)

### Bobok

IN ANCIENT TIMES in the Yaqui region, water became scarce for a long
period of time. Yaquis were suffering from the thirst which devastated
them. Water holes dried up. They made wells and couldn't find water.
Rocks resembled coals of fire. All the Yaqui region was burning up from
lack of water. The Indians assuaged their thirst with some half-green
plants.

So, out of such necessity, they attempted to send a message to Yuku, the
King of the Rain. First, they ordered up the sky sparrow. He went
straight to the King of the Rain. After greeting him on behalf of the
eight pueblos, the sparrow said to Yuku, "They tell me to ask you the
favor of some rain."

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

To this the King replied, saying, "Gladly. Go without any worries. Tell
your chiefs that the rain will come."

The sparrow descended with the speed of a bolt of lightning. But before
he reached the Yaquis, the world became cloudy. Lightning commenced. A
hurricane of wind overcame the sky sparrow. The rain, thus, never
arrived at the Yaqui region.

Seeing that the sparrow did not return, the Yaquis then commanded the
swallow to perform the same mission. The swallow flew up to the King of
the Rain supplicating on the part of his chiefs that he send them a
little water, for the Yaquis were dying of thirst.

The King answered in good humor, "Go without worry to your chiefs. After
you will come the rain."

The swallow flew down, but he was also destroyed, like the sparrow, by
the lightning and the wind. Neither he nor one drop of rain ever arrived
at the ground.

Then the leaders of the tribe, desperate, could think of no one else to
send. Until they remembered the toad. They tried to locate this toad,
and finally learned where he was. He was in a place called Bahkwam,
which means "lagoon"' and which now is the pueblo of Bacum. There they
found the toad, Bobok.

They told Bobok to come to a great council at a place near Vicam. There
the principal leaders of the eight pueblos met. The toad presented
himself, and they said to him, "You must go and beg rain for all of us
from the King of the Rain."

"Very well," answered the toad. "With your

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

permission I will retire in order to make ready for my trip tomorrow.
Wait for me and for the rain." He went off to the lagoon, Bahkwam, and
visited a friend of his who was a magician and could convert himself
into a bat. From him he borrowed some bats wings.

The following day Bobok flew up to the clouds and met the King of the
Rain. After greeting the King and saluting him for his chiefs, Bobok
said, "Sir, do not treat the Yaquis so badly. Send us a little water to
drink, for we are dying of thirst."

"Very well," answered the King of the Rain. "Go ahead. Don't worry. The
rain will follow you very soon."

Bobok pretended to go, but really dug into the ground at the door of the
King's house. Then it clouded up, lightning was seen, thunder was heard,
and it began to rain. In fact, the rain almost reached the earth. But it
could not find Bobok. It stopped, and began to run along on top of the
wind. Then Bobok ran along on top of the rain, saying "*Kowak*, *kowak*,
*kowak*."

The rain, hearing the toad, began to fall again. The toad stopped
singing. The rain, thinking toad was dead, again became calm. So Bobok
began singing and moving over the top of the rain toward the earth. At
last the rain struck the Yaqui region, still searching for the toad in
order to kill him.

It rained all over the earth, and suddenly there were many toads, all
singing. Bobok returned the bat wings to his magician friend and lived
on peacefully in his lagoon, Bahkwam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Five Mended Brothers](yml59.md)
