[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yml50)  [Next](yml52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span id="img_13500"></span> ![](img/13500.jpg)

### Tesak Pascola's Watermelons

WELL, GENTLEMEN, this horse of mine became very old. I let him out for a
few days so that he might rest. But one day I saddled him again, to take
a little turn through the monte. I traveled almost a whole day, and in
the afternoon I took off the saddle. I noticed that he had a sore on his
back. I turned him out. On the following day I went in search of him. I
found him, lassoed him and, after cutting myself a ripe watermelon, I
jumped on his back, opened the melon and rode along eating my
watermelon. I came to the river and let him drink and bathed the sore on
his back. I got on again and commenced eating watermelon and throwing
the seeds away. Soon we came to a well and I got down. I took a little
fine dirt and put it on my horse's wound, then set him free in my
pasture. I went back to my house and forgot about my horse.

About four or five months later, I went in search of him. The pasture
wasn't very big and didn't have much underbrush in it. It is well

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

fenced. My horse had no means of getting out, no place to hide.
Nevertheless, I could not find him. I was there an entire week without
once seeing him. The following week I went in search again. One day I
passed near a forest I had not seen before and stopped to contemplate
the branches. It was not mesquite, nor *batamote*. As I looked, I heard
a horse sneeze--brr--burr.

I went up to those branches and saw that it was a watermelon vine. I
looked again and saw that the vine had grown out of the sore on my
horse, aided by the dirt which I had placed on it. Some watermelon seeds
had fallen into the wound.

Well, I took my horse to my house and cut many watermelons, good-sized
and ripe, off of him. I sold them, and gave them to my neighbors. Later,
I cut the trunk of the watermelon vine off and cured my horse.

When he died, I gave him a fiesta and did mourning for six months.

There you have it, Señores.

<span id="img_13600"></span> ![](img/13600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Calabazas Funeral](yml52)
