[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yml59)  [Next](yml61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span id="img_15800"></span> ![](img/15800.jpg)

### The First Fire

NOW THERE IS fire in all rocks, in all sticks. But long ago there wasn't
any fire in the world, and all of the Yaquis and the animals and the
creatures of the sea, everything that lived, gathered in a great council
in order to understand why there was no fire.

They knew that somewhere there must be fire, perhaps in the sea, maybe
on some islands, or on the other side of the sea. For this reason,
Bobok, the Toad, offered to go get this fire. The Crow offered to help
him and also the Roadrunner and the Dog. These four, the winged animals
and the dog, went along to help. But Bobok, the Toad, alone, knew how to
enter the water of the sea and not die.

The God of Fire would not permit anyone to take his fire away. For this
reason he still sends thunderbolts and lightning at anyone who carries
light or fire. He is always killing them.

But Bobok entered the house of the God of Fire and stole the fire. He
carried it in his mouth,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

traveling through the waters. Lightning and thunder made a great noise
and many flashes. But Bobok came on, safe beneath the waters. Then there
formed on the flooding water, little whirlpools of water full of rubbish
and driftwood.

Suddenly not only one toad was to be seen, but many swam in the waters,
many, many toads. They were all singing and carrying little bits of
fire. Bobok had met his sons and had given some fire to one, then
another, until every toad had some. These carried fire to the land where
they were awaited by the Dog, the Roadrunner, and the Crow. Bobok gave
his fire to those who could not enter the water.

The God of Fire saw this and threw lightning at the Crow and the
Roadrunner and the Dog. But many toads kept on coming and bearing fire
to the world. These animals gave light to all the things in the world.
They put it into sticks and rocks. Now men can make fire with a drill
because the sticks have fire in them. LC

<span id="img_15900"></span> ![](img/15900.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spirit Fox](yml61.md)
