[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smog08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3SA6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Smoky God*, by Willis George Emerson, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__000"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following advertisements are transcribed from the original book.
They are included for completness.

By WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

# BUELL HAMPTON

A TALE OF LOVE, OF SURPRISES,

OF A MYSTERY

"Buell Hampton " is a good story in every particular. Nothing better has
been done in its line.—*The Mirror* (*St. Louis*).

One of the leading books of the year. Every page breathes; is alive with
people who do things and say bright and witty things.—*Chicago Journal*.

As a distinctly American novel, "Buell Hampton" has, for abundance of
thrilling incident and pure interestingness, no superior.—*Albany
Times-Union*.

Many a year has passed since so strong, so bright, and so clever a novel
as "Buell Hampton" has made its appearance. There are no dull patches in
it. Every page is filled with dewy freshness.—*Opie Read*.

From the very beginning the reader is impressed with its plot and
striking incidents. Buell Hampton is a character we have never met in
books. The romance is absorbingly interesting. There are plenty of
surprises in the book, and once begun the reader will not be satisfied
until lie has finished the story.—*Philadelphia Telegraph*.

*Popular edition, cloth. Price, 75 cents*

FORBES & COMPANY, <span class="smallcaps">Publishers</span>

CHICAGO

<span id="page__001"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

By WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

# THE BUILDERS

Strikingly interesting.—*Cincinnati Enquirer*.

Has scored a great success.—*Los Angeles Graphic*.

A broad, powerful, successful novel.—*New York Herald*.

There is no story of the West like it.—*Boston Globe*.

A really notable story of the West.—*Philadelphia Press*.

In reading "The Builders" one reaches the heights of tragedy and
melodrama.—*San Francisco Bulletin*.

Not only readable, but downright interesting, for it possesses a
romantic quality that lures on the reader, page after page.—*Chicago
Evening Post*.

"The Builders " is a book for men who glory in accomplishments, for
women who delight in detail, and for lovers who revel in sympathetic
understanding.—*Los Angeles Examiner.*

*Price, $1.50*

FORBES & COMPANY, <span class="smallcaps">Publishers</span>

CHICAGO

<span id="page__002"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOKS BY

# NIXON WATERMAN

Nixon Waterman needs no introduction to the American public. One of our
most natural and musical singers, his verses have been quoted in every
newspaper in the land and have gone straight to the heart of the great
army of "just common folks." He is always an optimist. The world is
better—both happier and better—for such verses as these of Nixon
Waterman.—*The Chicago Record-Herald*.

### IN MERRY MOOD

A BOOK OF CHEERFUL RHYMES

Genuine poems, aglow with high and pure sentiment and sparkling with
fetching humor.—*The Congregationalist* (*Boston*).

Nixon Waterman's verses touch the heart; they are the kind people love,
and the kind that will live. He teaches the philosophy of garnering
sunshine and his religion is the gospel of brotherly love and
kindness.—*The Worcester Gazette*.

*12mo, cloth, gilt top, 208 pp., $1.25*

### A BOOK OF VERSES

It will be impossible for those who love verse to read "A Book of
Verses" without enjoyment, and more than one who ordinarily prefers to
limit himself to prose will be beguiled by such numbers as these of Mr.
Waterman.—*The Chicago Tribune*.

To have such a wholesome book on hand where the whole family can get at
it is a wise provision on the part of any home-maker.—*Boston Globe*.

*12mo, cloth, gilt top, 226 pp., $1.25*

FORBES & COMPANY, <span class="smallcaps">Publishers</span>

CHICAGO

<span id="page__003"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOKS BY

# NIXON WATERMAN

### BOY WANTED

A BOOK OF CHEERFUL COUNSEL

A book that will interest boys of all ages, and also their parents and
teachers. The author has avoided the triteness common in books of advice
and prepared a volume which any boy will read with pleasure.

"Boy Wanted" is an unusual achievement.—*San Francisco Call*.

I have never seen a better book for boys than "Boy Wanted."—*Dr. E. A.
Winship in Journal of Education*.

His views are wholesome, homely, and optimistic, and appeal to every-day
folks.—*Woman's Home Companion*.

*Illustrated, beautifully bound, cloth, 8 vo.  
Price, $1.25*

### SONNETS OF A BUDDING BARD

A book of original, sparkling wit. There are fifty-two illustrations in
three colors by John A. Williams that are worth the price of the book
alone.—*St. Louis Times*.

It is rich.—*Denver Times*.

A more delightful book of poetry it would be hard to find. There is many
a hearty laugh in its pages.—*Indianapolis News*.

*Attractively bound, picture cover.  
Price, 75 cents*

FORBES & COMPANY, <span class="smallcaps">Publishers</span>

CHICAGO

 

 

 

 
