[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smog03)  [Next](smog05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3SA6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Smoky God*, by Willis George Emerson, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### PART THREE

### BEYOND THE NORTH WIND

<span class="smallcaps">I tried</span> to forget my thirst by busying
myself with bringing up some food and an empty vessel from the hold.
Reaching over the side-rail, I filled the vessel with water for the
purpose of laving my hands and face. To my astonishment, when the water
came in contact with my lips, I could taste no salt. I was startled by
the discovery. "Father!" I fairly gasped, "the water, the water; it is
fresh!" "What, Olaf?" exclaimed

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

my father, glancing hastily around. "Surely you are mistaken. There is
no land. You are going mad." "But taste it!" I cried.

And thus we made the discovery that the water was indeed fresh,
absolutely so, without the least briny taste or even the suspicion of a
salty flavor.

We forthwith filled our two remaining water-casks, and my father
declared it was a' heavenly dispensation of mercy from the gods Odin and
Thor.

We were almost beside ourselves with joy, but hunger bade us end our
enforced fast. Now that we had found fresh water in the open sea, what
might we not expect in this strange latitude where ship had never

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

before sailed and the splash of an oar had never been heard? <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

We had scarcely appeased our hunger when a breeze began filling the idle
sails, and, glancing at the coin-

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

pass, we found the northern point pressing hard against the glass.

In response to my surprise, my father said, "I have heard of this
before; it is what they call the dipping of the needle."

We loosened the compass and turned it at right angles with the surface
of the sea before its point would free itself from the glass and point
according to unmolested attraction. It shifted uneasily, and seemed as
unsteady as a drunken man, but finally pointed a course.

Before this we thought the wind was carrying us north by northwest, but,
with the needle free, we discovered, if it could be relied upon, that we
were sailing slightly north by

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

northeast. Our course, however, was ever tending northward. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

The sea was serenely smooth, with hardly a choppy wave, and the wind
brisk and exhilarating. The sun's rays, while striking us aslant,
furnished tranquil warmth. And thus time wore on day after day, and we
found from the record in our log-book, we had been sailing eleven days
since the storm in the open sea.

By strictest economy, our food was holding out fairly well, but
beginning to run low. In the meantime, one of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

our casks of water had been exhausted, and my father said: "We will fill
it again." But, to our dismay, we found the water was now as salt as in
the region of the Lofoden Islands off the coast of Norway. This
necessitated our being extremely careful of the remaining cask.

I found myself wanting to sleep much of the time; whether it was the
effect of the exciting experience of sailing in unknown waters, or the
relaxation from the awful excitement incident to our adventure in a
storm at sea, or due to want of food, I could not say.

I frequently lay down on the bunker of our little sloop, and looked far
up into the blue dome of the sky; and, notwithstanding the sun was

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

shining far away in the east, I always saw a single star overhead. For
several days, when I looked for this star, it was always there directly
above us.

It was now, according to our reckoning, about the first of August. The
sun was high in the heavens, and was so bright that I could no longer
see the one lone star that attracted my attention a few days earlier.

One day about this time, my father startled me by calling my attention
to a novel sight far in front of us, almost at the horizon. "It is a
mock sun," exclaimed my father. "I have read of them; it is called a
reflection or mirage. It will soon pass away."

But this dull-red, false sun, as we supposed it to be, did not pass away
for several hours; and while we were

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="img_08900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“It could hardly
be said to resemble the sun except in its circular
shape.”](tn/08900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08900.jpg)  
“It could hardly be said to resemble the sun except in its circular
shape.”  
</span>

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

unconscious of its emitting any rays of light, still there was no time
thereafter when we could not sweep the horizon in front and locate the
illumination of the so-called false sun, during a period of at least
twelve hours out of every twenty-four.

Clouds and mists would at times almost, but never entirely, hide its
location. Gradually it seemed to climb higher in the horizon of the
uncertain purply sky as we advanced.

It could hardly be said to resemble the sun, except in its circular
shape, and when not obscured by clouds or the ocean mists, it had a
hazy-red, bronzed appearance, which would change to a white light like a
luminous cloud, as if reflecting some greater light beyond.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

We finally agreed in our discussion of this smoky furnace-colored sun,
that, whatever the cause of the phenomenon, it was not a reflection of
our sun, but a planet of some sort—a reality. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

One day soon after this, I felt exceedingly drowsy, and fell into a
sound sleep. But it seemed that I was almost immediately aroused by my
father's vigorous shaking of me

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

by the shoulder and saying: "Olaf, awaken; there is land in sight!"

I sprang to my feet, and oh! joy unspeakable! There, far in the
distance, yet directly in our path, were lands jutting boldly into the
sea. The shore-line stretched far away to the right of us, as far as the
eye could see, and all along the sandy beach were waves breaking into
choppy foam, receding, then going forward again, ever chanting in
monotonous thunder tones the song of the deep. The banks were covered
with trees and vegetation.

I cannot express my feeling of exultation at this discovery. My father
stood motionless, with his hand on the tiller, looking straight ahead,
pouring out his heart in thankful prayer

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and thanksgiving to the gods Odin and Thor.

In the meantime, a net which we found in the stowage had been cast, and
we caught a few fish that materially added to our dwindling stock of
provisions.

The compass, which we had fastened back in its place, in fear of another
storm, was still pointing due north, and moving on its pivot, just as it
had at Stockholm. The dipping of the needle had ceased. What could this
mean? Then, too, our many days of sailing had certainly carried us far
past the North Pole. And yet the needle continued to point north. We
were sorely perplexed, for surely our direction was now south. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

We sailed for three days along the

shoreline, then came to the mouth of a fjord or river of immense size.
It seemed more like a great bay, and into this we turned our
fishing-craft, the direction being slightly northeast of south. By the
assistance of a fretful wind that came to our aid about twelve hours out
of every twenty-four, we continued to make our way

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

inland, into what afterward proved to be a mighty river, and which we
learned was called by the inhabitants Hiddekel.

We continued our journey for ten days thereafter, and found we had
fortunately attained a distance inland where ocean tides no longer
affected the water, which had become fresh.

The discovery came none to soon, for our remaining cask of water was

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

well-nigh exhausted. We lost no time in replenishing our casks, and
continued to sail farther up the river when the wind was favorable.

Along the banks great forests miles in extent could be seen stretching
away on the shore-line. The trees were of enormous size. We landed after
anchoring near a sandy beach, and waded ashore, and were rewarded by
finding a quantity of nuts that were very palatable and satisfying to
hunger, and a welcome change from the monotony of our stock of
provisions.

It was about the first of September, over five months, we calculated,
since our leave-taking from Stockholm. Suddenly we were frightened
almost out of our wits by hearing in the far

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

distance the singing of people. Very soon thereafter we discovered a
huge ship gliding down the river directly toward us. Those aboard were
singing in one mighty chorus that, echoing from bank to bank, sounded
like a thousand voices, filling the whole universe with quivering
melody. The accompaniment was played on stringed instruments not unlike
our harps.

It was a larger ship than any we bad ever seen, and was differently
constructed. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

At this particular time our sloop was becalmed, and not far from the
shore. The bank of the river, covered with mammoth trees, rose up
several hundred feet in beautiful fashion. We seemed to be on the edge
of some primeval forest that doubtless stretched far inland.

The immense craft paused, and almost immediately a boat was lowered and
six men of gigantic stature rowed to our little fishing-sloop. They
spoke to us in a strange language. We knew from their manner, however,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“They spoke to us
in a strange language.”](tn/10100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10100.jpg)  
“They spoke to us in a strange language.”  
</span>

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

that they were not unfriendly. They talked a great deal among
themselves, and one of them laughed immoderately, as though in finding
us a queer discovery had been made. One of them spied our compass, and
it seemed to interest them more than any other part of our sloop.

Finally, the leader motioned as if to ask whether we were willing to
leave our craft to go on board their ship. "What say you, my son?" asked
my father. "They cannot do any more than kill us."

"They seem to be kindly disposed," I replied, "although what terrible
giants! They must be the select six of the kingdom's crack regiment.
Just look at their great size."

"We may as well go willingly as be

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

taken by force," said my father, smiling, "for they are certainly able
to capture us." Thereupon he made known, by signs, that we were ready to
accompany them.

Within a few minutes we were on board the ship, and half an hour later
our little fishing-craft had been lifted bodily out of the water by a
strange sort of hook and tackle, and set on board as a curiosity.

There were several hundred people on board this, to us, mammoth ship,
which we discovered was called "The Naz," meaning, as we afterward
learned, "Pleasure," or to give a more proper interpretation, "Pleasure
Excursion" ship.

If my father and I were curiously

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

observed by the ship's occupants, this strange race of giants offered us
an equal amount of wonderment.

There was not a single man aboard who would not have measured fully
twelve feet in height. They all wore full beards, not particularly long,
but seemingly short-cropped. They had mild and beautiful faces,
exceedingly fair, with ruddy complexions. The hair and beard of some
were black, others sandy, and still others yellow. The captain, as we
designated the dignitary in command of the great vessel, was fully a
head taller than any of his companions. The women averaged from ten to
eleven feet in height. Their features were especially regular and
refined, while their

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

complexion was of a most delicate tint heightened by a healthful
glow. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Both men and women seemed to possess that particular ease of manner
which we deem a sign of good breeding, and, notwithstanding their huge
statures, there was nothing about them suggesting awkwardness. As I was
a lad in only my nineteenth

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

year, I was doubtless looked upon as a true Tom Thumb. My father's six
feet three did not lift the top of his head above the waist line of
these people.

Each one seemed to vie with the others in extending courtesies and
showing kindness to us, but all laughed heartily, I remember, when they
had to improvise chairs for my father and myself to sit at table. They
were richly attired in a costume peculiar to themselves, and very
attractive. The men were clothed in handsomely embroidered tunics of
silk and satin and belted at the waist. They wore knee-breeches and
stockings of a fine texture, while their feet were encased in sandals
adorned with gold buckles. We early discovered

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

that gold was one of the most common metals known, and that it was used
extensively in decoration.

Strange as it may seem, neither my father nor myself felt the least bit
of solicitude for our safety. "We have come into our own," my father
said to me. "This is the fulfillment of the tradition told me by my
father and my father's father, and still back for many generations of
our race. This is, assuredly, the land beyond the North Wind."

We seemed to make such an impression on the party that we were given
specially into the charge of one of the men, Jules Galdea, and his wife,
for the purpose of being educated in their language; and we, on

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

our part, were just as eager to learn as they were to instruct.

At the captain's command, the vessel was swung cleverly about, and began
retracing its course up the river. The machinery, while noiseless, was
very powerful.

The banks and trees on either side seemed to rush by. The ship's speed,
at times, surpassed that of any railroad train on which I have ever
ridden, even here in America. It was wonderful.

In the meantime we had lost sight of the sun's rays, but we found a
radiance "within" emanating from the dull-red sun which had already
attracted our attention, now giving out a white light seemingly from a
cloud-bank

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

far away in front of us. It dispensed a greater light, I should say,
than two full moons on the clearest night.

In twelve hours this cloud of whiteness would pass out of sight as if
eclipsed, and the twelve hours following corresponded with our night. We
early learned that these strange people were worshipers of this great
cloud of night. It was "The Smoky God" of the "Inner World."

The ship was equipped with a mode of illumination which I now presume
was electricity, but neither my father nor myself were sufficiently
skilled in mechanics to understand whence came the power to operate the
ship, or to maintain the soft beautiful lights that answered the same
purpose

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

of our present methods of lighting the streets of our cities, our houses
and places of business.

It must be remembered, the time of which I write was the autumn of 1829,
and we of the "outside" surface of the earth knew nothing then, so to
speak, of electricity.

The electrically surcharged condition of the air was a constant
vitalizer. I never felt better in my life than during the two years my
father and I sojourned on the inside of the earth.

To resume my narrative of events: The ship on which we were sailing came
to a stop two days after we had been taken on board. My father said as
nearly as he could judge, we were directly under Stockholm or London.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The city we had
reached was called "Jehu," signifying a seaport town. The houses were
large and beautifully constructed, and quite uniform in appearance, yet
without sameness. The principal occupation of the people appeared to be
agriculture; the hillsides were covered with vineyards, while the
valleys were devoted to the growing of grain.

I never saw such a display of gold. It was everywhere. The door-casings
were inlaid and the tables were veneered with sheetings of gold. Domes
of the public buildings were of gold. It was used most generously in the
finishings of the great temples of music.

Vegetation grew in lavish exuberance, and fruit of all kinds possessed

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the most delicate flavor. Clusters of grapes four and five feet in
length, each grape as large as an orange, and apples larger than a man's
head typified the wonderful growth of all things on the "inside" of the
earth.

The great redwood trees of California would be considered mere
underbrush compared with the giant forest trees extending for miles and
miles in all directions. In many directions along the foothills of the
mountains vast herds of cattle were seen during the last day of our
travel on the river.

We heard much of a city called "Eden," but were kept at "Jehu" for an
entire year. By the end of that time we had learned to speak fairly well
the language of this strange race of people. Our instructors, Jules

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Galdea and his
wife, exhibited a patience that was truly commendable.

One day an envoy from the Ruler at "Eden" came to see us, and for two
whole days my father and myself were put through a series of surprising
questions. They wished to know from whence we came, what sort of people
dwelt "without," what God we worshiped, our religious beliefs, the mode
of living in our strange land, and a thousand other things.

The compass which we had brought with us attracted especial attention.
My father and I commented between ourselves on the fact that the compass
still pointed north, although we now knew that we had sailed over the
curve or edge of the earth's aperture, and were far along southward on
the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "inside" surface
of the earth's crust, which, according to my father's estimate and my
own, is about three hundred miles in thickness from the "inside" to the
"outside" surface. Relatively speaking, it is no thicker than an
egg-shell, so that there is almost as much surface on the "inside" as on
the "outside" of the earth.

The great luminous cloud or ball of dull-red fire—fiery-red in the
mornings and evenings, and during the day giving off a beautiful white
light, "The Smoky God,"—is seemingly suspended in the center of the
great vacuum "within" the earth, and held to its place by the immutable
law of gravitation, or a repellant atmospheric force, as the case may
be. I refer to the known power that draws or repels

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

with equal force in all directions.

The base of this electrical cloud or central luminary, the seat of the
gods, is dark and non-transparent, save for innumerable small openings,
seemingly in the bottom of the great support or altar of the Deity, upon
which "The Smoky God" rests; and, the lights shining through these many
openings twinkle at night in all their splendor, and seem to be stars,
as natural as the stars we saw shining when in our home at Stockholm,
excepting that they appear larger. "The Smoky God," therefore, with each
daily revolution of the earth, appears to come up in the east and go
down in the west, the same as does our sun on the external surface. In
reality, the people "within" believe that

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The Smoky God" is
the throne of their Jehovah, and is stationary. The effect of night and
day is, therefore, produced by the earth's daily rotation.

I have since discovered that the language of the people of the Inner
World is much like the Sanskrit.

After we had given an account of ourselves to the emissaries from the
central seat of government of the inner continent, and my father had, in
his crude way, drawn maps, at their request, of the "outside" surface of
the earth, showing the divisions of land and water, and giving the name
of each of the continents, large islands and the oceans, we were taken
overland to the city of "Eden," in a conveyance different from anything

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

we have in Europe or America. This vehicle was doubtless some electrical
contrivance. It was noiseless, and ran on a single iron rail in perfect
balance. The trip was made at a very high rate of speed. We were carried
up hills and down dales, across valleys and again along the sides of
steep mountains, without any apparent attempt having been made to level
the earth as we do for railroad tracks. The car seats were huge yet
comfortable affairs, and very high above the floor of the car. On the
top of each car were high geared fly wheels lying on their sides, which
were so automatically adjusted that, as the speed of the car increased,
the high speed of these fly wheels geometrically increased.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jules Galdea
explained to us that these revolving fan-like wheels on top of the cars
destroyed atmospheric pressure, or what is generally understood by the
term gravitation, and with this force thus destroyed or rendered
nugatory the car is as safe from falling to one side or the other from
the single rail track as if it were in a vacuum; the fly wheels in their
rapid revolutions destroying effectually the so-called power of
gravitation, or the force of atmospheric pressure or whatever potent
influence it may be that causes all unsupported things to fall downward
to the earth's surface or to the nearest point of resistance.

The surprise of my father and myself was indescribable when, amid the
regal magnificence of a spacious hall,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

we were finally brought before the Great High Priest, ruler over all the
land. He was richly robed, and much taller than those about him, and
could not have been less than fourteen or fifteen feet in height. The
immense room in which we were received seemed finished in solid slabs of
gold thickly studded with jewels of amazing brilliancy.

The city of "Eden" is located in what seems to be a beautiful valley,
yet, in fact, it is on the loftiest mountain plateau of the Inner .
Continent, several thousand feet higher than any portion of the
surrounding country. It is the most beautiful place I have ever beheld
in all my travels. In this elevated garden all manner of fruits, vines,
shrubs, trees,

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="img_12100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“We were brought
before the Great High Priest.”](tn/12100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12100.jpg)  
“We were brought before the Great High Priest.”  
</span>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

and flowers grow in riotous profusion.

In this garden four rivers have their source in a mighty artesian
fountain. They divide and flow in four directions. This place is called
by the inhabitants the "navel of the earth," or the beginning, "the
cradle of the human race." The names of the rivers are the Euphrates,
the Pison, the Gihon, and the Hiddekel. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

The unexpected awaited us in this palace of beauty, in the finding of
our little fishing-craft. It had been brought before the High Priest in
perfect shape, just as it had been

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

taken from the waters that day when it was loaded on board the ship by
the people who discovered us on the river more than a year before.

We were given an audience of over two hours with this great dignitary,
who seemed kindly disposed and considerate. He showed himself eagerly
interested, asking us numerous questions, and invariably regarding
things about which his emissaries had failed to inquire.

At the conclusion of the interview he inquired our pleasure, asking us
whether we wished to remain in his country or if we preferred to return
to the "outer" world, providing it were possible to make a successful
return trip, across the frozen belt barriers that encircle both the
northern

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and southern openings of the earth.

My father replied: "It would please me and my son to visit your country
and see your people, your colleges and palaces of music and art, your
great fields, your wonderful forests of timber; and after we have had
this pleasurable privilege, we should like to try to return to our home
on the \`outside' surface of the earth. This son is my only child, and
my good wife will be weary awaiting our return."

"I fear you can never return," replied the Chief High Priest, "because
the way is a most hazardous one. However, you shall visit the different
countries with Jules Galdea as your escort, and be accorded every
courtesy and kindness. Whenever you

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

are ready to attempt a return voyage, I assure you that your boat which
is here on exhibition shall be put in the waters of the river Heddekel
at its mouth, and we will bid you Jehovah-speed."

Thus terminated our only interview with the High Priest or Ruler of the
continent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[83:1](smog04.htm#fr_10) *In vol. I, page* 196*,
Nansen writes: "It is a peculiar phenomenon,—this dead water. We had at
present a better opportunity of studying it than we desired. It occurs
where a surface layer of fresh water rests upon the salt water of the
sea, and this fresh water is carried along with the ship gliding on the
heavier sea beneath it as if on a fixed foundation. The difference
between the two strata was in this case so great that while we had
drinking water on the surface, the water we got from the bottom cock of
the engine-room was far too salt to be used for the boiler."*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[85:1](smog04.htm#fr_11) *In volume II, pages*
18 *and* 19*, Nansen writes about the inclination of the needle.
Speaking of Johnson, his aide: "One day—it was November* 24*th—he came
in to supper a little after six o'clock, quite alarmed, and said: 'There
has just been a singular inclination of the needle in twenty-four
degrees. And remarkably enough, its northern extremity pointed to the
east.'"*

*We again find in Peary's first voyage—page* 67*,—the following: "It had
been observed that from the moment they had entered Lancaster Sound, the
motion of the compass needle was very sluggish, and both this and its
deviation increased as they progressed to the westward, and continued to
do so in descending this* <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> *inlet. Having
reached latitude* 73 *degrees, they witnessed for the first time the
curious phenomenon of the directive power of the needle becoming so weak
as to be completely overcome by the attraction of the ship, so that the
needle might now be said to point to the north pole of the ship."*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[92:1](smog04.htm#fr_12) *Nansen, on page* 394*,
says: "Today another noteworthy thing happened, which was that about
midday we saw the sun, or to be more correct, an image of the sun, for
it was only a mirage. A peculiar impression was produced by the sight of
that glowing fire lit just above the outermost edge of the ice.
According to the enthusiastic descriptions given by many Arctic
travelers of the first appearance of this god of life e after the long
winter night, the impression ought to be one of jubilant excitement; but
it was not so in my case. We had not expected to see it* <span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> *for some days yet, so that my feeling was
rather one of pain, of disappointment, that we must have drifted farther
south than we thought. So it was with pleasure I soon discovered that it
could not be the sun itself. The mirage was at first a flattened-out,
glowing red streak of fire on the horizon; later there were two streaks,
the one above the other, with a dark space between; and from the maintop
I could see four, or even five, such horizontal lines directly over one
another, all of equal length, as if one could only imagine a square,
dull-red sun, with horizontal dark streaks across it."*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[95:1](smog04.htm#fr_13) *Peary's first voyage,
pages* 69 *and* 95 <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> 70, *says: "On,
reaching Sir Byam Martin's Island, the nearest to Melville Island, the
latitude of the place of observation was* 75 *degrees*-09´-23″, *and the
longitude* 103 *degrees*-44´-37″; *the dip of the magnetic needle* 88
*degrees*-25´-58″ *west in the longitude of* 91 *degrees*-48´, *where
the last observations on the shore had been made, to* 165
*degrees*-50´-09″, *east, at their present station, so that* <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> *we had," says Peary, "in sailing over the
space included between these two meridians, crossed immediately
northward of the magnetic pole, and had undoubtedly passed over one of
those spots upon the globe where the needle would have been found to
vary* 180 *degrees, or in other words, where the North Pole would have
pointed to the south."*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[99:1](smog04.htm#fr_14) *Asiatic
Mythology,—page* 240, *"Paradise Found"—from translation by Sayce, in a
book called "Records of the Past," we were told of a "dwelling" which
"the gods created for" the first human beings,—a dwellin*g <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> *in which they "became great" and "increased
in numbers," and the location of which is described in words exactly
corresponding to those of Iranian, Indian, Chinese, Eddaic and Aztecan
literature; namely, "in the center of the earth."—Warren*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[106:1](smog04.htm#fr_15) *"According to all
procurable data, that spot at the era of man's appearance upon the stage
was in the now lost 'Miocene continent,' which then surrounded the
Arctic Pole. That in that true, original Eden some of the early
generations of men attained to a stature and longevity unequaled in any
countries known to postdiluvian history is by no means scientifically
incredible."—Wm. F. Warren, "Paradise Found," p.* 284.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[123:1](smog04.htm#fr_16) *"And the Lord God
planted a garden, and out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every
tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food."—The Book of
Genesis*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Four: In the Under World](smog05)
