<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](doro13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SU1O/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Don Rodriguez*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f12"></span>

THE TWELFTH CHRONICLE

THE BUILDING OF CASTLE RODRIGUEZ AND THE ENDING OF THESE CHRONICLES

When the King of Shadow Valley met Rodriguez, for the first time in the
forest, and gave him his promise and left him by his camp- fire, he went
back some way towards the bowmen's cottage and blew his horn; and his
hundred bowmen were about him almost at once. To these he gave their
orders and they went back, whence they had come, into the forest's
darkness. But he went to the bowmen's cottage and paced before it, a
dark and lonely figure of the night; and wherever he paced the ground he
marked it with small sticks. And next morning the hundred bowmen came
with axes as soon as the earliest light had entered the forest, and each
of them chose out one of the giant trees that stood before the cottage,
and attacked it. All day they swung their axes against the forest's
elders, of which nearly a hundred were fallen when evening came. And the
stoutest of these, great trunks that were four feet through, were
dragged by horses to the bowmen's cottage and laid by the little sticks
that the King of Shadow Valley had put overnight in the ground. The
bowmen's cottage and the kitchen that was in the wood behind it, and a
few trees that still stood, were now all enclosed by four lines of
fallen trees which made a large rectangle on the ground with a small
square at each of its corners. And craftsmen came, and smoothed and
hollowed the inner sides of the four rows of trees, working far into the
night. So was the first day's work accomplished and so was built the
first layer of the walls of Castle Rodriguez.

On the next day the bowmen again felled a hundred trees; the top of the
first layer was cut flat by carpenters; at evening the second layer was
hoisted up after their under sides had been flattened to fit the layer
below them; quantities more were cast in to make the floor when they had
been gradually smoothed and fitted: at the end of the second day a man
could not see over the walls of Castle Rodriguez. And on the third day
more craftsmen arrived, men from distant villages at the forest's edge,
whence the King of Shadow Valley had summoned them; and they carved the
walls as they grew. And a hundred trees fell that day, and the castle
was another layer higher. And all the while a park was growing in the
forest, as they felled the great trees; but the greatest trees of all
the bowmen spared, oaks that had stood there for ages and ages of men;
they left them to grip the earth for a while longer, for a few more
human generations.

On the fourth day the two windows at the back of the bowmen's cottage
began to darken, and that evening Castle Rodriguez was fifteen feet
high. And still the hundred bowmen hewed at the forest, bringing
sunlight bright on to grass that was shadowed by oaks for ages. And at
the end of the fifth day they began to roof the lower rooms and make
their second floor: and still the castle grew a layer a day, though the
second storey they built with thinner trees that were only three feet
through, which were more easily carried to their place by the pulleys.
And now they began to heap up rocks in a mass of mortar against the wall
on the outside, till a steep slope guarded the whole of the lower part
of the castle against fire from any attacker if war should come that
way, in any of the centuries that were yet to be: and the deep windows
they guarded with bars of iron.

The shape of the castle showed itself clearly now, rising on each side
of the bowmen's cottage and behind it, with a tower at each of its
corners. To the left of the old cottage the main doorway opened to the
great hall, in which a pile of a few huge oaks was being transformed
into a massive stair. Three figures of strange men held up this ceiling
with their heads and uplifted hands, when the castle was finished; but
as yet the carvers had only begun their work, so that only here and
there an eye peeped out, or a smile flickered, to give any expression to
the curious faces of these fabulous creatures of the wood, which were
slowly taking their shape out of three trees whose roots were still in
the earth below the floor. In an upper storey one of these trees became
a tall cupboard; and the shelves and the sides and the back and the top
of it were all one piece of oak.

All the interior of the castle was of wood, hollowed into alcoves and
polished, or carved into figures leaning out from the walls. So vast
were the timbers that the walls, at a glance, seemed almost one piece of
wood. And the centuries that were coming to Spain darkened the walls as
they came, through autumnal shades until they were all black, as though
they all mourned in secret for lost generations; but they have not yet
crumbled.

The fireplaces they made with great square red tiles, which they also
put in the chimneys amongst rude masses of mortar: and these great dark
holes remained always mysterious to those that looked for mystery in the
family that whiled away the ages in that castle. And by every fireplace
two queer carved creatures stood upholding the mantlepiece, with mystery
in their faces and curious limbs, uniting the hearth with fable and with
tales told in the wood. Years after the men that carved them were all
dust the shadows of these creatures would come out and dance in the
room, on wintry nights when all the lamps were gone and flames stole out
and flickered above the smouldering logs.

In the second storey one great saloon ran all the length of the castle.
In it was a long table with eight legs that had carvings of roses
rambling along its edges: the table and its legs were all of one piece
with the floor. They would never have hollowed the great trunk in time
had they not used fire. The second storey was barely complete on the day
that Rodriguez and Don Alderon and Morano came to the chains that
guarded the park. And the King of Shadow Valley would not permit his
gift to be seen in anything less than its full magnificence, and had
commanded that no man in the world might enter to see the work of his
bowmen and craftsmen until it should frown at all comers a castle
formidable as any in Spain.

And then they heaped up the mortar and rock to the top of the second
storey, but above that they let the timbers show, except where they
filled in plaster between the curving trunks: and the ages blackened the
timber in amongst the white plaster; but not a storm that blew in all
the years that came, nor the moss of so many Springs, ever rotted away
those beams that the forest had given and on which the bowmen had
laboured so long ago. But the castle weathered the ages and reached our
days, worn, battered even, by its journey through the long and sometimes
troubled years, but splendid with the traffic that it had with history
in many gorgeous periods. Here Valdar the Excellent came once in his
youth. And Charles the Magnificent stayed a night in this castle when on
a pilgrimage to a holy place of the South.

It was here that Peter the Arrogant in his cups gave Africa, one Spring
night, to his sister's son. What grandeurs this castle has seen! What
chronicles could be writ of it! But not these chronicles, for they draw
near their close, and they have yet to tell how the castle was built.
Others shall tell what banners flew from all four of its towers, adding
a splendour to the wind, and for what cause they flew. I have yet to
tell of their building.

The second storey was roofed, and Castle Rodriguez still rose one layer
day by day, with a hauling at pulleys and the work of a hundred men: and
all the while the park swept farther into the forest.

And the trees that grew up through the building were worked by the
craftsmen in every chamber into which they grew: and a great branch of
the hugest of them made a little crooked stair in an upper storey. On
the floors they laid down skins of beasts that the bowmen slew in the
forest; and on the walls there hung all manner of leather, tooled and
dyed as they had the art to do in that far-away period in Spain.

When the third storey was finished they roofed the castle over, laying
upon the huge rafters red tiles that they made of clay. But the towers
were not yet finished.

At this time the King of Shadow Valley sent a runner into Lowlight to
shoot a blunt arrow with a message tied to it into Don Alderon's garden,
near to the door, at evening.

And they went on building the towers above the height of the roof And
near the top of them they made homes for archers, little turrets that
leaned like swallows' nests out from each tower, high places where they
could see and shoot and not be seen from below. And little narrow
passages wound away behind perched battlements of stone, by which
archers could slip from place to place, and shoot from here or from
there and never be known. So were built in that distant age the towers
of Castle Rodriguez.

And one day four weeks from the felling of the first oak, the period of
his promise being accomplished, the King of Shadow Valley blew his horn.
And standing by what had been the bowmen's cottage, now all shut in by
sheer walls of Castle Rodriguez, he gathered his bowmen to him. And when
they were all about him he gave them their orders. They were to go by
stealth to the village of Lowlight, and were to be by daylight before
the house of Don Alderon; and, whether wed or unwed, whether she fled or
folk defended the house, to bring Dona Serafina of the Valley of
Dawnlight to be the chatelaine of Castle Rodriguez.

For this purpose he bade them take with them a chariot that he thought
magnificent, though the mighty timbers that gave grandeur to Castle
Rodriguez had a cumbrous look in the heavy vehicle that was to the
bowmen's eyes the triumphal car of the forest. So they took their bows
and obeyed, leaving the craftsmen at their work in the castle, which was
now quite roofed over, towers and all. They went through the forest by
little paths that they knew, going swiftly and warily in the bowmen's
way: and just before nightfall they were at the forest's edge, though
they went no farther from it than its shadows go in the evening. And
there they rested under the oak trees for the early part of the night
except those whose art it was to gather news for their king; and three
of those went into Lowlight and mixed with the villagers there.

When white mists moved over the fields near dawn and wavered ghostly
about Lowlight, the green bowman moved with them. And just out of
hearing of the village, behind wild shrubs that hid them, the bowmen
that were coming from the forest met the three that had spent the night
in taverns of Lowlight. And the three told the hundred of the great
wedding that there was to be in the Church of the Renunciation that
morning in Lowlight: and of the preparations that were made, and how
holy men had come from far on mules, and had slept the night in the
village, and the Bishop of Toledo himself would bless the bridegroom's
sword. The bowmen therefore retired a little way and, moving through the
mists, came forward to points whence they could watch the church, well
concealed on the wild plain, which here and there gave up a field to man
but was mostly the playground of wild creatures whose ways were the
bowmen's ways. And here they waited.

This was the wedding of Rodriguez and Serafina, of which gossips often
spoke at their doors in summer evenings, old women mumbling of fair
weddings that each had seen; and they had been children when they saw
this wedding; they were those that threw small handfuls of anemones on
the path before the porch. They told the tale of it till they could tell
no more. It is the account of the last two or three of them, old, old
women, that came at last to these chronicles, so that their tongues may
wag as it were a little longer through these pages although they have
been for so many centuries dead. And this is all that books are able to
do.

First there was bell-ringing and many voices, and then the voices
hushed, and there came the procession of eight divines of Murcia, whose
vestments were strange to Lowlight. Then there came a priest from the
South, near the border of Andalusia, who overnight had sanctified the
ring. (It was he who had entertained Rodriguez when he first escaped
from la Garda, and Rodriguez had sent for him now.) Each note of the
bells came clear through the hush as they entered the church. And then
with suitable attendants the bishop strode by and they saw quite close
the blessed cope of Toledo. And the bridegroom followed him in, wearing
his sword, and Don Alderon went with him. And then the voices rose again
in the street: the bells rang on: they all saw Dona Mirana. The little
bunches of bright anemones grew sticky in their hands: the bells seemed
louder: cheering rose in the street and came all down it nearer. Then
Dona Serafina walked past them with all her maids: and that is what the
gossips chiefly remembered, telling how she smiled at them, and praising
her dress, through those distant summer evenings. Then there was music
in the church. And afterwards the forest-people had come. And the people
screamed, for none knew what they would do. But they bowed so low to the
bride and bridegroom, and showed their great hunting bows so willingly
to all who wished to see, that the people lost their alarm and only
feared lest the Bishop of Toledo should blast the merry bowmen with one
of his curses.

And presently the bride and bridegroom entered the chariot, and the
people cheered; and there were farewells and the casting of flowers; and
the bishop blessed three of their bows; and a fat man sat beside the
driver with folded arms, wearing bright on his face a look of foolish
contentment; and the bowmen and bride and bridegroom all went away to
the forest.

Four huge white horses drew that bridal chariot, the bowmen ran beside
it, and soon it was lost to sight of the girls that watched it from
Lowlight; but their memories held it close till their eyes could no
longer see to knit and they could only sit by their porches in fine
weather and talk of the days that were.

So came Rodriguez and his bride to the forest; he silent, perplexed,
wondering always to what home and what future he brought her; she
knowing less than he and trusting more. And on the untended road that
the bowmen shared with stags and with rare, very venturous travellers,
the wheels of the woodland chariot sank so deep in the sandy earth that
the escort of bowmen needed seldom to run any more; and he who sat by
the driver climbed down and walked silent for once, perhaps awed by the
occasion, though he was none other than Morano. Serafina was delighted
with the forest, but between Rodriguez and its beautiful grandeur his
anxieties crowded thickly. He leaned over once from the chariot and
asked one of the bowmen again about that castle; but the bowman only
bowed and answered with a proverb of Spain, not easily carried so far
from its own soil to thrive in our language, but signifying that the
morrow showeth all things. He was silent then, for he knew that there
was no way to a direct answer through those proverbs, and after a while
perhaps there came to him some of Serafma's trustfulness. By evening
they came to a wide avenue leading to great gates.

Rodriguez did not know the avenue, he knew no paths so wide in Shadow
Valley; but he knew those gates. They were the gates of iron that led
nowhere. But now an avenue went from them upon the other side, and
opened widely into a park dotted with clumps of trees. And the two great
iron shields, they too had changed with the changes that had bewitched
the forest, for their surfaces that had glowed so unmistakably blank,
side by side in the firelight, not many nights before, blazoned now the
armorial bearings of Rodriguez upon the one and those of the house of
Dawnlight upon the other. Through the opened gates they entered the
young park that seemed to wonder at its own ancient trees, where wild
deer drifted away from them like shadows through the evening: for the
bowmen had driven in deer for miles through the forest. They passed a
pool where water-lilies lay in languid beauty for hundreds of summers,
but as yet no flower peeped into the water, for the pond was all
hallowed newly.

A clump of trees stood right ahead of their way; they passed round it;
and Castle Rodriguez came all at once into view. Serafina gasped
joyously. Rodriguez saw its towers, its turrets for archers, its guarded
windows deep in the mass of stone, its solemn row of battlements, but he
did not believe what he saw. He did not believe that here at last was
his castle, that here was his dream fulfilled and his journey done. He
expected to wake suddenly in the cold in some lonely camp, he expected
the Ebro to unfold its coils in the North and to come and sweep it away.
It was but another strayed hope, he thought, taking the form of dream.
But Castle Rodriguez still stood frowning there, and none of its towers
vanished, or changed as things change in dreams; but the servants of the
King of Shadow Valley opened the great door, and Serafina and Rodriguez
entered, and all the hundred bowmen disappeared.

Here we will leave them, and let these Chronicles end. For whoever would
tell more of Castle Rodriguez must wield one of those ponderous pens
that hangs on the study wall in the house of historians. Great days in
the story of Spain shone on those iron- barred windows, and things were
said in its banqueting chamber and planned in its inner rooms that
sometimes turned that story this way or that, as rocks turn a young
river. And as a traveller meets a mighty river at one of its bends, and
passes on his path, while the river sweeps on to its estuary and the
sea, so I leave the triumphs and troubles of that story which I touched
for one moment by the door of Castle Rodriguez.

My concern is but with Rodriguez and Serafina and to tell that they
lived here in happiness; and to tell that the humble Morano found his
happiness too. For he became the magnificent steward of Castle
Rodriguez, the majordomo, and upon august occasions he wore as much red
plush as he had ever seen in his dreams, when he saw this very event,
sleeping by dying camp-fires. And he slept not upon straw but upon good
heaps of wolf-skins. But pining a little in the second year of his
somewhat lonely splendour, he married one of the maidens of the forest,
the child of a bowman that hunted boars with their king. And all the
green bowmen came and built him a house by the gates of the park, whence
he walked solemnly on proper occasions to wait upon his master. Morano,
good, faithful man, come forward for but a moment out of the Golden Age
and bow across all those centuries to the reader: say one farewell to
him in your Spanish tongue, though the sound of it be no louder than the
sound of shadows moving, and so back to the dim splendour of the past,
for the Senor or Senora shall hear your name no more.

For years Rodriguez lived a chieftain of the forest, owning the
overlordship of the King of Shadow Valley, whom he and Serafina would
entertain with all the magnificence of which their castle was capable on
such occasions as he appeared before the iron gates. They seldom saw
him. Sometimes they heard his horn as he went by. They heard his bowmen
follow. And all would pass and perhaps they would see none. But upon
occasions he came. He came to the christening of the eldest son of
Rodriguez and Serafina, for whom he was godfather. He came again to see
the boy shoot for the first time with a bow. And later he came to give
little presents, small treasures of the forest, to Rodriguez' daughters;
who treated him always, not as sole lord of that forest that travellers
dreaded, but as a friend of their very own that they had found for
themselves. He had his favourites among them and none quite knew which
they were.

And one day he came in his old age to give Rodriguez a message. And he
spoke long and tenderly of the forest as though all its glades were
sacred.

And soon after that day he died, and was buried with the mourning of all
his men in the deeps of Shadow Valley, where only Rodriguez and the
bowmen knew. And Rodriguez became, as the old king had commanded, the
ruler of Shadow Valley and all its faithful men. With them he hunted and
defended the forest, holding all its ways to be sacred, as the old king
had taught. It is told how Rodriguez ruled the forest well.

And later he made a treaty with the Spanish King acknowledging him sole
Lord of Spain, including Shadow Valley, saving that certain right should
pertain to the foresters and should be theirs for ever. And these rights
are written on parchment and sealed with the seal of Spain; and none may
harm the forest without the bowmen's leave.

Rodriguez was made Duke of Shadow Valley and a Magnifico of the first
degree; though little he went with other hidalgos to Court, but lived
with his family in Shadow Valley, travelling seldom beyond the splendour
of the forest farther than Lowlight.

Thus he saw the glory of autumn turning the woods to fairyland: and when
the stags were roaring and winter coming on he would take a boar-spear
down from the wall and go hunting through the forest, whose twigs were
black and slender and still against the bright menace of winter. Spring
found him viewing the fields that his men had sown, along the forest's
edge, and finding in the chaunt of the myriad birds a stirring of
memories, a beckoning towards past days. In summer he would see his boys
and girls at play, running through shafts of sunlight that made leaves
and grass like pale emeralds. He gave his days to the forest and the
four seasons. Thus he dwelt amidst splendours such as History has never
seen in any visit of hers to the courts of men.

Of him and Serafina it has been written and sung that they lived happily
ever after; and though they are now so many centuries dead, may they
have in the memories of such of my readers as will let them linger
there, that afterglow of life that remembrance gives, which is all that
there is on earth for those that walked it once and that walk the paths
of their old haunts no more.

 

 
