---
description: "Sacred Texts: Atlantis"
title: "Sacred Texts: Atlantis"
alttext1: ""
titleh1: "Atlantis"
---
<span class="c_e"> <span
class="c_t">[Timaeus](../cla/plato/timaeus.md)</span>  
<span class="c_t">[Critias](../cla/plato/critias.md)</span>   by <span
class="c_a">Plato</span> \[<span class="c_d">360 B.C</span>\]   <span
class="c_b">The two dialogs of Plato which contain the primary ancient
account of Atlantis.</span>  
There is a short framing story about Solon in Egypt in Timaeus, and
Critias, which contains the description of Atlantis, breaks off
mid-narrative. Did Plato mean the tale literally or as an allegory?
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

These books, which were written at the end of the 19th century, are the
core texts of the modern Atlantis mythos.

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Vril, the Power of the Coming
Race](vril/index.md)</span>  
by Sir <span class="c_a">Edward Bulwer-Lytton</span> \[<span
class="c_d">1871</span>\]   <span class="c_b">The Victorian science
fiction novel from which introduced the concept of 'Vril.'</span>
</span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Oera Linda
Book](olb/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Wiliam R. Sandbach</span>
\[<span class="c_d">1876</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A purported
chronicle of the descendants of the lost Atlantis--of the North
Sea.</span>  
</span>

<span id="ataw"></span> <span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Atlantis,
the Antediluvian World](ataw/index.md)</span>   by <span
class="c_a">Ignatius Donnelly</span> \[<span class="c_d">1882</span>\]  
<span class="c_b">The complete text of the 19th Century bestseller that
started the modern Atlantis craze.</span>  
Required reading for anyone interested in Atlantis, in spite of much
dated and incorrect information. This etext was scanned at Intangible
Textual Heritage and appears here in its entirety for the first time on
the Internet. This text is also available through the [Project
Gutenberg](https://digital.library.upenn.edu/webbin/gutbook/lookup?num=4032.md)
(thanks to Norman Wolcott, for working on the text version of this
file). The illustrations, proofing and formatting of this etext were
revised as of July 2003. </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Ragnarok: The Age of Fire and
Gravel](rag/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Ignatius
Donnelly</span> \[<span class="c_d">1883</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A
sensational description of how a cometary impact could have destroyed an
unknown prehistoric civilization.</span>  
Donnelly ties his comet impact into the death of Atlantis, and the lost
origins of our own civilization. A perennially rediscovered hypothesis.
</span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Book of
Dzyan](dzyan/dzyan.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">H.P. Blatavsky</span>
\[<span class="c_d">1888</span>\]   <span class="c_b">Blatavskys'
channeled sacred text from Lemuria.</span>  
This excerpt from Helena Blatavskys' ["The Secret
Doctrine"](../the/sd/index.md) is supposed to be an actual book from
Lemuria summarizing occult knowledge about the evolution of the
universe. In reality it was 'channeled'. The Theosophists greatly
elaborated the Atlantis story, adding numerous additional lost
continents such as Hyperborea, Lemuria, Daitya, Ruta, Poseidonis; and
peopled them with an entire succession of pre-human species. (See the
[Scott-Elliot](#soa) text, below.md). </span>

<span id="soa"></span> <span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Story
of Atlantis](soa/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">W.
Scott-Elliot</span> \[<span class="c_d">1896</span>\]   <span
class="c_b">An imaginative Theosophic history of the Earth, the
Theosophic concept of human evolution and everyday life in old
Atlantis.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Lost
Continent](tlc/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Cutcliffe
Hyne</span> \[<span class="c_d">1900</span>\]   <span class="c_b">The
decline and fall of decadent Atlantis; a cruel queen, and ancient magic:
a long-forgotten swashbuckling adventure.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Lost
Lemuria](tll/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">W. Scott-Elliot</span>
\[<span class="c_d">1904</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A short essay by
Scott-Elliot on the lost continent which preceeded Atlantis in
Theosophic beliefs: Lemuria.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[A Dweller on Two
Planets](dtp/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Frederick S.
Oliver</span> \[<span class="c_d">1905</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A
very influential speculative novel of Atlantis and points beyond,
purportedly composed via automatic writing by a teenager in the shadow
of Mount Shasta.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[How I Found the Lost Atlantis, The
Source of All Civilization](hif/index.md)</span>   by <span
class="c_a">Paul Schliemann</span> \[<span class="c_d">1912</span>\]  
<span class="c_b">A famous and often cited Atlantis hoax, republished at
Intangible Textual Heritage for the first time in over ninety
years.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Treasure of
Atlantis](toa/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">J. Allan Dunn</span>
\[<span class="c_d">1916</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A pulp-fiction era
Atlantis in South America yarn.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Altantida
(L'Antlantide)](ant/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Pierre
Benoit</span>, tr. by <span class="c_a">Mary C. Tongue</span> and <span
class="c_a">Mary Ross</span> \[<span class="c_d">1920</span>\]   <span
class="c_b">A harrowing trip through the Sahara to ... Atlantis, and the
strange allure of its ultimate queen.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Sacred Symbols of
Mu](ssm/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">James Churchward</span>
\[<span class="c_d">1933</span>\]   <span class="c_b">Mu, the other lost
continent, and its sacred symbology.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Selestor's Men of
Atlantis](smoa/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Clara Iza von
Ravn</span> \[<span class="c_d">1937</span>\]   <span class="c_b">The
history of Atlantis, told as a channeled vision of an ancient
sage.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[I Remember
Lemuria](../ufo/irl/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Richard S.
Shaver</span> \[<span class="c_d">1948</span>\]   <span
class="c_b">Beware the devolved tunnel-dwellers who rule the earth: the
dress-rehearsal for the UFO craze.</span> </span>
