[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mom07)  [Next](mom09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

# THE MITHRAIC LITURGY, CLERGY AND DEVOTEES

IN ALL the religions of classical antiquity there is one feature which,
while formerly very conspicuous and perhaps the most important of all
for the faithful, has to-day almost totally disappeared. It is their
liturgy. The Mysteries of Mithra form no exception to this unfortunate
rule. The sacred books which contain the prayers recited or chanted
during the services, the ritual of the initiations, and the ceremonials
of the feasts, have vanished and left scarce a trace behind. A verse
borrowed from one unknown hymn is almost all that has come down to us
from the collections which anciently must have been so abundant. The old
Gâthas composed in honor of the Mazdean gods were translated into Greek
during the Alexandrian epoch, and Greek remained for a long time the
language of the Mithraic cult, even in the Occident. Barbaric words,
incomprehensible to the profane, were interspersed throughout the sacred
texts and augmented the veneration of the worshippers for the ancient
formulary, as well as their confidence in its efficacy. Such were the
epithets like *Nabarze*, "victorious," which has been applied to Mithra,
or the obscure invocations

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

like Nama, Nama Sebesio, engraved on our bas-reliefs, which have never
yet been interpreted.

 

<span id="img_37"></span> ![](img/15100.jpg)  
Fig. 37.  
TAUROCTONOUS MITHRA. BAS-RELIEF OF WHITE MARBLE (BOLOGNA).

Important for its accessory figures. In the center, the dog, serpent,
scorpion, the two torch-bearers, and above the one to the left the
raven. Near each torch-bearer is a pine-tree (?). On the upper border
are the busts of the seven planets in the following order from the left:
The Sun, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter, Hermes, Mars, and Luna. The lower
border, three figures at a banquet; infant, or Eros (?); bearded figure
reclining (Oceanus). (*T. et M.*, Fig. 99, p. 261.)

 

A scrupulous respect for the traditional practices of their sect
characterized the Magi of Asia Minor, and continued to be manifested

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

with unabated ardor among their Latin successors. On the downfall of
paganism, the latter still took pride in worshipping the gods according
to the ancient Persian rites which Zoroaster was said to have
instituted. These rites sharply distinguished their religion from all
the others that were practised at the same time in Rome, and prevented
its Persian origin from ever being forgotten.

If some piece of good fortune should one day unearth for us a Mithraic
missal, we should be able to study there these ancient usages and to
participate in imagination in the celebration of the services. Deprived
as we are of this indispensable guide, we are excluded utterly from the
sanctuary and know the esoteric discipline of the Mysteries only from a
few indiscretions. A text of St. Jerome, confirmed by a series of
inscriptions, informs us that there were seven degrees of initiation and
that the mystic (μύστης, *sacratus*) successively assumed the names of
Raven (*corax*), Occult (*cryphius*), Soldier Lion (*leo*), Persian
(*Perses*), Runner of the Sun (*heliodromus*), and Father (*pater*).
These strange appellations were not empty epithets with no practical
bearing. On certain occasions the celebrants donned garbs suited to the
title that had been accorded them. On the bas-reliefs we see them
carrying the counterfeit heads of animals, of soldiers, and of Persians.
(See Fig. [38](#img_38), [p. 159](#page_159)) "Some flap their wings
like birds, imitating

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the cry of crows; others growl like lions," says a Christian writer of
the fourth century; <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) "in such manner
are they that are called wise basely travestied."

These sacred masks, of which the ecclesiastical writer exhibits the
ridiculous side, were interpreted by pagan theologians as an allusion to
the signs of the Zodiac, and even to the doctrine of metempsychosis.
Such divergences of interpretation simply prove that the real meaning of
these animal disguises was no longer understood. They are in reality a
survival of primitive practices which have left their traces in numerous
cults. We find the titles of Bear, Ox, Colt, and other similar names
borne by the initiates of the different Mysteries in Greece and Asia
Minor. They go back to that prehistoric period where the divinities
themselves were represented under the forms of animals; and when the
worshipper, in taking the name and semblance of his gods, believed that
he identified himself with them. The lion-headed Kronos having become
the incarnation of Time, was substituted for the lions which the
forerunners of the Mithraists worshipped; and similarly the cloth and
paper masks with which the Roman mystics covered their faces were
substitutes for the animal skins with which their barbarous predecessors
originally clothed themselves, be it that they believed they thus

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

entered into communion with the monstrous idols which they worshipped,
or that, in enveloping themselves in the pelts of their flayed victims,
they conceived these bloody tunics to possess some purifying virtue.

To the primitive titles of Raven and Lion others were afterward added
for the purpose of attaining the sacred number seven. The seven degrees
of initiation through which the mystic was forced to pass in order to
acquire perfect wisdom and purity, answered to the seven planetary
spheres which the soul was forced to traverse in order to reach the
abode of the blessed. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) After having
been Raven, the initiates were promoted to the rank of Occult (κρύφιος).
The members of this class, hidden by some veil, probably remained
invisible to the rest of the congregation. To exhibit them (*ostendere*)
constituted a solemn act. The Soldier (*miles*) formed part of the
sacred militia of the invincible god and waged war under his directions
on the powers of evil. The dignity of Persian recalled the first origin
of the Mazdean religion, and he who obtained it assumed during the
sacred ceremonies the Oriental custom of donning the Phrygian cap, which
had also been bestowed on Mithra. The latter having been identified with
the Sun, his servitors invested themselves with the name of Runners of
the Sun (Ἡλιοδρόμοι); lastly, the title "Fathers" was borrowed from the
Greek

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

Thiasi, where this honorific appellation frequently designated the
directors of the community.

In this septuple division of the deities, certain additional
distinctions were established. We may conclude from a passage in
Porphyry that the taking of the first three degrees did not authorize
participation in the Mysteries. These initiates, comparable to the
Christian catechumens, were the Servants (ὑπηρετοῦντες). To enter this
order it was sufficient to have been admitted to the Ravens, doubtless
so called because mythology made the raven the servitor of the Sun. Only
the mystics that had received the Leontics became Participants
(μετέχοντες), and it is for this reason that the grade of Leo is
mentioned more frequently in the inscriptions than any other. Finally,
at the summit of the hierarchy were placed the Fathers, who appear to
have presided over the sacred ceremonies (*pater sacrorum*) and to have
commanded the other classes of the faithful. The head of the Fathers
themselves bore the name of *Pater Patrum*, sometimes transformed into
*Pater patratus*, in order to introduce an official sacerdotal title
into a sect which had become Roman. These grandmasters of the adepts
retained until their death the general direction of the cult. The
reverence and affection which were entertained for these venerable
dignitaries are indicated by their name of Father, and the mystics
placed

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

under their authority were called brethren by one another, because the
fellow-initiates (*consacranei*) were expected to cherish mutual
affection. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

Admission (acceptio) to the lower orders could be accorded even to
children. We do not know whether the initiates were obliged to remain in
any one of the grades for a fixed length of time. The Fathers probably
decided when the novice was sufficiently prepared to receive the higher
initiation, which they conferred in person (*tradere*).

This ceremony of initiation appears to have borne the name of sacrament
(*sacramentum*), doubtless because of the oath which the neophyte took
and which was compared to that made by the conscripts enrolled in the
army. The candidate engaged above all things not to divulge the
doctrines and the rites revealed to him, but other and more special vows
were exacted of him. Thus, the mystic that aspired to the title of Miles
was presented with a crown on a sword. He thrust it back with his hand
and caused it to fall on his shoulder, saying that Mithra was his only
crown. Thereafter, he never wore one, neither at banquets nor when it
was awarded to him as a military honor, replying to the person who
conferred it: "It belongs to my god," that is to say, to the invincible
god.

We are as poorly acquainted with the liturgy

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of the seven Mithraic sacraments as we are with the dogmatic
instructions that accompanied them. We know, however, that conformably
to the ancient Iranian rites, repeated ablutions were prescribed to
neophytes as a kind of baptism designed to wash away their guilty
stains. As with a certain class of Gnostics, this lustration doubtless
had different effects at each stage of initiation, and it might consist
according to circumstances either in a simple sprinkling of holy water,
or in an actual immersion as in the cult of Isis.

Tertullian also compared the confirmation of his co-religionists to the
ceremony in which they "signed" the forehead of the soldier. It appears,
however, that the sign or seal impressed was not, as in the Christian
liturgy, an unction, but a mark burned with a red-hot iron like that
applied in the army to recruits before they were admitted to the oath.
This indelible imprint perpetuated the memory of the solemn engagement
by which the person under vow contracted to serve in that order of
chivalry which Mithraism constituted. On reception among the Lions,
there were new purifications. But this animal being the emblem of the
principle of fire, the use of water, the element hostile to fire, was
renounced; and, in order to preserve the initiate from the blemish of
sin, honey was poured on his hands and applied to his tongue, as was the
custom with new-born children. It was honey also

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

that was presented to the Persian because of its preservative virtue, as
Porphyry tells us; <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) in fact,
marvellous properties appear to have been associated with this
substance, which was believed to have been produced under the influence
of the moon. According to the ancient ideas, it was the food of the
"blessed, and its absorption by the neophyte made him a peer of the
gods. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41)

In the Mazdean service, the celebrant consecrated the bread and the
water which he mingled with the intoxicating juice of the Haoma prepared
by him, and he consumed these foods during the performance of his
sacrifice. These ancient usages were preserved in the Mithraic
initiations, save that for the Haoma, a plant unknown in the Occident,
was substituted the juice of the vine. A loaf of bread and a goblet of
water were placed before the mystic, over which the priest pronounced
the sacred formula. This oblation of bread and water, with which
undoubtedly wine was afterward mixed, is compared by the apologists to
the Christian sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Like the latter, it was
not granted until after a long novitiate. It is probable that only those
initiates who had attained the degree of Lions were admitted to it, and
that this is the reason that the name of "Participants"

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

 

<span id="img_38"></span> ![](img/15900.jpg)  
MITHRAIC COMMUNION

At the left the Raven and the Persian; at the right, the Soldier and the
Lion. (Fragment of a bas-relief recently discovered in Konjica, Bosnia.)
(*T. et M.*, *Introduction*, p. 175).

 

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

was given to them. A curious bas-relief recently published shows us the
spectacle of this sacred repast (Fig. [38](#img_38)). Before two persons
stretched upon a couch covered with pillows is placed a tripod bearing
four tiny loaves of bread, each marked with a cross. Around them are
grouped the initiates of the different orders, and one of them, the
Persian, presents to the two a drinking-horn; whilst a second vessel is
held in the hands of one of the Participants. These love feasts are
evidently the ritual commemoration of the banquet which Mithra
celebrated with the Sun before his ascension. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) From this mystical banquet, and especially
from the imbibing of the sacred wine, supernatural effects were
expected. The intoxicating liquor gave not only vigor of body and
material prosperity, but wisdom of mind; it communicated to the neophyte
the power to combat the malignant spirits, and what is more, conferred
upon him as upon his god a glorious immortality.

The sacramental collation was accompanied, or rather preceded, by other
rites of a different character. These were genuine trials imposed upon
the candidate. To receive the sacred ablutions and the consecrated food,
the Participant was obliged to prepare for them by prolonged abstinence
and numerous austerities; he played the rôle of sufferer in certain
dramatic expiations of strange character and

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

of which we know neither the number nor the succession. If we can
believe a Christian writer of the fourth century, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) the eyes of the neophyte were bandaged,
his hands were bound with the entrails of chickens, and he was compelled
to leap over a ditch filled with water; finally, a liberator approached
with a sword and sundered his loathsome bonds. Sometimes, the terrified
mystic took part, if not as an actor, at least as a spectator, in a
simulated murder, which in its origin was undoubtedly real. In late
periods, the officiants were contented with producing a sword dipped in
the blood of a man who had met a violent death. The cruelty of these
ceremonies, which among the warlike tribes of the Taurus must have been
downright savage orgies, was softened by contact with western
civilization. In any event, they had become more fear-inspiring than
fearful, and it was the moral courage of the: initiate that was tried
rather than his physical endurance. The idea which was sought to be
attained was the stoic "apathy," the absence of every sensitive emotion.
The atrocious tortures, the impossible macerations, to which some too
credulous or inventive authors have condemned the adepts of the
Mysteries, must be relegated to the realm of fable, as must likewise the
pretended human sacrifices which were said to have been perpetrated in
the shades of the sacred crypts.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Nevertheless, it must not be supposed that Mithraism exhibited nothing
more than the benignant phantasmagoria of a species of ancient
freemasonry. There had subsisted in its liturgic drama vestiges of its
original barbarism, of the time when in the forests, in the depths of
some dark cave, corybantes, enveloped in the skins of beasts, sprinkled
the altars with their blood. In the Roman towns, the secluded caverns of
the mountains were replaced by subterranean vaults (*spelæa*) of far
less imposing aspect (Fig. [39](#img_39)). But even in these artificial
grottos the scenes of initiation were calculated to produce on the
neophyte a profound impression. When, after having traversed the
approaches of the temple, he descended the stairs of the crypt, he
perceived before him in the brilliantly decorated and illuminated
sanctuary the venerated image of the tauroctonous Mithra erected in the
apse, then the monstrous statues of the leontocephalous Kronos, laden
with attributes and mystic symbols, the meaning of which was still
unknown to him. At the two sides, partly in the shadow, the assistants,
kneeling on stone benches, were seen praying. Lamps ranged about the
choir threw their bright rays on the images of the gods and the
celebrants, who, robed in strange costumes, received the new convert.
Fitful flashes of light skillfully manipulated impressed his eyes and
his mind. The sacred emotion with which he

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

 

<span id="img_39"></span> ![](img/16300.jpg)  
MITHRÆUM OF CARNUNTUM, THE MODERN PETRONELL, NEAR VIENNA TO THE EAST.

(Restored by Tragan.)

This mithræum, like all others of the same style, is underground. Before
the great bas-relief of Mithra slaying the bull are two altars, the one
large and square in form, the other smaller and richly ornamented. The
small statute on the left is Mithra being born from the rock. At the
right of the entrance we see the lion of Mithra and at the left is a
font for holy water. The two torch-bearers stand on the pillars which
separate the aisles. The mithræum is approached by a stairway and
through a square hall (or pronaos) which is considerably larger than the
sanctum itself (T. et M., p. 493).

 

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

was seized lent to images which were really puerile a most formidable
appearance; the vain allurements with which he was confronted appeared
to him serious dangers over which his courage triumphed. The fermented
beverage which he imbibed excited his senses and disturbed his reason to
the utmost pitch; he murmured his mystic formulas, and they evoked
before his distracted imagination divine apparitions. In his ecstasy, he
believed himself transported beyond the limits of the world, and having
issued from his trance he repeated, as did the mystic of Apuleius: <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) "I have transcended the boundaries of
death, I have trodden the threshold of Proserpine, and having traversed
all the elements I am returned to the earth. In the middle of the night
I have seen the Sun scintillating with a pure light; I have approached
the gods below and the gods above, and have worshipped them face to
face."

The tradition of all this occult ceremonial was scrupulously observed by
a priesthood instructed in the divine science and distinct from all
classes of initiates. Its first founders were certainly the Oriental
Magi, but we are almost entirely ignorant of the manner in which its
ranks were later recruited and organized, Was it hereditary, named for
life, or chosen for a fixed term? In the latter event, who had the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

right of choosing and what conditions did the candidates have to fulfil?
None of these points is sufficiently elucidated. We can only state that
the priest, who bore indifferently, as it seems, the title of *sacerdos*
or that of *antistes*, was often, but not always, a member of the
Fathers. We find one vicar, and sometimes several, in each temple. There
is every ground for believing that a certain hierarchy existed in this
"sacerdotal order." Tertullian tells us that the chief pontiff (*summus
Pontifex*) <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) could marry but once; he
doubtless designated by this Roman name the "Father of the Fathers," who
appears to have exercised general jurisdiction over all the initiates
residing in the city. <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) This is the
only indication we possess regarding an organization which was perhaps
as solidly constituted as that of the Magi in the Sassanian kingdom, or
that of the Manichæans of the Roman empire. The same apologist adds that
the sectarians of the Persian god also had, like the Christians, their
"virgins and their continents." The existence of this kind of Mithraic
monachism appears to be all the more remarkable as the merit attached to
celibacy is antagonistic to the spirit of Zoroastrianism.

The rôle of the clergy was certainly more extensive than in the ancient
Greek and Roman

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

religions. The priest was the intermediary between God and man. His
functions evidently included the administration of the sacraments and
the celebration of the services. The inscriptions tell us that in
addition he presided at the formal dedications, or at least represented
the faithful one on such an occasion along with the Fathers; but this
was the least portion only of the duties he had to perform; the
religious service which fell to his lot appears to have been very
exacting. He doubtless was compelled to see that a perpetual fire burned
upon the altars. Three times a day, at dawn, at noon, and at dusk, he
addressed a prayer to the Sun, turning in the morning toward the East,
at noon toward the South, at evening toward the West. The daily liturgy
frequently embraced special sacrifices. The celebrant, garbed in
sacerdotal robes resembling those of the Magi, sacrificed to the higher
and lower gods divers victims, the blood of which was collected in a
trench; or offered them libations, holding in his hands the bundle of
sacred twigs which we know from the Avesta. Long psalmodies and chants
accompanied with music were interspersed among the ritual acts. A solemn
moment in the service,--one very probably marked by the sounding of a
bell,--was that in which the image of the tauroctonous Mithra, hitherto
kept veiled, was uncovered before the eyes of the initiates. In some
temples, the sculptured

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

slab, like our tabernacles, revolved on a pivot, and alternately
concealed and exposed the figures that adorned its two faces.

Each day in the week, the Planet to which the day was sacred was invoked
in a fixed spot in the crypt; and Sunday, over which the Sun presided,
was especially holy. Further, the liturgic calendar solemnized certain
dates by festivals concerning which we are unfortunately very poorly
informed. Possibly the sixteenth or middle day of the month continued
(as in Persia) to have Mithra for its patron. On the other hand, there
is never a word in the Occident concerning the celebration of the
Mithrakana, which were so popular in Asia. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) They were doubtless merged in the
celebration of the 25th of December, for a very wide-spread custom
required that the new birth of the Sun (*Natalis invicti*), which began
to wax great again on the termination of the winter solstice, should be
celebrated by sacred festivals. We have good reasons for believing that
the equinoxes were also days of rejoicing, the return of the deified
seasons being inaugurated by some religious salutation. The initiations
took place preferably at the beginning of spring, in March or in April,
at the Paschal period, when Christians likewise admitted their
catechumens to the rites of baptism. But concerning all these
solemnities, as generally with everything connected with

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

the heortology <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) of the Mysteries, our
ignorance is almost absolute.

The Mithraic communities were not only brotherhoods united by spiritual
bonds; they were also associations possessing juridic existence and
enjoying the right of holding property. For the management of their
affairs and the care of their temporal interests, they elected officers,
who must not be confounded either with the initiates or the priests. The
titles borne in the descriptions by the members of these boards of
trustees prove to us that the organization of the colleges of the
worshippers of Mithra did not differ from that of the other religious
*sodalicia*, which was based upon the constitutions of the
municipalities or towns. These corporations published an official list
of their members, an *album sacratorum*, in which the latter were ranked
according to the importance of their office. They had at their head a
council of decurions, a directing committee named most likely in a
general assembly, a sort of miniature senate, of which the first ten
(*decem primi*) possessed, as in the cities, special privileges. They
had their masters (*magistri*) or presidents, elected annually, their
curators (*curatores*), upon whom fell the task of managing the
finances, their attorneys (*defensores*), charged with presenting their
cause before

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

the courts or public bureaus; and finally, their patrons (*patroni*),
persons of consequence, from whom they expected not only efficient
protection but also pecuniary aid in replenishing their budget.

As the state granted them no subsidies, their well-being depended
exclusively on private generosity. Voluntary contributions, the regular
revenues of the college, scarcely covered the expenses of worship, and
the least extraordinary expenditure was a heavy burden for the common
purse. These associations of unmoneyed people could not, with their
slender resources, construct sumptuous temples; ordinarily they acquired
from some favorably disposed land-holder a piece of ground, on which
they erected, or rather dug, their chapel, some other benefactor
defraying the cost of the construction. Or, some wealthy burgher placed
at the disposal of the mystics a cellar, where they installed themselves
as best they could. If the original donor had not the means to pay for
the interior decoration of the crypt and the modelling of the sacred
images, other Brothers supplied the necessary sum, and a honorific
inscription perpetuated the memory of their munificence. Three votive
inscriptions found in Rome enable us to witness the founding of one of
these Mithraic congregations. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) A
freedman. and a freeman

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

contributed a marble altar, two other initiates consecrated a second
one, and a slave likewise made his modest offering. The generous
protectors obtained in return for their liberality the highest dignities
in the little church. Through their efforts it was gradually furnished,
and in the end could allow itself certain luxuries. Marble succeeded
common stone, sculpture replaced plaster, and mosaic was substituted for
painting. Finally, when the first temple fell into decay, the enriched
community frequently rebuilt it with new splendor.

The number of the gifts mentioned in the epigraphic texts bears witness
to the attachment of the faithful to the brotherhoods into which they
had been admitted. It was owing to the constant devotion of the
thousands of zealous; disciples that these societies, the organic cells
of the great religious body, could live and flourish. The order was
divided into a multitude of little circles, strongly knit together and
practising the same rites in the same sanctuaries. The size of the
temples in which they worshipped is proof that the number of members was
always very limited. Even supposing that the Participants only were
allowed to enter the subterranean crypt and that the initiates of
inferior rank were admitted only to the vestibule (*pronaos*), it is
impossible that these societies should have counted more than one
hundred members.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

When the number increased beyond measure, a new chapel was constructed
and the group separated. In these compact churches, where every one knew
and aided every one else, prevailed the intimacy of a large family. The
clear-cut distinctions of an aristocratic society were here effaced; the
adoption of the same faith had made the slave the equal, and sometimes
the superior, of the decurion and the *clarissimus*. All bowed to the
same rules, all were equally honored guests at the same festivals, and
after their death they all doubtless reposed in one common sepulcher.
Although no Mithraic cemetery has been discovered up to the present day,
the special belief of the sect regarding the future life and its very
definite rites render it quite probable that like the majority of the
Roman *sodalicia* it formed not only religious colleges but also
funerary associations. It certainly practised inhumation, and the
liveliest and most ardent desire of its adepts must have been that of
obtaining an interment that was at once honorable and religious, a
"mansion eternal," where they could await in peace the day of the
Resurrection. If the name of brothers which the initiates gave
themselves was not an empty term, they were bound to render to one
another at least this last duty.

The very imperfect image that we can frame of the interior life of the
Mithraic conventicles aids us nevertheless in fathoming the reasons

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

of their rapid multiplication. The humble plebeians who first entered
its vaults in great numbers found in the fraternity of these
congregations succor and solace. In joining them, they passed from their
isolation and abandonment to become a part of a powerful organization
with a fully developed hierarchy and having ramifications that spread
like a dense net over the entire empire. Besides, the titles which were
conferred upon them satisfied the natural desire that dwells in every
man of playing a part in the world and of enjoying some consideration in
the eyes of his fellows.

With these purely secular reasons were associated the more powerful
motives of faith. The members of these little societies imagined
themselves in the privileged possession of a body of ancient wisdom
derived from the far Orient. The secrecy with which these unfathomable
arcana were surrounded increased the veneration that they inspired:
*Omne ignoratum pro magnifico est*. The gradual initiations kept alive
in the heart of the neophyte the hopes of truth still more sublime, and
the strange rites which accompanied them left in his ingenuous soul an
ineffaceable impression. The converts believed they found, and, the
suggestion being transformed into reality, actually did find, in the
mystic ceremonies a stimulant and a consolation. They believed
themselves purified of their guilt by the ritual

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

ablutions, and this baptism lightened their conscience of the weight of
their heavy responsibility. They came forth strengthened from these
sacred banquets, which contained the promise of a better life, where the
sufferings of this world would find their full compensation. The
astonishing spread of Mithraism is due in large measure to these
stupendous illusions, which would appear ludicrous were they not so
profoundly and thoroughly human.

Nevertheless, in the competition between the rival churches that
disputed under the Cæsars the empire of human souls, one cause of
inferiority rendered the struggle unequal for the Persian sect. Whilst
the majority of the Oriental cults accorded to women a considerable rôle
in their churches, and sometimes even a preponderating one, finding in
them ardent supporters of the faith, Mithra forbade their participation
in his Mysteries and so deprived himself of the incalculable assistance
of these propagandists. The rude discipline of the order did not permit
them to take the degrees in the sacred cohorts, and, as among the
Mazdeans of the Orient, they occupied only a secondary place in the
society of the faithful. Among the hundreds of inscriptions that have
come down to us, not one mentions either a priestess, a woman initiate,
or even a donatress. But a religion which aspired to become universal
could not deny a knowledge of divine things to one half of the

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

human race, and in order to afford some opportunity for feminine
devotion it contracted at Rome an alliance which certainly contributed
to its success. The history of Mithraism in the Occident would not be
intelligible if we neglected to consider its policy toward the rest of
paganism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[153:1](mom08.htm#fr_37) Ps. Augustine, *Quaest.
vet. et novi Test.*, (*T. et M.*, Vol. II., p. 8).

<span id="fn_38"></span>[154:1](mom08.htm#fr_38) See *supra*, [p.
144](mom07.htm#page_144).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[156:1](mom08.htm#fr_39) See *infra*, [p.
190](mom09.htm#page_190), footnote.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[158:1](mom08.htm#fr_40) Porph., *De antro
nymph*., c. 15 (*T. et M.*, Vol. II., p. 40).

<span id="fn_41"></span>[158:2](mom08.htm#fr_41) The liturgic use of
honey has recently been elucidated by Usener, "Milch und Honig"
(*Hermes*, LVII), 1902, p. 177 ff.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[160:1](mom08.htm#fr_42) See above, [p.
138](mom07.htm#page_138).

<span id="fn_43"></span>[161:1](mom08.htm#fr_43) See above, [p.
153](#page_153), footnote.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[164:1](mom08.htm#fr_44) Apuleius, *Metam*. XI,
23, *à propos* of the mystics of Isis.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[165:1](mom08.htm#fr_45) Tertull., De praescr.
haeret., XL.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[165:2](mom08.htm#fr_46) Cf. *supra*, [p.
155](#page_155). I adopt here the suggestion of M. Wissova, *Religion
der Römer*, 1902, p. 309.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[167:1](mom08.htm#fr_47) See above, [p.
9](mom04.htm#page_9).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[168:1](mom08.htm#fr_48) The science of
festivals. From ἑορτή, festival, holiday.--*Tr*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[169:1](mom08.htm#fr_49) *Corpus inscriptionum
latinarum*, Vol. VI., Nos. 556, 717, 734 = 30822 (*T. et M.*, Vol. II.
p. 202, n<sup>os</sup> 47-48<sup>bis</sup>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mithraism and the Religions of the Empire](mom09)
