[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mom00)  [Next](mom02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE TO THE FRENCH EDITION

THE present work, in which we purpose to treat of the origin and history
of the Mithraic religion, does not pretend to offer a picture of the
downfall of paganism. We shall not attempt, even in a general way, to
seek for the causes which explain the establishment of the Oriental
religions in Italy; nor shall we endeavor to show how their doctrines,
which were far more active as fermenting agents than the theories of the
philosophers, decomposed the national beliefs on which the Roman state
and the entire life of antiquity rested, and how the destruct on of the
edifice which they had disintegrated was ultimately accomplished by
Christianity. We shall not undertake to trace here the various phases of
the battle waged between idolatry and the growing Church; this vast
subject, which we hope some day to approach, lies beyond the scope of
the present work. We are concerned here with one epoch only of this
decisive revolution, it being our purpose to show with all the
distinctness in our power how and why a certain Mazdean sect failed
under the Cæsars to become the dominant religion of the empire.

The civilization of the Greeks had never succeeded in establishing
itself among the Persians, and the Romans were no more successful in
subjecting the Parthians to their sway. The significant fact which
dominates the entire history of Hither Asia is that the Iranian world
and the Græco-Latin world

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

remained forever unamenable to reciprocal assimilation, forever sundered
as much by a mutual repulsion, deep and instinctive, as by their
hereditary hostility.

Nevertheless, the religion of the Magi, which was the highest blossom of
the genius of Iran, exercised a deep influence on Occidental culture at
three different periods. In the first place, Parseeism had made a very
distinct impression on Judaism in its formative stage, and several of
its cardinal doctrines were disseminated by Jewish colonists throughout
the entire basin of the Mediterranean, and subsequently even forced
themselves on orthodox Catholicism.

The influence of Mazdaism on European thought was still more direct,
when Asia Minor was conquered by the Romans. Here, from time immemorial,
colonies of Magi who had migrated from Babylon lived in obscurity, and,
welding together their traditional beliefs and the doctrines of the
Grecian thinkers, had elaborated little by little in these barbaric
regions a religion original despite its complexity. At the beginning of
our era, we see this religion suddenly emerging from the darkness, and
pressing forward, rapidly and simultaneously, into the valleys of the
Danube and the Rhine, and even into the heart of Italy. The nations of
the Occident felt vividly the superiority of the Mazdean faith over
their ancient national creeds, and the populace thronged to the altars
of the exotic god. But the progress of the conquering religion was
checked when it came in contact with Christianity. The two adversaries
discovered with amazement, but with no inkling of their origin, the
similarities

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

which united them; and they severally accused the Spirit of Deception of
having endeavored to caricature the sacredness of their religious rites.
The conflict between the two was inevitable,--a ferocious and implacable
duel: for the stake was the dominion of the world. No one has told the
tale of its changing fortunes, and our imagination alone is left to
picture the forgotten dramas that agitated the souls of the multitudes
when they were called upon to choose between Ormadz and the Trinity. We
know the result of the battle only: Mithraism was vanquished, as without
doubt it should have been. The defeat which it suffered was not due
entirely to the superiority of the evangelical ethics, nor to that of
the apostolic doctrine regarding the teaching of the Mysteries; it
perished, not only because it was encumbered with the onerous heritage
of a superannuated past, but also because its liturgy and its theology
had retained too much of its Asiatic coloring to be accepted by the
Latin spirit without repugnance. For a converse reason, the same battle,
waged in the same epoch in Persia between these same two rivals, was
without success, if not without honor, for the Christians; and in the
realms of the Sassanids, Zoroastrianism never once was in serious danger
of being overthrown.

The defeat of Mithraism did not, however, utterly annihilate its power.
It had prepared the minds of the Occident for the reception of a new
faith, which, like itself, came also from the banks of the Euphrates,
and which resumed hostilities with entirely different tactics.
Manichæism appeared as its successor and continuator. This was the final
assault made by Persia on the Occident,--an assault

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

more sanguinary than the preceding, but one which was ultimately
destined to be repulsed by the powerful resistance offered to it by the
Christian empire.

\*     \*     \*     \*     \*

The foregoing rapid sketch will, I hope, give some idea of the great
importance which the history of Mithraism possesses. A branch torn from
the ancient Mazdean trunk, it has preserved in many respects the
characteristics of the ancient worship of the Iranian tribes; and it
will enable us by comparison to understand the extent, so much disputed,
of the Avestan reformation. Again, if it has not inspired, it has at
least contributed to give precise form to, certain doctrines of the
Church, as the ideas relative to the powers of hell and to the end of
the world. And thus both its rise and its decadence combine in
explaining to us the formation of two great religions. In the heyday of
its vigor, it exercised no less remarkable an influence on the society
and government of Rome. Never, perhaps, not even in the epoch of the
Mussulman invasion, was Europe in greater danger of being Asiaticized
than in the third century of our era, and there was a moment in this
period when Cæsarism was apparently on the point of being transformed
into a Caliphate. The resemblances which the court of Diocletian bore to
that of Chosroes have been frequently emphasized. It was the worship of
the sun, and in particular the Mazdean theories, that disseminated the
ideas upon which the deified sovereigns of the West endeavored to rear
their monarchical absolutism. The rapid spread of the Persian Mysteries
among all classes of the population served admirably the political
ambitions

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

of the emperors. A sudden inundation of Iranian and Semitic conceptions
swept over the Occident, threatening to submerge everything that the
genius of Greece and Rome had so laboriously erected, and when the flood
subsided it left behind in the conscience of the people a deep sediment
of Oriental beliefs, which have never been completely obliterated.

I believe I have said sufficient to show that the subject of which I am
about to treat is deserving of exhaustive and profound study. Although
my investigations have carried me, on many sides, much farther than I
had at the outset intended to go, I still do not regret the years of
labor and of travel which they have caused me. The work which I have
undertaken could not have been other than difficult. On the one hand, we
do not know to what precise degree the Avesta and the other sacred books
of the Parsees represent the ideas of the Mazdeans of the Occident; on
the other, these books constitute the sole material in our possession
for interpreting the great mass of figured monuments which have
gradually been collected. The inscriptions by themselves are always a
sure guide, but their contents are upon the whole very meager. Our
predicament is somewhat similar to that in which we should find
ourselves if we were called upon to write the history of the Church of
the Middle Ages with no other sources at our command than the Hebrew
Bible and the sculptured *débris* of Roman and Gothic portals. For this
reason, our explanations of the Mithraic imagery will frequently possess
nothing more than a greater or less degree of probability. I make no
pretension to having

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

reached in all cases a rigorously exact decipherment of these
hieroglyphics, and 1 am anxious to ascribe to my opinions nothing but
the value of the arguments which support them. 1 hope nevertheless to
have established with certainty the general signification of the sacred
images which adorned the Mithraic crypts. On the details of their
recondite symbolism it is difficult to throw much light. We are
frequently forced to take refuge here in the *ars nesciendi*.

The following pages reproduce the "Conclusions" printed at the end of
the first volume of my large work, *Textes et monuments figurés relatifs
aux mystères de Mithra* (Brussels: H. Lamertin). <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Stripped of the notes and references which
there served to establish them, they are confined to epitomizing and
co-ordinating the sum-total of the knowledge we possess concerning the
origin and the characteristic features of the Mithraic religion. They
will furnish, in fact, all the material necessary for readers desirous
of general information on this subject. To impart the same solidity to
all the various portions of the edifice we have been reconstructing has
been impossible. The uncertainties and discontinuity of the tradition do
not permit this. Persons desirous of examining the stability of the
foundations upon which my expositions rest, should consult the critical
discussions of the "Introduction" to my larger work, the purpose of
which is to ascertain

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the meaning and value of the written documents, and especially of the
figured monuments, there described.

During the long period in which this work has been in preparation I have
been frequently obliged to resort to that community of interest and
sentiment which unites men of science throughout the world, and I may
say I have rarely appealed to it in vain. The courtesy of devoted
friends, several of whom are now no more, has often anticipated the
expression of my wishes, and has spontaneously placed at my disposal
things which I could scarcely have dared to request. I have endeavored
in my large work to make due acknowledgment to each one of them. It
would not be fitting to give in this place a mere mechanical list of the
names of my collaborators, and by bestowing upon them commonplace thanks
to appear in the light of cancelling the indebtedness which I owe them.
But it is with a feeling of profound gratitude that I recall to mind the
services which have been lavished upon me, and that, having now reached
the end of my task, after more than ten years, I still think of all who
have aided me in completing it.

The first edition of the present work appeared in 1900, and a second was
called for not long afterwards. Few changes have been made. We have
added a few notes, made a few references to recent articles, and adorned
the pages with a considerable number of illustrations. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) The most important addition is the chapter
on Mithraic sculpture, which,

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

in view of the extensive researches now being made as to the Oriental
origins of Roman art, cannot fail to be of interest.

We have also to thank the many critics who have so kindly reviewed our
Mysteries of Mithra, and have generously acknowledged that our
reconstruction of this vanished creed rests upon an objective and
complete interpretation of the sources. In a matter which is still so
obscure, it was inevitable that certain divergences of opinion should
have come to light, and our conclusions, at times bold, may, in certain
points, have appeared to some erroneous. We have had regard for these
expressions of doubt in our revision. If we have not always felt obliged
to modify our opinion, it is not because we have not weighed the
arguments of our critics, but because in so small a volume as the
present, from which all discussions must be excluded, we had not the
space to substantiate our conclusions. It is a delicate matter, we
grant, to publish a text without the notes which support, explain, and
modify it; but we trust that the reader will not feel too keenly this
inevitable omission.

FRANZ CUMONT.

GHENT, *May 1st, 1902*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](mom01.htm#fr_0) Large octavo, 931 pages,
507 illustrations and 9 photogravure plates. This work, which is a
monument of scholarship and industry, is a complete descriptive and
critical collection of all the Mithraic texts, inscriptions, references,
and monuments that have been recovered from antiquity.--T. J. McC.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:1](mom01.htm#fr_1) The illustrations of the
French edition numbered twenty-two. The present English edition contains
more than double that number.--T. J. McC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](mom02)
