[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mom04)  [Next](mom06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# THE DISSEMINATION OF MITHRAISM IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE

IT MAY be said, in a general way, that Mithra remained forever excluded
from the Hellenic world. The ancient authors of Greece speak of him only
as a foreign god worshipped by the kings of Persia. Even during the
Alexandrian epoch he had not descended from the plateau of Asia Minor to
the shores of Ionia. In all the countries washed by the Ægean Sea, only
a single late inscription in the Piræus recalls his existence, and we
seek in vain for his name among the numerous exotic divinities
worshipped at Delos in the second century before our era. Under the
empire, it is true, mithræums are found in divers ports of the coast of
Phoenicia and Egypt, near Aradus, Sidon, and Alexandria; but these
isolated monuments only throw into stronger relief the absence of every
vestige of the Mithraic Mysteries in the interior of the country. The
recent discovery of a temple of Mithra at Memphis would appear to be an
exception that confirms the rule, for the Mazdean deity was probably not
introduced into that ancient city until the time of the Romans. He has
not been mentioned hitherto in any inscription of Egypt or Assyria, and
there is likewise nothing to show that altars were erected to him even
in the capital

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

of the Seleucidæ. In these semi-Oriental empires the powerful
organization of the indigenous clergy and the ardent devotion of the
people for their national idols appear to have arrested the progress of
the invader and to have paralyzed his influence.

One characteristic detail shows that the Iranian *yazata* never made
many converts in the Hellenic or Hellenized countries. Greek
onomatology, which furnishes a considerable series of theophorous or
god-bearing names indicating the popularity which the Phrygian and
Egyptian divinities enjoyed, has no *Mithrion*, *Mithrocles*,
*Mithrodorus*, or *Mithrophilus*, to show as the counterparts of its
Menophili, its Metrodoti, its Isidori, and its Serapions. All the
derivatives of Mithra are of barbaric formation. Although the Thracian
Bendis, the Asian Cybele, the Serapis of the Alexandrians, and even the
Syrian Baals, were successively received with favor in the cities of
Greece, that country never extended the hand of hospitality to the
tutelar deity of its ancient enemies.

His distance from the great centers of ancient civilization explains the
belated arrival of Mithra in the Occident. Official worship was rendered
at Rome to the *Magna Mater* of Pessinus as early as 204 B.C.; Isis and
Serapis made their appearance there in the first century before our era,
and long before this they had counted their worshippers in Italy by
multitudes. The Carthaginian Astarte

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

had a temple in the capital from the end of the Punic Wars; the Bellona
of Cappadocia from the period of Sulla; the *Dea Syria* of Hierapolis
from the beginning of the empire, when the Persian Mysteries were still
totally unknown there. And yet these deities were those of a nation or a
city only, while the domain of Mithra extended from the Indus to the
Pontus Euxinus.

But this domain, even in the epoch of Augustus, was still situated
almost entirely beyond the frontiers of the empire; and the central
plateau of Asia Minor, which had long resisted the Hellenic
civilization, remained even more hostile to the culture of Rome. This
region of steppes, forests, and pastures, intersected by precipitous
declivities, and having a climate more rigorous than that of Germany,
had no attractions for foreigners, and the indigenous dynasties which,
despite the state of vassalage to which they had been reduced, still
held their ground under the early Cæsars, encouraged the isolation that
had been their distinction for ages. Cilicia, it is true, had been
organized as a Roman province in the year 102 B.C., but a few points
only on the coast had been occupied at that period, and the conquest of
the country was not completed until two centuries later. Cappadocia was
not incorporated until the reign of Tiberius, the western part of Pontus
until the reign of Nero, and Commagene and Lesser

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Armenia not definitively until the reign of Vespasian. Not until then
were regular and immediate relations established between these remote
countries and the Occident. The exigencies of administration and the
organization of defence, the mutations of governors and officers, the
relieving of procurators and revenue officers, the levies of troops of
infantry and cavalry, and finally the permanent establishment of three
legions along the frontier of the Euphrates, provoked a perpetual
interchange of men, products, and ideas between these mountainous
districts hitherto closed to the world, and the European provinces. Then
came the great expeditions of Trajan, of Lucius Verus, of Septimius
Severus, the subjection of Mesopotamia, and the foundation of numerous
colonies in Osrhoene and as far as Nineveh, which formed the links of a
great chain binding Iran with the Mediterranean. These successive
annexations of the Cæsars were the first cause of the diffusion of the
Mithraic religion in the Latin world. It began to spread there under the
Flavians and developed under the Antonines and the Severi, just as did
another cult practised alongside of it in Commagene, namely that of
Jupiter Dolichenus, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) which made at
the same time the tour of the Roman empire.

According to Plutarch, <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) Mithra was
introduced

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

much earlier into Italy. The Romans, by this account, are said to have
been initiated into his Mysteries by the Cilician pirates conquered by
Pompey. Plutarch's testimony has nothing improbable in it. We know that
the first Jewish community established *trans Tiberim* (across the
Tiber) was composed of captives that the same Pompey had brought back
from the capture of Jerusalem (63 B.C.). Owing to this particular event,
it is possible that towards the end of the republic the Persian god
actually had found a few faithful devotees in the mixed populace of the
capital. But mingled with the multitudes of fellow worshippers that
practised foreign rites, his little group of votaries did not attract
attention. The *yazata* was the object of the same distrust as the
Asiatics that worshipped him. The influence of this small band of
sectaries on the great mass of the Roman population was virtually as
infinitesimal as is to-day the influence of Buddhistic societies on
modern Europe.

It was not until the end of the first century that the name of Mithra
began to be generally bruited abroad in Rome. When Statius wrote the
first canto of the *Thebaid*, about eighty years after Christ, he had
already seen typical representations of the tauroctonous hero, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) and it appears from the testimony of
Plutarch that in his time (46-125 A.D.) the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

Mazdean sect already enjoyed a certain notoriety in the Occident. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) This conclusion is confirmed by epigraphic
documents. The most ancient inscription to Mithra which we possess is a
bilingual inscription of a freedman of the Flavians (69-96 A.D.). Not
long after, a marble group is consecrated to him by a slave of T.
Claudius Livianus who was pretorian prefect under Trajan (102 A.D.)
(Figure [10](#img_10).md). The invincible god must also have penetrated
about the same time into central Italy, at Nersæ, in the country of the
Æqui; a text of the year 172 A.D. has been discovered which speaks of a
mithræum that had "crumbled to pieces from old age." The appearance of
the invader in the northern part of the empire is almost simultaneous.
It is undoubted that the fifteenth legion brought the Mysteries to
Carnuntum on the Danube about the beginning of the reign of Vespasian,
and we also know that about 148 A.D. they were practised by the troops
in Germany. Under the Antonines, especially from the beginning of the
reign of Commodus, the proofs of their presence abound in all countries.
At the end of the second century, the Mysteries were celebrated at Ostia
in at least four temples.

We cannot think of enumerating all the cities in which our Asiatic cult
was established, nor of stating in each case the reasons

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

why it was introduced. Despite their frequency, the epigraphic texts and
sculptured monuments throw but very imperfect light on

 

<span id="img_10"></span> ![](img/03900.jpg)  
Fig. 10.  
TAUROCTONOUS MITHRA.

(Marble group of the second century, British Museum.)

The remarkable feature of this group is that not blood, but three spikes
of wheat, issue from the wound of the bull. According to the Mithraic
theory, wheat and the vine sprang from the spinal cord and the blood of
the sacrificed animal (see the Chapter on "The Doctrine of the Mithraic
Mysteries"). *T. et M.*, p. 228.

 

the local history of Mithraism. It is impossible for us to follow the
detailed steps in its advancement, to distinguish the concurrent
influences exercised by the different churches,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

to draw up a picture of the work of conversion, pursuing its course from
city to city and province to province. All that we can do is to indicate
in large outlines in what countries the new faith was propagated and who
were in general the champions that advocated it.

The principal agent of its diffusion was undoubtedly the army. The
Mithraic religion is predominantly a religion of soldiers, and it was
not without good reason that the name of *milites* was given to a
certain grade of initiates. The influence of the army may appear less
capable of affording an explanation when one reflects that under the
emperors the legions were quartered in stationary encampments, and from
the time of Hadrian at least (117-138 A.D.) they were severally
recruited from the provinces in which they were stationed. But this
general rule was subject to numerous exceptions. Thus, for example, the
Asiatics contributed for a long time the bulk of the effective troops in
Dalmatia and Mœsia, and for a certain period in Africa also.
Furthermore, the soldier who after several years of service in his
native country had been promoted to the rank of centurion was as a rule
transferred to some foreign station; and after he had passed through the
different stages of his second charge he was often assigned to a new
garrison, so that the entire body of centurions of any one legion
constituted "a sort of microcosm

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of the empire." <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) These officers were
a potent source of influence, for their very position insured to them a
considerable moral influence over the conscripts whom it was their
vocation to instruct. In addition to this individual propaganda, which
is almost totally withdrawn from our ken, the temporary or permanent
transfers of single detachments, and sometimes of entire regiments, to
remotely situated fortresses or camps brought together people of all
races and beliefs. Finally, there were to be found side by side with the
legionaries who were Roman citizens, an equal, if not a greater, number
of foreign *auxilia*, who did not, like their comrades, enjoy the
privilege of serving in their native country. Indeed, in order to
forestall local uprisings, it was a set part of the imperial policy to
remove these foreign troops as far as possible from the country of their
origin. Thus, under the Flavians, the indigenous *alæ* or cohorts formed
but a minimal fraction of the auxiliaries that guarded the frontiers of
the Rhine and the Danube.

Among the recruits summoned from abroad to take the place of the
national troops sent to distant parts were numerous Asiatics, and
perhaps no country of the Orient furnished, relatively to the extent of
its territory, a greater number of Roman soldiers than Commagene, where
Mithraism had struck deepest

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

root. In addition to horsemen and legionaries, there were levied in this
country, probably at the time of its union with the empire, at least six
cohorts of allies (*auxilia*). Numerous also were the native soldiers of
Cappadocia, Pontus, and Cilicia, not to speak of Syrians of all classes;
and the Cæsars did not scruple even to enroll those agile squadrons of
Parthian cavalry with whose warlike qualities they had, to their own
cost, but too often been made acquainted.

The Roman soldier was, as a rule, pious and even superstitious. The many
perils to which he was exposed caused him to seek unremittingly the
protection of Heaven, and an incalculable number of dedicatory
inscriptions bears witness both to the vivacity of his faith and to the
variety of his beliefs. The Orientals especially, transported for twenty
years and more into countries which were totally strange to them,
piously preserved the memories of their national divinities, and
whenever the opportunity offered, they did not fail to assemble for the
purpose of rendering them devotion. They had experienced the need of
conciliating the great lord (*Baal*), whose anger as little children
they had learned to fear. Their worship also offered an occasion for
reunion, and for recalling to memory under the gloomy climates of the
North their distant country. But their brotherhoods were not exclusive;
they gladly admitted to their rites

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

those of their companions in arms, of whatever origin, whose aspirations
the official religion of the army failed to satisfy, and who hoped to
obtain from the foreign god more efficacious succor in their combats,
or, in case of death, a happier lot in the life to come. Afterwards,
these neophytes, transferred to other garrisons according to the
exigencies of the service or the necessities of war, from converts
became converters, and formed about them a new nucleus of proselytes. In
this manner, the Mysteries of Mithra, first brought to Europe by
semi-barbarian recruits from Cappadocia or Commagene, were rapidly
disseminated to the utmost confines of the ancient world.

From the banks of the Black Sea to the mountains of Scotland and to the
borders of the great Sahara Desert, along the entire length of the Roman
frontier, Mithraic monuments abound. Lower Mœsia, which was not explored
until very recently, has already furnished a number of them,--a
circumstance which will not excite our astonishment when it is
remembered that Oriental contingents supplied in this province the
deficiency of native conscripts. To say nothing of the port of Tomi,
legionaries practised the Persian cult at Troësmis, at Durostorum, and
at Œscus, as well as at the *Tropæum Traiani*, which the discovery of
the monuments of Adam-Klissi has recently rendered celebrated.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

In the interior of the country, this cult penetrated to Montana and to
Nicopolis; and it is doubtless from these northern cities that it
crossed the Balkans and spread into the northern parts of Thrace,
notably above Serdica (Sofia) and as far as the environs of
Philippopolis in the valley of the Hebrus. Ascending the Danube, it
gained a footing at Viminacium, the capital of Upper Mœsia; but we are
ignorant of the extent to which it spread in this country, which is
still imperfectly explored. The naval flotilla that patrolled the waters
of this mighty river was manned and even commanded by foreigners, and
the fleet undoubtedly disseminated the Asiatic religion in all the ports
it touched.

We are better informed regarding the circumstances of the introduction
of Mithraism into Dacia. When in 107 A.D. Trajan annexed this barbarous
kingdom to the Roman empire, the country, exhausted by six years of
obstinate warfare, was little more than a desert. To repopulate it, the
emperor transported to it, as Eutropius <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) tells us, multitudes of colonists "*ex
toto orbe Romano*," from all the territories of Rome. The population of
this country was even more mixed in the second century than it is
to-day, where all the races of Europe are still bickering and battling
with one another. Besides the remnants of the ancient Dacians, were
found here Illyrians

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and Pannonians, Galatians, Carians, and Asiatics, people from Edessa and
Palmyra, and still others besides, all of whom continued to practise the
religions of their native countries. But none of these cults prospered
more than the Mysteries of Mithra, and one is astounded at the
prodigious development that this religion took during the 150 years that
the Roman domination lasted in this region. It flourished not only in
the capital of the province, Sarmizegetusa, and in the cities that
sprang up near the Roman camps, like Potaïssa and notably Apulum, but
along the entire extent of the territory occupied by the Romans. Whereas
one cannot find in Dacia, so far as I know, the slightest vestige of a
Christian community, from the fortress Szamos Ujvar to the northern
frontier and as far as Romula in Wallachia, multitudes of inscriptions,
of sculptures, and of altars which have escaped the destruction of
mithræums have been found. These *débris* especially abound in the
central portions of the country, along the great causeway that followed
the course of the valley of the Maros, the principal artery by which the
civilization of Rome spread into the mountains of the surrounding
country. The single colony of Apulum counted certainly four temples of
the Persian deity, and the *spelæum* of Sarmizegetusa, recently
excavated, still contains the fragments of a round fifty of bas-reliefs
and other

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

votive tablets which the piety of the faithful had there consecrated to
their god.

Likewise in Pannonia, the Iranian religion implanted itself in the
fortified cities that formed the chain of Roman defences along the
Danube, in Cusum, Intercisa, Aquincum, Brigetio, Carnuntum, Vindobona,
and even in the hamlets of the interior. It was especially powerful in
the two principal places of this double province, in Aquincum and in
Carnuntum; and in both of these cities the causes of its greatness are
easily discovered. The first-named city, where in the third century the
Mysteries were celebrated in at least five temples scattered over its
entire area, was the headquarters of the *legio II adjutrix*, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) which had been formed in the year 70 A.D.
by Vespasian from sailors of the fleet stationed at Ravenna. Among the
freedmen thus admitted into the regular army, the proportion of Asiatics
was considerable, and it is probable that from the very beginning
Mithraism counted a number of adepts in this irregular legion. When
towards the year 120 A.D. it was established by Hadrian in Lower
Pannonia, it undoubtedly brought with it to this place the Oriental cult
to which it appears to have remained loyal to the day of its
dissolution. The *legio I adjutrix*, which had a similar

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

origin, probably sowed the fertile seeds of Mithraism in like manner in
Brigetio, when under Trajan its camp was transferred to that place.

We can determine with even greater precision the manner in which the
Persian god arrived at Carnuntum. In 71 or 72 A.D., Vespasian caused
this important strategic position to be occupied by the *legio XV
Apollinaris*, which for the preceding eight or nine years had been
warring in the Orient. Sent in 63 A.D. to the Euphrates to reinforce the
army which Corbulo was leading against the Parthians, it had taken part
during the years 67 to 70 A.D. in suppressing the uprisings of the Jews,
and had subsequently accompanied Titus to Alexandria. The losses which
this veteran legion had suffered in these sanguinary campaigns were
doubtless made good with recruits levied in Asia. These conscripts were
for the most part probably natives of Cappadocia, and it was they that,
after their transportation to the Danube with the old rank and file of
the legion, there first offered sacrifices to the Iranian god whose name
had been hitherto unknown in the region north of the Alps. There has
been found at Carnuntum a votive Mithraic inscription due to a soldier
of the Apollinarian legion bearing the characteristic name of
*Barbarus*. The first worshippers of the *Sol Invictus* consecrated to
him on the banks of the river a

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

semicircular grotto, which had to be restored from its ruins in the
third century by a Roman knight, and whose high antiquity is evidenced
in all its details. When, some forty years after its arrival in the
Occident, Trajan again transported the fifteenth legion to the
Euphrates, the Persian cult had already struck deep roots in the capital
of Upper Pannonia. Not only the fourteenth legion, *gemina Martia*,
which replaced that which had returned to Asia, but also the sixteenth
and the thirteenth *geminæ*, certain detachments of which were, as it
appears, connected with the first-mentioned legion, succumbed to the
allurements of the Mysteries and counted initiates in their own ranks.
Soon the first temple was no longer adequate, and a second was built,
which--and this is an important fact--immediately adjoined the temple of
Jupiter Dolichenus of Commagene. A municipality having developed
alongside the camp and the conversions continuing to multiply, a third
mithræum was erected, probably towards the beginning of the second
century, and its dimensions surpass those of all similar structures
hitherto discovered. It was enlarged by Diocletian and the princes
associated with him in 307 A.D., when they held their conference at
Carnuntum. Thus these princes sought to give public testimony of their
devotion to Mithra in this holy city, which of all those in the North
probably contained the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

most ancient sanctuaries of the Mazdean sect.

This warlike post, the most important in the entire region, seems also
to have been the religious center from which the foreign cult radiated
into the smaller towns of the surrounding country. Stix-Neusiedl, where
it was certainly practised from the middle of the second century, was
only a dependent village of this powerful city. But farther to the south
the temple of Scarbantia was enriched by a *decurio coloniæ Carnunti*.
Towards the east the territory of Æquinoctium has furnished a votive
inscription to the *Petræ Genetrici*, and still farther off at Vindobona
(Vienna) the soldiers of the tenth legion had likewise learned doubtless
from the neighboring camp, to celebrate the Mysteries. Even in Africa,
traces are found of the influence which the great Pannonian city
exercised on the development of Mithraism.

Several leagues from Vienna, passing across the frontier of Noricum, we
come upon the hamlet of Commagenæ, the name of which is doubtless due to
the fact that a squadron of Commageneans (an *ala Commagenorum*) was
there quartered. One is not surprised, therefore, to learn that a
bas-relief of the tauroctonous god has been discovered here.
Nevertheless, in this province, as in Rhætia, the army does not seem to
have taken, as it did in Pannonia, an active part in the propagation of
the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Asiatic religion. A belated Inscription of a *speculator legionis I
Noricorum* is the only one in these countries that mentions a soldier;
and generally the monuments of the Mysteries are very sparsely scattered
in the valley of the Upper Danube, where the Roman troops were
concentrated. They are not found in increased numbers until the other
slope of the Alps is reached, and the epigraphy of this last-named
region forbids us to assign to them a military origin.

 

<span id="img_11"></span> ![](img/05000.jpg)  
Fig. 11.  
SUN-GOD.

(Fragment from the grand bas-relief of Virunum, in Noricum. *T. et M.*,
p. 336.)

 

On the other hand, the marvellous extension that Mithraism took in the
two Germanies is undoubtedly due to the powerful army corps that
defended that perpetually menaced territory. We find here an inscription
dedicated by a centurion to the *Soli Invicto Mithræ*, about the year
148 A.D., and it is probable that in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the middle of the second century this god had already obtained a goodly
number of converts in the Roman garrisons. All the regiments appear to
have been seized with the contagion: the legions *VIII Augusta*, *XII
Primigenia*, and *XXX Ulpia*, the cohorts and auxiliary *alæ*, as well
as the picked troops of citizen volunteers.

 

<span id="img_12"></span> ![](img/05100.jpg)  
Fig. 12.  
MITHRAIC BAS-RELIEF OF OSTERBURKEN.

(Discovered in 1861 near the ruins of a Roman fort, in the Odenwald,
Hesse. *T. et M.*, Plate VI.)

 

So general a diffusion prevents us from telling exactly from what side
the foreign religion entered this country, but it may be assumed without
fear of error that, save possibly at a certain few points, it was not
imported directly from the Orient, but was transmitted through the
agency of the garrisons on the Danube; and if we wish to assign

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

absolutely the circumstances of its origin we may take it for granted,
with every likelihood of truth, that the eighth legion, which was
transferred from Mœsia to Upper Germany in the year 70 A.D., first
practised there the religion which was soon destined to become the
preponderating one of this country.

Of all countries Germany is that in which the greatest number of
mithræums, or places of Mithraic worship, has been discovered. Germany
has given us the bas-reliefs having the greatest dimensions and
furnishing the most complete representations; and certainly no god of
paganism ever found in this nation as many enthusiastic devotees as
Mithra. The *Agri Decumates*, a strip of land lying on the right bank of
the Rhine and forming the military confines of the empire, together with
the advance posts of the Roman military system between the river Main
and the fortified walls of the *limes*, have been marvellously fertile
in discoveries. North of Frankfort, near the village of Heddernheim, the
ancient *civitas Taunensium*, three important temples have been
successively exhumed (Figs. [13](#img_13), [14](#img_14).md), three others
existed in Friedberg in Hesse and three more have been dug out in the
surrounding country. On the other side, along the entire course of the
Rhine, from Augst (Raurica) near Basel as far as Xanten (Vetera),
passing through Strassburg, Mayence, Neuwied, Bonn, Cologne, and
Dormagen, a series

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

 

<span id="img_13"></span> ![](img/05300.jpg)  
PLAN OF A MITHRÆUM DISCOVERED AT HEDDERNHEIM.

A. Pronaos with colonnade.--B. Entrance to stairway.--CC. Sacristy
(apparatorium?)--D. Vestibule.--E. Benches ranged along the sides.--F.
Space reserved for celebrants.--G. Apse containing the sacred images.
(T. et M., p. 370.)

 

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

of monuments have been found which show clearly the manner in which the
new faith spread like an epidemic, and was disseminated

 

<span id="img_14"></span> ![](img/05400.jpg)  
Fig. 14.  
REVERSE OF THE GRAND MITHRAIC BAS-RELIEF OF HEDDERNHEIM, GERMANY.

 

into the very heart of the barbarous tribes of the Ubians and Batavians.

The influence of Mithraism among the troops massed along the Rhenish
frontier

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

 

<span id="img_15"></span> ![](img/05500.jpg)  
Fig. 15.  
BAS-RELIEF OF NEUENHEIM, NEAR HEIDELBERG, GERMANY.

This monument, which escaped mutilation at the hands of the early
fanatics, was discovered in 1838 in a cave near Neuenheim, a village on
the southern slope of the Heiligenberg, near Heidelberg, by workmen who
were laying the foundation of a farmhouse. It is interesting as
distinctly showing in a series of small bas-reliefs twelve important
scenes from the life of Mithra, including the following: His birth from
the rocks (top of left border), his capture of the bull, which he
carries to the cave (right hand border), his ascent to Ahura-Mazda (top
border). The second scene from the top of the left border is likewise
interesting; it represents Kronos (Zervan) handing to Zeus (Ahura-Mazda)
the scepter of the government of the world.

 

is also proved by the extension of this religion into the interior of
Gaul. A soldier of the eighth legion dedicated an altar to the *Deo* 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

*Invicto* at Geneva, which lay on the military road from Germany to the
Mediterranean; and other traces of the Oriental cult have been found in
modern Switzerland and the French Jura. In Sarrebourg (*Pons Saravi*) at
the mouth of the pass leading from the Vosges Mountains, by which
Strassburg communicated and still communicates with the basins of the
Mosel and the Seine, a *spelæum* has recently been exhumed that dates
from the third century; another, of which the principal bas-relief,
carved from the living rock, still subsists to our day, existed at
Schwarzerden, between Metz and Mayence. It would be surprising that the
great city of Treves, the regular residence of the Roman military
commanders, has preserved only some *débris* of inscriptions and
statues, did not the important rôle which this city played under the
successors of Constantine explain the almost total disappearance of the
monuments of paganism. Finally, in the valley of the Meuse, not far from
the route that joins Cologne with Bavay (*Bagacum*), some curious
remains of the Mysteries have been discovered.

From Bavay, this route leads to Boulogne (*Gesoriacum*), the naval base
of the *classis Britannica* or Britannic fleet. The statues of the two
dadophors, or torch-bearers, which have been found here and were
certainly chiselled on the spot, were doubtless offered

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

to the god by some foreign mariner or officer of the fleet. It was the
object of this important naval station to keep in daily touch with the
great island that lay opposite, and especially with London, which even
at this epoch was visited by numerous merchants. The existence of a
mithræum in this principal commercial and military depot of Britain
should not surprise us. Generally speaking, the Iranian cult was in no
country so completely restricted to fortified places as in Britain.
Outside of York (*Eburacum*), where the headquarters of the troops of
the province were situated, it was disseminated only in the west of the
country, at Caërleon (*Isca*) and at Chester (*Deva*), where camps had
been established to repel the inroads of the Gallic tribes of the
Silures and the Ordovices; and finally in the northern outskirts of the
country along the wall of Hadrian, which protected the territory of the
empire from the incursions of the Picts and the Caledonians. All the
stations of this line of ramparts appear to have had their Mithraic
temple, where the commander of the place (*præfectus*) furnished an
example of devotion for his subordinates. It is evident, therefore, that
the Asiatic god had penetrated in the train of the army to these
northern regions, but it is impossible to determine precisely the period
at which he reached this place or the troops by whom he was carried
there. But there is reason for

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

believing that Mithra was worshipped in these countries from the middle
of the second century, and that Germany <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md) served as the intermediary agent between
the far Orient

"*Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos*."

At the other extremity of the Roman world the Mysteries were likewise
celebrated by soldiers. They had their adepts in the third legion
encamped at Lambæse and in the posts that guarded the defiles of the
Aurasian Mountains or that dotted the frontiers of the Sahara Desert.
Nevertheless, they do not appear to have been as popular to the south of
the Mediterranean as in the countries to the north, and their
propagation has assumed here a special character. Their monuments,
nearly all of which date from later epochs, are due to the officers, or
at least to the centurions, many of whom were of foreign origin, rather
than to the simple soldiers, nearly all of whom were levied in the
country which they were charged to defend. The legionaries of Numidia
remained faithful to their indigenous gods, who were either Punic or
Berber in origin, and only rarely adopted the beliefs of the companions
with whom their vocation of arms had thrown them in contact. Apparently,
therefore, the Persian religion was practised in Africa almost
exclusively by those whom military service had called to these countries

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

from abroad; and the bands of the faithful were composed for the most
part, if not of Asiatics, at least of recruits drawn from the Danubian
provinces.

Finally, in Spain, the country of the Occident which is poorest in
Mithraic monuments, the connection of their presence with that of the
garrisons is no less manifest. Throughout the entire extent of this vast
peninsula, in which so many populous cities were crowded together, they
are almost totally lacking, even in the largest centers of urban
population. Scarcely the faintest vestige of an inscription is found in
Emerita and Tarraco, the capitals of Lusitania and Tarraconensis. But in
the uncivilized valleys of Asturias and Gallæcia the Iranian god had an
organized cult. This fact will be immediately connected with the
prolonged sojourn of a Roman legion in this country, which remained so
long unsubjugated. Perhaps the conventicles of the initiated also
included veterans of the Spanish cohorts who, after having served as
auxiliaries on the Rhine and the Danube, returned to their native
hearths converted to the Mazdean faith.

The army thus united in the same fold citizens and emigrants from all
parts of the world; kept up an incessant interchange of officers and
centurions and even of entire army-corps from one province to another,
according to the varying needs of the day; in

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

fine, threw out to the remotest frontiers of the Roman world a net of
perpetual communications. Yet this was not the only way in which the
military system contributed to the dissemination of Oriental religions.
After the expiration of their term of service, the soldiers continued in
their places of retirement the practices to which they had become
accustomed under the standards of the army; and they soon evoked in
their new environment numerous imitators. Frequently they settled in the
neighborhood of their latest station, in the little towns which had
gradually replaced in the neighborhood of the military camps the shops
of the sutlers. At times, too, they would choose their homes in some
large city of the country where they had served, to pass there with
their old comrades in arms the remainder of their days. Lyons always
sheltered within its walls a large number of these veteran legionaries
of the German army, and the only Mithraic inscription that London has
furnished us was written by a soldier emeritus of the troops of Britain.
It was customary also for the emperor to send discharged soldiers to
some region where a colony was to be founded; Elusa in Aquitania was
probably made acquainted with the Asiatic cult by Rhenish veterans whom
Septimius Severus (193-211 A.D.) established in this region. Frequently,
the conscripts whom the military authorities transported to the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

confines of the empire retained at heart their love for their native
country, with which they never ceased to sustain relations; but when,
after twenty or twenty-five years of struggle and combat, they returned
to their native country, they preferred to the gods of their own city or
tribe, the foreign deity whose mysterious worship some military comrade
had taught them in distant lands.

Nevertheless, the propagation of Mithraism in the towns and country
districts of the provinces in which no armies were stationed was due in
great measure to other agencies. By her continued conquests in Asia,
Rome had subjected to her domination numerous Semitic provinces. After
the founding of the empire had assured peace to the entire Roman world
and permanently insured the safety of commerce, these new subjects,
profiting by the special aptitudes of their race, could be seen
gradually concentrating in their hands the entire traffic of the Levant.
As the Phœnicians and Carthaginians formerly, so now the Syrians
populated with their colonies all the shores of the Mediterranean. In
the Hellenic epoch they had established themselves in the commercial
centers of Greece, and notably at Delos. A number of these merchants now
flocked to the vicinity of Rome, settling at Pozzuoli and at Ostia. They
appear to have carried on business in all the maritime cities of the
Occident. They are found

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

in Italy at Ravenna, Aquileia, and Tergeste; at Salonæ in Dalmatia, and
as far distant as Malaga in Spain. Their mercantile activity even led
them into the distant interior of these countries at every point where
there was the least prospect of profit. In the valley of the Danube they
penetrated as far as Sarmizegetusa and Apulum in Dacia, and as far as
Sirmium in Pannonia. In Gaul, this Oriental population was particularly
dense. They reached Bordeaux by the Gironde and ascended the Rhone as
far as Lyons. After occupying the banks of this river, they flocked into
the interior of the province, and Treves, the great capital of the
north, attracted them in hordes. They literally filled the Roman world.
Even the later invasions of the barbarians were impotent to dampen their
spirit of enterprise. Under the Merovingians they still spoke their
Semitic idiom at Orleans. Their emigration was only checked when the
Saracens destroyed the navigation of the Mediterranean.

The Syrians were distinguished in all epochs by their ardent zeal. No
people, not even the Egyptians, defended their idols with such great
pertinacity against the Christians. So, when they founded a colony,
their first care was to organize their national cults, and the mother
country frequently allowed them generous subsidies towards the
performance of this pious duty. It was in this manner that

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the deities of Heliopolis, of Damascus, and Palmyra first penetrated to
Italy.

The word *Syrian* had in popular usage a very vague significance. This
word, which was an abbreviation of *Assyrian*, was frequently confounded
with it, and served to designate generally all the Semitic populations
anciently subject to the kings of Nineveh, as far east as, and even
beyond, the Euphrates. It embraced, therefore, the sectaries of Mithra
established in the valley of this river; and as Rome extended her
conquests in this quarter, the worshippers of the Persian god
necessarily became more and more numerous among the "Syrians" who dwelt
in the Latin cities.

Nevertheless, the majority of the merchants that founded the commercial
houses of the Occident were servitors of the Semitic Baals, and those
who invoked Mithra were generally Asiatics in humbler conditions of
life. The first temples which this god possessed in the west of the
empire were without doubt mainly frequented by slaves. The *mangones*,
or slavemongers, procured their human merchandise preferably from the
provinces of the Orient. From the depths of Asia Minor they drove to
Rome hordes of slaves purchased from the great landed proprietors of
Cappadocia and of Pontus; and this imported population, as one ancient
writer has put it, ultimately came to form distinct towns or quarters in
the great capital. But the supply did not suffice for the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

increasing consumption of depopulated Italy. War also was a mighty
purveyor of human chattels. When we remember that Titus, in a single
campaign in Judæa (70 A.D.), reduced to slavery 90,000 Jews, our
imagination becomes appalled at the multitudes of captives that the
incessant struggles with the Parthians, and particularly the conquests
of Trajan, must have thrown on the markets of the Occident.

But whether taken en masse after some great victory, or acquired singly
by the professional traffickers in human flesh, these slaves were
particularly numerous in the maritime towns, to which their
transportation was cheap and easy. They introduced here, concurrently
with the Syrian merchants, the Oriental cults and particularly that of
Mithra. This last-named god has been found established in an entire
series of ports on the Mediterranean. We signalize above all his
presence at Sidon in Phœnicia and at Alexandria in Egypt. In Italy, if
Pozzuoli and its environs, including Naples, have furnished relatively
few monuments of the Mysteries, the reason is that this city had ceased
in the second century to be the great *entrepôt* from which Rome derived
its supplies from the Levant. The Tyrian colony of Pozzuoli, at one time
wealthy and powerful, complains in the year 172 A.D. of being reduced to
a small settlement. After the immense structures of Claudius and Trajan

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

were erected at Ostia, this latter city inherited the prosperity of its
Campanian rival; and the result was that all the Asiatic

 

<span id="img_16"></span> ![](img/06500.jpg)  
Fig 16.  
PLAN OF A MITHRÆUM DISCOVERED IN OSTIA, AT THE MOUTH OF THE TIBER.

BB. Benches ranged along the sides.--C. Entrance.--D. Exit leading to
the Baths of Antoninus.--E. Elevated choir bearing the sacred
images.--F. Stairway.--G. Retiring room.--HH. Niches for statues.--II.
Supporting walls.

The inscription trace in the mosaic of the pavement reads: *Soli
invict(o) Mit(hræ) d(onum) d(edit) L Agrius Calendio*. (*T. et M.*, p.
240)

 

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

religions soon had here their chapels and their congregations of
devotees. Yet none enjoyed

 

<span id="img_17"></span> ![](img/06600.jpg)  
Fig. 17. SILVANUS.

Mosaic in a niche of the vestibule of the mithræum of Fig. 16, in Ostia,
near the Baths of Antoninus. Silvanus holds in one hand a fir branch, in
the other a hatchet. See the Chapter on "The Doctrine of the Mithraic
Mysteries."

 

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

greater favor than that of the Iranian god. In the second century, at
least four or five *spelæa* had been dedicated to him. One of them,
constructed at the latest in 162 A.D., and communicating with the baths
of Antoninus, was situated on the very spot where the foreign ships
landed (Fig. [16](#img_16).md), and another one adjoined the *metroon*, or
sanctuary in which the official cult of the *Magna Mater* was
celebrated. To the south the little hamlet of Antium (Porto d'Anzio) had
followed the example of its powerful neighbor; while in Etruria, Rusellæ
(Grosseto) and Pisæ likewise accorded a favorable reception to the
Mazdean deity.

In the east of Italy, Aquileia is distinguished for the number of its
Mithraic inscriptions. As Trieste to-day, so Aquileia in antiquity was
the market in which the Danubian provinces exchanged their products for
those of the South. Pola, at the extremity of Istria, the islands of
Arba and Brattia, and the sea-ports of the coast of Dalmatia, Senia,
Iader, Salonæ, Narona, Epidaurus, including Dyrrachium in Macedonia,
have all preserved more or less numerous and indubitable vestiges of the
influence of the invincible god, and distinctly mark the path which he
followed in his journey to the commercial metropolis of the Adriatic.
(See Frontispiece.)

His progress may also be followed in the western Mediterranean. In
Sicily at Syracuse and Palermo, on the coast of Africa at Carthage,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

Rusicada, Icosium, Cæsarea, on the opposite shores of Spain at Malaga
and Tarraco,

 

<span id="img_18"></span> ![](img/06800.jpg)  
Fig. 18.  
STATUES OF TORCH-BEARERS (DADOPHORI)

From the same mithræum at Ostia, now in the Lateran. See the Chapter on
"The Doctrine of the Mithraic Mysteries."

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Mithraic associations were successively formed in the motley population
which the sea had carried to these cities. And farther to the north, on
the Gulf of Lyons, the proud Roman colony of Narbonne doffed its
exclusiveness in his favor.

In Gaul, especially, the correlation which we have discovered between
the spread of the Mysteries and the extension of Oriental traffic is
striking. Both were principally concentrated between the Alps and the
Cévennes, or to be more precise, in the basin of the Rhone, the course
of which had been the main route of its penetration. Sextantio, near
Montpellier, has given us the epitaph of a *pater sacrorum*, and Aix in
the Provence a presumably Mithraic representation of the sun on his
*quadriga*. Then, ascending the river, we find at Arles a statue of the
leontocephalous Kronos who was worshipped in the Mysteries; at
*Bourg-Saint-Andéol*, near Montélimar, a representation of the
tauroctonous god sculptured from the living rock near a spring; at
Vaison, not far from Orange, a dedicatory inscription made on the
occasion of an initiation; at Vienne, a *spelæum* from which, among
other monuments, has been obtained the most unique bas-relief of the
lion-headed god hitherto discovered. Finally, at Lyons, which is known
from the history of Christianity to have had direct relations with Asia
Minor, the success of the Persian religion was certainly

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

considerable. Farther up the river, its presence has been proved at
Geneva on the one hand and at Besançon and Mandeure on the Doubs, a
branch of the Saone, on the other. An unbroken series of sanctuaries
which were without doubt in constant communication with one another thus
bound together the shores of the great inland sea and the camps of
Germany.

Sallying forth from the flourishing cities of the valley of the Rhone,
the foreign cult crept even into the depths of the mountains of
Dauphiny, Savoy, and Bugey. Labâtie near Gap, Lucey not far from Belley,
and Vieu-en-Val Romey have preserved for us inscriptions, temples, and
statues dedicated by the faithful. As we have said, the Oriental
merchants did not restrict their activity to establishing agencies in
the maritime and river ports; the prospect of more lucrative trade
attracted them to the villages of the interior, where competition was
less active. The dispersion of the Asiatic slaves was even more
complete. Scarcely had they disembarked from their ships, when they were
scattered haphazard in every direction by the auctioneers, and we find
them in all the different countries discharging the most diverse
functions.

In Italy, a country of great estates and ancient municipalities, either
they went to swell the armies of slaves who were tilling the vast
domains of the Roman aristocracy, or

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

they were afterwards promoted to the rank of superintendents (*actor*,
*villicus*) and became the masters of those whose miserable lot they had
formerly shared. Sometimes they were acquired by some municipality, and
as public servants (*servi publici*) they carried out the orders of the
magistrates or entered the bureaus of the administrations. It is
difficult to realize the rapidity with which the Oriental religions were
in this way able to penetrate to regions which it would appear they
could never possibly have attained. A double inscription at Nersæ, in
the heart of the Apennines, informs us that in the year 172 of our era a
slave, the treasurer of the town, had restored a mithræum that had
fallen into ruins. At Venusia, a Greek inscription Ἡλίῳ Μίθρᾳ was
dedicated by the steward of some wealthy burgher, and his name Sagaris
at once proves his servile rank and Asiatic origin. The examples could
be multiplied. There is not a shadow of a doubt that these obscure
servitors of the foreign god were the most active agents in the
propagation of the Mysteries, not only within the limits of the city of
Rome itself, and in the other great cities of the country, but
throughout the entire extent of Italy, from Calabria to the Alps. We
find the Iranian cult practised at Grumentum, in the heart of Lucania;
then, as we have already said, at Venusia in Apulia, and at Nersæ in the
country of the Æqui, also at Aveia in the land of the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

Vestini; then in Umbria, along the Flaminian road, at Interamna, at
Spoletum, where one can visit a spelæum decorated with paintings, and at
Sentinum, where there has been discovered a list of the patrons of a
*collegium* of Mithraists; likewise, in Etruria this religion followed
the Cassian way and established itself at Sutrium, at Bolsena, and
perhaps at Arretium and at Florence. Its traces are no less well marked
and significant to the north of the Apennines. They appear only
sporadically in Emilia, where the provinces of Bologna and Modena alone
have preserved some interesting *débris*, as they do also in the fertile
valley of the Po. Here Milan, which rapidly grew to prosperity under the
empire, appears to be the only locality in which the exotic religion
enjoyed great favor and official protection. Some fragments of
inscriptions exhumed at Tortona, Industria, and Novara are insufficient
to prove that it attained in the remainder of the country any
wide-spread diffusion.

It is certainly remarkable that we have unearthed far richer booty in
the wild defiles of the Alps than in the opulent plains of upper Italy.
At Introbbio, in the Val Sassina to the east of Lake Como, in the Val
Camonica, watered by the river Oglio, altars were dedicated to the
invincible god. But the monuments which were consecrated to him
especially abound along the river Adige (Etsch)

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and its tributaries, near the grand causeway which led in antiquity as
it does to-day over the Brenner pass and Puster-Thal to the northern
slope of the Alps into Rhætia and Noricum. At Trent, there is a mithræum
built near a cascade; near San-Zeno, bas-reliefs have been found in the
rocky gorges; at Castello di Tuenno, fragments of votive tablets carved
on both faces have been unearthed; on the banks of the Eisack, there has
been found a dedicatory inscription to Mithra and to the Sun; and Mauls
finally has given us the celebrated sculptured plaque discovered in the
sixteenth century and now in the museum at Vienna.

The progress of Mithraism in this mountainous district was not checked
at the frontiers of Italy. If, pursuing our way through the valley of
the Drave, we seek for the vestiges which it left in this region, we
shall immediately discover them at Teurnia and especially at Virunum,
the largest city of Noricum, in which in the third century two temples
at least had been opened to the initiated. A third one was erected not
far from the same place in a grotto in the midst of the forest.

The city of Aquileia <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) was undoubtedly
the religious metropolis of this Roman colony, and its important church
founded many missions in the surrounding region. The cities

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

that sprang up along the routes leading from this port across Pannonia
to the military strongholds on the Danube almost without exception
favorably received the foreign god: they were Æmona, the Latobici,
Neviodunum, and principally Siscia, on the course of the Save; and then
toward the north Adrans, Celeia, Poetovio, received him with equal
favor. In this manner, his devotees who were journeying from the shores
of the Adriatic to Mœsia, on the one hand, or to Carnuntum on the other,
could be received at every stage of their journey by co-religionists.

In these regions, as in the countries south of the Alps, Oriental slaves
acted as the missionaries of Mithra. But the conditions under which
their propaganda was conducted were considerably different. These slaves
were not employed in this country, as they were in the *latifundia* and
the cities of Italy, as agricultural laborers, or stewards of wealthy
land-owners, or municipal employees. Depopulation had not created such
havoc here as in the countries of the old civilization, and people were
not obliged to employ foreign hands for the cultivation of their fields
or the administration of their cities. It was not individuals or
municipalities, but the state itself, that was here the great importer
of human beings. The procurators, the officers of the treasury, the
officers of the imperial domains, or as in Noricum the governors
themselves, had under

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

their orders a multitude of collectors of taxes, of treasurers, and
clerks of all kinds, scattered over the territory which they
administered; and as a rule these subaltern officers were not of free
birth. Likewise, the great *entrepreneurs* who leased the products of
the mines and quarries, or the customs returns, employed for the
execution of their projects a numerous staff of functionaries, both
hired and slave. From people of this class, who were either agents of
the emperor or publicans whom he appointed to represent him, are those
whose titles recur most frequently in the Mithraic inscriptions of
southern Pannonia and Noricum.

In all the provinces, the lowly employees of the imperial service played
a considerable part in the diffusion of foreign religions. just as these
officers of the central power were representatives of the political
unity of the empire in contrast with its regional particularism, so also
they were the apostles of the universal religions as opposed to the
local cults. They formed, as it were, a second army under the orders of
their prince, and their influence on the evolution of paganism was
analogous to that of the army proper. Like the soldiers, they too were
recruited in great numbers from the Asiatic countries; like them, they
too were perpetually changing their residence as they were promoted in
station; and the lists of their bureaus, like those of the legions,
comprised individuals of all nationalities.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Thus, the imperial administration transferred from one government to
another, along with its clerks and quartermasters, a knowledge of the
Mithraic Mysteries. In a characteristic discovery made at Cæsarea in
Cappadocia, a slave, probably of indigenous origin, an *arcarius
dispensatoris Augusti* (a clerk of the imperial treasury), dedicates in
very good Latin an image of the Sun to Mithra. In the interior of
Dalmatia, where the monuments of the Persian god are rather sparsely
scattered for the reason that this province was early stripped of its
legions, employees of the treasury, the postal and the customs service,
left nevertheless their names on some inscriptions. In the frontier
provinces especially, the financial agents of the Cæsars must have been
numerous, not only because the import duties on merchandise had to be
collected here, but because the heaviest drain on the imperial
treasuries was the cost of maintaining the army. It is therefore natural
to find cashiers, tax-gatherers, and revenue-collectors (*dispensatores,
exactores, procuratores*), and other similar titles mentioned in the
Mithraic texts of Dacia and Africa.

Here, therefore, is the second way in which the Iranian god penetrated
to the towns adjoining the military camps, where, as we have seen, he
was worshipped by the Oriental soldiers. The general domestic service,
as well as the political functions, of these administrators

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

and officers, was the cause of the transportation of public and private
slaves to all garrisons; while the constantly renewed needs of the
multitudes here assembled attracted to these points merchants and
traders from all parts of the world. Then again, as we have pointed out,
the veterans themselves afterwards settled in the ports and the large
cities, where they were thrown in contact with merchants and slaves. In
affirming categorically that Mithra was introduced in this or that
manner in a certain region, our generalization manifestly cannot lay
claim to absolute exactitude. The concurrent causes of the spread of the
Mysteries are so intermingled and intertwined, that it would be a futile
task to attempt to unravel strand by strand the fibers of this entangled
snarl. Having as our sole guide, as we frequently do, inscriptions of
uncertain date, on which by the side of the name of the god appears
simply that of an initiate or priest, it is impossible to determine in
each single case the circumstances which have fostered the progress of
the new religion. The more fleeting influences are almost absolutely
removed from our ken. On the accession of Vespasian (69 A.D.), did the
prolonged sojourn in Italy of Syrian troops, who were faithful
worshippers of the Sun, have any lasting results? Did the army which
Alexander Severus (222-235 A.D.) conducted into Germany, and which, as
Lampridius has

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

recorded, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) was *potentissima per
Armenios et Osrhœnos et Parthos* (viz., very largely composed of
Armenians, Osrhœnians, and Parthians), impart a new impulse to the
Mithraic propaganda on the banks of the Rhine? Did any of the high
functionaries that Rome sent annually to the frontier of the Euphrates
embrace the beliefs of the people over whom they ruled? Did priests from
Cappadocia or Pontus ever embark for the Occident after the manner of
the missionaries of the Syrian goddess, in the expectation of wresting
there a livelihood from the credulity of the masses? Even under the
republic Chaldæan astrologers roamed the great causeways of Italy, and
in the time of Juvenal the soothsayers of Commagene and Armenia vended
their oracles in Rome. These subsidiary methods of propagation, which
were generally resorted to by the Oriental religions, may also have been
put to profitable use by the disseminators of Mithraism; but the most
active agents of its diffusion were undoubtedly the soldiers, the
slaves, and the merchants. Apart from the detailed proofs already
adduced, the presence of Mithraic monuments in places where war and
commerce were, constantly conducted, and in the countries where the vast
current of Asiatic emigration was discharged, is sufficient to establish
our hypothesis.

The absence of these monuments in other

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

regions is also clear proof of our position. Why are no vestiges of the
Persian Mysteries found in Asia Propria, in Bithynia, in Galatia, in the
provinces adjoining those where they were practised for centuries?
Because the production of these countries exceeded their consumption,
because their foreign commerce was in the hands of Greek ship-owners,
because they exported men instead of importing them, and because from
the time of Vespasian at least no legion was charged with the defence or
surveillance of their territory. Greece was protected from the invasion
of foreign gods by its national pride, by its worship of its glorious
past, which is the most characteristic trait of the Grecian spirit under
the empire. But the absence of foreign soldiers and slaves also deprived
it of the least occasion of lapsing from its national religion. Lastly,
Mithraic monuments are almost completely missing in the central and
western parts of Gaul, in the Spanish peninsula, and in the south of
Britain, and they are rare even in the interior of Dalmatia. In these
places also no permanent army was stationed; there was consequently no
importation of Asiatics; while there was also in these countries no
great center of international commerce to attract them.

On the other hand, the city of Rome is especially rich in discoveries of
all kinds, more so in fact than any of the provinces. In fact Mithra
found in no other part of the empire

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

conditions so eminently favorable to the success of his religion. Rome
always had a large garrison made up of soldiers drawn from all parts of
the empire, and the veterans of the army, after having been honorably
discharged, flocked thither in great numbers to spend the remainder of
their days. An opulent aristocracy resided here, and their palaces, like
those of the emperor, were filled with thousands of Oriental slaves. It
was the seat of the central imperial administration, the official slaves
of which thronged its bureaus. Finally, all whom the spirit of
adventure, or disaster, had driven hither in search of fame and fortune
flocked to this "caravansary of the universe," and carried thither their
customs and their religions. Collaterally, the presence in Rome of
numbers of Asiatic princelings, who lived there, either as hostages or
fugitives, with their families and retinues, also abetted the
propagation of the Mazdean faith.

Like the majority of the foreign gods, Mithra undoubtedly had his first
temples outside of the *pomoerium*, or religious limits. Many of his
monuments have been discovered beyond these boundaries, especially in
the vicinity of the prætorian camp; but before the year 181 A.D. he had
overleaped the sacred barriers and established himself in the heart of
the city. It is unfortunately impossible to follow step by step his
progress in the vast metropolis. Records of exact date and indubitable

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

origin are too scarce to justify us in reconstructing the local history
of the Persian religion in Rome. We can only determine in a general way
the high degree of splendor which it attained there. Its vogue is
attested by a hundred or more inscriptions, by more than seventy-five
fragments of sculpture, and by a series of temples and chapels situated
in all parts of the city and its environs. The most justly celebrated of
these *spelæa* is the one that still existed during the Renaissance in a
cave of the Capitol, and from which the grand Borghesi bas-relief now in
the Louvre was taken. (See Fig. [4](mom04.htm#img_4)..md) To all
appearances, this monument dates from the end of the second century.

It was at this period that Mithra emerged from the partial obscurity in
which he had hitherto lived, to become one of the favorite gods of the
Roman aristocracy and the imperial court. We have seen him arrive from
the Orient a despised deity of the deported or emigrant Asiatics. It is
certain that he achieved his first conquests among the lower classes of
society, and it is an important fact that Mithraism long remained the
religion of the lowly. The most ancient inscriptions are eloquent
evidence of the truth of this assertion, for they emanated without
exception from slaves or freedmen, from soldiers active or retired. But
the high destinies to which freedmen were permitted to aspire under the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

empire are well known; while the sons of veterans or of centurions not
infrequently became citizens of wealth and influence. Thus, by a natural
evolution the religion transplanted to Latin soil was bound to wax great
in wealth as well as in influence, and soon to count among its sectaries
influential functionaries at the capital, and church and town
dignitaries in the municipalities. Under the Antonines (138-180 A.D.),
literary men and philosophers began to grow interested in the dogmas and
rites of this Oriental cult. The wit Lucian parodied their
ceremonies <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md); and in 177 A.D. Celsus
in his *True Discourse* undoubtedly pits its doctrines against those of
Christianity. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md) At about the same
period a certain Pallas devoted to Mithraism a special work, and
Porphyry cites a certain Eubulus who had published *Mithraic
Researches* <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29.md) in several books. If
this literature were not irrevocably lost to us, we should doubtless
re-read in its pages the story of entire Roman squadrons, both officers
and soldiers, passing over to the faith of the hereditary enemies of the
empire, and of great lords converted by the slaves of their own
establishments. The monuments frequently mention the names of slaves
beside

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

those of freedmen, and sometimes it is the former that have attained the
highest rank among the initiates. In these societies, the last
frequently became the first, and the first the last,--to all appearances
at least.

One capital result emerges from the detailed facts which we have
adduced. It is that the spread of the Persian Mysteries must have taken
place with extreme rapidity. With the suddenness of a flash of
gunpowder, they make their appearance almost simultaneously in countries
far removed from one another: in Rome, at Carnuntum on the Danube, and
in the *Agri Decumates*. Manifestly, this reformed church of Mazdaism
exercised on the society of the second century a powerful fascination,
of which to-day we can only imperfectly ascertain the causes.

But to the natural allurements which drew crowds to the feet of the
tauroctonous god was added an extrinsic element of the highest efficacy:
the imperial favor. Lampridius <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)
informs us that Commodus (180-192 A.D.) was initiated into the Mysteries
and took part in the bloody ceremonies of its liturgy, and the
inscriptions prove that this condescension of the monarch toward the
priests of Mithra created an immense stir in the Roman world, and told
enormously in favor of the Persian religion. From this moment the
exalted dignitaries

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of the empire are seen to follow the example of their sovereign and to
become zealous cultivators of the Iranian cult. Tribunes, prefects,
legates, and later *perfectissimi* and *clarissimi*, are frequently
mentioned as authors of the votive inscriptions; and until the downfall
of paganism the aristocracy remained attached to the solar god that had
so long enjoyed the favor of princes. But to understand the political
and moral motives of the kindly reception which these dignitaries
accorded to the new faith, it will be necessary to expound the Mithraic
doctrines concerning the sovereign power and their connection with the
theocratic claims of the Cæsars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[36:1](mom05.htm#fr_17.md) Named from the city of
Doliche, now Doluk, in Commagene.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[36:2](mom05.htm#fr_18.md) Plutarch, *Vit. Pomp*.,
24 (*T. et M.*, Vol. II., p. 35 d.).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[37:1](mom05.htm#fr_19.md) Statius, *Theb*., 1.,
717: *Persei sub rupibus antri Indignata sequi torquentem cornua
Mithram*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[38:1](mom05.htm#fr_20.md) Plut., *l. c*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[41:1](mom05.htm#fr_21.md) Jung, *Fasten der
Provinz Dacien*, 1894, p. xlv.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[44:1](mom05.htm#fr_22.md) Eutropius, VIII, 6.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[46:1](mom05.htm#fr_23.md) One of the legions
raised by the proconsuls in the Roman provinces for the purpose of
strengthening the veteran army.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[58:1](mom05.htm#fr_24.md) See *supra*, [p.
1](mom04.htm#page_1.md).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[73:1](mom05.htm#fr_25.md) Cf. *supra*, [p.
67](#page_67.md). See also Frontispiece.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[78:1](mom05.htm#fr_26.md) Lamprid., *Alex. Sev.*,
c. 61; *cf.* Capitol., *Maximin.*, c. 11.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[82:1](mom05.htm#fr_27.md) Lucian, *Menipp*. c. 6
*et seq.* Cf. *Deor. concil.*, c. 9; *Jup. trag.*, c. 8, 13 (*T. et M.*,
Vol. II, p. 22).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[82:2](mom05.htm#fr_28.md) Origen, *Contra. Cels.*,
I. 9 (*T. et M.*, Vol. II, p. 30).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[82:3](mom05.htm#fr_29.md) *Porphyr,. De antr.
nymph.*, c. 5; *De abstin.*, II. 56, IV. 16 (*cf*. *T. et M.*, Vol. II,
p. 39 *et seq.* and I., p. 26 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[83:1](mom05.htm#fr_30.md) Lamprid., *Commod*., c.
9 ( *T. et M.*, Vol. II, p. 21). See *infra*, Chap. III, [p.
73](#page_73.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mithra and the Imperial Power of Rome](mom06.md)
