[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mom09)  [Next](mom11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

# MITHRAIC ART  <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md)

THE monuments of Mithraism, which have been found in considerable
numbers in the provinces of the Occident and even in the Orient,
constitute a homogeneous group, of which it is desirable to characterize
the importance for the history of Roman art. In point of fact, their
artistic merit is far below that of their value as historical documents,
and their chief worth is not æsthetic but religious. The late epoch in
which these works were produced destroys the least hope of finding in
them any expression of true creative power or of following in them the
progress of any original development. But it would be unjust if,
inspired by a narrow-minded Atticism, we should cast upon them all a
like measure of reproach. In the absence of inventive genius, their
cleverness in the adaptation of ancient *motifs* and the manual skill
shown in their execution,--all technical qualities of which they give
evidence,--would alone be sufficient to claim our attention. Some of the
groups in high and low relief,--for the paintings and mosaics which have
been preserved are so few and mediocre as to dispense us from speaking

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

of them,--hold a very honorable place in the multitude of sculptured
works which the imperial period has left us, and are deserving of some
consideration.

It can be proved <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) that all our
representations of the tauroctonous Mithra, the hieratic figure of which
was fixed before the propagation of the Mysteries in the Occident, are
more or less faithful replicas of a type created by a sculptor of the
school of Pergamon, in imitation of the sacrificing Victory which
adorned the balustrade of the temple of Athena Nike on the Acropolis.
Certain marbles discovered at Rome and at Ostia (see for example, Figs.
[4](mom04.htm#img_4), [5](mom04.htm#img_5), [6](mom04.htm#img_6.md) and
[10](mom05.htm#img_10).md), which unquestionably go back to the beginning
of the second century, still reflect the splendor of the powerful
compositions of the Hellenistic epoch. After an ardent pursuit, the god
captures the bull, which has fallen to the earth; with one knee on its
croup and his foot on one of its hoofs, he bears down upon it, pressing
it against the earth; and grasping it by the nostrils with one hand,
with the other he plunges a knife into its flank. The impetuosity of
this animated scene throws into high relief the agility and strength of
the invincible hero. On the other hand, the suffering of the moribund
victim gasping its last, with its limbs contracted in the spasms of
death, the singular

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

mixture of exaltation and remorse depicted in the countenance of its
slayer, give prominence to the pathetic side of this sacred drama, and
even to-day inspire in the heart of the spectator an emotion which the
faithful of old experienced in all its living power. (See Fig.
[44](mom09.htm#img_44) and also the cover-stamp of this book..md)

The traditional type of torch-bearers, or *dadophori*, was not
susceptible of a similar impassioned treatment. But one remarks,
nevertheless, in the best specimens the advantageous effect which the
artist has produced by the ample Phrygian garments and by emphasizing
the different emotions of hope and sadness portrayed on the countenances
of the two young men. We possess a remarkable reproduction of this
divine couple in the two statues discovered near the Tiber, which Zoëga
attributed to the epoch of Hadrian and which were possibly imported from
the Orient to Italy. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md) (See Figures
[47](#img_47) and [48](#img_48)..md) It will be seen how their author
succeeded in offsetting the defective symmetry resulting from the fact
that the two figures, which are intended as counterparts, have both
their mantles fastened at the right shoulder and falling down at the
right side.

The solicitous concern for details which characterizes the works of the
Antonine epoch was also bestowed with more or less felicity

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

upon the monuments of a slightly more recent date. Consider the group of
Ostia, which

 

<span id="img_47"></span> ![](img/21200.jpg)  
Fig. 47.  
MITHRAIC DADOPHORUS.

Wrongly restored as Paris.

 

dates from the reign of Commodus, or the bas-relief of the Villa Albani,
which appears to be

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

contemporaneous with the first. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) The
artist delighted in multiplying the folds of the garments

 

<span id="img_48"></span> ![](img/21300.jpg)  
Fig. 48.  
MITHRAIC DADOPHORUS.

Wrongly restored as Paris.

 

and in increasing the undulations of the hair merely to show his skill
in conquering the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

difficulties which he had himself created: yet even this *bizarre*
mannerism does not atone for the coldness of the total impression. The
success of this minute execution of details is more felicitous in
fragments of smaller dimensions. A small marble recently discovered in
Aquileia, and reproduced in our Frontispiece is distinguished in this
respect by a "bewildering cleverness of technique." The delicately
carved figures are almost entirely severed from their massive base, to
which they are attached only by the thinnest supports. It is a piece of
artistic braggadocio in which the sculptor parades his virtuosity by
producing with a brittle material the same effects that are obtained by
workers in ductile metals. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md)

But these comparatively perfect compositions are rare in Italy and
especially so in the provinces, and it has to be acknowledged that the
great mass of the Mithraic monuments is of discouraging mediocrity. The
hewers and

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

cutters of stone--they deserve no other name--who are responsible for
these productions, were often content with roughly outlining by a few
strokes of the chisel the scene which they pretended to reproduce. A
garish coloring then emphasized certain details. The work is sometimes
so hastily executed that the contours alone are distinctly marked,, as
in the hieroglyphics. It sufficed, it is true, merely to outline
representations, the meaning of which every faithful devotee knew and
which he completed in imagination; and it is our ignorance that feels so
vividly the imperfections of these awkward and vague compositions.
Still, some of the smaller bas-reliefs could never have been more than
downright caricatures bordering on the grotesque, and their deformities
strongly remind us of the little toy gingerbread men which are sold at
our fairs.

The carelessness with which these tablets were executed is excused by
their places of destination. The mystics of Mithra were wont not only to
consecrate them in their temples, but also to adorn with them their
modest dwelling-houses. This domestic consumption explains the enormous
quantity of these monuments, which have been found wherever the cult
penetrated. To satisfy the incessant demand of the faithful for these
figures, the workshops in which they were carved must have produced them
rapidly and in quantities.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

The manufacturers of this brummagem sculpture had no other thought than
that of cheaply satisfying their clientage of devotees, whose artistic
tastes were far from exacting. The ancient manufacturers turned out
hundreds of smaller tauroctonous Mithras, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md) just as our image-makers multiply in
profusion the very same type of crucifixes and the very same Virgin
Mary. It was the religious imagery of the epoch, and it was not more
æsthetic than is ours to-day.

These manufacturers did not restrict themselves to the unceasing
production of replicas of the same traditional type; they sought to
diversify their wares, in order to recommend them to all tastes and
purses. Look only at the series of ex-votos found in the mithræum of
Sarmizegetusa in Dacia. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) We find here
specimens of all the models that the workshops of the place reproduced.
High reliefs, which are difficult and costly, are avoided. At most, the
marble was perforated in places, so as to show forth the group of the
tauroctonous god. But what a wondrous variety in the small bas-reliefs
which were affixed to the walls of the sanctuaries! For a mere bagatelle
square tablets could be obtained bearing only

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the immolation of the bull. Sometimes its value is enhanced by the
addition of a sort of predella, divided into three or four smaller
scenes. Again, its composition is complicated by an upper panel
decorated with accessory scenes. These, finally, also occupy the borders
of the monuments, and encompass on four sides the principal
representation. Again, the fancy of the workman taking flight, the
tauroctonous god has been enclosed in a circle ornamented with the signs
of the Zodiac, or in a crown of foliage. Frames were added or omitted.
Considerable ingenuity was exercised to give new forms to the sculptured
plaques. They were indiscriminately square, oblong, semicircular,
trapezoidal, or even round. There are no two of these pieces which are
exactly alike.

If these commercial products of labor for hire have only the remotest
relationship with art, they nevertheless furnish a valuable commentary
upon the stone-hewing industry of antiquity. We have many proofs that a
goodly portion of the sculptures intended for the provincial cities were
executed during the imperial epoch at Rome. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) This is probably the case with some of the
monuments discovered in Gaul, and also for those which adorned a
mithræum in London. <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73.md) On the other
hand, certain statues discovered in the capital were

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

presumably imported from Asia Minor. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)
The beautiful bas-reliefs of Virunum were likewise brought from abroad,
probably by way of Aquileia. We know by the passion of the Four Crowned
Ones the importance of the quarries of Pannonia in the third
century, <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md) where marble was not only
quarried but worked. These stone-yards appear to have been an important
center for the manufacture of Mithraic votive offerings. In any event,
there are several of them, exhumed in the temples of Germany, which were
unquestionably sculptured on the banks of the Danube. These facts cast
an interesting light on the traffic in church ornaments during the days
of paganism.

Yet the majority of the Mithraic monuments were undoubtedly executed on
the spot. The matter is clear for those which were sculptured on the
walls of natural rocks smoothed for the purpose,--they are unfortunately
all greatly damaged,--but the proof of local manufacture for many others
is also forcibly forthcoming from the nature of the stone employed. The
construction of these fragments likewise

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

clearly reveals that they are not the handiwork of foreign masters and
of some great center of art, nor even of those nomadic sculptors who
traversed the land in quest of lucrative or honorific employment, but of
the modest stone-cutters of some neighboring town.

The local origin of the largest monuments is best established, since
their transportation would have involved both numerous risks and
extravagant expenditures. Our collection of large Mithraic bas-reliefs
thus constitutes a highly interesting group for the study of the
provincial art of the empire. Like the mass of votive tablets that have
come down to us, these sculptures, which were exhibited in the apse of
the temples for the adoration of the faithful, are also far from being
masterpieces of art. But they were nevertheless not executed with the
same carelessness, and we feel in their presence that their authors
bestowed upon them their best energies. If the artists afforded no proof
of originality in the invention of subjects, they nevertheless give
evidence of ingenuity in the arrangement of their figures and of their
skill in handling the material.

It must not be forgotten, further, in judging of these fragments, that
the painter came to the aid of the sculptor and that the brush completed
what the chisel had only sketched. On the naked marble or on stone
coated with

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

plaster, flaring colors were laid: green, blue, yellow, black, and all
shades of red were wantonly intermingled. This glaring contrast of tones
accentuated the main contours of the figures, and made prominent their
secondary parts. In many cases the details were only indicated with the
brush. Gilding, finally, emphasized certain subsidiary features. In the
penumbral darkness of the subterranean crypts, the reliefs of these
sculptured compositions would have been almost invisible without this
brilliant polychromatic vesture. Vivid variety of coloring, moreover,
was one of the traditions of Oriental art, and Lucian had already
contrasted the simple and graceful forms of the Hellenic deities with
the ostentatious gaudery of the gods imported from Asia. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)

The most remarkable of these sculptures have been brought to light in
the north of Gaul, or, more precisely, on the Rhenish frontier. It
appears that we must attribute this entire group of monuments to that
interesting school of sculpture which flourished in Belgium in the
second and third centuries, the productions of which unquestionably
surpass those of the workshops of the south. One cannot contemplate the
bas-relief of Osterburken, which is the most complete of the series,
without being impressed with the wealth and the general harmony of this
vast composition. The

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

confused impression resulting from the accumulation of personages and
groups,--a defect which the Mithraic monuments show with many others of
their epoch, and especially with the sarcophagi, the composition of
which is generally intricate,--is here tempered by the judicious use of
separating bands and frames. If we were anxious to criticize the details
of these works, it would be easy to point out the disproportion of
certain of their figures, the awkwardness of certain of their movements,
and sometimes the stiffness of their attitudes and vestments. But these
defects should not render us oblivious to the delicacy of the work here
performed with a crumbling material, and especially to the praiseworthy
success with which a conception of real grandeur has been realized. To
attempt to represent on stone not only the gods but the cosmogony of the
Mysteries and the episodes of the legend of Mithra, even to the final
immolation of the bull, was an undertaking attended with great perils
and is a meritorious achievement even in partial success. Even prior to
this date, and particularly on the sarcophagi, instances occur where the
successive moments of the drama are depicted on superposed or parallel
plates, but we cannot, nevertheless, cite a single monument of Roman
paganism which can be compared in this respect to our grand bas-reliefs,
and for similar productions we must wait for the lengthy compositions
with which

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

the Christian mosaicists decorated the walls of their churches.

We shall not inquire here into the origin of each one of the different
representations which are portrayed upon our monuments; we shall merely
observe that in spite of their variety two or even three clearly marked
classes may be distinguished. Some of the figures have been borrowed
outright from the traditional types of Græco-Roman art. Ahura-Mazda
destroying the monsters that had risen against him is a Hellenic Zeus
annihilating the giants with his bolts; Verethragna is transformed into
a Hercules; Helios is a young man with long flowing hair, mounted on the
usual quadriga; Neptune, Venus, Diana, Mercury, Mars, Pluto, Saturn, are
shown to us in their ordinary aspect with the garb and attributes which
are known to have been theirs from time immemorial. Similarly, the
Winds, the Seasons, and the Planets had been personified long before the
propagation of Mithraism, and the latter cult had only to reproduce in
its temples the models that had long since been made popular.

On the other hand, one personage at least is a transformation of an
Asiatic archetype; this is the leontocephalous, or lion-headed, Kronos.
(See Figs. [20](mom07.htm#img_20)-[23](mom07.htm#img_23)..md) Like the
majority of his compeers, this animal-headed monster is a creation of
the Oriental imagination. His genealogy would doubtless carry us back to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

 

<span id="img_49"></span> ![](img/22300.jpg)  
Fig. 49.  
MITHRAIC KRONOS, OR PERSONIFICATION OF INFINITE TIME.

Surrounded by the signs of the Zodiac (see [p.
121](mom07.htm#page_121).md). In the corners the gods of the Winds. Here
represented without the head of a lion, which appears on the breast of
the figure. A Roman beautification of the horrific features of the
Oriental god. (Bas-relief of Modena, *Rev. arch.*, 1902, I., p. 1.)

 

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

the period of Assyrian sculpture. But the artists of the Occident,
having to represent a deity entirely strange to the Greek Pantheon, and
being untrammelled by the traditions of any school, gave free rein to
their fancy. The various transformations to which they subjected his
figure were in part influenced by religious considerations, which tended
to complicate the symbolism of this deified abstraction and to multiply
more and more his attributes, and in part by an æsthetic solicitude to
soften as much as possible the monstrous character of this barbaric
personage, and thus gradually to humanize it. Ultimately they suppressed
the lion's head, and contented themselves with representing this animal
by its feet only, or with placing the head of the beast on the figure's
breast. (See Fig. [49](#img_49).md)

The leontocephalous god of Eternity is the most original creation of
Mithraic art, and if it is totally destitute of the charm of grace, its
unwonted aspect and the suggestive accumulation of its attributes
awakened curiosity and provoked reflection. With the exception of this
god of Time, we can establish the Oriental origin of certain emblems
only, like the Phrygian bonnet topping a staff, or the sphere surmounted
by an eagle representing the Heavens. As the Mithra immolating the bull,
so also the other scenes in which this hero appears as actor, are
unquestionably in greater part the transpositions of *motifs* popular in
the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

Hellenistic epoch, although we are unable in every case to rediscover
the original which the Roman marble-cutter imitated or the elements
which he combined in his composition. As for the rest, the artistic
value of these

 

<span id="img_50"></span> ![](img/22500.jpg)  
Fig. 50.  
BIRTH OF ERICHTHONIOS.

From a Greek vase. (Baumeister.)

 

adaptations is generally very slight. We have only to compare the
lifeless group of Mithra issuing from the rock (Fig.
[30](mom07.htm#img_30).md) with the animated picture of the birth of
Erichthonios as it is portrayed on Greek vases (see, for example, Fig.
[50](#img_50).md) to note the superior artistic effect which the ancient
Hellenic ceramists could produce from a similar theme. The poverty

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

of the innovations which the Mithraic iconography introduced contrasts
painfully with the importance of the religious movement that provoked
them. We have, in this, an additional corroboration of the fact that in
the epoch in which the Persian Mysteries spread throughout the empire,
the ancient sculpture was doomed beyond recall. Whereas, during the
Hellenistic period, sculptors were still able to conceive new forms
felicitously adapted to the character of the Egyptian divinities, under
the empire, on the other hand, the majority of the Mazdean gods, despite
their very peculiar nature, were compelled, whether or no, to take on
the form and the garb of the denizens of Olympus. And if for some of
these strange subjects new types were actually invented, they were in
every instance distressingly commonplace. The superabundant wealth
inherited from the ancient generations had enervated the generative
potencies of art; and, accustomed to draw from these rich stores, art
had grown incapable of all individual productivity.

But we should be wrong in exacting from the adepts of Mithraism
something which they never made the pretense of offering. The religion
which they preached was not a cult of beauty, and love of plastic form
would doubtless have appeared to them a vain, if not a condemnable,
taste. Religious emotion alone was of consequence in their eyes, and to

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

awaken it they addressed themselves mainly to the reason. In spite of
the many appropriations which it made from the treasury of types created
by Greek sculptors, Mithraic art rested at heart Asiatic, like the
Mysteries of which it was the expression. Its predominating idea was not
to provoke an aesthetic impression; it aimed not to fascinate, but to
tell its mission and to instruct,--faithful in this also to the
traditions of the ancient Orient. The jumbled mass of personages and
groups which are presented on some of the bas-reliefs, the host of
attributes with which it surcharged the eternal Kronos, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) show us that a new ideal was born with the
new religion. These uncouth and unappealing symbols, the manifold use of
which our monuments exhibit, did not allure by their elegance or
nobility; they fascinated the mind by the disquieting attractions of the
Unknown, and provoked in souls reverential fear for an august mystery.

Thus is explained why this art, extremely refined despite its
imperfections, exercised a lasting influence. It was united to Christian
art by an affinity of nature, and the symbolism which it had popularized
in the Occident did not perish with it. Even the allegorical figures of
the cosmic cycle which the devotees of the Persian god had reproduced in
great profusion (for nature was for them divine throughout) were adopted
by Christianity,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

although in essence they were diametrically opposed to its spirit. So
with the images of the Heavens, the Earth, and the Ocean, of the Sun,
the Moon, and the Planets, and of the signs of the Zodiac, of the Winds,
the Seasons, and the Elements, so frequent on the Christian sarcophagi,
the mosaics, and miniatures.

The mediocre compositions which the artists had conceived to represent
the episodes of the legend of Mithra appeared also worthy of imitation
to the Christian ages, which were even more powerless than their
predecessors to shake off the traditions of the workshops. When, after
the triumph of the Church, Christian sculptors were confronted with
subjects hitherto unattempted, and found themselves under the
embarrassing obligations of depicting on stone the personages and
stories of the Bible, they were happy in the opportunity of being able
to draw inspiration from the portrayals which the Persian Mysteries had
popularized. A few alterations in costume and attitude transformed a
pagan scene into a Christian picture. Mithra discharging his arrows
against the rock became Moses causing the waters of the mountain of
Horeb to gush forth; the Sun, raising his ally out of the Ocean, served
to express the ascension of Elijah in the chariot of fire; and to the
time of the Middle Ages the type of the tauroctonous god was perpetuated
in the images of Samson rending the lion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[209:1](mom10.htm#fr_65.md) In the original this
chapter appeared as an Appendix. We have given it an independent place
in this edition.--*Tr*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[210:1](mom10.htm#fr_66.md) Compare my large work,
*Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra*, Vol. II.,
pp. 180 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[211:1](mom10.htm#fr_67.md) *T. et M.*, Mon. 27,
Plate II, opposite p. 209, Vol. II. Conmut thinks these statues are
prior to Hadrian.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[213:1](mom10.htm#fr_68.md) *T. et M.* Mon. 79,
Fig. 67; and Mon. 38, Fig. 45.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[214:1](mom10.htm#fr_69.md) M. von Schneider, *loc.
cit.*, Vol. II., p. 488, who sees in this composition "*ein
verblüffendes technisches Geschick*," compares it with the relief on the
base of the Antonine column (Brunn, *Denkmäler gr. u. röm. Skulptur*,
Pl. 210*b*), and a bas-relief of the Campo Santo of Pisa (Dütschke,
*Bildwerke in Ober-Italien*, I., No. 60), and the bust of Commodus in
the Palais des Conservateurs (Helbig, *Führer*, second ed., No. 524).
The same application of the technique of metal-working to marble may be
noticed in two admirably preserved busts which were discovered at Smyrna
and are to-day to be found in the Museum at Brussels (*Catal. des
antiquitées acquises par les musées royaux depuis le 1<sup>er</sup>
janvier 1900*, Bruxelles, 1901, Nos. 110-111).

<span id="fn_70"></span>[216:1](mom10.htm#fr_70.md) The absence of
machinery naturally excluded any absolute resemblance, but some of our
bas-reliefs are certainly from the same hand or at least from the same
workshop. Cf. *T. et M.*, Vol. II., Mon. 45 and 46; Figs. 85 and 95,
Fig. 87; 192 and 192 *bis*; 194 and 195.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[216:2](mom10.htm#fr_71.md) *T. et M.* Vol. II.,
Nos. 138 to 183.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[217:1](mom10.htm#fr_72.md) Friedländer,
*Sittengeschichte*, Vol. III., p. 280.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[217:2](mom10.htm#fr_73.md) *T. et M.*, Vol. II.,
Mon. 267 and the note on p. 390.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[218:1](mom10.htm#fr_74.md) *T. et M.*, Vol. II.,
Mon. 235 and the note on p. 338. *Cf*. supra, [p.
122](mom07.htm#page_122), Fig. [26](mom07.htm#img_26.md).

<span id="fn_75"></span>[218:2](mom10.htm#fr_75.md) Wattenbach, *Passio
sanct, quatuor coronat*., with the notes of Benndorf and Max Büdinger,
1870; cf. Friedländer, *op. cit.*, p. 282. A new text has been published
by Wattenbach, *Sitzungsb. Akad.*, *Berlin*, XLVII., 1896, p. 1281 *et
seq.* There still exists of this work an unpublished Greek translation;
cf. *Analecta Bollandiana*, XVI., 1897, p. 337.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[220:1](mom10.htm#fr_76.md) Lucian, *Jup. trag.*, §
8.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[227:1](mom10.htm#fr_77.md) *Cf*. [p.
139](mom07.htm#page_139), Fig. [35](mom07.htm#img_35.md), and [p.
105](mom07.htm#page_105.md) *et seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](mom11.md)
