[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tms05)  [Next](tms07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV

## MAGIC ACTS: THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES

WE have observed, in our first chapter, that magic acts arise from early
man's inability to distinguish effect from cause, the part from the
whole, that which is like or has been in contact with a person or thing,
from the person or thing itself, imaginings about facts from the facts
themselves. These turns in thinking, which seem so odd to us, we have
ascribed to man's ignorance of the world in which he finds himself--all
of which makes him unable to distinguish error from truth. That early
man's brain was underdeveloped physiologically may, in a measure,
account for this inability to form correct associations and to make
logical inferences. However, the precarious life of the savage and the
dangers with which he is beleaguered tend to heighten his inability to
think correctly.

Note an example, taken from modern times, of such incorrect thinking.
Andrew Lang is our informant. He writes: <span
id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_347) " . . . the arrival of the French
missionaries among the Hurons was coincident with certain unfortunate
events; therefore it was argued that the advent of the missionaries was
the cause of the misfortune." And one example taken from antiquity.
Aulus Gellius <span id="fr_348"></span>[2](#fn_348) once attended a
dinner given by a poet friend at which shriveled oysters were served.
The host thus explained: "The moon, you see, is now waning; oysters,
therefore, like certain other things, are scrawny and juiceless." The
eyes of cats, too, Gellius informs us, grow larger or smaller according
to whether the moon is waxing or waning.

When a person imitates the evil he would repel--grinning like a wolf to
ward off wolves, smearing his face with blood to ward off blood and
death, making thunderous noises to drive away
thunderstorms--anthropologists speak of homoeopathic magic; when he
makes use of some object, such as hair or nails, which has been a part
of or has been in contact with the individual, the name contagious magic
is given. The general term sympathetic magic is applied to both types,
for a mysterious sympathy is supposed to exist between the object to be
influenced and the object which is like or has been in contact with it.
Often the rite is both contagious and homoeopathic at the same time.

In our introductory chapter we discussed one example, taken from
primitive magic, of the principles stated above. We shall now add to
this an account of two magic rites which, while having no organic
connection with the Roman State religion, yet occurred in connection
with State rites.

On June first--a day known as the Kalends of the Beans--the pontiffs
sacrificed to a somewhat obscure goddess of great antiquity, Carna, the
"Flesh Goddess," in an ancient grove near the Tiber. <span
id="fr_349"></span>[3](#fn_349) The goddess, it would seem, had in her
care the vital organs of human beings, the heart, liver, and stomach.
There was a shrine to Carna on the Caelian Hill which, as the tradition
went, Marcus Junius Brutus, in fulfillment of a vow, dedicated to her
after the expulsion of Tarquin the Proud. Beans mixed with spelt were
sacrificed to Carna because, as Macrobius says, "by these foods
especially the powers of the human body are strengthened." The people
ate this mixture and fat bacon, foods which, they believed, prevented
stomach disorders. <span id="fr_350"></span>[4](#fn_350)

We may dismiss, as W. Warde Fowler has done, <span
id="fr_351"></span>[5](#fn_351) Ovid's identification of Carna with
Cardea, the goddess of the hinge; for quite obviously Ovid made the
identification in order to introduce a racy story into his text.

We are particularly interested here in Carna as she survived in popular
belief, long after the goddess had ceased to be worshiped. She possessed
the powers of a witch and could be invoked to keep off bloodsucking
vampires which appeared in the form of screech owls. The rites of
riddance, described by Ovid in the case of the infant Procas who became
king of Alba Longa, are as follows: <span
id="fr_352"></span>[6](#fn_352)

"Immediately she (Crane) touches the doorposts three times in succession
with a spray of arbutus; three times she marks the threshold with an
arbutus spray. She sprinkles the entrance with water (and the water
contained a drug). She holds the bloody entrails of a two months' old
sow and thus speaks: 'Birds of the night, spare the entrails of the boy.
For a small boy a small victim falls. Take heart for heart, I pray,
entrails for entrails. This life we give you in place of a better one.'"

Having killed the sow, the witch placed the vital organs in the open air
and forbade those attending the rite to look upon them. Then a
whitethorn branch was set in a small window which furnished light to the
house. After that the child was safe and the color returned to his
pallid face.

The principle of similarity in this magic act is evident: the vital
organs of the child, which, in early Roman times, were under the care of
the goddess Carna, are to be saved by the vicarious offering of a sow.
The pig was frequently thus used. A similar substitution is to be seen
in the ceremony of treaty-making, preserved in Livy, where the spokesman
for the Roman side strikes a sacrificial pig, uttering these words the
while: <span id="fr_353"></span>[7](#fn_353) "If (the Roman people)
shall be the first to defect (from the terms of the treaty) . . . then
do you, Diespiter, so strike the Roman people as I shall here to-day
strike this pig."

In the magic rites of Crane there is no mention of a divinity--an
important fact, of which we shall take notice in our next chapter. The
significant elements of the description for our present use are the
sprinkling of purificatory waters, the striking of the door-post and the
threshold with arbutus, and the placing of the spray of whitethorn in
the window. The belief that whitethorn could keep off the spirits was
common in antiquity. Ovid, in the rite which we have just described,
says <span id="fr_354"></span>[8](#fn_354) that "by it she (the witch)
could drive away sorrow-bringing harm from the doors." The Greeks had
such a belief. <span id="fr_355"></span>[9](#fn_355) So, too, many
country people in our day use whitethorn to avert evils. <span
id="fr_356"></span>[10](#fn_356) Striking and sweeping are universal
methods of dispelling evil influences. Hence the witch swept the
threshold and the window sill where the vampires would naturally seek
entrance.

Another example: On the twenty-first of February, the Feralia, a day on
which Roman families concluded their rites in honor of the dead,
occurred a curious bit of magic which was intended to silence an enemy.
It had no official connection with the ritual of the day, but was
appropriate perhaps because, as Frazer facetiously remarks, <span
id="fr_357"></span>[11](#fn_357) "the dead . . . are notoriously
silent." The picture which Ovid draws  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[12](#fn_358) is that of an old beldame, surrounded
by a group of girls, performing magic rites to Tacita, the Silent
Goddess. With three fingers she places three pinches of incense in a
mouse's hole under the threshold, probably an offering to the spirits of
the dead, which are commonly believed to haunt thresholds. <span
id="fr_359"></span>[13](#fn_359) Then, as she utters a spell, she winds
woolen threads about a dark-colored lead image of the person whose
slanderous tongue she is endeavoring to seal up. Meanwhile, she turns
black beans in her mouth. She then takes a fish and smears its head with
pitch, pierces it with a bronze needle, and sews it up. As she leaves,
she utters these words: "Hostile tongues and enemy lips have we bound."

We have several of the usual magic details in this rite: the number
three, incense, beans, woolen threads, the color black, the lead image,
bronze, spinning. The object of the performance is to keep a slanderous
person from talking. This is accomplished, first, by winding woolen
threads around a leaden image of the slanderer. As the old woman thus
binds the image, she binds the slanderer. Am incantation assists the
magic act. As the mouth of the fish is sewed up, so the mouth of the
slanderer will be sealed. The use of the fish in this case is clear: as
the person to be affected by the magic is to be rendered silent, a
silent creature must be chosen to represent him. Again, thresholds are
favorite haunts of departed spirits: hence the appropriateness of the
incense offering at that spot.

It is interesting to know in this connection that the punishment meted
out in hell by Minos to persons who had been talkative and betrayed
secrets was that they should become fishes, that thus, in unending
silence, they might atone for the wagging of their tongues. <span
id="fr_360"></span>[14](#fn_360)

Whether there was actually a goddess Tacita is problematic. Plutarch
 <span id="fr_361"></span>[15](#fn_361) calls her one of the Muses and
says that Numa instituted her worship in honor of the silence enjoined
by Pythagoras upon his followers.

We turn now to magic rain-making. We shall first take two examples from
Christianity, one from ancient and one from modern times, and one
example from modern China. Then we shall discuss a Roman rite of
rain-making.

When Marcus Aurelius was leading his forces against the Quadi in 174
A.D., a drought settled upon their country. According to one account,
some Christians who happened to be serving under the Roman standards
prayed for rain, and forthwith the heavens overflowed. <span
id="fr_362"></span>[16](#fn_362) The pagan account of this rainstorm
says that an Egyptian magician procured it from Hermes. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[17](#fn_363) We do not have to go to antiquity,
however, for evidence of supernatural rain-making. Frazer records  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[18](#fn_364) a case of rain-making by immersing the
statue of a saint in water. He writes: "Beside the old priory of
Commagny, a mile or two to the southwest of Moulins-Engilbert, there is
a spring of St. Gervais, whither the inhabitants go in procession to
obtain rain or fine weather according to the needs of the crops. In
times of great drought they throw into the basin of the fountain an
ancient stone image of the saint that stands in a sort of niche from
which the fountain flows."

In the Paris edition of the New York Herald (August 18, 1929) we read of
a drought which menaced the crops in one of the Chinese provinces. The
rice crops were ruined by lack of rain, and a famine set in. The
farmers, backed by the merchants who saw their business in rice
endangered, planned a huge meeting for prayer to the god of rain and the
god of harvest. The government frowned upon this superstitious practice
on the ground that it was out of keeping with the enlightenment of
modern China. However, after enduring the opposition for over a month,
during which the drought grew worse, the authorities yielded, and the
mammoth prayer-meeting was held. Strange to say, rain fell on the day
after the meeting, and the farmers naturally ascribed the downpour to
their rain god. In token of thankfulness, the people carried the image
of the god through the streets.

Ancient peoples, as well as half-civilized tribes of our own day,
believed that certain stones, when brought in contact with water, were
potent to produce rain.

Outside the walls of Rome, in the vicinity of the temple of Mars,
reposed such a stone, perhaps a hollow meteorite, called "the flowing
stone" (lapis manalis). <span id="fr_365"></span>[19](#fn_365) When the
crops were suffering from lack of rain, the pontiffs, accompanied by the
magistrates and their lictors, dragged the stone into the city to the
altar of Jupiter Elicius on the Aventine.

Here they drenched it with water, or if, as is generally believed, it
was hollow, filled it to overflowing--a rite calculated by sympathetic
magic to cause the heavens to overflow. Ovid indicates the magic nature
of the rite where he represents Picus and Faunus chanting spells to
induce Jupiter to come down from the sky. <span
id="fr_366"></span>[20](#fn_366) Petronius represents women, barefoot,
with flowing hair, climbing up to the Capitol to petition Jupiter for
rain. The god answered their plea, and the women went home as wet as
drowned rats. <span id="fr_367"></span>[21](#fn_367) As the setting of
the Satyricon is, for the most part, in southern Italy, a Greek rite may
be intended. The "flowing stone" in this rite must not be confused with
the stone of the same name which, according to Festus, <span
id="fr_368"></span>[22](#fn_368) was the gateway to the underworld.
Tertullian doubtless has the same or a similar rite in mind when he
says: <span id="fr_369"></span>[23](#fn_369) "When the sky is paralyzed
and the year is rainless, barefoot processions are declared. The
magistrates lay aside the purple, reverse their fasces, offer prayer,
and sacrifice a victim." The fact that the magistrates doffed their
purple-edged dress and the lictors reversed their fasces points to the
conclusion that the rites were believed to lie outside the realm of
recognized religion--within the sphere of magic.

In this rite of the aquaelicium, not only does the actual rain-making
belong to the realm of magic, but that women were barefoot and had their
hair streaming has magic significance as well, a point which we have
noticed in our chapters on taboo. Doubtless the stone, representing the
sky and not Jupiter Elicius, was at first concerned. The use of a stone
to represent the sky was not unusual in Greece. Greek astronomers so
employed a stone--a globe resting on a pillar. An Etruscan boundary
stone was often spheroidal in shape on a rectangular base, the stone
probably representing the sky. Furthermore, meteorites, having fallen
from the sky, signified the sky to primitive minds and could quite
easily be used to produce rain, because of the habit of incorrect
application of the law of the association of ideas.

On March sixteenth and seventeenth, a solemn procession made a circuit
of twenty-seven chapels called "Argei" located in various parts of the
city of Rome. <span id="fr_370"></span>[24](#fn_370) Rush puppets,
bearing the same name, and resembling bound men, were made in the
chapels, where they reposed until May fourteenth or fifteenth, when the
pontiffs and the generals (praetores) carried them in procession to the
Sublician Bridge over the Tiber. Here the Vestals threw them into the
river in the presence of the generals and the wife of the Priest of
Jupiter, who was in mourning. Ovid records several explanations of the
rite which were current in his day: In ancient times, two men had been
sacrificed to Saturn, the god of sowing, and thrown into the Tiber; with
the coming to Italy of Hercules, who substituted straw puppets for the
men, the practice of throwing puppets into the river began. Another
account tells how the younger generation of Romans, in order to secure
the voting privilege for themselves alone, threw all men who were over
sixty years of age from certain bridges, probably--as we read in
Festus, <span id="fr_371"></span>[25](#fn_371) who tells the same
story--the bridges in the Plain of Mars over which the Romans passed
when going to vote. This version, of course, cannot explain a rite which
took place, not in the Plain of Mars, but on a bridge over the Tiber.
Still another story had it that the followers of Hercules (Argivi),
having established themselves in Italy, refused to travel farther with
their leader. When one of them was dying, however, the longing for his
native land seized him, and he gave instructions that his body should be
thrown into the Tiber to be carried to his native shores. The slave who
was his heir refused to carry out his master's request and threw a straw
puppet into the river in place of his master.

An attempt has been made in modern times to revive the ancient Roman
explanation of this rite <span id="fr_372"></span>[26](#fn_372)--that
the puppets represented, by substitution, a survival of the times when
old men had actually been sacrificed and thrown into the Tiber, possibly
to pacify the river god for the building of the bridge. We are disposed
to follow Fowler, <span id="fr_373"></span>[27](#fn_373) who is
convinced that the rite is a case of sympathetic magic, the purpose of
which is to produce rain and fertility for the crops. A comparative
study of this rite with other magic rites among various peoples
strengthens this conclusion.

The magic elements are clear: the straw puppets, made to look like men,
were as good as men themselves in a magic rite, whether or not the rite
originated in human sacrifice. Again, if the straw represented the
products of the earth, the "corn spirit" as it is called, <span
id="fr_374"></span>[28](#fn_374) the puppets, when drenched with water,
were sufficient to cause rain to fall, just as the "flowing stone" when
drenched with water could cause the heavens to overflow. This view is
strengthened by the prominent part taken in the rite by the Vestals,
who, in all their public duties, were concerned with rites to produce
fertility in crops and flocks, and who, as we know, were felt to be
possessed of magical powers. The procession involved purification, a
magic rite in itself.

On the twenty-fifth of April, at the Festival of Robigus  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[29](#fn_375) (Robigalia), the spirit of the mildew,
a suckling puppy and a sheep were slain in the city in the morning, and
the entrails and the blood were carried in the afternoon by the priest
of Mars, attended by worshipers clad in white, to the grove of Robigus
at the fifth milestone from Rome on the Claudian Road. Here they were
offered on an altar, together with unmixed wine and incense, as a burnt
sacrifice to the god, with prayer to Robigus to spare the crops and to
ward off harm from them. On this day, boys and men participated in foot
races. Now we have record of a sacrifice of reddish puppies, offered
near an otherwise unknown Puppies' Gate. From the entrails of the
puppies, auguries were taken--a rite which, while it may have had an
independent origin, probably was identical in historical times with the
Festival of the Spirit of the Mildew. The rite was a case of
homoeopathic magic--a red dog to keep off the red mildew, or, if you
prefer, to bring the crops to ruddy ripeness. Ovid once, when returning
to Rome from Nomentum, witnessed the ceremonies of the Festival of the
Mildew, and on inquiring their purpose, received answer from the
sacrificing priest that the rites were intended to keep off the
destructive heat of the Dog Star. Ovid writes: <span
id="fr_376"></span>[30](#fn_376) "This dog is set on the altar instead
of the star dog, and its mere name is sufficient for it to perish." This
statement is illuminating, for it clearly shows the same psychology in
the sacrificing priest that we find in the savage performing a magic
rite. Because the star is called "Dog" a dog in sacrifice will drive
away the star and its heat--a process of homoeopathic magic.

It would seem that Robigus was a form of Mars. Tertullian connects the
two in a passage  <span id="fr_377"></span>[31](#fn_377) in which he
ascribes to Numa the institution of games to Mars and Robigus. We have
seen that the priest of Mars officiated at the rites of the Robigalia.

April fifteenth marked one of the most ancient rites of the Romans, the
Festival of the Pregnant Cows (Fordicidia). <span
id="fr_378"></span>[32](#fn_378) On this day, in historical times, the
pontiffs sacrificed pregnant cows (called fordae or hordae) to Earth.
Some of the cows were slaughtered on the Capitol for the State, and
thirty others in the thirty curiae, one for each curia. The Romans
themselves believed that the sacrifice was to produce fertility for the
crops. Ovid says:  <span id="fr_379"></span>[33](#fn_379) "Now the
cattle are heavy with young; the earth, too, is heavy with seed. To the
full earth a full victim is given." The magic element underlying the
sacrifice is simply this: the cows possessed fertility, and their
sacrifice to Earth transferred this fertility to the earth.

The most interesting part of the rite for our study of magic is the
tearing of the calves, as yet unborn, from their mothers' wombs, under
the supervision of the oldest of the Vestals. These calves were burnt by
the Vestal and the ashes were preserved until the Festival of Pales on
the twenty-first of April. The blood from a horse known as the October
Horse, sacrificed on the Ides of October, was mixed with the ashes of
the calves and with sulphur, and some of the mixture was thrown into
burning bean stalks, through which man and beast leaped--a rite of
purification intended to ward off hostile influence from man and beast
and crops, and to induce fertility. The Vestals distributed a portion of
the mixture--known as suffimen--at the altar of Vesta as a fertility
charm. The ashes of the calves, having come from a prolific mother, were
believed to give creative strength to the men and women who used the
mixture. <span id="fr_380"></span>[34](#fn_380) Other magic elements in
this rite--leaping, bonfires--we shall discuss in a later chapter. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[35](#fn_381)

At the Festival of Ceres (Cerealia) on April nineteenth, foxes were let
loose in the Circus Maximus with torches tied to their backs. Ovid
explains  <span id="fr_382"></span>[36](#fn_382) the custom by telling a
story which he had heard from the lips of a friend at Carseoli. It
appears that a boy caught a vixen fox which had been playing havoc among
the chickens on his father's farm. To punish the thief, the boy wrapped
her in straw and hay and set her afire. The fox managed to escape, and
soon flames had seized the crops and destroyed them. This rite has
puzzled scholars, and many explanations have been forthcoming. The
latest is that of Frazer. <span id="fr_383"></span>[37](#fn_383) He
believes that the burning of the fox "was intended to serve as an awful
warning to other foxes not to come and poach on the farmer's fields."
Doubtless here the familiar principle of similarity offers an
explanation of the rite. The fox is red and hence keeps off red foxes
and, in fact, anything red, mildew, for example, and fire. The
firebrands attached to the wolf's tail assist in warding off the red
flames which, in the dry season, would menace the crops and flocks.

Having explained and illustrated the general principles underlying magic
acts, we may proceed to a study of magic acts as we find them embedded
in the rites of Roman religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[1](tms06.htm#fr_347) Andrew Lang, Myth, Ritual
and Religion, Vol. 1, pp. 94-95.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[2](tms06.htm#fr_348) Noctes Atticae XX. 8; see
also Pliny, Naturalis Historia II. 41, 109.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[3](tms06.htm#fr_349) Ovid, Fasti VI. 101-106.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[4](tms06.htm#fr_350) Macrobius, Saturnalia I.
12. 31-33.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[5](tms06.htm#fr_351) The Roman Festivals, p.
131.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[6](tms06.htm#fr_352) Fasti VI. 155-162. I have
already made use of this excerpt in another connection; but its
appropriateness for our present purpose compels me to repeat it here.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[7](tms06.htm#fr_353) Livy I. 24, 8.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[8](tms06.htm#fr_354) Fasti VI. 129-130.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[9](tms06.htm#fr_355) See Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. IV, p. 142.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[10](tms06.htm#fr_356) Frazer, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[11](tms06.htm#fr_357) Ibid., Vol. II, p. 446.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[12](tms06.htm#fr_358) Fasti II. 571-582.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[13](tms06.htm#fr_359) See Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. II, pp. 447-448.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[14](tms06.htm#fr_360) Claudius Claudianus, In
Rufinum II. 488-490.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[15](tms06.htm#fr_361) Numa VIII. 6.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[16](tms06.htm#fr_362) Tertullian, Apologeticus
adversus Gentes pro Cbristianis V; Julius Capitolinus, Marcus Antoninus
XXIV. 4.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[17](tms06.htm#fr_363) Dion Cassius LXXI. 8-10.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[18](tms06.htm#fr_364) The Magic Art, P. 307.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[19](tms06.htm#fr_365) Ancient sources for this
rite are: Festus: Aquaelicium (Mueller's edition, p. 2); lbid.: Manalem
lapidem (p. 128); Tertullian, Apologeticus XL; De Ieiunio XVI; Servius
on Vergil's Aeneid III. 175; Varro, De Lingua Latina VI. 94; Livy I. 20,
7; Ovid, Fasti III. 327-328; Arnobius V. I; Plutarch, Numa XV; Pliny,
Naturalis Historia II. 140, XXVIII. 14.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[20](tms06.htm#fr_366) Fasti III. 324-325. Note
that Jupiter, i.e., rain, is to be brought down from heaven by sheer
magic.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[21](tms06.htm#fr_367) Satyricon XLIV.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[22](tms06.htm#fr_368) Manalem lapidem
(Mueller's edition, p. 128).

<span id="fn_369"></span>[23](tms06.htm#fr_369) De Ieiunio XVI.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[24](tms06.htm#fr_370) Ancient sources for this
rite are: Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Antiquitates Romanae I. 37, 3;
Ovid, Fasti III. 791-792, V. 621-622; Varro, De Lingua Latina V. 45-54,
VII. 44; Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae XXXII; Festus: Sexagenarios
(Mueller's edition, P. 334). The best summary of the views of modern
scholars is contained in Frazer's note to Ovid, Fasti V. 621-622.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[25](tms06.htm#fr_371) Loc. cit.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[26](tms06.htm#fr_372) Georg Wissowa, Religion
und Kultus der Romer, p. 421.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[27](tms06.htm#fr_373) The Roman Festivals, pp.
116-121.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[28](tms06.htm#fr_374) See H. J. Rose,
Primitive Culture in Italy, pp. 103-io4.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[29](tms06.htm#fr_375) For this rite see:
Varro, Res Rusticae I. 1, 6, De Lingua Latina VI. 16; Ovid, Fasti IV.
901-942; Servius on Vergil's Georgica I. 151; Columella, De Re Rustica
X. 342; Tertullian, De Spectaculis XV; Lactantius I. 20, 17; Festus:
Catularia (Mueller's edition, p. 45), Robigalia (p. 267) ; Pliny,
Naturalis Historia XVIII. 14; C. I. L. I, pp. 231, 316.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[30](tms06.htm#fr_376) Fasti IV. 941-942.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[31](tms06.htm#fr_377) De Spectaculis V.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[32](tms06.htm#fr_378) For this rite see:
Festus: Horda (Mueller's edition, p. 102) Varro, Res Rusticae II. 5,
6-7; De Lingua Latina VI. 15; Lydus, De Mensibus IV. 49 and 72; Ovid,
Fasti IV. 629-672, 731-740.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[33](tms06.htm#fr_379) Fasti IV. 633-634.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[34](tms06.htm#fr_380) See Joannes Lydus, De
Mensibus IV. 72.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[35](tms06.htm#fr_381) Chapter V.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[36](tms06.htm#fr_382) Fasti IV. 681-712.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[37](tms06.htm#fr_383) Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. III, p. 331; see also Rose, Primitive Culture in Italy, pp.
50-51.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Removing Evils by Magic Acts](tms07)
