[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tms06)  [Next](tms08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V

## REMOVING EVILS BY MAGIC ACTS

MAGIC acts in Roman religion are intended to remove the harmful effects
of contact with religiously dangerous persons and things, possessing, as
we say, negative mana or taboo; to ward off real or potential evil
influences which have not as yet harmed the person, and to communicate
to the person, by striking, some quality possessed by the striker or by
the object which is used to strike. Often the same magic performance is
double-acting: it wards off evil and induces good at the same time.

When man finds that he has unavoidably come in contact with some person
or thing which has been found by experience to possess negative mana or
taboo, he may rid himself of the evil effects of the contagion in
various ways. In highly developed religions, a sacrifice is often felt
to be necessary. A concubine, for instance, might not touch the temple
of Juno. An ancient law with regard to this prohibition, ascribed to
Numa, reads as follows: <span id="fr_384"></span>[1](#fn_384) "Let no
kept mistress touch the temple of Juno. If she does so, let her, with
streaming hair, kill and offer up a ewe lamb to Juno." Again, no graving
tools were allowed in the sacred grove of the Arval Brothers; and so an
atoning sacrifice of a pig and a lamb was made before the tools were
taken into the grove and again after they had been removed. <span
id="fr_385"></span>[2](#fn_385) Furthermore, rites must be repeated if a
religiously dangerous person had polluted the place where they were to
be celebrated. Thus, in 491 B.C., the Great Games had to be repeated
because, after they had been given, it was discovered that, on the
morning set for the celebration, a slave had been driven by his master
through the circus where the games were to take place. <span
id="fr_386"></span>[3](#fn_386)

Magic acts which are intended to avert evils resulting from contact with
tabooed objects most commonly involve the use of purifying instruments
called by the Romans februa, <span id="fr_387"></span>[4](#fn_387) such
as water, fire, wool, the skins of sacrificial animals, laurel, pine,
spelt, salt, sulphur, and any object which they used to cleanse their
bodies. Evils, physical and spiritual alike, may be washed or burned
away by the use of these objects. In the case of instruments of
purification called februa, the object itself has the power to ward off
the ill effects of contact; but there is, in almost every case, an
incantation and an assisting action to bring the purifying agent in
contact with the person or thing to be purified. However, it is the
mysterious quality (mana) in the agent itself which has the power to
avert the evil effects of contact. In the case of sticks, wands, brooms,
and the like, it is primarily the action which averts the ill.

A distinction must be made at this juncture between instruments of
purification (februa) on the one hand and talismans and amulets on the
other. In the case of februa, as we have pointed out, there is an
attendant incantation, and the object is used as an element in a magic
rite; in the case of talismans and amulets, no magic rite is
involved--the force is passive, so to speak; it is by inherent mana that
the talisman wards off evil and the amulet induces good. It must be
remembered, however, that the same object may be either februum, amulet,
or talisman, depending on its purpose. If the purpose is purification
from contact with tabooed persons or things, it is a februum; if it is
calculated to ward off evil influences, without magic action, it is a
talisman; if it is believed to induce good, it is an amulet. Wool, for
example, is a februum when it is used in rites of the Lupercalia to wipe
the blood from the brows of the youthful priests, for the purpose there
is purification: it involves a magic act in a regular religious
ceremony. However, the wool worn by the priests and by the victims may
be either talisman or amulet: through its own mana, without a magic act,
it wards off evil and induces good. Again, the bulla worn by the Roman
boy was a talisman-amulet: it warded off evil primarily, but thereby
induced good.

Most instruments of purification used in Roman religion were employed
also in magic rites. In the latter, the individual is usually involved,
and the object of the rite is often questionable or even evil; in
religious rites, on the contrary, the general welfare is involved and
the object is usually good.

We are now ready to turn to a Roman festival in which many purificatory
agents are used--the Festival of Pales (Palilia). <span
id="fr_388"></span>[5](#fn_388) This festival unquestionably antedated
the founding of the city, <span id="fr_389"></span>[6](#fn_389) which,
according to tradition, occurred on the same day as the celebration of
the festival. Pales, to whom the day was sacred, was an ancient Italian
shepherd divinity, of uncertain sex, worshiped on April twenty-first, in
the city as well as in the country. Ovid himself had taken part in the
celebration: he had with his own hands carried the ashes of the calves
and the bean stalks which were used in rites of purification; and he had
jumped through the fumigating fires and had been sprinkled with water
from a laurel spray. Although animal sacrifice was forbidden on this
day, <span id="fr_390"></span>[7](#fn_390) the blood from the tail and
head of a horse, familiarly known as the October Horse, which had been
sacrificed on October fifteenth, was mixed with sulphur and with bean
stalks and with the ashes of the unborn calves which had been sacrificed
at the Festival of the Pregnant Cows (Fordicidia) on April fifteenth.
This mixture was distributed at the Festival of Pales as a fertility
charm.

On the morning of the festival, the shepherds ceremonially swept their
folds with a broom and sprinkled both sheep and folds with purificatory
water. They adorned the folds with laurel sprays and fumigated the sheep
with sulphur, while male olives, pine, and savines were thrown into the
fire, presumably on the hearth of the farmhouse. These would crackle if
the omens were favorable. Baskets of millet, millet cakes, and milk were
offered to Pales, whose wooden statue, standing near the farmhouse,
seems to have been splashed with milk. A feast followed in which
shepherds and god took part. The shepherds then prayed to Pales to keep
away evil influences--wolves, disease, hunger--and to bring good
influences to bear--water, food, health to man and to flocks; they
repeated the prayer four times, facing the East, while they cleansed
their hands in fresh dew. The people drank wine boiled down until it was
thick and then mixed with milk. After this, the farmer, his family, and
his flocks leaped through bonfires made of straw, a rite which, as they
believed, would make women prolific. The worshipers, eating and
drinking, lay about on the grass.

We have noted in this rite many of the purifying instruments mentioned
by Ovid under the name februa. Water is used to cleanse, fire to burn
away evil influences. Sulphur is burned as a fumigating agent for flocks
and men. There has also been a ceremonial sweeping of the folds. Some
notion of spiritual cleansing may be associated with the purificatory
objects here used, as well as with the ceremonial sweeping. The
significance of these various februa and of the magic sweeping we shall
presently consider in detail.

Rites similar to or almost identical with those of the Festival of Pales
have survived to our day in various parts of the world. Frazer
writes: <span id="fr_391"></span>[8](#fn_391)

"In eastern Europe many analogous rites have been performed down to
recent times, and probably still are performed, for the same purpose, by
shepherds and herdsmen on St. George's Day, the twenty-third of April,
only two days after the Parilia, with which they may well be connected
by descent from a common festival observed by pastoral Aryan peoples in
spring. The ceremonies appear to be mainly designed to guard the flocks
and herds against wolves and witches. . . ."

### Removing the Evil Effects of Dangerous Contact by Washing and Burning

Among all peoples, water and fire are common instruments for removing
the harmful effects of contact with persons or things which, as they
believe, possess a mysterious power to harm. Inasmuch as they find in
everyday life that water can cleanse their household utensils and their
bodies, they believe, by a curious twist in thinking, that it can
cleanse them of the uncanny contagion of those persons and things which
are, as we say, taboo.

We shall give a few examples of this use of water. First, an instance of
its power to cleanse a stranger of the influences dangerous to a Roman.
A Sabine, on one occasion, presented himself at the temple of Diana in
Rome with a prodigiously large heifer, intending to sacrifice it to the
goddess. Now soothsayers had prophesied that the state whose citizen
should offer that particular heifer to Diana would possess the supreme
power in Italy. The Roman priest, aware of the prophecy, insisted that
the Sabine--a stranger and hence religiously dangerous--bathe in a
running stream as the Roman ritual demanded. While the Sabine was thus
occupied, the priest sacrificed the heifer to the goddess. <span
id="fr_392"></span>[9](#fn_392) Again, corpses and death, in all ages,
have been considered dangerous, and the person who has come in contact
with them needs purification. Thus persons who attended a Roman funeral
must wash their hands in pure water before performing the last rites for
the dead, and on returning must be sprinkled with water and walk over
fire to remove the contagion of death. <span
id="fr_393"></span>[10](#fn_393)

AEneas, we recall, refused to touch his home gods until he had removed
the blood of battle from his hands. <span
id="fr_394"></span>[11](#fn_394) Again, before Claudia Quinta laid hold
of the cable of the ship bearing the Great Mother and forced it to move,
thus proving her chastity, she dipped her hands in the Tiber and three
times sprinkled her head with holy water. <span
id="fr_395"></span>[12](#fn_395) And at the Festival of Pales, the
farmer sprinkled the ground and, after prayer to the divinity, washed
his hands in pure spring water. <span id="fr_396"></span>[13](#fn_396)
Sprinkling, in such cases as these, seems to be a survival of an earlier
ceremony of washing, just as in Christian sects sprinkling at a
christening ceremony is a survival of an earlier immersion.

Water was commonly used in magic rites also. The witch Sagana, in
Horace's fifth Epode, sprinkled with water from Lake Avernus the house
in which she and two other witches were making preparations to murder a
boy to secure his marrow for magic purposes. <span
id="fr_397"></span>[14](#fn_397) One recalls the rites in which Dido
(feigning thus to destroy AEneas by magic) sprinkled on the pyre
pretended waters from Avernus. <span id="fr_398"></span>[15](#fn_398)
Again, in certain rites described by Ovid which were believed to have
the power to ward off evil influences from a baby, the witch sprinkled
the entrance of the house with water containing a drug. <span
id="fr_399"></span>[16](#fn_399)

Fire, like water, is regularly used to remove the harmful effects of
contact with persons and things which are taboo and for driving away
evils of all sorts, whether spiritual or physical. Thus, as we have
seen, when a person returned from a funeral, he had to walk over fire to
remove the contagion of death-a rite usually called "the fire
walk." <span id="fr_400"></span>[17](#fn_400)

A vigorous description of purificatory rites which later Romans used
after contact with a foreigner is found in a late writer. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[18](#fn_401) The rites are intended to rid a person
of the evil influences of such dangerous contact. The priest whirls
lustral torches of blazing pungent sulphur and bitumen about the person
to be purified; he sprinkles sacred waters and grasses which have the
power to rout evil influences. With his hands turned backward he hurls
torches to the south. These are to carry off with them all the spells
which have been cast upon the sick. The poet, to be sure, pictures the
city of Rome as the body to be purified (from contact with Alaric) ; but
the rites are doubtless true to current practice, otherwise there would
be no point to the figure.

Not only sulphur but other combustible substances were used as purifying
agents. A witch, for example, purified Tibullus from the harmful effects
of magic by using pine torches. <span id="fr_402"></span>[19](#fn_402)
Such torches, we know, were carried in procession from the house of the
bride to that of the bridegroom. <span id="fr_403"></span>[20](#fn_403)
Ovid once heard a flamen's wife asking for instruments of purification,
and a spray of pine was handed to her. <span
id="fr_404"></span>[21](#fn_404) In most magic rites pine torches are
used along with sulphur and laurel and other purifying agents. <span
id="fr_405"></span>[22](#fn_405) In the case of purification by laurel,
the person to be purified was sprinkled with water from a laurel
spray. <span id="fr_406"></span>[23](#fn_406) The soldiers who followed
the general's car in a triumphal procession wore a laurel garland that
they might enter the city with the stain of blood removed, and to ward
off the ghosts of the slain enemies. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[24](#fn_407) This is a talismanic use of laurel. The
war-herald who accompanied the Roman army took with him for purifying
purposes certain sacred greens--in all likelihood the modern vervain
which is commonly used in magic rites. <span
id="fr_408"></span>[25](#fn_408) In the rite of treaty-making between
the Romans and the Albans, prior to the contest between the Horatii and
the Curiatii, the fetial took pure vervain and touched the head of the
spokesman (pater patratus) of the Roman side. The words of the treaty,
which Livy felt were not worth quoting, were in verse, in keeping with
the magic character of the rite. <span id="fr_409"></span>[26](#fn_409)

### Removing Evils by Sweeping and Striking

In Roman religious rites, various instruments for sweeping and striking
were used to drive away evils of all sorts, whether physical or
spiritual. For this purpose the Romans used branches of certain trees,
wands, lashes, brooms and besoms. To take an example: after a dead body
had been carried out for burial at Rome, scruples demanded that the
house be swept out ceremonially. Festus writes as follows  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[27](#fn_410) about the person who performed the
rite: "Everriator (the one who sweeps out) is the name given to the
person who, having by law received an inheritance, is bound to perform
due rites to the dead. If he fails to do so, or if there is any
interference in this rite, he shall atone with his life. This name is
derived from the process of sweeping out." Ovid mentions the rite: <span
id="fr_411"></span>[28](#fn_411) "After houses have been swept out, the
objects of purification which the lictor takes--parched spelt and
salt--are called februa." Here, then, we have a magic ceremony
performed, either by a State official--a lictor who customarily assisted
the Priest of Jupiter--or, as is implied in what Festus writes, by the
heir of the deceased. It is our purpose here to note that there is a
ceremonial sweeping of the house with a particular kind of broom, the
purpose of which, as Frazer suggests  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[29](#fn_412) (supporting his belief with parallels
from many lands), was to sweep out the ghosts of the deceased, and also,
we may add, to sweep out the evils which had caused his death. Spelt and
salt were regularly used in magic rites of purification and as offerings
to the spirits of the dead; hence the appropriateness of their use
here. <span id="fr_413"></span>[30](#fn_413)

Our second illustration of magic sweeping comes from St. Augustine, who
describes  <span id="fr_414"></span>[31](#fn_414) the danger surrounding
the mother and her new-born child--the superstition that they were
liable to be tormented by evil spirits from the woodland (Silvanus, as
the later Romans believed) until a curious ceremony was performed. We
have had occasion to quote the passage before; but its appropriateness
to the present subject leads us to give it again and to discuss it a
little more fully.

"After the birth of the child, three protecting divinities are summoned
lest the god Silvanus enter during the night and harass mother and
child; and to give tokens of those guardian divinities three men by
night surround the threshold of the house and first strike it with an ax
and a pestle; then they sweep it off with a broom, that, by giving these
signs of worship, the god Silvanus may be kept from entering. For trees
are not cut nor pruned without iron; nor is spelt powdered without a
pestle; nor is grain piled up without a broom. Now from these three
objects are named three divinities: Intercidona from the intercisio of
the ax; Pilumnus from the pilum; Deverra from the 'sweeping' (verrere)
of the broom; and by the protection of these divinities new-born babes
are preserved against the violence of Silvanus."

Needless to say, this rite fairly teems with magic. The objects used in
it are talismanic: they are possessed of mana potent to drive away evil
influences. The iron of the ax and the iron tip of the pestle in
themselves have power to drive away baleful forces; and this is assisted
by the power of the ax to kill with its sharp edge. The striking with
the pestle and the ceremonial sweeping are familiar magic acts of
aversion.

We have already had occasion to describe the Festival of Pales. <span
id="fr_415"></span>[32](#fn_415) We must notice here again, however,
that the shepherds on the morning of the festival ceremonially swept
their folds to drive away dangerous forces.

We conclude our description of ceremonial sweeping with an account of
the cleansing of the temple of Vesta on the fifteenth of June. The muck
(stercus) thus swept out was carried up the Capitoline Hill to an alley
shut off by a gate called the Muck Gate (Porta Stercoria), where it was
buried. <span id="fr_416"></span>[33](#fn_416) The other sweepings
(purgamina) from the temple were thrown into the Tiber. <span
id="fr_417"></span>[34](#fn_417) The day was a holiday until after the
ceremony was completed. Frazer (following Wissowa) has assumed  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[35](#fn_418) that the sweepings mentioned by Ovid
and the muck recorded in Festus and in Varro were one and the same
thing; and he has conjectured that these were placed in a depository on
the Capitoline Hill and were subsequently dumped into the Tiber. Now the
word purgamina in Latin signifies "sweepings," but it does not
necessarily mean "muck." Purgamina is commonly used of sweepings in
magic rites which are calculated to drive away evil spirits. Thus, in my
opinion, stercus and purgamina were two different things. The sweeping
of the temple of Vesta may be a survival of the primitive days when the
daughters of the family actually swept out the rude hut. <span
id="fr_419"></span>[36](#fn_419) The sweeping, then, in historical times
would be a ritualistic survival of this act.

Whipping and striking are favorite ways of driving evils out of persons
and things, and thereby allowing good influences to take their place.
For example, when a Vestal in Rome had committed an offense against the
proprieties of her order, the chief Priest whipped her, not only to
punish her, but to drive out the evil influences which caused her
wrongdoing. <span id="fr_420"></span>[37](#fn_420)

We shall conclude this part of our study with accounts of two festivals
in which rites of magic whipping had a prominent place: the Lupercalia
and the Festival of the Nones of the Goat (Nonae Caprotinae).

To discuss the various interpretations of the Lupercalia would lead us
too far afield. <span id="fr_421"></span>[38](#fn_421) We are concerned
here primarily with its magic elements and more especially with the rite
of ceremonial whipping contained in it.

One of the most revered spots in the city of Rome in ancient days was
the cave at the base of the Palatine Hill called the Lupercal, with the
sacred fig tree hard by, under whose shadow, as the story went, a
she-wolf suckled Remus and Romulus. Here, on February fifteenth, a goat
and a dog, together with certain salt cakes baked by the Vestals, were
sacrificed, whether to Lupercus, Faunus, Inuus, or Juno is problematic.
Justin Martyr mentions  <span id="fr_422"></span>[39](#fn_422) an image
of Lupercus which stood in the Lupercal, nude save for a girdle of
goatskin. There seems to be no good reason for believing that this
statue represented a god Lupercus: it may well have represented one of
the priests; and, inasmuch as the rites of the Lupercalia are very old
and have magic significance, no god need be involved at all. Because of
the curious medley of rites in the festival, the ancients assigned it to
various divinities, not realizing that no god was necessary.

A bloody knife, fresh from the sacrifice, was smeared across the brows
of two youths of aristocratic families, probably leaders of two colleges
of priests called Luperci. The blood was wiped off with wool which had
been dipped in milk, and the youths were compelled to laugh. Blood, we
know, was commonly used in magic rites; and goats, too, often had a
place in these rites. The blood of a goat, for example, was believed to
possess the power to break adamant. By the principles of magic, the
blood of the goat and the dog would, in itself, be sufficient to drive
away evil--in this case, probably wolves at first and then, because of
the wolf's connection with Mars, all the evil influences centered in
that god. But it would be easier to explain the rite's connection with
wolf aversion if the actual sacrifice were a wolf. Perhaps wolves were
originally sacrificed, and when these dangerous creatures became less
available for sacrificial purposes, dogs were substituted for them. Such
substitutions are easy for primitive peoples. Servius, for instance,
writes: <span id="fr_423"></span>[40](#fn_423) "In sacrifice, likenesses
are accepted for realities. Hence, when animals which are difficult to
find must be sacrificed, they are made of bread or of wax and are
accepted as the real victims." Certainly in the rites of the Lupercalia
the smiling of the youths smacks of the grinning of wolves, and so, by
the principle of similarity, the Luperci became wolves so far as magic
was concerned, and thus originally kept off wolves.

The rite which ensued is of particular interest at this point. The
Luperci, clad only in a magic girdle made of the skins of the
sacrificial goats, made a purificatory circuit of the city, beginning at
the Lupercal, forming as they ran a magic circle, the object of which
was to keep off evil influences--here again, no doubt, originally
wolves--from the sheepfold of the primitive Palatine settlement. As the
youths ran, they smote the hands of any women who placed themselves in
their path. There seems to have been no incantation or prayer
accompanying this rite. We know that lashings of this sort were
believed, among other peoples, to expel evil influences of all sorts and
to stir up the reproductive powers; and the Romans, in historical times,
believed that this was the object of the lashings at the Lupercalia. The
fertility of the goat was by some mysterious force transferred to the
women through this contact. Inasmuch, too, as primitive peoples closely
associate fertility in women with fertility in crops, the rites may have
been intended to promote productiveness of the soil as well. <span
id="fr_424"></span>[41](#fn_424)

Our final festival--the Festival of the Nones of the Goat <span
id="fr_425"></span>[42](#fn_425)--occurred on July seventh, the day on
which, according to tradition, Romulus disappeared at the Goat's Marsh
in the Plain of Mars (Campus Martius). On this day slave women, dressed
in their mistresses' clothes, ran about in play, scoffing at passers-by
and engaging in a kind of sham fight in which they cast stones at one
another. They feasted and drank under fig-tree boughs in the Plain of
Mars and, along with their mistresses, cut sprays from the sacred fig
tree and sacrificed them and their milky juice to Juno of the Goat. Now
the fig is purgative, and such purgatives were ceremonially used by the
ancients as cathartics to expel evil influences and hence to induce
good. The resemblance of the sap of the fig to milk and the fact that
the sacrifice, in historical times, was made to the especial goddess of
mothers, make the object of the rite fairly sure. The male fig
communicates its richness to the divinity who, in turn, communicates it
to the women. Moreover, we have the curious statement recorded in Varro
 <span id="fr_426"></span>[43](#fn_426) about this festival: "They use
the switch from the (male) wild fig-tree." While we are not told exactly
what use was made of it, it is reasonable to suppose that the women
lashed one another with it and thus transferred by magic the fertility
of the fig to themselves, driving out at the same time any influences
detrimental to reproduction. We have record of similar lashings with
wild fig switches at the Thargelia in Athens in the curious rite of
riddance by two scapegoats called pharmakoi. <span
id="fr_427"></span>[44](#fn_427)

Originally these rites may have had some connection with the
fertilization, by the aid of insects, of the female cultivated fig tree
by the pollen of the male fig, a process which the ancients sought to
further, about this season of the year, by placing strips of the fruit
of the wild fig among the boughs of the cultivated variety. <span
id="fr_428"></span>[45](#fn_428) The throwing of stones at one another
by the maidservants also shows this to be a fertility rite. There was a
similar throwing of stones in the temple of Hippolytus at Troezen at the
festival of the two divinities Damia and Auxesis, both fertility
deities.

### Keeping Away Evils by Drawing a Magic Circle

The describing of a circle about the person or thing to be protected was
usual in magic rites. <span id="fr_429"></span>[46](#fn_429) Thus magic
circles could protect one against snakes. <span
id="fr_430"></span>[47](#fn_430) The Roman ceremonial drawing of circles
by processions about persons and things had its origin in such a belief.
We have record of several magic processions among the Romans. Thus, in
founding towns, they employed an Etruscan rite. <span
id="fr_431"></span>[48](#fn_431) On an auspicious day, they yoked a
white bull and a white cow to a plough with a bronze share. The
ploughman, with his left side turned toward the proposed town, drove to
the left, with the bull on the outside and the cow on the inside. Thus
he traced a furrow around the city, marking out the line of the proposed
wall and being careful that the upturned earth should fall inwards,
toward the left and the town. The furrow, however, was not unbroken, for
wherever a gate was to be built, the share was removed and the plough
was lifted from the ground. The line thus traced--known as the
pomerium--was considered sacred; but such spots as were intended for
gates were not so considered, because dangerous persons--strangers,
enemies, soldiers contaminated by death and blood--had to pass through.
Moreover, dead bodies must go through the gates, and these would
contaminate anything sacred. The magic circle so described was believed
to be effective in keeping away evil influences of all sorts, demons,
witches, diseases, plagues, and the like. The pomerium therefore
constituted a magic line of demarcation between the sacred and the
profane. Hence it was that the Romans would ordinarily not allow foreign
gods within the sacred line, and generals and their armies had to be
purified before entering the city. The use of bronze for the ploughshare
has already been discussed. <span id="fr_432"></span>[49](#fn_432) The
Romans usually considered the left auspicious. Hence the ploughman
turned up the clods of earth to the left and drove his plough to the
left. There was a yearly dramatization of this original rite called the
amburbium, but unfortunately we know no more about the rite than that
there was a procession about the city and that there was a sacrificial
victim. <span id="fr_433"></span>[50](#fn_433)

The lustration of the farm, usually held in May, took the form of a
procession around its bounds, consisting of a pig, a sheep, and a bull
(suovetaurilia), driven by a throng of people wearing garlands, chanting
and waving olive branches. The procession made a circuit of the farm
three times, at the conclusion of which the sacrifice of the
suovetaurilia was made to Mars, with an offering of wine, and prayer to
Janus and Jupiter. We translate Cato's description of the rite: <span
id="fr_434"></span>[51](#fn_434)

"The cultivated land should be purified as follows: Order the
suovetaurilia to be driven around. . . . First pray to Janus and to
Jupiter, with offering of wine, and (then) say thus: 'Father Mars I pray
and entreat thee to be favorable and propitious to me, my home, and my
slaves (familia); and with this aim I have ordered the suovetaurilia to
be driven around my arable field, land, and farm, that thou mayest ward
off, debar, and keep away from us diseases, seen and unseen, dearth,
devastation, disasters, inclement weather; and that thou mayest permit
the products, grain, vineyards, and shrubbery to come to full growth and
prove a success; and that thou mayest keep the shepherds and their
flocks safe, and grant good health and strength to me, my home, and my
slaves; and to this end, as I have stated it--the purification and
lustration of my farm, land, and cultivated field-be thou strengthened
by this sacrifice of the suckling suovetaurilia.'"

Then a cake is sacrificed. Cato continues: "When you sacrifice the pig,
lamb, and calf, you must say this: 'To this end, be thou strengthened by
the sacrifice of the suovetaurilia.'" If the sacrifice is not
successful, another is made, with the following prayer: "'Father Mars,
if in anything thou hast not been satisfied with this sacrifice of the
suckling suovetaurilia, I make atonement with this suovetaurilia.'" If,
in the case of one or more victims, there has been doubt whether Mars
was satisfied or not, a pig is sacrificed, with these words: "'Father
Mars, because, in the case of the pig offered, satisfaction has not been
given to thee, I make atonement to thee with this pig.'" The words of
the prayer to be made to Janus, the god of the doorway, and to Jupiter,
the god of the sky, are not given--probably because the necessity of
ridding the farm of the evil influences which centered in Mars was more
compelling.

There are three elements in the prayer to Mars: first, a petition that
Mars ward off evil influences, a power which he possesses by reason of
the fact that he is the source of these influences; <span
id="fr_435"></span>[52](#fn_435) second, a petition that he bring good
influences to bear upon the farm; and, third, in some mystic way the god
is to receive strength to act by partaking of the sacrifice. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[53](#fn_436) The god Mars addressed in these
formulae is, of course, a fully developed god, represented in the ritual
of the State as the god of war; but the ritual and the prayers hark back
to a more primitive period, when man made no distinction between himself
and the things and forces with which he found himself beleaguered in his
struggle with nature. The primitive farmer probably addressed, not a
god, but disease, dearth, and the rest, as real spirits, and, being
incapable, as it seems, of conceiving a force as emanating from
something unlike himself, he came gradually to ascribe personality to
the spirits, who were to be warded off by what was in all probability a
charm, the forerunner of these prayers in Cato. This was followed by a
gradual accumulation of all the hostile spirits into one great hostile
spirit, Mars, the spirit, powerful for ill, who dwelt in the regions
beyond the bounds of the farm, and who must be induced to keep
away. <span id="fr_437"></span>[54](#fn_437)

But the lustration, while it passed through this animistic stage before
it became connected with Mars, Janus, and Jupiter, had its origin
further back in the age of magic. It was originally a process of marking
off the sacred from the profane by a magic circle formed by the slow
procession from point to point on a Roman farm. In the procession were
carried, or driven, the sacred animals, the pig, the sheep, and the
bull. The animals originally possessed sufficient mana--in this case
their productivity--to communicate it to the fields and flocks. No god
or spirit was at first concerned in the rite. A charm, in the form of a
command, accompanied the tracing of the magic circle, and this was
sufficient to ward off evils.

### Removing Evils by Dancing: The Scapegoat

Dancing played a prominent part in ancient Roman rites and seems to
involve principles of sympathetic magic. On the first of March began a
series of processions lasting throughout the whole month, in which
twenty-four priests of Mars, called Leapers (Salii), clad in armor of
bronze, each carrying in his right hand a staff and in his left a
shield, marched in procession through the city, visiting certain
important spots such as the Forum and the Capitol. They danced in solemn
rhythm, chanting their ancient hymn and beating their shields with their
staffs. On the fourteenth of the month, a man called Mamurius Veturius,
clad in the skins of a goat, was beaten with the staffs and driven from
the city. <span id="fr_438"></span>[55](#fn_438) Frazer has gathered
 <span id="fr_439"></span>[56](#fn_439) many parallels to these rites in
which savages, in warlike dances, brandish swords, fire off muskets, and
beat drums in order to drive away spirits hostile to crops. It would
seem that such rites and, by analogy, those of the Leapers of Mars,
involve principles of sympathetic magic: the crops will grow as high as
the worshipers can leap; the striking, too, drives away hostile demons
of all sorts. The smiting of the scapegoat--probably representing Mars,
the accumulated hostile spirits of the farm and, later, of the
city--transferred to him the evils which were harmful to crops and
flocks and men, and these were carried away when the scapegoat was
driven out.

In historical times, certain Leaping Maidens, dressed exactly like the
Leapers, and performing some, if not all, of the functions of their male
colleagues, were hired to take part in the rites. <span
id="fr_440"></span>[57](#fn_440) It has been suggested that originally
they may have been priestesses of Mars, with important functions. <span
id="fr_441"></span>[58](#fn_441)

Servius records  <span id="fr_442"></span>[59](#fn_442) a curious
incident which illustrates the power of dancing to avert the evil
effects of desecrating the sacred games. While the games of Apollo were
in progress, news reached the city that Hannibal was making an attack
near one of the gates. Everyone took up arms to repel the enemy. On
returning home, however, they were seized by dread of the evil
consequences of their having interrupted the sacred games. Noticing an
old man dancing in the Circus, they inquired the reason for his action.
He replied: "I have not interrupted my dancing." There are several
possible explanations. Servius believes that the Roman proverb "The
State is safe while the old man dances" originated in this event; and
inasmuch as he tells the story apropos of a line of Vergil which
mentions an interruption in sacred rites, he must feel that the dancing
in some way atoned for the interrupted rites of Apollo. It may be
possible, however, that his dance was imitative of war actions, in which
case he would help the Romans by sympathetic magic; or he may have
danced in order thus to keep the games of Apollo in progress.

To summarize: We have noticed in this chapter that magic acts in Roman
religion may be divided, according to their objects, into three classes:
those which are calculated to remove the baleful effects of actual
contact with persons and things which have, in the past, been found to
be uncannily dangerous to man; those which are intended to keep off
potential evils, whether physical or spiritual; and, finally, those
which are intended to communicate to the person struck some quality
possessed by the striker or by the object used to strike. Such magic
rites are often double-acting; they ward off evils and induce good at
the same time.

The evil effects of contact with dangerous persons or things may be
removed in several ways: in developed religions, where some notion of a
personal god is present, sacrifice may be necessary, or a whole rite may
have to be repeated. Most magic acts, however, involve the use of
certain instruments of purification--called februa by the Romans--such
as fire, water, wool, and the like. By means of these, evils both
physical and spiritual are washed or burned away. Some mysterious power
to ward off evil is believed to be present in these objects: the magic
act is purely secondary. In the case of sticks, wands, and besoms,
however, it is primarily the action, often accompanied by an
incantation, which averts the ill. All such instruments of purification
are used both in magic and in religious rites among ancient peoples and
among savages of to-day. In the case of magic rites, the individual is
concerned; in religion the common good is involved.

We have seen, too, that all magic instruments of purification were used
in the Roman State festivals; that rites similar to those of old Rome
are occasionally to be found among modern peoples--a fact which points
to a common origin for such festivals.

We have seen, further, that water and fire are commonly used in
religious and in magic rites to wash and to burn away evils. Early man,
knowing that water cleansed his body and his household vessels, thought
that it could wash away the contagion of things which he felt to be
dangerous to him. Such is the curious reasoning of savages.

Again, he saw that fire refined the dross from metal, so why should it
not burn away evils which were actually harming him and keep off evils
which might harm him in the future? Thus we have ceremonial leapings
through bonfires and walking over hot coals. These fires, too, may have
been felt as setting up barriers between the living and the dead.
Sulphur, because of its real disinfectant properties and because of its
fiery nature, is particularly potent in rites of purification.

Evils, as we have shown, can also be driven away by striking and by
sweeping, rites which have parallels among all peoples. Early man could
sweep the filth from his hovel, so why could he not sweep out the spirit
of the dead man? Often, as we have noticed, such ceremonies are believed
to keep away the hostile spirits of the dead, or to drive away evil
influences which might interfere with childbearing, or to communicate,
by contact through lashings, the fertility of some fruitful object, an
animal or a tree, for example.

We have seen that evils of all sorts can be kept away by tracing a magic
line about them. This protecting rite is often assisted by driving in
the procession animals whose fertility is communicated to the crops.

And, finally, rites of dancing seem to have a sympathetic connection
with the crops: these will grow as high as the dancers can leap. In such
rites magic striking is also found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_384"></span>[1](tms07.htm#fr_384) Gellius, Noctes Afficae
IV. 3, 3.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[2](tms07.htm#fr_385) G. Henzen, Acta Fratrum
Arvalium, pp. 128-135.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[3](tms07.htm#fr_386) Livy II. 36, 1.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[4](tms07.htm#fr_387) See Varro, De Lingua
Latina VI. 13, 34; Ovid, Fasti II. 1936, and Frazer's notes on these
lines. The word februum is of Sabine origin. See Varro. loc. cit.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[5](tms07.htm#fr_388) For this festival see
especially Tibullus II. 5, 87-106; Propertius V. 4, 73-78; Ovid, Fasti
IV. 721-782; see also Frazer's notes on Ovid, Fasti IV. 721-782.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[6](tms07.htm#fr_389) Ovid, Fasti IV. 807-820;
Plutarch, Romulus XII. 1.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[7](tms07.htm#fr_390) Plutarch, loc. cit.;
Solinus I. 19.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[8](tms07.htm#fr_391) J. G. Frazer, The Fasti
of Ovid, Vol. III, P. 339.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[9](tms07.htm#fr_392) Livy I. 45, 4-7.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[10](tms07.htm#fr_393) Festus: Aqua et igni
(Mueller, pp. 2-3).

<span id="fn_394"></span>[11](tms07.htm#fr_394) Aeneid II. 717-720.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[12](tms07.htm#fr_395) Ovid, Fasti IV. 314-315.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[13](tms07.htm#fr_396) Ovid, Fasti IV. 736 and
778.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[14](tms07.htm#fr_397) Epodi V. 25-26.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[15](tms07.htm#fr_398) Aeneid IV. 512.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[16](tms07.htm#fr_399) Fasti VI. 157. See a
paper entitled The House Door in Greek and Roman Religion and Folk Lore,
by Professor M. B. Ogle, American Journal of Philology XXXII (1911), pp.
251-271.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[17](tms07.htm#fr_400) Festus: Aqua et igni
(Mueller, pp. 2-3).

<span id="fn_401"></span>[18](tms07.htm#fr_401) Claudianus, De Sexto
Consulatu Honorii Augusti 324-330.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[19](tms07.htm#fr_402) I. 2. 61.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[20](tms07.htm#fr_403) Catullus LXI. 15.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[21](tms07.htm#fr_404) Fasti II. 27-28.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[22](tms07.htm#fr_405) Nemesianus IV. 62.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[23](tms07.htm#fr_406) Ovid, Fasti IV. 728.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[24](tms07.htm#fr_407) Festus: Laureati
(Mueller, p. 117).

<span id="fn_408"></span>[25](tms07.htm#fr_408) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid XII. 120.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[26](tms07.htm#fr_409) Livy I. 24, 4-9.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[27](tms07.htm#fr_410) Everriator (Mueller, p.
77).

<span id="fn_411"></span>[28](tms07.htm#fr_411) Fast; II. 2 3-24.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[29](tms07.htm#fr_412) The Fasti of Ovid, Vol.
II, p. 279.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[30](tms07.htm#fr_413) See Thomas J. Marett, in
Folk Lore XXXVIII (1927), p. 181; Peter J. Hamilton, in Folk Lore
XXXVIII (1927), p. 62.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[31](tms07.htm#fr_414) De Civitate Dei VI. 9.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[32](tms07.htm#fr_415) See above, pp. 148-150.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[33](tms07.htm#fr_416) Festus: Stercus
(Mueller, P. 344).

<span id="fn_417"></span>[34](tms07.htm#fr_417) Ovid, Fasti VI. 713-714.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[35](tms07.htm#fr_418) Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. IV, pp. 314-315.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[36](tms07.htm#fr_419) W. Warde Fowler, The
Religious Experience of the Roman People, P. 136.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[37](tms07.htm#fr_420) Plutarch, Numa X.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[38](tms07.htm#fr_421) For an excellent account
of the Lupercalia see Frazer, The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. II, pp. 327-341,
with the references there given.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[39](tms07.htm#fr_422) Justin Martyr XLIII. 1,
7.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[40](tms07.htm#fr_423) On Vergil's Aeneid II.
116.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[41](tms07.htm#fr_424) See Apuleius, Apologia
LXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[42](tms07.htm#fr_425) For this rite see Varro,
De Lingua Latina VI. 18; Plutarch, Romulus XXIX, Camillus XXXIII;
Macrobius, Saturnalia I. 11, 36-42; Ausonius, De Feriis, 9-10; Frazer,
op, cit., Vol. II, pp. 343-356.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[43](tms07.htm#fr_426) Loc. cit.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[44](tms07.htm#fr_427) Fragments of Hipponax
(in Tzetzes, Hist. XXIII. 726-756); see Servius on Vergil's Aeneid III.
57.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[45](tms07.htm#fr_428) L. Preller, Romische
Mythologie, I. 287.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[46](tms07.htm#fr_429) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia XXI. 42, XXV. 50.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[47](tms07.htm#fr_430) Eugene Stock McCartney,
"Magic Circles as Barriers to Snakes," in The Classical Weekly, Vol.
XXII (1929), pp. 175-176.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[48](tms07.htm#fr_431) Ovid, Fasti IV. 825-826;
Servius on Vergil's Aeneid IV. 212; Festus: Primigenius sulcus (Mueller,
p. 237) ; Varro, De Lingua Latina V. 143, Res Ruslicae II. 1, 10;
Plutarch, Romulus XI. 1-2, Quaestiones Romanae XXVII; Isidore, Originer
XV. 2, 3; Columella, De Re Rustica VI, Praefatio VII; see also Frazer,
The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. III, pp. 379-384; Fowler, The Religious
Experience of the Roman People, P. 214.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[49](tms07.htm#fr_432) See Chapter III, p. 118.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[50](tms07.htm#fr_433) Servius on Vergil's
Bucolica III. 77.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[51](tms07.htm#fr_434) De Agricultura CXLI.
1-3; see E. G. Sihler, Testimonium Animae, pp. 342-344.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[52](tms07.htm#fr_435) See W. Warde Fowler. The
Roman Festivals, P. 89.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[53](tms07.htm#fr_436) W. Warde Fowler. The
Religious Experience of the Roman People, pp. 182-183.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[54](tms07.htm#fr_437) Ibid., pp. 132-133.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[55](tms07.htm#fr_438) For the Salian priests
see Festus: Mamuri Veturi (Mueller, P. 131); Dionysius of Halicarnassus,
Antiquitates Romanae II. 71; Plutarch, Numa XIII; Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid VII. 188, VIII. 285. Ovid, Fasti III. 259-392; Livy I. 20, 4, 1.
27, 7; Varro, De Lingua Latina VI. 14; joannes Lydus, De Mensibus IV.
49.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[56](tms07.htm#fr_439) The Golden Bough, Vol.
II. pp. 157-182.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[57](tms07.htm#fr_440) Festus: Salias Virgines
(Mueller, P. 329).

<span id="fn_441"></span>[58](tms07.htm#fr_441) H. J. Rose, Primitive
Culture in Italy, p. 96.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[59](tms07.htm#fr_442) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid VIII. 110.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Incantation and Prayer](tms08)
