[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw00)  [Next](hw02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter One

### Bimala's Story

#### I

Mother, today there comes back to mind the vermilion mark  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) at the parting of your hair, the *sari*
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) which you used to wear, with its wide
red border, and those wonderful eyes of yours, full of depth and peace.
They came at the start of my life's journey, like the first streak of
dawn, giving me golden provision to carry me on my way.

The sky which gives light is blue, and my mother's face was dark, but
she had the radiance of holiness, and her beauty would put to shame all
the vanity of the beautiful.

Everyone says that I resemble my mother. In my childhood I used to
resent this. It made me angry with my mirror. I thought that it was
God's unfairness which was wrapped round my limbs--that my dark features
were not my due, but had come to me by some misunderstanding. All that
remained for me to ask of my God in reparation was, that I might grow up
to be a model of what woman should be, as one reads it in some epic
poem.

When the proposal came for my marriage, an astrologer was sent, who
consulted my palm and said, "This girl has good signs. She will become
an ideal wife."

And all the women who heard it said: "No wonder, for she resembles her
mother."

I was married into a Rajah's house. When I was a child, I was quite
familiar with the description of the Prince of the fairy story. But my
husband's face was not of a kind that one's imagination would place in
fairyland. It was dark, even as mine was. The feeling of shrinking,
which I had about my own lack of physical beauty, was lifted a little;
at the same time a touch of regret was left lingering in my heart.

But when the physical appearance evades the scrutiny of our senses and
enters the sanctuary of our hearts, then it can forget itself. I know,
from my childhood's experience, how devotion is beauty itself, in its
inner aspect. When my mother arranged the different fruits, carefully
peeled by her own loving hands, on the white stone plate, and gently
waved her fan to drive away the flies while my father sat down to his
meals, her service would lose itself in a beauty which passed beyond
outward forms. Even in my infancy I could feel its power. It transcended
all debates, or doubts, or calculations: it was pure music.

I distinctly remember after my marriage, when, early in the morning, I
would cautiously and silently get up and take the dust  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) of my husband's feet without waking him, how
at such moments I could feel the vermilion mark upon my forehead shining
out like the morning star.

One day, he happened to awake, and smiled as he asked me: "What is that,
Bimala? What *are* you doing?"

I can never forget the shame of being detected by him. He might possibly
have thought that I was trying to earn merit secretly. But no, no! That
had nothing to do with merit. It was my woman's heart, which must
worship in order to love.

My father-in-law's house was old in dignity from the days of the
*Badshahs*. Some of its manners were of the Moguls and Pathans, some of
its customs of Manu and Parashar. But my husband was absolutely modern.
He was the first of the house to go through a college course and take
his M.A. degree. His elder brother had died young, of drink, and had
left no children. My husband did not drink and was not given to
dissipation. So foreign to the family was this abstinence, that to many
it hardly seemed decent! Purity, they imagined, was only becoming in
those on whom fortune had not smiled. It is the moon which has room for
stains, not the stars.

My husband's parents had died long ago, and his old grandmother was
mistress of the house. My husband was the apple of her eye, the jewel on
her bosom. And so he never met with much difficulty in overstepping any
of the ancient usages. When he brought in Miss Gilby, to teach me and be
my companion, he stuck to his resolve in spite of the poison secreted by
all the wagging tongues at home and outside.

My husband had then just got through his B.A. examination and was
reading for his M.A. degree; so he had to stay in Calcutta to attend
college. He used to write to me almost every day, a few lines only, and
simple words, but his bold, round handwriting would look up into my
face, oh, so tenderly! I kept his letters in a sandalwood box and
covered them every day with the flowers I gathered in the garden.

At that time the Prince of the fairy tale had faded, like the moon in
the morning light. I had the Prince of my real world enthroned in my
heart. I was his queen. I had my seat by his side. But my real joy was,
that my true place was at his feet.

Since then, I have been educated, and introduced to the modern age in
its own language, and therefore these words that I write seem to blush
with shame in their prose setting. Except for my acquaintance with this
modern standard of life, I should know, quite naturally, that just as my
being born a woman was not in my own hands, so the element of devotion
in woman's love is not like a hackneyed passage quoted from a romantic
poem to be piously written down in round hand in a school-girl's
copy-book.

But my husband would not give me any opportunity for worship. That was
his greatness. They are cowards who claim absolute devotion from their
wives as their right; that is a humiliation for both.

His love for me seemed to overflow my limits by its flood of wealth and
service. But my necessity was more for giving than for receiving; for
love is a vagabond, who can make his flowers bloom in the wayside dust,
better than in the crystal jars kept in the drawing-room.

My husband could not break completely with the old-time traditions which
prevailed in our family. It was difficult, therefore, for us to meet at
any hour of the day we pleased.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) I
knew exactly the time that he could come to me, and therefore our
meeting had all the care of loving preparation. It was like the rhyming
of a poem; it had to come through the path of the metre.

After finishing the day's work and taking my afternoon bath, I would do
up my hair and renew my vermilion mark and put on my *sari*, carefully
crinkled; and then, bringing back my body and mind from all distractions
of household duties, I would dedicate it at this special hour, with
special ceremonies, to one individual. That time, each day, with him was
short; but it was infinite.

My husband used to say, that man and wife are equal in love because of
their equal claim on each other. I never argued the point with him, but
my heart said that devotion never stands in the way of true equality; it
only raises the level of the ground of meeting. Therefore the joy of the
higher equality remains permanent; it never slides down to the vulgar
level of triviality.

My beloved, it was worthy of you that you never expected worship from
me. But if you had accepted it, you would have done me a real service.
You showed your love by decorating me, by educating me, by giving me
what I asked for, and what I did not. I have seen what depth of love
there was in your eyes when you gazed at me. I have known the secret
sigh of pain you suppressed in your love for me. You loved my body as if
it were a flower of paradise. You loved my whole nature as if it had
been given you by some rare providence.

Such lavish devotion made me proud to think that the wealth was all my
own which drove you to my gate. But vanity such as this only checks the
flow of free surrender in a woman's love. When I sit on the queen's
throne and claim homage, then the claim only goes on magnifying itself;
it is never satisfied. Can there be any real happiness for a woman in
merely feeling that she has power over a man? To surrender one's pride
in devotion is woman's only salvation.

It comes back to me today how, in the days of our happiness, the fires
of envy sprung up all around us. That was only natural, for had I not
stepped into my good fortune by a mere chance, and without deserving it?
But providence does not allow a run of luck to last for ever, unless its
debt of honour be fully paid, day by day, through many a long day, and
thus made secure. God may grant us gifts, but the merit of being able to
take and hold them must be our own. Alas for the boons that slip through
unworthy hands!

My husband's grandmother and mother were both renowned for their beauty.
And my widowed sister-in-law was also of a beauty rarely to be seen.
When, in turn, fate left them desolate, the grandmother vowed she would
not insist on having beauty for her remaining grandson when he married.
Only the auspicious marks with which I was endowed gained me an entry
into this family-- otherwise, I had no claim to be here.

In this house of luxury, but few of its ladies had received their meed
of respect. They had, however, got used to the ways of the family, and
managed to keep their heads above water, buoyed up by their dignity as
*Ranis* of an ancient house, in spite of their daily tears being drowned
in the foam of wine, and by the tinkle of the dancing girls' anklets.
Was the credit due to me that my husband did not touch liquor, nor
squander his manhood in the markets of woman's flesh? What charm did I
know to soothe the wild and wandering mind of men? It was my good luck,
nothing else. For fate proved utterly callous to my sister-in-law. Her
festivity died out, while yet the evening was early, leaving the light
of her beauty shining in vain over empty halls--burning and burning,
with no accompanying music!

His sister-in-law affected a contempt for my husband's modern notions.
How absurd to keep the family ship, laden with all the weight of its
time-honoured glory, sailing under the colours of his slip of a
girl-wife alone! Often have I felt the lash of scorn. "A thief who had
stolen a husband's love!" "A sham hidden in the shamelessness of her
new-fangled finery!" The many-coloured garments of modern fashion with
which my husband loved to adorn me roused jealous wrath. "Is not she
ashamed to make a show-window of herself--and with her looks, too!"

My husband was aware of all this, but his gentleness knew no bounds. He
used to implore me to forgive her.

I remember I once told him: "Women's minds are so petty. so crooked!"
"Like the feet of Chinese women," he replied. "Has not the pressure of
society cramped them into pettiness and crookedness? They are but pawns
of the fate which gambles with them. What responsibility have they of
their own?"

My sister-in-law never failed to get from my husband whatever she
wanted. He did not stop to consider whether her requests were right or
reasonable. But what exasperated me most was that she was not grateful
for this. I had promised my husband that I would not talk back at her,
but this set me raging all the more, inwardly. I used to feel that
goodness has a limit, which, if passed, somehow seems to make men
cowardly. Shall I tell the whole truth? I have often wished that my
husband had the manliness to be a little less good.

My sister-in-law, the Bara Rani,  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) was
still young and had no pretensions to saintliness. Rather, her talk and
jest and laugh inclined to be forward. The young maids with whom she
surrounded herself were also impudent to a degree. But there was none to
gainsay her--for was not this the custom of the house? It seemed to me
that my good fortune in having a stainless husband was a special eyesore
to her. He, however, felt more the sorrow of her lot than the defects of
her character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](hw01.htm#fr_0.md) The mark of Hindu wifehood and
the symbol of all the devotion that it implies.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](hw01.htm#fr_1.md) The *sari* is the dress of the
Hindu woman.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](hw01.htm#fr_2.md) Taking the dust of the feet is
a formal offering of reverence and is done by lightly touching the feet
of the revered one and then one's own head with the same hand. The wife
does not ordinarily do this to the husband.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](hw01.htm#fr_3.md) It would not be reckoned good
form for the husband to be continually going into the zenana, except at
particular hours for meals or rest.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](hw01.htm#fr_4.md) *Bara* = Senior; *Chota* =
Junior. In joint families of rank, though the widows remain entitled
only to a life-interest in their husbands' share, their rank remains to
them according to seniority, and the titles "Senior" and "Junior"
continue to distinguish the elder and younger branches, even though the
junior branch be the one in power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II](hw02.md)
