[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw03)  [Next](hw05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter Two

### Bimala's Story

#### IV

This was the time when Sandip Babu with his followers came to our
neighbourhood to preach *Swadeshi*.

There is to be a big meeting in our temple pavilion. We women are
sitting there, on one side, behind a screen. Triumphant shouts of *Bande
Mataram* come nearer: and to them I am thrilling through and through.
Suddenly a stream of barefooted youths in turbans, clad in ascetic
ochre, rushes into the quadrangle, like a silt-reddened freshet into a
dry river-bed at the first burst of the rains. The whole place is filled
with an immense crowd, through which Sandip Babu is borne, seated in a
big chair hoisted on the shoulders of ten or twelve of the youths.

Bande Mataram! Bande Mataram! Bande Mataram! It seems as though the
skies would be rent and scattered into a thousand fragments.

I had seen Sandip Babu's photograph before. There was something in his
features which I did not quite like. Not that he was bad-looking--far
from it: he had a splendidly handsome face. Yet, I know not why, it
seemed to me, in spite of all its brilliance, that too much of base
alloy had gone into its making. The light in his eyes somehow did not
shine true. That was why I did not like it when my husband
unquestioningly gave in to all his demands. I could bear the waste of
money; but it vexed me to think that he was imposing on my husband,
taking advantage of friendship. His bearing was not that of an ascetic,
nor even of a person of moderate means, but foppish all over. Love of
comfort seemed to ... any number of such reflections come back to me
today, but let them be.

When, however, Sandip Babu began to speak that afternoon, and the hearts
of the crowd swayed and surged to his words, as though they would break
all bounds, I saw him wonderfully transformed. Especially when his
features were suddenly lit up by a shaft of light from the slowly
setting sun, as it sunk below the roof-line of the pavilion, he seemed
to me to be marked out by the gods as their messenger to mortal men and
women.

From beginning to end of his speech, each one of his utterances was a
stormy outburst. There was no limit to the confidence of his assurance.
I do not know how it happened, but I found I had impatiently pushed away
the screen from before me and had fixed my gaze upon him. Yet there was
none in that crowd who paid any heed to my doings. Only once, I noticed,
his eyes, like stars in fateful Orion, flashed full on my face.

I was utterly unconscious of myself. I was no longer the lady of the
Rajah's house, but the sole representative of Bengal's womanhood. And he
was the champion of Bengal. As the sky had shed its light over him, so
he must receive the consecration of a woman's benediction ...

It seemed clear to me that, since he had caught sight of me, the fire in
his words had flamed up more fiercely. Indra's  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) steed refused to be reined in, and there
came the roar of thunder and the flash of lightning. I said within
myself that his language had caught fire from my eyes; for we women are
not only the deities of the household fire, but the flame of the soul
itself.

I returned home that evening radiant with a new pride and joy. The storm
within me had shifted my whole being from one centre to another. Like
the Greek maidens of old, I fain would cut off my long, resplendent
tresses to make a bowstring for my hero. Had my outward ornaments been
connected with my inner feelings, then my necklet, my armlets, my
bracelets, would all have burst their bonds and flung themselves over
that assembly like a shower of meteors. Only some personal sacrifice, I
felt, could help me to bear the tumult of my exaltation.

When my husband came home later, I was trembling lest he should utter a
sound out of tune with the triumphant paean which was still ringing in
my ears, lest his fanaticism for truth should lead him to express
disapproval of anything that had been said that afternoon. For then I
should have openly defied and humiliated him. But he did not say a word
... which I did not like either.

He should have said: "Sandip has brought me to my senses. I now realize
how mistaken I have been all this time."

I somehow felt that he was spitefully silent, that he obstinately
refused to be enthusiastic. I asked how long Sandip Babu was going to be
with us.

"He is off to Rangpur early tomorrow morning," said my husband.

"Must it be tomorrow?"

"Yes, he is already engaged to speak there."

I was silent for a while and then asked again: "Could he not possibly
stay a day longer?"

"That may hardly be possible, but why?"

"I want to invite him to dinner and attend on him myself."

My husband was surprised. He had often entreated me to be present when
he had particular friends to dinner, but I had never let myself be
persuaded. He gazed at me curiously, in silence, with a look I did not
quite understand.

I was suddenly overcome with a sense of shame. "No, no," I exclaimed,
"that would never do!"

"Why not!" said he. "I will ask him myself, and if it is at all possible
he will surely stay on for tomorrow."

It turned out to be quite possible.

I will tell the exact truth. That day I reproached my Creator because he
had not made me surpassingly beautiful--not to steal any heart away, but
because beauty is glory. In this great day the men of the country should
realize its goddess in its womanhood. But, alas, the eyes of men fail to
discern the goddess, if outward beauty be lacking. Would Sandip Babu
find the *Shakti* of the Motherland manifest in me? Or would he simply
take me to be an ordinary, domestic woman?

That morning I scented my flowing hair and tied it in a loose knot,
bound by a cunningly intertwined red silk ribbon. Dinner, you see, was
to be served at midday, and there was no time to dry my hair after my
bath and do it up plaited in the ordinary way. I put on a gold-bordered
white *sari*, and my short-sleeve muslin jacket was also gold-bordered.

I felt that there was a certain restraint about my costume and that
nothing could well have been simpler. But my sister-in-law, who happened
to be passing by, stopped dead before me, surveyed me from head to foot
and with compressed lips smiled a meaning smile. When I asked her the
reason, "I am admiring your get-up!" she said.

"What is there so entertaining about it?" I enquired, considerably
annoyed.

"It's superb," she said. "I was only thinking that one of those
low-necked English bodices would have made it perfect." Not only her
mouth and eyes, but her whole body seemed to ripple with suppressed
laughter as she left the room.

I was very, very angry, and wanted to change everything and put on my
everyday clothes. But I cannot tell exactly why I could not carry out my
impulse. Women are the ornaments of society-- thus I reasoned with
myself--and my husband would never like it, if I appeared before Sandip
Babu unworthily clad.

My idea had been to make my appearance after they had sat down to
dinner. In the bustle of looking after the serving the first awkwardness
would have passed off. But dinner was not ready in time, and it was
getting late. Meanwhile my husband had sent for me to introduce the
guest.

I was feeling horribly shy about looking Sandip Babu in the face.
However, I managed to recover myself enough to say: "I am so sorry
dinner is getting late."

He boldly came and sat right beside me as he replied: "I get a dinner of
some kind every day, but the Goddess of Plenty keeps behind the scenes.
Now that the goddess herself has appeared, it matters little if the
dinner lags behind."

He was just as emphatic in his manners as he was in his public speaking.
He had no hesitation and seemed to be accustomed to occupy,
unchallenged, his chosen seat. He claimed the right to intimacy so
confidently, that the blame would seem to belong to those who should
dispute it.

I was in terror lest Sandip Babu should take me for a shrinking,
old-fashioned bundle of inanity. But, for the life of me, I could not
sparkle in repartees such as might charm or dazzle him. What could have
possessed me, I angrily wondered, to appear before him in such an absurd
way?

I was about to retire when dinner was over, but Sandip Babu, as bold as
ever, placed himself in my way.

"You must not," he said, "think me greedy. It was not the dinner that
kept me staying on, it was your invitation. If you were to run away now,
that would not be playing fair with your guest."

If he had not said these words with a careless ease, they would have
been out of tune. But, after all, he was such a great friend of my
husband that I was like his sister.

While I was struggling to climb up this high wave of intimacy, my
husband came to the rescue, saying: "Why not come back to us after you
have taken your dinner?"

"But you must give your word," said Sandip Babu, "before we let you
off."

"I will come," said I, with a slight smile.

"Let me tell you," continued Sandip Babu, "why I cannot trust you.
Nikhil has been married these nine years, and all this while you have
eluded me. If you do this again for another nine years, we shall never
meet again."

I took up the spirit of his remark as I dropped my voice to reply: "Why
even then should we not meet?"

"My horoscope tells me I am to die early. None of my forefathers have
survived their thirtieth year. I am now twenty-seven."

He knew this would go home. This time there must have been a shade of
concern in my low voice as I said: "The blessings of the whole country
are sure to avert the evil influence of the stars."

"Then the blessings of the country must be voiced by its goddess. This
is the reason for my anxiety that you should return, so that my talisman
may begin to work from today."

Sandip Babu had such a way of taking things by storm that I got no
opportunity of resenting what I never should have permitted in another.

"So," he concluded with a laugh, "I am going to hold this husband of
yours as a hostage till you come back."

As I was coming away, he exclaimed: "May I trouble you for a trifle?"

I started and turned round.

"Don't be alarmed," he said. "It's merely a glass of water. You might
have noticed that I did not drink any water with my dinner. I take it a
little later."

Upon this I had to make a show of interest and ask him the reason. He
began to give the history of his dyspepsia. I was told how he had been a
martyr to it for seven months, and how, after the usual course of
nuisances, which included different allopathic and homoeopathic
misadventures, he had obtained the most wonderful results by indigenous
methods.

"Do you know," he added, with a smile, "God has built even my
infirmities in such a manner that they yield only under the bombardment
of *Swadeshi* pills."

My husband, at this, broke his silence. "You must confess," said he,
"that you have as immense an attraction for foreign medicine as the
earth has for meteors. You have three shelves in your sitting-room full
of..."

Sandip Babu broke in: "Do you know what they are? They are the punitive
police. They come, not because they are wanted, but because they are
imposed on us by the rule of this modern age, exacting fines
and-inflicting injuries."

My husband could not bear exaggerations, and I could see he disliked
this. But all ornaments are exaggerations. They are not made by God, but
by man. Once I remember in defence of some untruth of mine I said to my
husband: "Only the trees and beasts and birds tell unmitigated truths,
because these poor things have not the power to invent. In this men show
their superiority to the lower creatures, and women beat even men.
Neither is a profusion of ornament unbecoming for a woman, nor a
profusion of untruth."

As I came out into the passage leading to the zenana I found my
sister-in-law, standing near a window overlooking the reception rooms,
peeping through the venetian shutter.

"You here?" I asked in surprise.

"Eavesdropping!" she replied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](hw04.htm#fr_10.md) The Jupiter Pluvius of
Hindu mythology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V](hw05.md)
