[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw06)  [Next](hw08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II

I have known my master these thirty years. Neither calumny, nor
disaster, nor death itself has any terrors for him. Nothing could have
saved me, born as I was into the traditions of this family of ours, but
that he has established his own life in the centre of mine, with its
peace and truth and spiritual vision, thus making it possible for me to
realize goodness in its truth.

My master came to me that day and said: "Is it necessary to detain
Sandip here any longer?"

His nature was so sensitive to all omens of evil that he had at once
understood. He was not easily moved, but that day he felt the dark
shadow of trouble ahead. Do I not know how well he loves me?

At tea-time I said to Sandip: "I have just had a letter from Rangpur.
They are complaining that I am selfishly detaining you. When will you be
going there?"

Bimala was pouring out the tea. Her face fell at once. She threw just
one enquiring glance at Sandip.

"I have been thinking," said Sandip, "that this wandering up and down
means a tremendous waste of energy. I feel that if I could work from a
centre I could achieve more permanent results."

With this he looked up at Bimala and asked: "Do you not think so too?"

Bimala hesitated for a reply and then said: "Both ways seem good-- to do
the work from a centre, as well as by travelling about. That in which
you find greater satisfaction is the way for you."

"Then let me speak out my mind," said Sandip. "I have never yet found
any one source of inspiration suffice me for good. That is why I have
been constantly moving about, rousing enthusiasm in the people, from
which in turn I draw my own store of energy. Today you have given me the
message of my country. Such fire I have never beheld in any man. I shall
be able to spread the fire of enthusiasm in my country by borrowing it
from you. No, do not be ashamed. You are far above all modesty and
diffidence. You are the Queen Bee of our hive, and we the workers shall
rally around you. You shall be our centre, our inspiration."

Bimala flushed all over with bashful pride and her hand shook as she
went on pouring out the tea.

Another day my master came to me and said: "Why don't you two go up to
Darjeeling for a change? You are not looking well. Have you been getting
enough sleep?"

I asked Bimala in the evening whether she would care to have a trip to
the Hills. I knew she had a great longing to see the Himalayas. But she
refused... The country's Cause, I suppose!

I must not lose my faith: I shall wait. The passage from the narrow to
the larger world is stormy. When she is familiar with this freedom, then
I shall know where my place is. If I discover that I do not fit in with
the arrangement of the outer world, then I shall not quarrel with my
fate, but silently take my leave... Use force? But for what? Can force
prevail against Truth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I](hw08)
