[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw13)  [Next](hw15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VIII

For some time all talk of the country's cause has been dropped. Our
conversation nowadays has become full of modern sex-problems, and
various other matters, with a sprinkling of poetry, both old Vaishnava
and modern English, accompanied by a running undertone of melody, low
down in the bass, such as I have never in my life heard before, which
seems to me to sound the true manly note, the note of power.

The day had come when all cover was gone. There was no longer even the
pretence of a reason why Sandip Babu should linger on, or why I should
have confidential talks with him every now and then. I felt thoroughly
vexed with myself, with my sister-in-law, with the ways of the world,
and I vowed I would never again go to the outer apartments, not if I
were to die for it.

For two whole days I did not stir out. Then, for the first time, I
discovered how far I had travelled. My life felt utterly tasteless.
Whatever I touched I wanted to thrust away. I felt myself waiting--from
the crown of my head to the tips of my toes-- waiting for something,
somebody; my blood kept tingling with some expectation.

I tried busying myself with extra work. The bedroom floor was clean
enough but I insisted on its being scrubbed over again under my eyes.
Things were arranged in the cabinets in one kind of order; I pulled them
all out and rearranged them in a different way. I found no time that
afternoon even to do up my hair; I hurriedly tied it into a loose knot,
and went and worried everybody, fussing about the store-room. The stores
seemed short, and pilfering must have been going on of late, but I could
not muster up the courage to take any particular person to task-- for
might not the thought have crossed somebody's mind: "Where were your
eyes all these days!"

In short, I behaved that day as one possessed. The next day I tried to
do some reading. What I read I have no idea, but after a spell of
absentmindedness I found I had wandered away, book in hand, along the
passage leading towards the outer apartments, and was standing by a
window looking out upon the verandah running along the row of rooms on
the opposite side of the quadrangle. One of these rooms, I felt, had
crossed over to another shore, and the ferry had ceased to ply. I felt
like the ghost of myself of two days ago, doomed to remain where I was,
and yet not really there, blankly looking out for ever.

As I stood there, I saw Sandip come out of his room into the verandah, a
newspaper in his hand. I could see that he looked extraordinarily
disturbed. The courtyard, the railings, in front, seemed to rouse his
wrath. He flung away his newspaper with a gesture which seemed to want
to rend the space before him.

I felt I could no longer keep my vow. I was about to move on towards the
sitting-room, when I found my sister-in-law behind me. "O Lord, this
beats everything!" she ejaculated, as she glided away. I could not
proceed to the outer apartments.

The next morning when my maid came calling, "Rani Mother, it is getting
late for giving out the stores," I flung the keys to her, saying, "Tell
Harimati to see to it," and went on with some embroidery of English
pattern on which I was engaged, seated near the window.

Then came a servant with a letter. "From Sandip Babu," said he. What
unbounded boldness! What must the messenger have thought? There was a
tremor within my breast as I opened the envelope. There was no address
on the letter, only the words:

An urgent matter--touching the Cause. Sandip.

I flung aside the embroidery. I was up on my feet in a moment, giving a
touch or two to my hair by the mirror. I kept the *sari* I had on,
changing only my jacket--for one of my jackets had its associations.

I had to pass through one of the verandahs, where my sister-in-law used
to sit in the morning slicing betel-nut. I refused to feel awkward.
"Whither away, Chota Rani?" she cried.

"To the sitting-room outside."

"So early! A matinée, eh?"

And, as I passed on without further reply, she hummed after me a
flippant song.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX](hw15.md)
