[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw17)  [Next](hw19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### V

A question has been worrying me the last few days. Why am I allowing my
life to become entangled with Bimala's? Am I a drifting log to be caught
up at any and every obstacle?

Not that I have any false shame at Bimala becoming an object of my
desire. It is only too clear how she wants me, and so I look on her as
quite legitimately mine. The fruit hangs on the branch by the stem, but
that is no reason why the claim of the stem should be eternal. Ripe
fruit cannot for ever swear by its slackening stem-hold. All its
sweetness has been accumulated for me; to surrender itself to my hand is
the reason of its existence, its very nature, its true morality. So I
must pluck it, for it becomes me not to make it futile.

But what is teasing me is that I am getting entangled. Am I not born to
rule?--to bestride my proper steed, the crowd, and drive it as I will;
the reins in my hand, the destination known only to me, and for it the
thorns, the mire, on the road? This steed now awaits me at the door,
pawing and champing its bit, its neighing filling the skies. But where
am I, and what am I about, letting day after day of golden opportunity
slip by?

I used to think I was like a storm--that the torn flowers with which I
strewed my path would not impede my progress. But I am only wandering
round and round a flower like a bee--not a storm. So, as I was saying,
the colouring of ideas which man gives himself is only superficial. The
inner man remains as ordinary as ever. If someone, who could see right
into me, were to write my biography, he would make me out to be no
different from that lout of a Panchu, or even from Nikhil!

Last night I was turning over the pages of my old diary ... I had just
graduated, and my brain was bursting with philosophy. Even so early I
had vowed not to harbour any illusions, whether of my own or others'
imagining, but to build my life on a solid basis of reality. But what
has since been its actual story? Where is its solidity? It has rather
been a network, where, though the thread be continuous, more space is
taken up by the holes. Fight as I may, these will not own defeat. Just
as I was congratulating myself on steadily following the thread, here I
am badly caught in a hole! For I have become susceptible to
compunctions.

"I want it; it is here; let me take it"--This is a clear-cut,
straightforward policy. Those who can pursue its course with vigour
needs must win through in the end. But the gods would not have it that
such journey should be easy, so they have deputed the siren Sympathy to
distract the wayfarer, to dim his vision with her tearful mist.

I can see that poor Bimala is struggling like a snared deer. What a
piteous alarm there is in her eyes! How she is torn with straining at
her bonds! This sight, of course, should gladden the heart of a true
hunter. And so do I rejoice; but, then, I am also touched; and therefore
I dally, and standing on the brink I am hesitating to pull the noose
fast.

There have been moments, I know, when I could have bounded up to her,
clasped her hands and folded her to my breast, unresisting. Had I done
so, she would not have said one word. She was aware that some crisis was
impending, which in a moment would change the meaning of the whole
world. Standing before that cavern of the incalculable but yet expected,
her face went pale and her eyes glowed with a fearful ecstasy. Within
that moment, when it arrives, an eternity will take shape, which our
destiny awaits, holding its breath.

But I have let this moment slip by. I did not, with uncompromising
strength, press the almost certain into the absolutely assured. I now
see clearly that some hidden elements in my nature have openly ranged
themselves as obstacles in my path.

That is exactly how Ravana, whom I look upon as the real hero of the
*Ramayana*, met with his doom. He kept Sita in his Asoka garden,
awaiting her pleasure, instead of taking her straight into his harem.
This weak spot in his otherwise grand character made the whole of the
abduction episode futile. Another such touch of compunction made him
disregard, and be lenient to, his traitorous brother Bibhisan, only to
get himself killed for his pains.

Thus does the tragic in life come by its own. In the beginning it lies,
a little thing, in some dark under-vault, and ends by overthrowing the
whole superstructure. The real tragedy is, that man does not know
himself for what he really is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI](hw19.md)
