[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw19)  [Next](hw21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter Five

### Nikhil's Story

#### IV

Everything is rippling and waving with the flood of August. The young
shoots of rice have the sheen of an infant's limbs. The water has
invaded the garden next to our house. The morning light, like the love
of the blue sky, is lavished upon the earth... Why cannot I sing? The
water of the distant river is shimmering with light; the leaves are
glistening; the rice-fields, with their fitful shivers, break into
gleams of gold; and in this symphony of Autumn, only I remain voiceless.
The sunshine of the world strikes my heart, but is not reflected back.

When I realize the lack of expressiveness in myself, I know why I am
deprived. Who could bear my company day and night without a break?
Bimala is full of the energy of life, and so she has never become stale
to me for a moment, in all these nine years of our wedded life.

My life has only its dumb depths; but no murmuring rush. I can only
receive: not impart movement. And therefore my company is like fasting.
I recognize clearly today that Bimala has been languishing because of a
famine of companionship.

Then whom shall I blame? Like Vidyapati I can only lament:

It is August, the sky breaks into a passionate rain;  
Alas, empty is my house.

My house, I now see, was built to remain empty, because its doors cannot
open. But I never knew till now that its divinity had been sitting
outside. I had fondly believed that she had accepted my sacrifice, and
granted in return her boon. But, alas, my house has all along been
empty.

Every year, about this time, it was our practice to go in a house-boat
over the broads of Samalda. I used to tell Bimala that a song must come
back to its refrain over and over again. The original refrain of every
song is in Nature, where the rain-laden wind passes over the rippling
stream, where the green earth, drawing its shadow-veil over its face,
keeps its ear close to the speaking water. There, at the beginning of
time, a man and a woman first met--not within walls. And therefore we
two must come back to Nature, at least once a year, to tune our love
anew to the first pure note of the meeting of hearts.

The first two anniversaries of our married life I spent in Calcutta,
where I went through my examinations. But from the next year onwards,
for seven years without a break, we have celebrated our union among the
blossoming water-lilies. Now begins the next octave of my life.

It was difficult for me to ignore the fact that the same month of August
had come round again this year. Does Bimala remember it, I wonder?--she
has given me no reminder. Everything is mute about me.

It is August, the sky breaks into a passionate rain;  
Alas, empty is my house.

The house which becomes empty through the parting of lovers, still has
music left in the heart of its emptiness. But the house that is empty
because hearts are asunder, is awful in its silence. Even the cry of
pain is out of place there.

This cry of pain must be silenced in me. So long as I continue to
suffer, Bimala will never have true freedom. I must free her completely,
otherwise I shall never gain my freedom from untruth...

I think I have come to the verge of understanding one thing. Man has so
fanned the flame of the loves of men and women, as to make it overpass
its rightful domain, and now, even in the name of humanity itself, he
cannot bring it back under control. Man's worship has idolized his
passion. But there must be no more human sacrifices at its shrine ...

I went into my bedroom this morning, to fetch a book. It is long since I
have been there in the day-time. A pang passed through me as I looked
round it today, in the morning light. On the clothes rack was hanging a
*sari* of Bimala's, crinkled ready for wear. On the dressing-table were
her perfumes, her comb, her hair-pins, and with them, still, her
vermilion box! Underneath were her tiny gold-embroidered slippers.

Once, in the old days, when Bimala had not yet overcome her objections
to shoes, I had got these out from Lucknow, to tempt her. The first time
she was ready to drop for very shame, to go in them even from the room
to the verandah. Since then she has worn out many shoes, but has
treasured up this pair. When first showing her the slippers, I chaffed
her over a curious practice of hers; "I have caught you taking the dust
of my feet, thinking me asleep! These are the offerings of my worship to
ward the dust off the feet of my wakeful divinity." "You must not say
such things," she protested, "or I will never wear your shoes!"

This bedroom of mine--it has a subtle atmosphere which goes straight to
my heart. I was never aware, as I am today, how my thirsting heart has
been sending out its roots to cling round each and every familiar
object. The severing of the main root, I see, is not enough to set life
free. Even these little slippers serve to hold one back.

My wandering eyes fall on the niche. My portrait there is looking the
same as ever, in spite of the flowers scattered round it having been
withered black! Of all the things in the room their greeting strikes me
as sincere. They are still here simply because it was not felt worth
while even to remove them. Never mind; let me welcome truth, albeit in
such sere and sorry garb, and look forward to the time when I shall be
able to do so unmoved, as does my photograph.

As I stood there, Bimal came in from behind. I hastily turned my eyes
from the niche to the shelves as I muttered: "I came to get Amiel's
Journal." What need had I to volunteer an explanation? I felt like a
wrong-doer, a trespasser, prying into a secret not meant for me. I could
not look Bimal in the face, but hurried away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V](hw21)
