[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw20)  [Next](hw22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### V

I had just made the discovery that it was useless to keep up a pretence
of reading in my room outside, and also that it was equally beyond me to
busy myself attending to anything at all--so that all the days of my
future bid fair to congeal into one solid mass and settle heavily on my
breast for good--when Panchu, the tenant of a neighbouring *zamindar*,
came up to me with a basketful of cocoa-nuts and greeted me with a
profound obeisance.

"Well, Panchu," said I. "What is all this for?"

I had got to know Panchu through my master. He was extremely poor, nor
was I in a position to do anything for him; so I supposed this present
was intended to procure a tip to help the poor fellow to make both ends
meet. I took some money from my purse and held it out towards him, but
with folded hands he protested: "I cannot take that, sir!"

"Why, what is the matter?"

"Let me make a clean breast of it, sir. Once, when I was hard pressed, I
stole some cocoa-nuts from the garden here. I am getting old, and may
die any day, so I have come to pay them back."

Amiel's Journal could not have done me any good that day. But these
words of Panchu lightened my heart. There are more things in life than
the union or separation of man and woman. The great world stretches far
beyond, and one can truly measure one's joys and sorrows when standing
in its midst.

Panchu was devoted to my master. I know well enough how he manages to
eke out a livelihood. He is up before dawn every day, and with a basket
of *pan* leaves, twists of tobacco, coloured cotton yarn, little combs,
looking-glasses, and other trinkets beloved of the village women, he
wades through the knee-deep water of the marsh and goes over to the
Namasudra quarters. There he barters his goods for rice, which fetches
him a little more than their price in money. If he can get back soon
enough he goes out again, after a hurried meal, to the sweetmeat
seller's, where he assists in beating sugar for wafers. As soon as he
comes home he sits at his shell-bangle making, plodding on often till
midnight. All this cruel toil does not earn, for himself and his family,
a bare two meals a day during much more than half the year. His method
of eating is to begin with a good filling draught of water, and his
staple food is the cheapest kind of seedy banana. And yet the family has
to go with only one meal a day for the rest of the year.

At one time I had an idea of making him a charity allowance, "But," said
my master, "your gift may destroy the man, it cannot destroy the
hardship of his lot. Mother Bengal has not only this one Panchu. If the
milk in her breasts has run dry, that cannot be supplied from the
outside."

These are thoughts which give one pause, and I decided to devote myself
to working it out. That very day I said to Bimal: "Let us dedicate our
lives to removing the root of this sorrow in our country."

"You are my Prince Siddharta,  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) I
see," she replied with a smile. "But do not let the torrent of your
feelings end by sweeping me away also!"

"Siddharta took his vows alone. I want ours to be a joint arrangement."

The idea passed away in talk. The fact is, Bimala is at heart what is
called a "lady". Though her own people are not well off, she was born a
Rani. She has no doubts in her mind that there is a lower unit of
measure for the trials and troubles of the "lower classes". Want is, of
course, a permanent feature of their lives, but does not necessarily
mean "want" to them. Their very smallness protects them, as the banks
protect the pool; by widening bounds only the slime is exposed.

The real fact is that Bimala has only come into my home, not into my
life. I had magnified her so, leaving her such a large place, that when
I lost her, my whole way of life became narrow and confined. I had
thrust aside all other objects into a corner to make room for
Bimala--taken up as I was with decorating her and dressing her and
educating her and moving round her day and night; forgetting how great
is humanity and how nobly precious is man's life. When the actualities
of everyday things get the better of the man, then is Truth lost sight
of and freedom missed. So painfully important did Bimala make the mere
actualities, that the truth remained concealed from me. That is why I
find no gap in my misery, and spread this minute point of my emptiness
over all the world. And so, for hours on this Autumn morning, the
refrain has been humming in my ears:

It is the month of August, and the sky breaks into a passionate rain;  
Alas, my house is empty.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](hw21.htm#fr_16.md) The name by which Buddha
was known when a Prince, before renouncing the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI](hw22.md)
