[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw26)  [Next](hw28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IX

One afternoon, when I happened to be specially busy, word came to my
office room that Bimala had sent for me. I was startled.

"Who did you say had sent for me?" I asked the messenger.

"The Rani Mother."

"The Bara Rani?"

"No, sir, the Chota Rani Mother."

The Chota Rani! It seemed a century since I had been sent for by her. I
kept them all waiting there, and went off into the inner apartments.
When I stepped into our room I had another shock of surprise to find
Bimala there with a distinct suggestion of being dressed up. The room,
which from persistent neglect had latterly acquired an air of having
grown absent-minded, had regained something of its old order this
afternoon. I stood there silently, looking enquiringly at Bimala.

She flushed a little and the fingers of her right hand toyed for a time
with the bangles on her left arm. Then she abruptly broke the silence.
"Look here! Is it right that ours should be the only market in all
Bengal which allows foreign goods?"

"What, then, would be the right thing to do?" I asked.

"Order them to be cleared out!"

"But the goods are not mine."

"Is not the market yours?"

"It is much more theirs who use it for trade."

"Let them trade in Indian goods, then."

"Nothing would please me better. But suppose they do not?"

"Nonsense! How dare they be so insolent? Are you not ..."

"I am very busy this afternoon and cannot stop to argue it out. But I
must refuse to tyrannize."

"It would not be tyranny for selfish gain, but for the sake of the
country."

"To tyrannize for the country is to tyrannize over the country. But that
I am afraid you will never understand." With this I came away.

All of a sudden the world shone out for me with a fresh clearness. I
seemed to feel it in my blood, that the Earth had lost the weight of its
earthiness, and its daily task of sustaining life no longer appeared a
burden, as with a wonderful access of power it whirled through space
telling its beads of days and nights. What endless work, and withal what
illimitable energy of freedom! None shall check it, oh, none can ever
check it! From the depths of my being an uprush of joy, like a
waterspout, sprang high to storm the skies.

I repeatedly asked myself the meaning of this outburst of feeling. At
first there was no intelligible answer. Then it became clear that the
bond against which I had been fretting inwardly, night and day, had
broken. To my surprise I discovered that my mind was freed from all
mistiness. I could see everything relating to Bimala as if vividly
pictured on a camera screen. It was palpable that she had specially
dressed herself up to coax that order out of me. Till that moment, I had
never viewed Bimala's adornment as a thing apart from herself. But today
the elaborate manner in which she had done up her hair, in the English
fashion, made it appear a mere decoration. That which before had the
mystery of her personality about it, and was priceless to me, was now
out to sell itself cheap.

As I came away from that broken cage of a bedroom, out into the golden
sunlight of the open, there was the avenue of bauhinias, along the
gravelled path in front of my verandah, suffusing the sky with a rosy
flush. A group of starlings beneath the trees were noisily chattering
away. In the distance an empty bullock cart, with its nose on the
ground, held up its tail aloft--one of its unharnessed bullocks grazing,
the other resting on the grass, its eyes dropping for very comfort,
while a crow on its back was pecking away at the insects on its body.

I seemed to have come closer to the heartbeats of the great earth in all
the simplicity of its daily life; its warm breath fell on me with the
perfume of the bauhinia blossoms; and an anthem, inexpressibly sweet,
seemed to peal forth from this world, where I, in my freedom, live in
the freedom of all else.

We, men, are knights whose quest is that freedom to which our ideals
call us. She who makes for us the banner under which we fare forth is
the true Woman for us. We must tear away the disguise of her who weaves
our net of enchantment at home, and know her for what she is. We must
beware of clothing her in the witchery of our own longings and
imaginings, and thus allow her to distract us from our true quest.

Today I feel that I shall win through. I have come to the gateway of the
simple; I am now content to see things as they are. I have gained
freedom myself; I shall allow freedom to others. In my work will be my
salvation.

I know that, time and again, my heart will ache, but now that I
understand its pain in all its truth, I can disregard it. Now that I
know it concerns only me, what after all can be its value? The suffering
which belongs to all mankind shall be my crown.

Save me, Truth! Never again let me hanker after the false paradise of
Illusion. If I must walk alone, let me at least tread your path. Let the
drum-beats of Truth lead me to Victory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII](hw28)
