[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw27)  [Next](hw29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Sandip's Story

#### VII

Bimala sent for me that day, but for a time she could not utter a word;
her eyes kept brimming up to the verge of overflowing. I could see at
once that she had been unsuccessful with Nikhil. She had been so proudly
confident that she would have her own way--but I had never shared her
confidence. Woman knows man well enough where he is weak, but she is
quite unable to fathom him where he is strong. The fact is that man is
as much a mystery to woman as woman is to man. If that were not so, the
separation of the sexes would only have been a waste of Nature's energy.

Ah pride, pride! The trouble was, not that the necessary thing had
failed of accomplishment, but that the entreaty, which had cost her such
a struggle to make, should have been refused. What a wealth of colour
and movement, suggestion and deception, group themselves round this "me"
and "mine" in woman. That is just where her beauty lies--she is ever so
much more personal than man. When man was being made, the Creator was a
schoolmaster-- His bag full of commandments and principles; but when He
came to woman, He resigned His headmastership and turned artist, with
only His brush and paint-box.

When Bimala stood silently there, flushed and tearful in her broken
pride, like a storm-cloud, laden with rain and charged with lightning,
lowering over the horizon, she looked so absolutely sweet that I had to
go right up to her and take her by the hand. It was trembling, but she
did not snatch it away. "Bee," said I, "we two are colleagues, for our
aims are one. Let us sit down and talk it over."

I led her, unresisting, to a seat. But strange! at that very point the
rush of my impetuosity suffered an unaccountable check-- just as the
current of the mighty Padma, roaring on in its irresistible course, all
of a sudden gets turned away from the bank it is crumbling by some
trifling obstacle beneath the surface. When I pressed Bimala's hand my
nerves rang music, like tuned-up strings; but the symphony stopped short
at the first movement.

What stood in the way? Nothing singly; it was a tangle of a multitude of
things--nothing definitely palpable, but only that unaccountable sense
of obstruction. Anyhow, this much has become plain to me, that I cannot
swear to what I really am. It is because I am such a mystery to my own
mind that my attraction for myself is so strong! If once the whole of
myself should become known to me, I would then fling it all away--and
reach beatitude!

As she sat down, Bimala went ashy pale. She, too, must have realized
what a crisis had come and gone, leaving her unscathed. The comet had
passed by, but the brush of its burning tail had overcome her. To help
her to recover herself I said: "Obstacles there will be, but let us
fight them through, and not be down-hearted. Is not that best, Queen?"

Bimala cleared her throat with a little cough, but simply to murmur:
"Yes."

"Let us sketch out our plan of action," I continued, as I drew a piece
of paper and a pencil from my pocket.

I began to make a list of the workers who had joined us from Calcutta
and to assign their duties to each. Bimala interrupted me before I was
through, saying wearily: "Leave it now; I will join you again this
evening" and then she hurried out of the room. It was evident she was
not in a state to attend to anything. She must be alone with herself for
a while--perhaps lie down on her bed and have a good cry!

When she left me, my intoxication began to deepen, as the cloud colours
grow richer after the sun is down. I felt I had let the moment of
moments slip by. What an awful coward I had been! She must have left me
in sheer disgust at my qualms--and she was right!

While I was tingling all over with these reflections, a servant came in
and announced Amulya, one of our boys. I felt like sending him away for
the time, but he stepped in before I could make up my mind. Then we fell
to discussing the news of the fights which were raging in different
quarters over cloth and sugar and salt; and the air was soon clear of
all fumes of intoxication. I felt as if awakened from a dream. I leapt
to my feet feeling quite ready for the fray--Bande Mataram!

The news was various. Most of the traders who were tenants of Harish
Kundu had come over to us. Many of Nikhil's officials were also secretly
on our side, pulling the wires in our interest. The Marwari shopkeepers
were offering to pay a penalty, if only allowed to clear their present
stocks. Only some Mahomedan traders were still obdurate.

One of them was taking home some German-made shawls for his family.
These were confiscated and burnt by one of our village boys. This had
given rise to trouble. We offered to buy him Indian woollen stuffs in
their place. But where were cheap Indian woollens to be had? We could
not very well indulge him in Cashmere shawls! He came and complained to
Nikhil, who advised him to go to law. Of course Nikhil's men saw to it
that the trial should come to nothing, even his law-agent being on our
side!

The point is, if we have to replace burnt foreign clothes with Indian
cloth every time, and on the top of that fight through a law-suit, where
is the money to come from? And the beauty of it is that this destruction
of foreign goods is increasing their demand and sending up the
foreigner's profits--very like what happened to the fortunate shopkeeper
whose chandeliers the nabob delighted in smashing, tickled by the tinkle
of the breaking glass.

The next problem is--since there is no such thing as cheap and gaudy
Indian woollen stuff, should we be rigorous in our boycott of foreign
flannels and memos, or make an exception in their favour?

"Look here!" said I at length on the first point, "we are not going to
keep on making presents of Indian stuff to those who have got their
foreign purchases confiscated. The penalty is intended to fall on them,
not on us. If they go to law, we must retaliate by burning down their
granaries!--What startles you, Amulya? It is not the prospect of a grand
illumination that delights me! You must remember, this is War. If you
are afraid of causing suffering, go in for love-making, you will never
do for this work!"

The second problem I solved by deciding to allow no compromise with
foreign articles, in any circumstance whatever. In the good old days,
when these gaily coloured foreign shawls were unknown, our peasantry
used to manage well enough with plain cotton quilts--they must learn to
do so again. They may not look as gorgeous, but this is not the time to
think of looks.

Most of the boatmen had been won over to refuse to carry foreign goods,
but the chief of them, Mirjan, was still insubordinate.

"Could you not get his boat sunk?" I asked our manager here.

"Nothing easier, sir," he replied. "But what if afterwards I am held
responsible?"

"Why be so clumsy as to leave any loophole for responsibility? However,
if there must be any, my shoulders will be there to bear it."

Mirjan's boat was tied near the landing-place after its freight had been
taken over to the market-place. There was no one on it, for the manager
had arranged for some entertainment to which all had been invited. After
dusk the boat, loaded with rubbish, was holed and set adrift. It sank in
mid-stream.

Mirjan understood the whole thing. He came to me in tears to beg for
mercy. "I was wrong, sir--" he began.

"What makes you realize that all of a sudden?" I sneered.

He made no direct reply. "The boat was worth two thousand rupees," he
said. "I now see my mistake, and if excused this time I will never ..."
with which he threw himself at my feet.

I asked him to come ten days later. If only we could pay him that two
thousand rupees at once, we could buy him up body and soul. This is just
the sort of man who could render us immense service, if won over. We
shall never be able to make any headway unless we can lay our hands on
plenty of money.

As soon as Bimala came into the sitting-room, in the evening, I said as
I rose up to receive her: "Queen! Everything is ready, success is at
hand, but we must have money.

"Money? How much money?"

"Not so very much, but by hook or by crook we must have it!"

"But how much?"

"A mere fifty thousand rupees will do for the present."

Bimala blenched inwardly at the figure, but tried not to show it. How
could she again admit defeat?

"Queen!" said I, "you only can make the impossible possible. Indeed you
have already done so. Oh, that I could show you the extent of your
achievement--then you would know it. But the time for that is not now.
Now we want money!"

"You shall have it," she said.

I could see that the thought of selling her jewels had occurred to her.
So I said: "Your jewels must remain in reserve. One can never tell when
they may be wanted." And then, as Bimala stared blankly at me in
silence, I went on: "This money must come from your husband's treasury."

Bimala was still more taken aback. After a long pause she said: "But how
am I to get his money?"

"Is not his money yours as well?"

"Ah, no!" she said, her wounded pride hurt afresh.

"If not," I cried, "neither is it his, but his country's, whom he has
deprived of it, in her time of need!"

"But how am I to get it?" she repeated.

"Get it you shall and must. You know best how. You must get it for Her
to whom it rightfully belongs. *Bande Mataram*! These are the magic
words which will open the door of his iron safe, break through the walls
of his strong-room, and confound the hearts of those who are disloyal to
its call. Say *Bande Mataram*, Bee!"

"*Bande Mataram*!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII](hw29)
