[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw30)  [Next](hw32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### X

When I next saw Bimala I pitched my key high without further ado. "Have
we been able," I began, "to believe with all our heart in the god for
whose worship we have been born all these millions of years, until he
actually made himself visible to us?

"How often have I told you," I continued, "that had I not seen you I
never would have known all my country as One. I know not yet whether you
rightly understand me. The gods are invisible only in their heaven--on
earth they show themselves to mortal men."

Bimala looked at me in a strange kind of way as she gravely replied:
"Indeed I understand you, Sandip." This was the first time she called me
plain Sandip.

"Krishna," I continued, "whom Arjuna ordinarily knew only as the driver
of his chariot, had also His universal aspect, of which, too, Arjuna had
a vision one day, and that day he saw the Truth. I have seen your
Universal Aspect in my country. The Ganges and the Brahmaputra are the
chains of gold that wind round and round your neck; in the woodland
fringes on the distant banks of the dark waters of the river, I have
seen your collyrium-darkened eyelashes; the changeful sheen of your
*sari* moves for me in the play of light and shade amongst the swaying
shoots of green corn; and the blazing summer heat, which makes the whole
sky lie gasping like a red-tongued lion in the desert, is nothing but
your cruel radiance.

"Since the goddess has vouchsafed her presence to her votary in such
wonderful guise, it is for me to proclaim her worship throughout our
land, and then shall the country gain new life. 'Your image make we in
temple after temple.'  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) But this our
people have not yet fully realized. So I would call on them in your name
and offer for their worship an image from which none shall be able to
withhold belief. Oh give me this boon, this power."

Bimala's eyelids drooped and she became rigid in her seat like a figure
of stone. Had I continued she would have gone off into a trance. When I
ceased speaking she opened wide her eyes, and murmured with fixed gaze,
as though still dazed: "O Traveller in the path of Destruction! Who is
there that can stay your progress? Do I not see that none shall stand in
the way of your desires? Kings shall lay their crowns at your feet; the
wealthy shall hasten to throw open their treasure for your acceptance;
those who have nothing else shall beg to be allowed to offer their
lives. O my king, my god! What you have seen in me I know not, but I
have seen the immensity of your grandeur in my heart. Who am I, what am
I, in its presence? Ah, the awful power of Devastation! Never shall I
truly live till it kills me utterly! I can bear it no longer, my heart
is breaking!"

Bimala slid down from her seat and fell at my feet, which she clasped,
and then she sobbed and sobbed and sobbed.

This is hypnotism indeed--the charm which can subdue the world! No
materials, no weapons--but just the delusion of irresistible suggestion.
Who says "Truth shall Triumph"?"  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)
Delusion shall win in the end. The Bengali understood this when he
conceived the image of the ten-handed goddess astride her lion, and
spread her worship in the land. Bengal must now create a new image to
enchant and conquer the world. *Bande Mataram*!

I gently lifted Bimala back into her chair, and lest reaction should set
in, I began again without losing time: "Queen! The Divine Mother has
laid on me the duty of establishing her worship in the land. But, alas,
I am poor!"

Bimala was still flushed, her eyes clouded, her accents thick, as she
replied: "You poor? Is not all that each one has yours? What are my
caskets full of jewellery for? Drag away from me all my gold and gems
for your worship. I have no use for them!"

Once before Bimala had offered up her ornaments. I am not usually in the
habit of drawing lines, but I felt I had to draw the line there.  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) I know why I feel this hesitation. It is
for man to give ornaments to woman; to take them from her wounds his
manliness.

But I must forget myself. Am I taking them? They are for the Divine
Mother, to be poured in worship at her feet. Oh, but it must be a grand
ceremony of worship such as the country has never beheld before. It must
be a landmark in our history. It shall be my supreme legacy to the
Nation. Ignorant men worship gods. I, Sandip, shall create them.

But all this is a far cry. What about the urgent immediate? At least
three thousand is indispensably necessary--five thousand would do
roundly and nicely. But how on earth am I to mention money after the
high flight we have just taken? And yet time is precious!

I crushed all hesitation under foot as I jumped up and made my plunge:
"Queen! Our purse is empty, our work about to stop!"

Bimala winced. I could see she was thinking of that impossible fifty
thousand rupees. What a load she must have been carrying within her
bosom, struggling under it, perhaps, through sleepless nights! What else
had she with which to express her loving worship? Debarred from offering
her heart at my feet, she hankers to make this sum of money, so
hopelessly large for her, the bearer of her imprisoned feelings. The
thought of what she must have gone through gives me a twinge of pain;
for she is now wholly mine. The wrench of plucking up the plant by the
roots is over. It is now only careful tending and nurture that is
needed.

"Queen!" said I, "that fifty thousand rupees is not particularly wanted
just now. I calculate that, for the present, five thousand or even three
will serve."

The relief made her heart rebound. "I shall fetch you five thousand,"
she said in tones which seemed like an outburst of song--the song which
Radhika of the Vaishnava lyrics sang:

For my lover will I bind in my hair  
The flower which has no equal in the three worlds!

--it is the same tune, the same song: five thousand will I bring! That
flower will I bind in my hair!

The narrow restraint of the flute brings out this quality of song. I
must not allow the pressure of too much greed to flatten out the reed,
for then, as I fear, music will give place to the questions "Why?" "What
is the use of so much?" "How am I to get it?"--not a word of which will
rhyme with what Radhika sang! So, as I was saying, illusion alone is
real--it is the flute itself; while truth is but its empty hollow.
Nikhil has of late got a taste of that pure emptiness--one can see it in
his face, which pains even me. But it was Nikhil's boast that he wanted
the Truth, while mine was that I would never let go illusion from my
grasp. Each has been suited to his taste, so why complain?

To keep Bimala's heart in the rarefied air of idealism, I cut short all
further discussion over the five thousand rupees. I reverted to the
demon-destroying goddess and her worship. When was the ceremony to be
held and where? There is a great annual fair at Ruimari, within Nikhil's
estates, where hundreds of thousands of pilgrims assemble. That would be
a grand place to inaugurate the worship of our goddess!

Bimala waxed intensely enthusiastic. This was not the burning of foreign
cloth or the people's granaries, so even Nikhil could have no
objection--so thought she. But I smiled inwardly. How little these two
persons, who have been together, day and night, for nine whole years,
know of each other! They know something perhaps of their home life, but
when it comes to outside concerns they are entirely at sea. They had
cherished the belief that the harmony of the home with the outside was
perfect. Today they realize to their cost that it is too late to repair
their neglect of years, and seek to harmonize them now.

What does it matter? Let those who have made the mistake learn their
error by knocking against the world. Why need I bother about their
plight? For the present I find it wearisome to keep Bimala soaring much
longer, like a captive balloon, in regions ethereal. I had better get
quite through with the matter in hand.

When Bimala rose to depart and had neared the door I remarked in my most
casual manner: "So, about the money ..."

Bimala halted and faced back as she said: "On the expiry of the month,
when our personal allowances become due ..."

"That, I am afraid, would be much too late."

"When do you want it then?"

"Tomorrow.

"Tomorrow you shall have it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](hw31.htm#fr_19.md) A line from Bankim
Chatterjee's national song *Bande Mataram*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](hw31.htm#fr_20.md) A quotation from the
Upanishads.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](hw31.htm#fr_21.md) There is a world of
sentiment attached to the ornaments worn by women in Bengal.

They are not merely indicative of the love and regard of the giver, but
the wearing of them symbolizes all that is held best in wifehood--the
constant solicitude for her husband's welfare, the successful
performance of the material and spiritual duties of the household
entrusted to her care. When the husband dies, and the responsibility for
the household changes hands, then are all ornaments cast aside as a sign
of the widow's renunciation of worldly concerns. At any other time the
giving up of omaments is always a sign of supreme distress and as such
appeals acutely to the sense of chivalry of any Bengali who may happen
to witness it \[Trans.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](hw32.md)
