[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw34)  [Next](hw36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter Nine

### Bimala's Story

#### XV

For a time I was utterly at a loss to think of any way of getting that
money. Then, the other day, in the light of intense excitement, suddenly
the whole picture stood out clear before me.

Every year my husband makes a reverence-offering of six thousand rupees
to my sister-in-law at the time of the Durga Puja. Every year it is
deposited in her account at the bank in Calcutta. This year the offering
was made as usual, but it has not yet been sent to the bank, being kept
meanwhile in an iron safe, in a corner of the little dressing-room
attached to our bedroom.

Every year my husband takes the money to the bank himself. This year he
has not yet had an opportunity of going to town. How could I fail to see
the hand of Providence in this? The money has been held up because the
country wants it--who could have the power to take it away from her to
the bank? And how can I have the power to refuse to take the money? The
goddess revelling in destruction holds out her blood-cup crying: "Give
me drink. I am thirsty." I will give her my own heart's blood with that
five thousand rupees. Mother, the loser of that money will scarcely feel
the loss, but me you will utterly ruin!

Many a time, in the old days, have I inwardly called the Senior Rani a
thief, for I charged her with wheedling money out of my trusting
husband. After her husband's death, she often used to make away with
things belonging to the estate for her own use. This I used to point out
to my husband, but he remained silent. I would get angry and say: "If
you feel generous, make gifts by all means, but why allow yourself to be
robbed?" Providence must have smiled, then, at these complaints of mine,
for tonight I am on the way to rob my husband's safe of my
sister-in-law's money. My husband's custom was to let his keys remain in
his pockets when he took off his clothes for the night, leaving them in
the dressing-room. I picked out the key of the safe and opened it. The
slight sound it made seemed to wake the whole world! A sudden chill
turned my hands and feet icy cold, and I shivered all over.

There was a drawer inside the safe. On opening this I found the money,
not in currency notes, but in gold rolled up in paper. I had no time to
count out what I wanted. There were twenty rolls, all of which I took
and tied up in a corner of my *sari*.

What a weight it was. The burden of the theft crushed my heart to the
dust. Perhaps notes would have made it seem less like thieving, but this
was all gold.

After I had stolen into my room like a thief, it felt like my own room
no longer. All the most precious rights which I had over it vanished at
the touch of my theft. I began to mutter to myself, as though telling
*mantrams: Bande Mataram, Bande Mataram*, my Country, my golden Country,
all this gold is for you, for none else!

But in the night the mind is weak. I came back into the bedroom where my
husband was asleep, closing my eyes as I passed through, and went off to
the open terrace beyond, on which I lay prone, clasping to my breast the
end of the *sari* tied over the gold. And each one of the rolls gave me
a shock of pain.

The silent night stood there with forefinger upraised. I could not think
of my house as separate from my country: I had robbed my house, I had
robbed my country. For this sin my house had ceased to be mine, my
country also was estranged from me. Had I died begging for my country,
even unsuccessfully, that would have been worship, acceptable to the
gods. But theft is never worship--how then can I offer this gold? Ah me!
I am doomed to death myself, must I desecrate my country with my impious
touch? The way to put the money back is closed to me. I have not the
strength to return to the room, take again that key, open once more that
safe--I should swoon on the threshold of my husband's door. The only
road left now is the road in front. Neither have I the strength
deliberately to sit down and count the coins. Let them remain behind
their coverings: I cannot calculate.

There was no mist in the winter sky. The stars were shining brightly.
If, thought I to myself, as I lay out there, I had to steal these stars
one by one, like golden coins, for my country-- these stars so carefully
stored up in the bosom of the darkness-- then the sky would be blinded,
the night widowed for ever, and my theft would rob the whole world. But
was not also this very thing I had done a robbing of the whole
world--not only of money, but of trust, of righteousness?

I spent the night lying on the terrace. When at last it was morning, and
I was sure that my husband had risen and left the room, then only with
my shawl pulled over my head, could I retrace my steps towards the
bedroom.

My sister-in-law was about, with her brass pot, watering her plants.
When she saw me passing in the distance she cried: "Have you heard the
news, Chota Rani?"

I stopped in silence, all in a tremor. It seemed to me that the rolls of
sovereigns were bulging through the shawl. I feared they would burst and
scatter in a ringing shower, exposing to all the servants of the house
the thief who had made herself destitute by robbing her own wealth.

"Your band of robbers," she went on, "have sent an anonymous message
threatening to loot the treasury."

I remained as silent as a thief.

"I was advising Brother Nikhil to seek your protection," she continued
banteringly. "Call off your minions, Robber Queen! We will offer
sacrifices to your *Bande Mataram* if you will but save us. What doings
there are these days!--but for the Lord's sake, spare our house at least
from burglary."

I hastened into my room without reply. I had put my foot on quicksand,
and could not now withdraw it. Struggling would only send me down
deeper.

If only the time would arrive when I could hand over the money to
Sandip! I could bear it no longer, its weight was breaking through my
very ribs.

It was still early when I got word that Sandip was awaiting me. Today I
had no thought of adornment. Wrapped as I was in my shawl, I went off to
the outer apartments. As I entered the sitting-room I saw Sandip and
Amulya there, together. All my dignity, all my honour, seemed to run
tingling through my body from head to foot and vanish into the ground. I
should have to lay bare a woman's uttermost shame in sight of this boy!
Could they have been discussing my deed in their meeting place? Had any
vestige of a veil of decency been left for me?

We women shall never understand men. When they are bent on making a road
for some achievement, they think nothing of breaking the heart of the
world into pieces to pave it for the progress of their chariot. When
they are mad with the intoxication of creating, they rejoice in
destroying the creation of the Creator. This heart-breaking shame of
mine will not attract even a glance from their eyes. They have no
feeling for life itself--all their eagerness is for their object. What
am I to them but a meadow flower in the path of a torrent in flood?

What good will this extinction of me be to Sandip? Only five thousand
rupees? Was not I good for something more than only five thousand
rupees? Yes, indeed! Did I not learn that from Sandip himself, and was I
not able in the light of this knowledge to despise all else in my world?
I was the giver of light, of life, of *Shakti*, of immortality--in that
belief, in that joy, I had burst all my bounds and come into the open.
Had anyone then fulfilled for me that joy, I should have lived in my
death. I should have lost nothing in the loss of my all.

Do they want to tell me now that all this was false? The psalm of my
praise which was sung so devotedly, did it bring me down from my heaven,
not to make heaven of earth, but only to level heaven itself with the
dust?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI](hw36)
