[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw35)  [Next](hw37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XVI

"The money, Queen?" said Sandip with his keen glance full on my face.

Amulya also fixed his gaze on me. Though not my own mother's child, yet
the dear lad is brother to me; for mother is mother all the world over.
With his guileless face, his gentle eyes, his innocent youth, he looked
at me. And I, a woman--of his mother's sex--how could I hand him poison,
just because he asked for it?

"The money, Queen!" Sandip's insolent demand rang in my ears. For very
shame and vexation I felt I wanted to fling that gold at Sandip's head.
I could hardly undo the knot of my *sari*, my fingers trembled so. At
last the paper rolls dropped on the table.

Sandip's face grew black ... He must have thought that the rolls were of
silver ... What contempt was in his looks. What utter disgust at
incapacity. It was almost as if he could have struck me! He must have
suspected that I had come to parley with him, to offer to compound his
claim for five thousand rupees with a few hundreds. There was a moment
when I thought he would snatch up the rolls and throw them out of the
window, declaring that he was no beggar, but a king claiming tribute.

"Is that all?" asked Amulya with such pity welling up in his voice that
I wanted to sob out aloud. I kept my heart tightly pressed down, and
merely nodded my head. Sandip was speechless. He neither touched the
rolls, nor uttered a sound.

My humiliation went straight to the boy's heart. With a sudden, feigned
enthusiasm he exclaimed: "It's plenty. It will do splendidly. You have
saved us." With which he tore open the covering of one of the rolls.

The sovereigns shone out. And in a moment the black covering seemed to
be lifted from Sandip's countenance also. His delight beamed forth from
his features. Unable to control his sudden revulsion of feeling, he
sprang up from his seat towards me. What he intended I know not. I
flashed a lightning glance towards Amulya--the colour had left the boy's
face as at the stroke of a whip. Then with all my strength I thrust
Sandip from me. As he reeled back his head struck the edge of the marble
table and he dropped on the floor. There he lay awhile, motionless.
Exhausted with my effort, I sank back on my seat.

Amulya's face lightened with a joyful radiance. He did not even turn
towards Sandip, but came straight up, took the dust of my feet, and then
remained there, sitting on the floor in front of me. O my little
brother, my child! This reverence of yours is the last touch of heaven
left in my empty world! I could contain myself no longer, and my tears
flowed fast. I covered my eyes with the end of my *sari*, which I
pressed to my face with both my hands, and sobbed and sobbed. And every
time that I felt on my feet his tender touch trying to comfort me my
tears broke out afresh.

After a little, when I had recovered myself and taken my hands from my
face, I saw Sandip back at the table, gathering up the sovereigns in his
handkerchief, as if nothing had happened. Amulya rose to his seat, from
his place near my feet, his wet eyes shining.

Sandip coolly looked up at my face as he remarked: "It is six thousand."

"What do we want with so much, Sandip Babu?" cried Amulya. "Three
thousand five hundred is all we need for our work."

"Our wants are not for this one place only," Sandip replied. "We shall
want all we can get."

"That may be," said Amulya. "But in future I undertake to get you all
you want. Out of this, Sandip Babu, please return the extra two thousand
five hundred to the Maharani."

Sandip glanced enquiringly at me.

"No, no," I exclaimed. "I shall never touch that money again. Do with it
as you will."

"Can man ever give as woman can?" said Sandip, looking towards Amulya.

"They are goddesses!" agreed Amulya with enthusiasm.

"We men can at best give of our power," continued Sandip. "But women
give themselves. Out of their own life they give birth, out of their own
life they give sustenance. Such gifts are the only true gifts." Then
turning to me, "Queen!" said he, "if what you have given us had been
only money I would not have touched it. But you have given that which is
more to you than life itself!"

There must be two different persons inside men. One of these in me can
understand that Sandip is trying to delude me; the other is content to
be deluded. Sandip has power, but no strength of righteousness. The
weapon of his which rouses up life smites it again to death. He has the
unfailing quiver of the gods, but the shafts in them are of the demons.

Sandip's handkerchief was not large enough to hold all the coins.
"Queen," he asked, "can you give me another?" When I gave him mine, he
reverently touched his forehead with it, and then suddenly kneeling on
the floor he made me an obeisance. "Goddess!" he said, "it was to offer
my reverence that I had approached you, but you repulsed me, and rolled
me in the dust. Be it so, I accept your repulse as your boon to me, I
raise it to my head in salutation!" with which he pointed to the place
where he had been hurt.

Had I then misunderstood him? Could it be that his outstretched hands
had really been directed towards my feet? Yet, surely, even Amulya had
seen the passion that flamed out of his eyes, his face. But Sandip is
such an adept in setting music to his chant of praise that I cannot
argue; I lose my power of seeing truth; my sight is clouded over like an
opium-eater's eyes. And so, after all, he gave me back twice as much in
return for the blow I had dealt him--the wound on his head ended by
making me bleed at heart. When I had received Sandip's obeisance my
theft seemed to gain a dignity, and the gold glittering on the table to
smile away all fear of disgrace, all stings of conscience.

Like me Amulya also was won back. His devotion to Sandip, which had
suffered a momentary check, blazed up anew. The flower-vase of his mind
filled once more with offerings for the worship of Sandip and me. His
simple faith shone out of his eyes with the pure light of the morning
star at dawn.

After I had offered worship and received worship my sin became radiant.
And as Amulya looked on my face he raised his folded hands in salutation
and cried *Bande Mataram*! I cannot expect to have this adoration
surrounding me for ever; and yet this has come to be the only means of
keeping alive my self-respect.

I can no longer enter my bedroom. The bedstead seems to thrust out a
forbidding hand, the iron safe frowns at me. I want to get away from
this continual insult to myself which is rankling within me. I want to
keep running to Sandip to hear him sing my praises. There is just this
one little altar of worship which has kept its head above the
all-pervading depths of my dishonour, and so I want to cleave to it
night and day; for on whichever side I step away from it, there is only
emptiness.

Praise, praise, I want unceasing praise. I cannot live if my wine-cup be
left empty for a single moment. So, as the very price of my life, I want
Sandip of all the world, today.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII](hw37.md)
