[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw38)  [Next](hw40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XIII

What is this? Our Chakua sub-treasury looted! A remittance of seven
thousand five hundred rupees was due from there to headquarters. The
local cashier had changed the cash at the Government Treasury into small
currency notes for convenience in carrying, and had kept them ready in
bundles. In the middle of the night an armed band had raided the room,
and wounded Kasim, the man on guard. The curious part of it was that
they had taken only six thousand rupees and left the rest scattered on
the floor, though it would have been as easy to carry that away also.
Anyhow, the raid of the dacoits was over; now the police raid would
begin. Peace was out of the question.

When I went inside, I found the news had travelled before me. "What a
terrible thing, brother," exclaimed the Bara Rani. "Whatever shall we
do?"

I made light of the matter to reassure her. "We still have something
left," I said with a smile. "We shall manage to get along somehow."

"Don't joke about it, brother dear. Why are they all so angry with you?
Can't you humour them? Why put everybody out?" "I cannot let the country
go to rack and ruin, even if that would please everybody."

"That was a shocking thing they did at the burning-grounds. It's a
horrid shame to treat you so. The Chota Rani has got rid of all her
fears by dint of the Englishwoman's teaching, but as for me, I had to
send for the priest to avert the omen before I could get any peace of
mind. For my sake, dear, do get away to Calcutta. I tremble to think
what they may do, if you stay on here."

My sister-in-law's genuine anxiety touched me deeply.

"And, brother," she went on, "did I not warn you, it was not well to
keep so much money in your room? They might get wind of it any day. It
is not the money--but who knows..."

To calm her I promised to remove the money to the treasury at once, and
then get it away to Calcutta with the first escort going. We went
together to my bedroom. The dressing-room door was shut. When I knocked,
Bimala called out: "I am dressing."

"I wonder at the Chota Rani," exclaimed my sister-in-law, "dressing so
early in the day! One of their *Bande Mataram* meetings, I suppose.
Robber Queen!" she called out in jest to Bimala. "Are you counting your
spoils inside?"

"I will attend to the money a little later," I said, as I came away to
my office room outside.

I found the Police Inspector waiting for me. "Any trace of the dacoits?"
I asked.

"I have my suspicions."

"On whom?"

"Kasim, the guard."

"Kasim? But was he not wounded?"

"A mere nothing. A flesh wound on the leg. Probably self- inflicted."

"But I cannot bring myself to believe it. He is such a trusted servant."

"You may have trusted him, but that does not prevent his being a thief.
Have I not seen men trusted for twenty years together, suddenly
developing..."

"Even if it were so, I could not send him to gaol. But why should he
have left the rest of the money lying about?"

"To put us off the scent. Whatever you may say, Maharaja, he must be an
old hand at the game. He mounts guard during his watch, right enough,
but I feel sure he has a finger in all the dacoities going on in the
neighbourhood."

With this the Inspector proceeded to recount the various methods by
which it was possible to be concerned in a dacoity twenty or thirty
miles away, and yet be back in time for duty.

"Have you brought Kasim here?" I asked.

"No," was the reply, "he is in the lock-up. The Magistrate is due for
the investigation."

"I want to see him," I said.

When I went to his cell he fell at my feet, weeping. "In God's name," he
said, "I swear I did not do this thing."

"I do not doubt you, Kasim," I assured him. "Fear nothing. They can do
nothing to you, if you are innocent."

Kasim, however, was unable to give a coherent account of the incident.
He was obviously exaggerating. Four or five hundred men, big guns,
numberless swords, figured in his narrative. It must have been either
his disturbed state of mind or a desire to account for his easy defeat.
He would have it that this was Harish Kundu's doing; he was even sure he
had heard the voice of Ekram, the head retainer of the Kundus.

"Look here, Kasim," I had to warn him, "don't you be dragging other
people in with your stories. You are not called upon to make out a case
against Harish Kundu, or anybody else."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](hw40)
