[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw40)  [Next](hw42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Bimala's Story

#### XVIII

Amulya is due to return from Calcutta this morning. I told the servants
to let me know as soon as he arrived, but could not keep still. At last
I went outside to await him in the sitting-room.

When I sent him off to sell the jewels I must have been thinking only of
myself. It never even crossed my mind that so young a boy, trying to
sell such valuable jewellery, would at once be suspected. So helpless
are we women, we needs must place on others the burden of our danger.
When we go to our death we drag down those who are about us.

I had said with pride that I would save Amulya--as if she who was
drowning could save others. But instead of saving him, I have sent him
to his doom. My little brother, such a sister have I been to you that
Death must have smiled on that Brothers' Day when I gave you my
blessing--I, who wander distracted with the burden of my own evil-doing.

I feel today that man is at times attacked with evil as with the plague.
Some germ finds its way in from somewhere, and then in the space of one
night Death stalks in. Why cannot the stricken one be kept far away from
the rest of the world? I, at least, have realized how terrible is the
contagion--like a fiery torch which burns that it may set the world on
fire.

It struck nine. I could not get rid of the idea that Amulya was in
trouble, that he had fallen into the clutches of the police. There must
be great excitement in the Police Office--whose are the jewels?--where
did he get them? And in the end I shall have to furnish the answer, in
public, before all the world.

What is that answer to be? Your day has come at last, Bara Rani, you
whom I have so long despised. You, in the shape of the public, the
world, will have your revenge. O God, save me this time, and I will cast
all my pride at my sister-in-law's feet.

I could bear it no longer. I went straight to the Bara Rani. She was in
the verandah, spicing her betel leaves, Thako at her side. The sight of
Thako made me shrink back for a moment, but I overcame all hesitation,
and making a low obeisance I took the dust of my elder sister-in-law's
feet.

"Bless my soul, Chota Rani," she exclaimed, "what has come upon you? Why
this sudden reverence?"

"It is my birthday, sister," said I. "I have caused you pain. Give me
your blessing today that I may never do so again. My mind is so small."
I repeated my obeisance and left her hurriedly, but she called me back.

"You never before told me that this was your birthday, Chotie darling!
Be sure to come and have lunch with me this afternoon. You positively
must."

O God, let it really be my birthday today. Can I not be born over again?
Cleanse me, my God, and purify me and give me one more trial!

I went again to the sitting-room to find Sandip there. A feeling of
disgust seemed to poison my very blood. The face of his, which I saw in
the morning light, had nothing of the magic radiance of genius.

"Will you leave the room," I blurted out.

Sandip smiled. "Since Amulya is not here," he remarked, "I should think
my turn had come for a special talk."

My fate was coming back upon me. How was I to take away the right I
myself had given. "I would be alone," I repeated.

"Queen," he said, "the presence of another person does not prevent your
being alone. Do not mistake me for one of the crowd. I, Sandip, am
always alone, even when surrounded by thousands."

"Please come some other time. This morning I am ..."

"Waiting for Amulya?"

I turned to leave the room for sheer vexation, when Sandip drew out from
the folds of his cloak that jewel-casket of mine and banged it down on
the marble table. I was thoroughly startled. "Has not Amulya gone,
then?" I exclaimed.

"Gone where?"

"To Calcutta?"

"No," chuckled Sandip.

Ah, then my blessing had come true, in spite of all. He was saved. Let
God's punishment fall on me, the thief, if only Amulya be safe.

The change in my countenance roused Sandip's scorn. "So pleased, Queen!"
sneered he. "Are these jewels so very precious? How then did you bring
yourself to offer them to the Goddess? Your gift was actually made.
Would you now take it back?"

Pride dies hard and raises its fangs to the last. It was clear to me I
must show Sandip I did not care a rap about these jewels. "If they have
excited your greed," I said, "you may have them."

"My greed today embraces the wealth of all Bengal," replied Sandip. "Is
there a greater force than greed? It is the steed of the great ones of
the earth, as is the elephant, Airauat, the steed of Indra. So then
these jewels are mine?"

As Sandip took up and replaced the casket under his cloak, Amulya rushed
in. There were dark rings under his eyes, his lips were dry, his hair
tumbled: the freshness of his youth seemed to have withered in a single
day. Pangs gripped my heart as I looked on him.

"My box!" he cried, as he went straight up to Sandip without a glance at
me. "Have you taken that jewel-box from my trunk?"

"Your jewel-box?" mocked Sandip.

"It was my trunk!"

Sandip burst out into a laugh. "Your distinctions between mine and yours
are getting rather thin, Amulya," he cried. "You will die a religious
preacher yet, I see."

Amulya sank on a chair with his face in his hands. I went up to him and
placing my hand on his head asked him: "What is your trouble, Amulya?"

He stood straight up as he replied: "I had set my heart, Sister Rani, on
returning your jewels to you with my own hand. Sandip Babu knew this,
but he forestalled me."

"What do I care for my jewels?" I said. "Let them go. No harm is done.

"Go? Where?" asked the mystified boy.

"The jewels are mine," said Sandip. "Insignia bestowed on me by my
Queen!"

"No, no, no," broke out Amulya wildly. "Never, Sister Rani! I brought
them back for you. You shall not give them away to anybody else."

"I accept your gift, my little brother," said I. "But let him, who
hankers after them, satisfy his greed."

Amulya glared at Sandip like a beast of prey, as he growled: "Look here,
Sandip Babu, you know that even hanging has no terrors for me. If you
dare take away that box of jewels ..."

With an attempt at a sarcastic laugh Sandip said: "You also ought to
know by this time, Amulya, that I am not the man to be afraid of you."

"Queen Bee," he went on, turning to me, "I did not come here today to
take these jewels, I came to give them to you. You would have done wrong
to take my gift at Amulya's hands. In order to prevent it, I had first
to make them clearly mine. Now these my jewels are my gift to you. Here
they are! Patch up any understanding with this boy you like. I must go.
You have been at your special talks all these days together, leaving me
out of them. If special happenings now come to pass, don't blame me.

"Amulya," he continued, "I have sent on your trunks and things to your
lodgings. Don't you be keeping any belongings of yours in my room any
longer." With this parting shot, Sandip flung out of the room.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX](hw42.md)
