[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw44)  [Next](hw46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXII

Rumour became busy on every side. The police were continually in and
out. The servants of the house were in a great flurry.

Khema, my maid, came up to me and said: "Oh, Rani Mother! for goodness"
sake put away my gold necklace and armlets in your iron safe." To whom
was I to explain that the Rani herself had been weaving all this network
of trouble, and had got caught in it, too? I had to play the benign
protector and take charge of Khema's ornaments and Thako's savings. The
milk-woman, in her turn, brought along and kept in my room a box in
which were a Benares *sari* and some other of her valued possessions. "I
got these at your wedding," she told me.

When, tomorrow, my iron safe will be opened in the presence of
these--Khema, Thako, the milk-woman and all the rest ... Let me not
think of it! Let me rather try to think what it will be like when this
third day of Magh comes round again after a year has passed. Will all
the wounds of my home life then be still as fresh as ever? ...

Amulya writes that he will come later in the evening. I cannot remain
alone with my thoughts, doing nothing. So I sit down again to make cakes
for him. I have finished making quite a quantity, but still I must go
on. Who will eat them? I shall distribute them amongst the servants. I
must do so this very night. Tonight is my limit. Tomorrow will not be in
my hands.

I went on untiringly, frying cake after cake. Every now and then it
seemed to me that there was some noise in the direction of my rooms,
upstairs. Could it be that my husband had missed the key of the safe,
and the Bara Rani had assembled all the servants to help him to hunt for
it? No, I must not pay heed to these sounds. Let me shut the door.

I rose to do so, when Thako came panting in: "Rani Mother, oh, Rani
Mother!"

"Oh get away!" I snapped out, cutting her short. "Don't come bothering
me."

"The Bara Rani Mother wants you," she went on. "Her nephew has brought
such a wonderful machine from Calcutta. It talks like a man. Do come and
hear it!"

I did not know whether to laugh or to cry. So, of all things, a
gramophone needs must come on the scene at such a time, repeating at
every winding the nasal twang of its theatrical songs! What a fearsome
thing results when a machine apes a man.

The shades of evening began to fall. I knew that Amulya would not delay
to announce himself--yet I could not wait. I summoned a servant and
said: "Go and tell Amulya Babu to come straight in here." The man came
back after a while to say that Amulya was not in--he had not come back
since he had gone.

"Gone!" The last word struck my ears like a wail in the gathering
darkness. Amulya gone! Had he then come like a streak of light from the
setting sun, only to be gone for ever? All kinds of possible and
impossible dangers flitted through my mind. It was I who had sent him to
his death. What if he was fearless? That only showed his own greatness
of heart. But after this how was I to go on living all by myself?

I had no memento of Amulya save that pistol--his reverence- offering. It
seemed to me that this was a sign given by Providence. This guilt which
had contaminated my life at its very root--my God in the form of a child
had left with me the means of wiping it away, and then vanished. Oh the
loving gift-- the saving grave that lay hidden within it!

I opened my box and took out the pistol, lifting it reverently to my
forehead. At that moment the gongs clanged out from the temple attached
to our house. I prostrated myself in salutation.

In the evening I feasted the whole household with my cakes. "You have
managed a wonderful birthday feast--and all by yourself too!" exclaimed
my sister-in-law. "But you must leave something for us to do." With this
she turned on her gramophone and let loose the shrill treble of the
Calcutta actresses all over the place. It seemed like a stable full of
neighing fillies.

It got quite late before the feasting was over. I had a sudden longing
to end my birthday celebration by taking the dust of my husband's feet.
I went up to the bedroom and found him fast asleep. He had had such a
worrying, trying day. I raised the edge of the mosquito curtain very
very gently, and laid my head near his feet. My hair must have touched
him, for he moved his legs in his sleep and pushed my head away.

I then went out and sat in the west verandah. A silk-cotton tree, which
had shed all its leaves, stood there in the distance, like a skeleton.
Behind it the crescent moon was setting. All of a sudden I had the
feeling that the very stars in the sky were afraid of me--that the whole
of the night world was looking askance at me. Why? Because I was alone.

There is nothing so strange in creation as the man who is alone. Even he
whose near ones have all died, one by one, is not alone-- companionship
comes for him from behind the screen of death. But he, whose kin are
there, yet no longer near, who has dropped out of all the varied
companionship of a full home--the starry universe itself seems to
bristle to look on him in his darkness.

Where I am, I am not. I am far away from those who are around me. I live
and move upon a world-wide chasm of separation, unstable as the dew-drop
upon the lotus leaf.

Why do not men change wholly when they change? When I look into my
heart, I find everything that was there, still there--only they are
topsy-turvy. Things that were well-ordered have become jumbled up. The
gems that were strung into a necklace are now rolling in the dust. And
so my heart is breaking.

I feel I want to die. Yet in my heart everything still lives-- nor even
in death can I see the end of it all: rather, in death there seems to be
ever so much more of repining. What is to be ended must be ended in this
life--there is no other way out.

Oh forgive me just once, only this time, Lord! All that you gave into my
hands as the wealth of my life, I have made into my burden. I can
neither bear it longer, nor give it up. O Lord, sound once again those
flute strains which you played for me, long ago, standing at the rosy
edge of my morning sky--and let all my complexities become simple and
easy. Nothing save the music of your flute can make whole that which has
been broken, and pure that which has been sullied. Create my home anew
with your music. No other way can I see.

I threw myself prone on the ground and sobbed aloud. It was for mercy
that I prayed--some little mercy from somewhere, some shelter, some sign
of forgiveness, some hope that might bring about the end. "Lord," I
vowed to myself, "I will lie here, waiting and waiting, touching neither
food nor drink, so long as your blessing does not reach me."

I heard the sound of footsteps. Who says that the gods do not show
themselves to mortal men? I did not raise my face to look up, lest the
sight of it should break the spell. Come, oh come, come and let your
feet touch my head. Come, Lord, and set your foot upon my throbbing
heart, and at that moment let me die.

He came and sat near my head. Who? My husband! At the first touch of his
presence I felt that I should swoon. And then the pain at my heart burst
its way out in an overwhelming flood of tears, tearing through all my
obstructing veins and nerves. I strained his feet to my bosom--oh, why
could not their impress remain there for ever?

He tenderly stroked my head. I received his blessing. Now I shall be
able to take up the penalty of public humiliation which will be mine
tomorrow, and offer it, in all sincerity, at the feet of my God.

But what keeps crushing my heart is the thought that the festive flutes
which were played at my wedding, nine years ago, welcoming me to this
house, will never sound for me again in this life. What rigour of
penance is there which can serve to bring me once more, as a bride
adorned for her husband, to my place upon that same bridal seat? How
many years, how many ages, aeons, must pass before I can find my way
back to that day of nine years ago?

God can create new things, but has even He the power to create afresh
that which has been destroyed?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV](hw46)
