[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw45)  [Next](hw47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter Twelve

### Nikhil's Story

#### XV

Today we are going to Calcutta. Our joys and sorrows lie heavy on us if
we merely go on accumulating them. Keeping them and accumulating them
alike are false. As master of the house I am in an artificial
position--in reality I am a wayfarer on the path of life. That is why
the true Master of the House gets hurt at every step and at last there
comes the supreme hurt of death.

My union with you, my love, was only of the wayside; it was well enough
so long as we followed the same road; it will only hamper us if we try
to preserve it further. We are now leaving its bonds behind. We are
started on our journey beyond, and it will be enough if we can throw
each other a glance, or feel the touch of each other's hands in passing.
After that? After that there is the larger world-path, the endless
current of universal life.

How little can you deprive me of, my love, after all? Whenever I set my
ear to it, I can hear the flute which is playing, its fountain of melody
gushing forth from the flute-stops of separation. The immortal draught
of the goddess is never exhausted. She sometimes breaks the bowl from
which we drink it, only to smile at seeing us so disconsolate over the
trifling loss. I will not stop to pick up my broken bowl. I will march
forward, albeit with unsatisfied heart.

The Bara Rani came and asked me: "What is the meaning, brother, of all
these books being packed up and sent off in box-loads?" "It only means,"
I replied, "that I have not yet been able to get over my fondness for
them."

"I only wish you would keep your fondness for some other things as well!
Do you mean you are never coming back home?"

"I shall be coming and going, but shall not immure myself here any
more."

"Oh indeed! Then just come along to my room and see how many things *I*
have been unable to shake off *my* fondness for." With this she took me
by the hand and marched me off.

In my sister-in-law's rooms I found numberless boxes and bundles ready
packed. She opened one of the boxes and said: "See, brother, look at all
my *pan*-making things. In this bottle I have catechu powder scented
with the pollen of screw-pine blossoms. These little tin boxes are all
for different kinds of spices. I have not forgotten my playing cards and
draught-board either. If you two are over-busy, I shall manage to make
other friends there, who will give me a game. Do you remember this comb?
It was one of the *Swadeshi* combs you brought for me..."

"But what is all this for, Sister Rani? Why have you been packing up all
these things?"

"Do you think I am not going with you?"

"What an extraordinary idea!"

"Don't you be afraid! I am not going there to flirt with you, nor to
quarrel with the Chota Rani! One must die sooner or later, and it is
just as well to be on the bank of the holy Ganges before it is too late.
It is too horrible to think of being cremated in your wretched
burning-ground here, under that stumpy banian tree--that is why I have
been refusing to die, and have plagued you all this time."

At last I could hear the true voice of home. The Bara Rani came into our
house as its bride, when I was only six years old. We have played
together, through the drowsy afternoons, in a corner of the
roof-terrace. I have thrown down to her green amras from the tree-top,
to be made into deliciously indigestible chutnies by slicing them up
with mustard, salt and fragrant herbs. It was my part to gather for her
all the forbidden things from the store-room to be used in the marriage
celebration of her doll; for, in the penal code of my grandmother, I
alone was exempt from punishment. And I used to be appointed her
messenger to my brother, whenever she wanted to coax something special
out of him, because he could not resist my importunity. I also remember
how, when I suffered under the rigorous régime of the doctors of those
days--who would not allow anything except warm water and sugared
cardamom seeds during feverish attacks--my sister-in-law could not bear
my privation and used to bring me delicacies on the sly. What a scolding
she got one day when she was caught!

And then, as we grew up, our mutual joys and sorrows took on deeper
tones of intimacy. How we quarrelled! Sometimes conflicts of worldly
interests roused suspicions and jealousies, making breaches in our love;
and when the Chota Rani came in between us, these breaches seemed as if
they would never be mended, but it always turned out that the healing
forces at bottom proved more powerful than the wounds on the surface.

So has a true relationship grown up between us, from our childhood up
till now, and its branching foliage has spread and broadened over every
room and verandah and terrace of this great house. When I saw the Bara
Rani make ready, with all her belongings, to depart from this house of
ours, all the ties that bound us, to their wide-spreading ends, felt the
shock.

The reason was clear to me, why she had made up her mind to drift away
towards the unknown, cutting asunder all her lifelong bonds of daily
habit, and of the house itself, which she had never left for a day since
she first entered it at the age of nine. And yet it was this real reason
which she could not allow to escape her lips, preferring rather to put
forward any other paltry excuse.

She had only this one relationship left in all the world, and the poor,
unfortunate, widowed and childless woman had cherished it with all the
tenderness hoarded in her heart. How deeply she had felt our proposed
separation I never realized so keenly as when I stood amongst her
scattered boxes and bundles.

I could see at once that the little differences she used to have with
Bimala, about money matters, did not proceed from any sordid
worldliness, but because she felt that her claims in regard to this one
relationship of her life had been overridden and its ties weakened for
her by the coming in between of this other woman from goodness knows
where! She had been hurt at every turn and yet had not the right to
complain.

And Bimala? She also had felt that the Senior Rani's claim over me was
not based merely on our social connection, but went much deeper; and she
was jealous of these ties between us, reaching back to our childhood.

Today my heart knocked heavily against the doors of my breast. I sank
down upon one of the boxes as I said: "How I should love, Sister Rani,
to go back to the days when we first met in this old house of ours."

"No, brother dear," she replied with a sigh, "I would not live my life
again--not as a woman! Let what I have had to bear end with this one
birth. I could not bear it over again."

I said to her: "The freedom to which we pass through sorrow is greater
than the sorrow."

"That may be so for you men. Freedom is for you. But we women would keep
others bound. We would rather be put into bondage ourselves. No, no,
brother, you will never get free from our toils. If you needs must
spread your wings, you will have to take us with you; we refuse to be
left behind. That is why I have gathered together all this weight of
luggage. It would never do to allow men to run too light."

"I can feel the weight of your words," I said laughing, "and if we men
do not complain of your burdens, it is because women pay us so
handsomely for what they make us carry."

"You carry it," she said, "because it is made up of many small things.
Whichever one you think of rejecting pleads that it is so light. And so
with much lightness we weigh you down ... When do we start?"

"The train leaves at half past eleven tonight. There will be lots of
time."

"Look here, do be good for once and listen to just one word of mine.
Take a good nap this afternoon. You know you never get any sleep in the
train. You look so pulled down, you might go to pieces any moment. Come
along, get through your bath first."

As we went towards my room, Khema, the maid, came up and with an
ultra-modest pull at her veil told us, in deprecatingly low tones, that
the Police Inspector had arrived with a prisoner and wanted to see the
Maharaja.

"Is the Maharaja a thief, or a robber," the Bara Rani flared up, "that
he should be set upon so by the police? Go and tell the Inspector that
the Maharaja is at his bath."

"Let me just go and see what is the matter," I pleaded. "It may be
something urgent."

"No, no," my sister-in-law insisted. "Our Chota Rani was making a heap
of cakes last night. I'll send some to the Inspector, to keep him quiet
till you're ready." With this she pushed me into my room and shut the
door on me.

I had not the power to resist such tyranny--so rare is it in this world.
Let the Inspector while away the time eating cakes. What if business is
a bit neglected?

The police had been in great form these last few days arresting now this
one, now that. Each day some innocent person or other would be brought
along to enliven the assembly in my office-room. One more such
unfortunate, I supposed, must have been brought in that day. But why
should the Inspector alone be regaled with cakes? That would not do at
all. I thumped vigorously on the door.

"If you are going mad, be quick and pour some water over your head--that
will keep you cool," said my sister-in-law from the passage.

"Send down cakes for two," I shouted. "The person who has been brought
in as the thief probably deserves them better. Tell the man to give him
a good big helping."

I hurried through my bath. When I came out, I found Bimal sitting on the
floor outside.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) Could this be my
Bimal of old, my proud, sensitive Bimal?

What favour could she be wanting to beg, seated like this at my door?

As I stopped short, she stood up and said gently with downcast eyes: "I
would have a word with you."

"Come inside then," I said.

"But are you going out on any particular business?"

"I was, but let that be. I want to hear ..."

"No, finish your business first. We will have our talk after you have
had your dinner."

I went off to my sitting-room, to find the Police Inspector's plate
quite empty. The person he had brought with him, however, was still busy
eating.

"Hullo!" I ejaculated in surprise. "You, Amulya?"

"It is I, sir," said Amulya with his mouth full of cake. "I've had quite
a feast. And if you don't mind, I'll take the rest with me." With this
he proceeded to tie up the remaining cakes in his handkerchief.

"What does this mean?" I asked, staring at the Inspector.

The man laughed. "We are no nearer, sir," he said, "to solving the
problem of the thief: meanwhile the mystery of the theft deepens." He
then produced something tied up in a rag, which when untied disclosed a
bundle of currency notes. "This, Maharaja," said the Inspector, "is your
six thousand rupees!"

"Where was it found?"

"In Amulya Babu's hands. He went last evening to the manager of your
Chakna sub-office to tell him that the money had been found. The manager
seemed to be in a greater state of trepidation at the recovery than he
had been at the robbery. He was afraid he would be suspected of having
made away with the notes and of now making up a cock-and-bull story for
fear of being found out. He asked Amulya to wait, on the pretext of
getting him some refreshment, and came straight over to the Police
Office. I rode off at once, kept Amulya with me, and have been busy with
him the whole morning. He refuses to tell us where he got the money
from. I warned him he would be kept under restraint till he did so. In
that case, he informed me he would have to lie. Very well, I said, he
might do so if he pleased. Then he stated that he had found the money
under a bush. I pointed out to him that it was not quite so easy to lie
as all that. Under what bush? Where was the place? Why was he
there?--All this would have to be stated as well. 'Don't you worry,' he
said, 'there is plenty of time to invent all that.'"

"But, Inspector," I said, "why are you badgering a respectable young
gentleman like Amulya Babu?"

"I have no desire to harass him," said the Inspector. "He is not only a
gentleman, but the son of Nibaran Babu, my school-fellow. Let me tell
you, Maharaja, exactly what must have happened. Amulya knows the thief,
but wants to shield him by drawing suspicion on himself. That is just
the sort of bravado he loves to indulge in." The Inspector turned to
Amulya. "Look here, young man," he continued, "I also was eighteen once
upon a time, and a student in the Ripon College. I nearly got into gaol
trying to rescue a hack driver from a police constable. It was a near
shave." Then he turned again to me and said: "Maharaja, the real thief
will now probably escape, but I think I can tell you who is at the
bottom of it all."

"Who is it, then?" I asked.

"The manager, in collusion with the guard, Kasim."

When the Inspector, having argued out his theory to his own
satisfaction, at last departed, I said to Amulya: "If you will tell me
who took the money, I promise you no one shall be hurt."

"I did," said he.

"But how can that be? What about the gang of armed men?..."

"It was I, by myself, alone!"

What Amulya then told me was indeed extraordinary. The manager had just
finished his supper and was on the verandah rinsing out his mouth. The
place was somewhat dark. Amulya had a revolver in each pocket, one
loaded with blank cartridges, the other with ball. He had a mask over
his face. He flashed a bull's-eye lantern in the manager's face and
fired a blank shot. The man swooned away. Some of the guards, who were
off duty, came running up, but when Amulya fired another blank shot at
them they lost no time in taking cover. Then Kasim, who was on duty,
came up whirling a quarterstaff. This time Amulya aimed a bullet at his
legs, and finding himself hit, Kasim collapsed on the floor. Amulya then
made the trembling manager, who had come to his senses, open the safe
and deliver up six thousand rupees. Finally, he took one of the estate
horses and galloped off a few miles, there let the animal loose, and
quietly walked up here, to our place.

"What made you do all this, Amulya?" I asked.

"There was a grave reason, Maharaja," he replied.

"But why, then, did you try to return the money?"

"Let her come, at whose command I did so. In her presence I shall make a
clean breast of it."

"And who may 'she' be?"

"My sister, the Chota Rani!"

I sent for Bimala. She came hesitatingly, barefoot, with a white shawl
over her head. I had never seen my Bimal like this before. She seemed to
have wrapped herself in a morning light.

Amulya prostrated himself in salutation and took the dust of her feet.
Then, as he rose, he said: "Your command has been executed, sister. The
money is returned."

"You have saved me, my little brother," said Bimal.

"With your image in my mind, I have not uttered a single lie," Amulya
continued. "My watchword *Bande Mataram* has been cast away at your feet
for good. I have also received my reward, your *prasad*, as soon as I
came to the palace."

Bimal looked at him blankly, unable to follow his last words. Amulya
brought out his handkerchief, and untying it showed her the cakes put
away inside. "I did not eat them all," he said. "I have kept these to
eat after you have helped me with your own hands."

I could see that I was not wanted here. I went out of the room. I could
only preach and preach, so I mused, and get my effigy burnt for my
pains. I had not yet been able to bring back a single soul from the path
of death. They who have the power, can do so by a mere sign. My words
have not that ineffable meaning. I am not a flame, only a black coal,
which has gone out. I can light no lamp. That is what the story of my
life shows--my row of lamps has remained unlit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](hw46.htm#fr_29) Sitting on the bare floor
is a sign of mourning, and so, by association of ideas, of an abject
attitude of mind. \[Trans.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI](hw47)
