[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr04)  [Next](gpr06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# GREEK POPULAR RELIGION

### THE COUNTRYSIDE

Greek religion in its various aspects has been the subject of numerous
investigations. Modern research has progressed along two lines
especially, the search for primitive survivals and the study of the
literary expressions of religion. The first is attributable to the rise
of the science of anthropology since the seventies of the last century.
In this science the study of Greek religion, viewed as a direct
development from a primitive nature religion, has always taken a
prominent place. I need only mention the names of Andrew Lang, Sir James
Frazer, and Jane Harrison. While it is true that there were very many
relics of primitive religion in Greek religion, it must be remembered
that Greece was a highly civilized country and that even its most
backward inhabitants were subject to the influence of its culture. It is
misleading, therefore, to represent Greek religion as essentially
primitive. The primitive elements were modified and overlaid by higher
elements through the development of Greek culture. They were survivals
and must be treated as such.

The second line of research has been pursued by philologists, who, quite
naturally from their point of view, found the highest and most valuable
expression of Greek religious thought in the works of the great writers
and philosophers. I may recall the names of such men as Lewis Campbell,
James Adam, and Wilamowitz-Moellendorff. The philologists neglect or
impatiently brush aside the popular aspects of Greek religion as less
valuable and less well known. It is true that the religion of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the masses was on a lower level than the religious ideas of eminent
literary men, but it is also true that those ideas made hardly any
impression on the development of Greek religion. The writers were not
prophets, and the philosophers were seekers of wisdom, not of religious
truth. The fate of religion is determined by the masses. The masses are,
indeed, susceptible to high religious ideas if they are carried away by
a religious genius, but only one such genius arose in Greece, Plato.
Even he wished to be regarded as a philosopher rather than as a prophet,
and he was accepted as such by his contemporaries. The religious
importance of his thought did not come to the fore until half a
millennium after his death, although since that time all religions have
been subject to his influence.

I should perhaps mention a third kind of inquiry which has been taken up
by scholars in recent years, especially in Germany. Their endeavors
cannot properly be called research, however, for they have been directed
to the systematizing of the religious ideas of the Greeks and the
creation of a kind of theology, or, as the authors themselves express
it, to revealing the intrinsic and lasting values of Greek religion. To
this class belong, among others, W. F. Otto and E. Peterich. The great
risk they run is that of imputing to the Greeks a systematization such
as is found in religions which have laid down their creeds in books. The
Greeks had religious ideas, of course, but they never made them into a
system. What the Greeks called theology was either metaphysics, or the
doctrine of the persons and works of the various gods. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

It is of the greatest importance to attain a well-founded knowledge of
Greek popular religion, for the fate of Greek religion as a whole
depended on it. It is incorrect to say that we have not the means to
acquire such knowledge, for the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

means are at hand: first, in our information about the cults in which
the piety of believers expressed itself; second, in hints by the writers
of the classical period; and third, in archaeological discoveries. As I
have stated, we ought not to mistake the popular religion for the
primitive elements, which persisted in great measure but were subject to
and influenced by the development of Greek civilization and political
life.

In beginning my exposition of Greek popular religion I want to draw
attention to a point of primary importance. In the latter part of the
archaic age and in the classical age the leading cities of Greece were
more and more industrialized and commercialized. Greek civilization was
urban. Many parts of Greece, however, remained in a backward state, and
while they are of no importance in the history of civilization and
political life, they are important in the history of religion. For they
still preserved the mode of life which had been common in earlier times,
when the inhabitants of Greece were peasants, compelled to subsist on
the products of their own country--the crops, the fruits, the flocks,
and the herds.

In trying to understand Greek popular religion we must start from the
agricultural and pastoral life of the countryside, which was neither
very advanced nor very primitive culturally. The Greek peasant usually
lived in a large village. Many ancient cities with names familiar in
history were but villages similar to those found in Greece today. Let us
imagine a Greek peasant. He rose early, as simple people always do,
before dawn. In the dusk of the morning he looked for the stars which
were beginning to wane above the eastern horizon, where the growing
light announced the rising of the sun. The stars were for him only
indications of the time of the year, not objects of worship. He greeted
the rising sun with a kiss of the hand, as he greeted the first swallow
or the first

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

kite, but he did not pay it any reverence. He needed rain, and sometimes
cool weather, more than he needed the sun. He looked at the highest
mountaintop in the neighborhood. Maybe it wore a cloudcap. This was
promising, for up there on the top of the mountain sat Zeus, the
cloud-gatherer, the thrower of the thunderbolt, the rain-giver. He was a
great god. He had other aspects of which we shall hear later. The roar
of the thunder was the sign of his power and presence--sometimes of his
anger. He smote the high mountains, the tall oaks, and occasionally man
with his thunderbolt. But the flash of the lightning and the roar of the
thunder were followed by the rain, which moistened the soil and
benefited the crops, the grass, and the fruits.

It was seldom necessary to pray for rain in Greece, for the course of
the seasons is much more regular there than in northern Europe. Late
autumn and winter bring rain; summer brings drought and heat. On the
other hand, the weather is not so regular that certain days of the year
could be fixed upon for weather magic. This is the reason why as weather
god Zeus had few festivals. Sometimes heat and drought were excessive.
Myths have much to tell about these disasters, and it is related that
they were sometimes so great that the most extreme of all sacrifices, a
human sacrifice, was offered. Two such sacrifices are recorded from
historical times, one to Zeus Lykaios and one to Zeus Laphystios. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) Zeus Lykaios received his name from the high
mountain in southwestern Arcadia, Lykaion, on the top of which he had a
famous sanctuary. Zeus Laphystios was named after the mountain
Laphystion in Boeotia, although his cult belonged to Halos in Thessaly.
On Mount Lykaion there was a well called Hagno. When there was need of
rain the priest of Zeus went to this well, performed

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

ceremonies and prayers, and dipped an oak twig into the water. Thereupon
a haze arose from the well and condensed into clouds, and soon there was
rain all over Arcadia.

Zeus Laphystios is well known from the myth of the Golden Fleece,
according to which Phrixos and Helle, who were to be sacrificed because
of a drought, saved themselves by riding away on a ram with a golden
fleece. Their mother was called Nephele (cloud). At the bottom of this
myth is weather magic such as is known to have been practiced at several
places in Greece, including Mount Pelion, not far from Halos. At the
time of the greatest heat young men girt with fresh ram fleeces went up
to the top of this mountain in order to pray to Zeus Akraios for cool
weather. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) From this fleece, Zeus was
called Melosios on Naxos, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) and the
fleece, which was used in several rites, for example, in the initiation
into the Eleusinian Mysteries, was called Zeus' fleece (*Dios kodion*).
It is generally said to have been a means of purification and
propitiation, and so it was. But its origin is to be found in the
weather magic by which the weather god was propitiated. It had a place
at Athens in the cult of Zeus Maimaktes, the stormy Zeus, who gave his
name to the stormy winter month of Maimakterion.

We are told that in other places, also, people went to the mountain of
Zeus to pray for rain. Ombrios and Hyetios are common epithets of Zeus,
and we hear of sanctuaries of Zeus on Olympus and on various other
mountaintops, such as the highest mountain of the island of Aegina,
where he was called Zeus Panhellenios. In this sanctuary a building was
erected

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

to accommodate his visitors. Probably the weather god Zeus ruled from
the highest peak in every neighborhood. It is supposed that Hagios
Elias, who nowadays has a chapel everywhere on the mountaintops, is his
successor.

We follow our peasant on his way. We pass the gardens and cornfields
where most of his work was done. We shall return to them later. We
follow him to those parts of the countryside which were not subject to
the labor of men--the meadows and the pasture grounds, the mountains and
the forests. Even in modern Greece there are vast tracts of land which
cannot be cultivated, and the extent of such land was greater in
antiquity. If our peasant passed a heap of stones, as he was likely to
do, he might lay another stone upon it. If a tall stone was erected on
top of the heap, he might place before it a bit of his provision as an
offering ([Fig. 3](gpr12.htm#img_fig03).md). He performed this act as a
result of custom, without knowing the real reason for it, but he knew
that a god was embodied in the stone heap and in the tall stone standing
on top of it. He named the god Hermes after the stone heap (*herma*) in
which he dwelt, and he called the tall stone a herm. Such heaps were
welcome landmarks to the wanderer who sought his way from one place to
another through desert tracts, and their god became the protector of
wayfarers. And if, by chance, the wayfarer found on the stone heap
something, probably an offering, which would be welcome to the poor and
hungry, he ascribed this lucky find to the grace of the god and called
it a *hermaion*.

Our peasant or his forefathers knew that the stone heaps sometimes
covered a dead man and that the stone erected on top was a tombstone.
Accordingly, the god who dwelt in the stone heap had relations with the
dead. Although the people brought libations and food offerings to the
dead in their tombs, they also believed in a common dwelling place of
the dead.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such
contradictions are hardly noticed by simple people. This abode of the
dead, the dark and gloomy Hades, was some-where far away beneath the
earth. On leaving their earthly home, the souls needed someone to show
them the way, and nobody was more appropriate for this function than the
protector of wayfarers, who dwelt in the stone heaps. Hermes, the guide
of souls, is known not only from literature but also from pictures, in
which he is represented with a magic rod in his hand, permitting the
souls, small winged human figures, to ascend and sending them down again
through the mouth of a large jar ([Fig. 2](gpr12.htm#img_fig02).md) . Such
jars were often used for burial purposes.

Perhaps our peasant wanted to look after his stock, which grazed on the
meadows and mountain slopes. The god of the stone heaps was concerned
with them, too. The story, told in the *Homeric Hymn*, how, when a babe,
he stole the oxen of Apollo, is a humorous folk tale invented by
herdsmen who did not hesitate to augment their herds by fraud and
rejoiced in such profitable tricks. One may think of the Biblical story
of Jacob and Laban. To Hermes such stories were no boon, for he became
the god of thieves.

On Olympus Hermes was a subordinate god, the messenger of the gods, and
we know him chiefly as such. I take no ac-count of later additions to
his functions, which made him a god of commerce, of gymnastics, and of
rhetoric. He was especially popular in one of the backward provinces of
Greece, Arcadia, the land of shepherds. Here, too, the herms were
especially popular in cult. Attention has recently been drawn to a
series of Arcadian herms, some of which are double or triple and
inscribed with the names of various gods in the genitive <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) ([Fig. 1](gpr12.htm#img_fig01).md). Other gods
than Hermes were also embodied

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

in these stone pillars, a relic of the old stone cult, which has left
many traces.

According to Hesiod and the Homeric Hymn, Hermes cared for and protected
the livestock, but we do not find many evidences of this function in his
cult. It fell to other gods. Apollo is called Lykeios, an epithet which
surely describes him not as the light god but as the wolf god. And why
should not the shepherds have appealed to the great averter of evil for
protection against the most dangerous foe of their flocks, the wolf?
Pastoral life found expression in another god who was always especially
Arcadian, Pan. He came to Athens late--not until the time of the Persian
wars. He is represented with the legs and face of a goat; he is as
ruttish as the he-goat; he plays the syrinx, as the shepherds do in the
lazy hours when the flocks graze peacefully; but he may also cause a
sudden panic, when the animals, seized for some unknown reason by
fright, rush away headlong.

There are many rivers in Greece, but few of them are large. Most of them
are small and precipitous, and many are dry in summer. Water is scarce
in Greece, and so the benefits received from the rivers are especially
appreciated. In ancient times the rivers were holy. An army did not
cross a river without making a sacrifice to it, and Hesiod prescribes
that one should not cross a river without saying a prayer and washing
one's hands in its water. The aid of the rivers was sought for the
fertility not only of the land but also of mankind. After the sixth
century B.C., names taken from certain rivers were common, for instance,
Kephisodotos, the gift of Kephisos. When the young man cut his long
hair, he dedicated the locks to the neighboring river.

The rivers each had their god. These gods are represented in the shape
of a bull or a bull with a human head ([Fig. 6](gpr13.htm#img_fig06).md).
Such a figure is sometimes called by the name of the great river

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

in northwestern Greece, Acheloos, and Acheloos was venerated in several
places in Greece. It is not clear whether the god of the river Acheloos
was on his way to becoming a common river god or whether Acheloos is an
old word for water. At all events, as the rivers were individualized, so
too were their gods.

River spirits in the shape of a bull are well known from European
folklore of the present day, and they are certainly an ancient heritage.
The river spirit appears just as often, however, in the shape of a
horse. This is true, for example, in Sweden and in Scotland. One of the
great gods, Poseidon, is closely connected with the horse as well as
with water. It is related in some myths that he appeared in the shape of
a horse and that he created the horse. He brought forth a spring on the
Acropolis of Athens with a stroke of his trident, and Pegasus brought
forth the spring of Hippocrene on Mount Helicon with a stroke of his
hoof. Other springs, such as Aganippe, also have names referring to the
horse. No doubt the water spirit appeared in the shape of a horse also,
but the springs had other deities who carried the day, the nymphs, to
whom we shall come presently.

To the seafaring Ionians, Poseidon was the god of the sea. On the
mainland of Greece, and especially in the Peloponnesus, he was the god
of horses and of earthquakes. Earthquakes occur in Greece not
infrequently, and when the earth began to tremble, the Spartans used to
sing a paean to Poseidon. There is a certain connection between the
rivers and the earthquakes, for many rivers in Greece sink down into the
ground, eroding the limestone, and flow in subterranean channels for
long distances until they break forth again in a mighty stream. The
nature philosophers took over from the people the opinion that the
earthquakes were caused by this eroding of the ground by the rivers. It
is understandable, therefore,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

that the god of water was also the god of earthquakes. One of the
epithets by which he was designated in Laconia, Gaiaochos, has been
interpreted as "he who drives beneath the earth."

The Greeks also knew other horse-shaped daemons, the centaurs and the
seilenoi. The centaurs have in part the body of a horse and in part that
of a man. Homer calls them beasts. They appear only in the myths of art
and literature, and they seem to have been localized in two districts,
Mount Pelion and northwestern Arcadia. There is no doubt that they were
de-rived from popular belief. If the proposed etymology, according to
which the word means "water whipper," <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md)
is correct, they were water spirits. In that case, one might believe
that they were originally spirits of the precipitous mountain torrents.
At all events, their character is rough and violent. They resemble the
spirits of wood and wilderness which appear in the folklore of northern
Europe. They represent the fierce and rough aspects of nature. They are
depicted as using uprooted fir trees for weapons and as carrying the
victims of the chase on a pole.

There is another kind of horse daemon, which is often represented in
works of art of Ionian origin. These daemons are distinguished from the
centaurs by having the body of a man with the legs and tail of a horse
and by being ithyphallic. There has been a lengthy discussion concerning
their name. It was proposed to assign to these daemons, which were
confined to the Ionian area, the name of seilenoi--we know from
inscriptions that they were so called--in distinction from the goatlike
satyrs, which were supposed to be Dorian. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) The attempt

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

to make such a distinction has failed. Proper names prove that seilenoi
were well known in the Peloponnesus also, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) and their value as testimony is the greater
because they prove that the seilenoi belong not only to mythology but
also to popular belief. Moreover, there are archaic statuettes from
Arcadia showing daemons with a human body and features of goats and
other animals ([Fig. 4](gpr13.htm#img_fig04).md). These goatlike daemons
are sometimes called *panes*, and they are certainly akin to Pan. The
seilenoi and the satyrs have intercourse with the nymphs, and very often
they appear dancing and frolicking with the maenads, for they were made
companions of Dionysus. We do not know the exact reason why this came
about. It is supposed that they were fertility daemons, just as Dionysus
was a vegetation god. As a consequence, they appear only in mythology,
not in cult. But it is evident that the Greeks peopled untamed nature,
the mountains and the forests, with various daemons which were thought
of as having half-animal, half-human shape. This is one of the many
similarities between Greek mythology and the popular beliefs of northern
Europe, in which similar daemons and spirits are numerous. There can be
no doubt that centaurs, seilenoi, and satyrs were created by popular
belief, although art and literature appropriated them and they had no
cult.

Like the peoples of northern Europe, the Greeks knew not only male but
also female spirits of nature, the nymphs. The word signifies simply
young women, and, unlike the male daemons, the nymphs are always thought
of in purely human shape. They are beautiful and fond of dancing. They
are benevolent. But they may also be angry and threatening. If a man
goes mad it is said that he has been caught by the nymphs. In ancient
Greek mythology, as elsewhere, we find the folktale

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

motif of a man compelling a nymph to become his wife. She bears him
children but soon returns to her native element. Thetis was originally a
sea nymph whom Peleus won by wrestling with her. She soon abandoned his
house and only returned from time to time to look after her son,
Achilles. Nymphs are often mothers of mythical heroes.

The nymphs are almost omnipresent. They dwell on the mountains, in the
cool caves, in the groves, in the meadows, and by the springs. There are
also sea nymphs--the Nereids--and tree nymphs. The nymphs had cults at
many places, especially at springs and in caves (Fig. 8). Caves with
remains of such cults have been discovered. Most interesting is the cave
at Vari on Mount Hymettus. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) In the
fifth century B.C., a poor man of Theraean origin, Archedemos, who
styles himself "caught by the nymphs," planted a garden, decorated the
cave, and engraved inscriptions on its walls. Still more interesting is
a cave which was recently discovered at Pitza in the neighborhood of
Corinth. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) The discovery is famous
especially for its well-preserved paintings on wood in Corinthian style.
One of these tablets represents a sacrifice to the nymphs, and the other
represents women. There are a lot of terracottas representing
women--some of whom are pregnant--Pan, satyrs, and various animals. The
character of the cult and its connection with the nature daemons and
with animals is evident, but, on the other hand, it appears that it was
preeminently a cult of women and that the women applied to the nymphs
for help in childbirth. Such cults are also found in other places. In
the so-called prison of Socrates at Athens, where a century ago women
brought offerings to the Moirai

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

for success in marriage and childbirth, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) the Moirai may have succeeded the nymphs.
The nymphs were very popular in cult. They were beautiful and kind and
represented the gentle and benevolent aspects of nature and of almost
all its parts. It is quite understandable that they were venerated by
women especially. Although the cults of women were not absolutely
separated from those of men, men and women went different ways and had
different occupations in daily life, as they still do in the Greek
countryside. The women had their special concerns centering around
marriage and childbirth, and it was only natural that they should apply
to divinities of their own sex. The nymphs were to be found everywhere
and were supposed to be especially benevolent to those of their own sex.

There is a great goddess who is very similar to the nymphs and who is
accompanied by nymphs, namely Artemis, "Lady of the Wild Things" ([Fig.
5](gpr13.htm#img_fig05).md). She haunts the mountains and the meadows; she
is connected with the tree cult and with springs and rivers; she
protects women in childbirth; and she watches over little children.
Girls brought offerings to her before their marriage. Her aspect is
different in different parts of Greece, but it always goes back to the
general characteristics just mentioned, except that one or another of
them comes more into the foreground. Her habitual appearance is
determined by Homer and the great art and literature of Attica. She is
the virgin twin sister of Apollo and by preference the goddess of
hunting. How her relation to Apollo came about is not clear. We may only
remark here that both carry the bow as their weapon. Of course, the
goddess who haunts the mountains and the forests with a bow in her hand
is a hunting goddess. Artemis was much more than that, but the Homeric
knights, as well as the inhabitants of the great Ionian cities,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

had no relation to the free life of nature except in the sport of
hunting, which they loved. Hence, this side of Artemis' nature was
especially emphasized.

Other very interesting and very popular aspects of Artemis' nature were
prominent, especially in the Peloponnesus. She was closely connected
with the tree cult. She is sometimes called Lygodesma, because her image
was wound round with willow; Caryatis, after the chestnut; and
Cedreatis, after the cedar. Dances and masquerades of a very free and
even lascivious character assumed a prominent place in many of her
cults, in which men as well as women took part. Cymbals have been found
in the temple of Artemis Limnatis in the borderland between Laconia and
Messenia. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) During the excavations of
the British School in the famous sanctuary of Artemis Orthia at Sparta,
a number of terracotta masks, representing grotesque faces of both men
and women, were found ([Fig. 7](gpr13.htm#img_fig07).md) . It is very
probable that similar masks were worn by the dancers who performed in
this cult. In these customs we find the popular background for the
mythological Artemis who dances with her nymphs.

Artemis was the most popular goddess of Greece. She was the leader of
the nymphs, and, in fact, she herself was but the foremost of the
nymphs. Archedemos, who decorated the cave of Vari, dedicated his
inscriptions to the nymphs, but one of them is addressed to the Nymph,
in the singular. One of the crowd of nymphs was singled out as a
representative of them all, and she became the great goddess Artemis.

Christianity easily swept away the great gods, but the minor daemons of
popular belief offered a stubborn resistance. They were nearer the
living rock. The Greek peasant of today still believes in the nymphs,
though he gives them all the old name

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

of the sea nymphs, *Neraids*. They haunt the same places, they have the
same appearance and the same occupations, and the same tales are told of
them. It is remarkable that they have a queen, called "the Great Lady,"
"the Fair Lady," or even "the Queen of the Mountains." Perhaps she is a
last remembrance of the great goddess Artemis, or perhaps there has been
a recurrence of the process by which Artemis, the foremost of the
nymphs, became a great goddess. Nobody knows, but the fact that the
nymphs alone survive in modern popular belief is a telling argument for
their popularity among the Greek people in ancient times.

What interests primitive man is not nature in itself but nature so far
as it intervenes in human life and forms a necessary and obvious basis
for it. In the foreground are the needs of man together with nature as a
means of satisfying those needs, for upon the generosity of nature
depends whether men shall starve or live in abundance. Therefore, in a
scantily watered land such as Greece, the groves and meadows where the
water produces a rich vegetation are the dwelling places of the nature
spirits, and so are the forests and mountains where the wild beasts
live. In the forests the nymphs dance; centaurs, satyrs, and seilenoi
roam about; and Pan protects the herds, though he may also drive them
away in a panic. The life of nature becomes centered in Artemis, who
loves hills and groves and well-watered places and promotes that natural
fertility which does not depend upon the efforts of man.

Anyone who wishes to understand the religion of antiquity should have
before him a living picture of the ancient landscape as it is
represented in certain Pompeian frescoes <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) ([Fig. 9](gpr14.htm#img_fig09).md) and in
Strabo's description of the lowland at the mouth of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the river Alpheus. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) "The whole
tract," Strabo says, "is full of shrines of Artemis, Aphrodite, and the
nymphs, in flowery groves, due mainly to the abundance of water; there
are numerous hermae on the roads and shrines of Poseidon on the
headlands by the sea." One could hardly have taken a step out of doors
without meeting a little shrine, a sacred enclosure, an image, a sacred
stone, or a sacred tree. Nymphs lived in every cave and fountain. This
was the most persistent, though not the highest, form of Greek religion.
It outlived the fall of the great gods.

This is not the end of the story. Our peasant certainly passed on his
way other small sanctuaries or groves where he paid his respects. Not
gods or nature daemons but heroes dwelt in them <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) ([Fig. 10](gpr14.htm#img_fig10).md).
Although modern scholars have proffered other opinions, the Greeks were
persuaded that a hero was a man who had once lived, who died and was
buried, and who lay in his grave at the place where he was venerated. I
should think it likely that our peasant had heard weird stories about
heroes, such as those about the hero of Temesa, to whom the most
beautiful virgin of the town had to be sacrificed until the famous boxer
Euthymus drove him out in a regular fight, or about the hero Orestes,
whom the Athenians did not like to meet at night because he was apt to
give them a beating and to tear off their clothes. If our peasant became
sick he believed, perhaps, that some hero had attacked him. In other
words, ghost stories such as are not yet forgotten were told of the
heroes. The hero was a dead man who walked about corporeally, a revenant
such as popular belief tells of everywhere. But this aspect of the
heroes lingered only in the background, for in Greece the heroes had
cults and were generally

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

helpful. Their cult was bound to their tomb, and their power was bound
to their relics, which were buried in the tomb. This is the reason why
their bones were sometimes dug up and transferred to another place.
Cimon, for example, fetched the bones of Theseus from the island of
Scyros to Athens, and the Lacedaemonians with some difficulty found the
bones of Orestes beneath a smithy at Tegea and transferred them to
Sparta when they wanted his help in the war against the Arcadians. The
heroes were especially helpful in war. The sense which the word "hero"
had in Homer, namely "warrior," was not forgotten either, and the heroes
were particularly well suited to defend the land in which they were
buried. In the battle of Marathon, Theseus rose from the ground to fight
with his people against the Persians. The Locrians in Italy left a place
open in the file for Aias, and in the battle of Sagra he was said to
have wounded the commander of their foes, the Crotoniates. It sometimes
occurred that a people sent its heroes to help another people.

There were an exceedingly large number of hero tombs and sanctuaries all
over the countryside. The names of only the best known of these heroes,
and especially those with mythological names, are recorded. Very many
were anonymous or called only by some such epithet as "the leader."
Others were designated simply by the place where their cult was located.
This fact emerges, for example, from the sacrificial calendar of the
Marathonian tetrapolis, <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) in which we
find four couples, each consisting of a hero and a heroine, and in
addition to these some other heroes. In the inscription of the
Salaminioi, <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) which was discovered
recently during the American excavations at Athens, we also find a
series of heroes designated by the localities of their cults in the
neighborhood of Sunium.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The heroes were exceedingly numerous; they were found everywhere; and
they were close to the people. They were thought to appear in very
concrete form. It is not to be wondered at that the people applied to
them for help in all their needs. They were often healers of diseases,
like the Mohammedan saints, whose tombs are often hung with patches torn
from the clothes of the sick. Asclepius himself was a hero. He ousted
many other heroes who were locally venerated as healers of sickness.
Thus the heroes were good for almost everything, and this fact explains
why minor local gods who were too insignificant to be reckoned as true
gods were received among the number of the heroes. This is the reason
why some scholars were prone to consider the heroes as debased gods or
"special gods." I cannot enter into this complicated problem, which
Farnell has treated fully in his book on the hero cults. I have only
wished to give a concrete idea of the importance of the cult of the
heroes for the Greek people.

The similarity of the heroes to the saints of the Catholic Church is
striking and has often been pointed out. The power of the saints, like
that of the heroes, is bound to their relics, and just as the relics of
the saints are transferred from one place to another, so were those of
the heroes. Moreover, the oracle of Delphi prescribed that a hero cult
should be devoted to a dead man if it appeared that a supernatural power
was attached to his relics, and the pope canonizes a saint for similar
reasons. The cult of the heroes corresponded to a popular need which was
so strong that it continued to exist in Christian garb.

I have tried to give as well as possible in a limited space a concrete
idea of Greek rustic religion as far as it was concerned with the free
life of nature and with the heroes. Nature was peopled with spirits,
daemons, and gods. They haunted the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

mountains and the forests. They dwelt in trees and stones, in rivers and
wells. Some of them were rough and dreadful, as the wilderness is, while
others were gentle and benevolent. Some of them promoted the life of
nature and also protected mankind. The great gods are less prominent in
this sphere. Zeus holds his place as the god of the weather, the hurler
of the thunderbolt, and the sender of rain. Poseidon appears as the god
of water and earthquakes. Hermes is really a minor god, the spirit
embodied in the stone heaps, who has been introduced into Olympus by
Homeric poetry. Artemis is the foremost of the nymphs who has grown into
a great goddess. The innumerable heroes are protectors of the soil in
which their bones are laid, ready to help their fellow countrymen in all
their needs, linked with both the past and the present.

This aspect of Greek religion was certainly not the highest, but it was
the most enduring. It was close to the earth, which is the source of all
religion and from which even the great gods sprang. The great gods were
overthrown and soon forgotten by the people. The nature daemons and the
heroes were not so easily dealt with. The nature spirits have lived on
in the mind of the people to this day, as they have in other parts of
Europe, although they were not acknowledged by the Church, which called
them evil daemons, nor by educated people, who regarded them as products
of superstition. The cult of the heroes took on a Christian guise and
survived in much the same forms, except that the martyrs and the saints
succeeded the heroes.

These facts prove that we have here encountered a religion which
corresponds to deep-lying ideas and needs of humanity. They also prove
the importance of this kind of religion in antiquity. It was a religion
of simple and unlettered peasants, but it was the most persistent form
of Greek religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](gpr05.htm#fr_0.md) θεολογία is πρώτη
φιλοσοφία, Aristotle, *Metaphysica*, X, p. 1064a, ll. 33 ff. The persons
and the works of the gods are described by Cornutus in a book entitled
Ἐπιδορμή τῶν κατὰ τήν ἑλληνικήν θεολογίαν παραδεδομέων.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[6:2](gpr05.htm#fr_1.md) Herodotus, VII, 197, and
Pseudo-Plato, *Minos*, p. 315c; Theophrastus in Porphyrius, *De
abstinentia*, II, 27.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[7:3](gpr05.htm#fr_2.md) C. Müller, ed., *Fragmenta
historicorum Graecorum* (Paris, 1841-73), II, 262.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:4](gpr05.htm#fr_3.md) Inscriptiones Graecae,
consilio et auctoritate Academiae litterarum regiae borussicae editae
(Berlin, 1873-), Vol. XII, Fasc. 5, No. 48; interpretation by A. B.
Cook, Zeus; a Study in Ancient Religion (Cambridge, 1914-25), I, 164.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[9:5](gpr05.htm#fr_4.md) K. Rhomaios, "Arkadikoi
Hermai," *Ephemeris archaiologike*, 1911, pp. 149 ff.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12:6](gpr05.htm#fr_5.md) P. Kretschmer in *Glotta*,
X (1920), 50.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:7](gpr05.htm#fr_6.md) There has been a lengthy
discussion. I cite only E. Reisch, "Zur Vorgeschichte der attischen
Tragödie," *Festschrift Theodor Gomperz dargebracht zum siebzigsten
Geburtstage* (Vienna, 1902), pp. 451 ff., and the most recent work, F.
Brommer, *Satyroi* (Dissertation, Munich, 1937).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[13:8](gpr05.htm#fr_7.md) F. Solmsen in
*Indogermanische Forschungen*, XXX (1912), 1 ff.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[14:9](gpr05.htm#fr_8.md) *Amer. Journ. of
Archaeology*, VII (1903), 263 ff.; the inscriptions in *Inscriptiones
Graecae*, Editio minor (Berlin, 1913-), Vol. I, Nos. 778-800.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[14:10](gpr05.htm#fr_9.md) Summary description in
*Archäologischer Anzeiger, Beiblatt zum Jahrbuch des archäologischen
Instituts*, 1934, pp. 194 ff., and 1935, pp. 197 ff.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[15:11](gpr05.htm#fr_10.md) J. C. Lawson, *Modern
Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion; a Study in Survivals*
(Cambridge, 1910), p. 121.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[16:12](gpr05.htm#fr_11.md) H. Roehl, ed.,
*Inscriptiones Graecae antiquissimae praeter Atticas in Attica repertas*
(Berlin, 1882), Nos. 50, 61, 73.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[17:13](gpr05.htm#fr_12.md) M. Rostovtzeff, "Die
hellenistisch-römische Architekturlandschaft," *Römische Mitteilungen*,
XXVI (1911), 1 ff.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[18:14](gpr05.htm#fr_13.md) Strabo, VIII, p. 343.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[18:15](gpr05.htm#fr_14.md) The most comprehensive
treatment is by L. R. Farnell, *Greek Hero Cults and Ideas of
Immortality* (Oxford, 1921).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[19:16](gpr05.htm#fr_15.md) *Inscriptiones
Graecae*, Editio minor, Vols. II-III, Pt. 1, No. 1358.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[19:17](gpr05.htm#fr_16.md) Published by W.
Ferguson in *Hesperia*, VII (1938), 31 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rural Customs and Festivals](gpr06.md)
