[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr05)  [Next](gpr07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### RURAL CUSTOMS AND FESTIVALS

I have emphasized strongly the fact that except for a few industrial and
commercial centers ancient Greece was a country of peasants and herdsmen
and that according to modern notions many of its so-called cities were
but large villages. Certain provinces such as Boeotia, Phocis, and
Thessaly, not to speak of Messenia, were always agricultural. In other
ways also some of them were still very simple and backward in the
classical age. Examples are Arcadia, Aetolia, and Acarnania. Except for
those cities to which the leading role in Greek history fell, Greece
depended on agriculture and on cattle and sheep raising. In early times,
before the industrial and commercial development began, this was true of
the whole of Greece, and it was then that the foundations of the Greek
cults were laid.

I want to stress this fact and certain of its implications once more.
Corn, wheat, or barley was always the staple food of the Greeks. The
daily portion of food of soldiers, laborers, and slaves was always
reckoned as a certain number of pecks of corn. With the bread, some
olives, some figs, or a little goat-milk cheese was eaten and a little
wine was drunk. The diet of the Greek peasant is the same even today.
Meat was not daily or common food. One might slaughter an animal in
order to entertain a guest, as Eumaeus did when Odysseus came to his
hut, but this was considered as a sacrifice also. Generally

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

speaking, the common people ate meat only at the sacrifices which
accompanied the great festivals. One is re-minded of the great feasting
on mutton at Easter in modern Greece, where the peasants seldom eat
meat. It will be well to keep this background of Greek life in mind when
we try to expound the rural customs of ancient Greece.

The significance of agriculture in the popular festivals occurred even
to the ancients. Aristotle says that in early times sacrifices and
assemblies took place especially after the harvest had been gathered
because people had most leisure at this time. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) A late author, Maximus of Tyre, writes on
this topic at greater length. <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) Only
the peasants seem, he says, to have instituted festivals and
initiations; they are the first who instituted dancing choruses for
Dionysus at the wine press and initiations for Demeter on the threshing
floor. A survey of the Greek festivals with rites which are really
important from a religious point of view shows that an astonishing
number of them are agricultural. The importance of agriculture in the
life of the people in ancient times is reflected even in the religious
rites.

The significance of agriculture in the festivals founded on religious
rites goes still further. The Greek calendar is a calendar of festivals
promulgated under the protection of Apollo at Delphi in order that the
rites due to the gods might be celebrated at the right times. But long
before Apollo had appropriated the Delphic oracle for himself,
agriculture had created a natural calendar. Agricultural tasks succeed
each other in due order because they are bound up with the seasons, and
so also do the rites and ceremonies which are connected with these tasks
of sowing, reaping, threshing, gardening, and fruit gathering. For all
of them divine protection is required

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and is afforded by certain rites which belong, generally speaking, to an
old religious stratum and which have a magical character. Such customs,
very similar to those of the Greeks, have been preserved by the European
peasantry down to our own day.

The Greek goddess of agriculture was Demeter, together with her daughter
Kore, the Maiden. The meaning of -*meter* is "mother." In regard to the
first syllable, *de*-, philologists are at variance as to whether it
means "earth" or "corn." The cult proves that Demeter is the Corn Mother
and her daughter the Corn Maiden. Demeter is not a goddess of vegetation
in general but of the cultivation of cereals specifically. The Homeric
knights did not care much for this goddess of the peasants. The
references to her in Homer are few, but they are sufficient to show that
she was the corn goddess who presided at the winnowing of the corn.
Hesiod, who was himself a peasant and composed a poem for peasants,
mentions her often. For instance, he prescribes a prayer to Demeter and
Zeus in the earth that the fruit of Demeter may be full and heavy when
the handle of the plow is grasped in order to begin the sowing, and he
calls sowing, plowing, harvesting, and the other agricultural labors the
works of Demeter.

Agricultural labors were accompanied by rites and festivals, most of
which were devoted to Demeter. At the autumn sowing the Thesmophoria was
celebrated; in the winter, during which the crops grow and thrive in
Greece, sacrifices were brought to Demeter Chloe (the verdure); and when
the corn was threshed the Thalysia was celebrated. Best known is the
festival of the autumn sowing, the Thesmophoria. There is no other
festival for which we have so many testimonies from various places.
Demeter herself was called *thesmophoros*, and she and her daughter were
the two *thesmophoroi*. The epithet has been translated *legifera*. In
this interpretation *thesmos* is

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

taken in the sense of "law" or "ordinance" and reference is made to the
conception of agriculture as the foundation of a civilized life and of
obedience to the laws. This idea comes to the fore in the Eleusinian
Mysteries, which were originally a festival of the autumn sowing like
the Thesmophoria to which they were closely akin. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) It is said that the gift of Demeter is the
reason why men do not live like wild beasts, and Athens is praised as
the cradle of agriculture and of civilization.

But this interpretation of the word is late and erroneous. It arose only
after men had begun to reflect and had recognized that agriculture is
the foundation of a civilized life. Thesmos signifies simply "something
that has been laid down," and in compound names of festivals ending in
-*phoria* the first part of the compound refers to something carried in
the festival. Oschophoria, for example, means the carrying of branches.
The *thesmoi*, consequently, were things carried in the rites of the
Thesmophoria, and we know what these things were. At a certain time of
the year, perhaps at another festival of Demeter and Kore, the
Skirophoria, which was celebrated at the time of threshing, pigs were
thrown into subterranean caves together with other fertility charms. At
the Thesmophoria the putrefied remains were brought, mixed with the seed
corn, and laid on the altars. This is a very simple and old-fashioned
fertility magic known from Athens as well as from other places in
Greece. The swine was the holy animal of Demeter.

The Thesmophoria and some other festivals of Demeter were celebrated by
women alone; men were excluded. Some scholars have thought that the
reason for this was that the Thesmophoria had come down from very
ancient times when the cultivation of plants was in the hands of the
women. This can hardly be so, for the cultivation of cereals with the
help

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of the plow drawn by oxen has always been the concern of men. The
Thesmophoria was a fertility festival in which the women prayed for
fertility not only for the fields but also for themselves. The
parallelism of sowing and begetting is constant in the Greek language.
The reason why this festival was celebrated by women alone may simply be
that the women seemed especially fit for performing fertility magic.

While the festival of the autumn sowing is very often mentioned,
references to the corresponding festival of the harvest, the Thalysia,
are curiously few. It is, however, the only festival mentioned in Homer,
who says that sacrifices were offered on the threshing floor. Theocritus
describes it in his lovely seventh idyl, in the last lines of which he
mentions the altar of Demeter of the threshing floor and prays that he
may once again thrust his winnowing shovel into her corn heap and that
she may stand there smiling with sheaves and poppies in both hands. In
modern Europe the harvest home is a very popular rustic festival. The
contrast between the popularity of the modern harvest home and the few
references to the ancient harvest festival of the Thalysia is probably
only seeming. The rites of the autumn sowing, having become a state
festival, were celebrated on certain days of the calendar, while the
harvest home was in Greece a private festival celebrated on every farm
when the threshing was ended and its date was not fixed. It may be added
that the harvest is conducted differently in Greece than in northern
Europe. The sheaves are not stored in a barn but are brought immediately
to the threshing floor and threshed. The harvest in the coast districts
falls in May and the threshing at the beginning of June in the dry
season when rain is not to be expected. Another harvest festival was
probably the Kalamaia, which was not uncommon, though very little is
known about it. Its name, derived from

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

*kalamos* (stalk of wheat), its time--June--and its connection with
Demeter seem to prove its harvest character.

As becomes a harvest festival, first fruits were offered at the
Thalysia. A loaf baked of the new corn was called *thalysion arton*.
These loaves are also mentioned in other connections, and Demeter
herself received the name of the "goddess with the great loaves." In
Attica such a loaf was called *thargelos*, and it gave its name to
another well-known festival, the Thargelia. This festival, however,
belongs to Apollo, not to Demeter. Its characteristic rite is quite
peculiar, and its meaning is much discussed. A man, generally a
criminal, was led around through the streets, fed, flogged with green
branches, and finally expelled or killed. He was called *pharmakos*,
which is the masculine form of *pharmakon* (medicine). Some scholars
regard the pharmakos as a scapegoat on whom the sins and the impurity of
the people were loaded and who was then expelled or destroyed. They are
certainly right. Others have thought that he was a vegetation spirit
which was expelled in order to be replaced by a new one. This opinion,
too, is not quite unfounded, for fertility magic is conspicuous in the
rites. A crossing of various rites has taken place, as happens not
infrequently. <span id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20)

The purificatory character of the central rite of the Thargelia explains
why the festival was dedicated to Apollo, who is the god of
purifications. Purificatory rites are needed and often performed when
the crops are ripening in order to protect them against evil influences,
and this was probably the original purpose of leading around the
pharmakos. References to similar magical rites abound in the writings
about agriculture by later authors and are found elsewhere as well.
Theoretically,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

two different kinds of rites can be distinguished, though they are often
mixed up. One consists in walking about with some magical object in
order that its influence may be spread over the area. The other is
encirclement. <span id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21) Conducting the
pharmakos through the streets of the town belongs to the former class.
So does a kind of magic prescribed for destroying vermin, which required
that a nude virgin or a menstruating woman should walk about in the
fields or gardens. In the other case, a magic circle is drawn which
excludes the evil. It is related of Methana that when winds threatened
to destroy the vines, two men cut a cock into two pieces and, each
taking a bleeding piece, ran around the vineyard in opposite directions
until they met. Thus the magic circle was closed. Magic of a
corresponding kind is still practiced in modern times. The leading
around of the pharmakos is probably an old agrarian rite which was
introduced into the towns and extended to the expelling of all kinds of
evil.

Thus, a connection can be established between the chief rite of the
Thargelia and the agrarian character of the festival, which is proved by
the derivation of its name from thargelos, the loaf offered as first
fruit. This presents a certain difficulty, because the Thargelia was
celebrated on the seventh day of the month Thargelion, a date which
commonly falls a little before harvest time. But it is not without
precedent to use unripe ears for the first fruits. The vestal virgins at
Rome did so in preparing the *mola* *salsa* at the commencement of May.

First fruits are commonly considered as a thank offering to the gods,
and many people may have brought them with this intention. But like most
of the rites and customs discussed here, the offering of first fruits is
pre-deistic and older than

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the cult of the gods. Its origin is to be found in magic. Among many
primitive peoples certain plants and small animals are tabooed during a
particular time, and the lifting of the taboo so that they can be used
for food is effected by elaborate ceremonies, which are also intended to
bring about an increase of these plants and animals. Some scholars are
of the opinion that among the Greeks, too, the offering of first fruits
and the ceremonial drinking of new wine, of which I shall speak later,
represented the breaking of the taboo imposed upon the unripe cereals
and wine. <span id="fr_22"></span>[6](#fn_22) Perhaps they are right in
regard to the ancient times, about which we have no direct information.
The information which has come down to us from the Greeks proves that
they themselves thought that the aim of the offering of first fruits was
the promotion of fertility. The loaf called thargelos was also called
*eueteria* (a good year). It is said, furthermore, that *thargela* were
fruits of all kinds which were cooked in a pot and carried around as
offerings of first fruits to the gods. The loaf and the mixture of fruit
cooked together belong to two different forms of the same custom, to
which many parallels are found among modern European peoples, especially
in the harvest customs of eating ceremonially some part of the harvest.
We have found this custom in the harvest festival of the Thalysia and in
the Thargelia, which was celebrated a little before the harvest. It also
occurs in the Pyanopsia, which received its name from the cooking of
beans in a pot. The Pyanopsia was celebrated in the month of Pyanopsion
in late autumn and was a festival of fruit gathering. The *eiresione*
(the May bough), about which we shall have something to say later, was
also carried

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

around at this festival. The Pyanopsia, as the festival of the fruit
harvest, corresponds to the Thalysia, the festival of the cereal
harvest.

The meaning of such offerings appears very clearly in an ancient
Sicilian custom, which was recorded by ancient students of literature
because they believed that they had found in it the origin of bucolic
poetry. <span id="fr_23"></span>[7](#fn_23) The so-called bucoliasts
went around to people's doors. The goddess with whom the custom came to
be associated was Artemis, but the practices which characterize it prove
that it belongs among those which we are describing. The bucoliasts wore
hartshorns on their heads and carried loaves stamped with figures of
animals (this was a concession to the goddess with whom the custom was
associated), a sack of fruit of all kinds, and a skin of wine. They
strewed the fruit on the thresholds of the houses, offered a drink of
wine to the inhabitants, and sang a simple song: "Take the good luck,
take the health-bread which we bring from the goddess." What they
carried may, in fact, be called a *panspermia*, and the partaking of it
conferred luck on the inhabitants of the houses. Similar customs were
fairly common. A newly acquired slave and the bridegroom at a wedding
were strewn with fruit (*katachysmata*). <span
id="fr_24"></span>[8](#fn_24) The custom of strewing the bridegroom with
fruit still persists, but its original sense of conferring fertility is
forgotten.

This kind of offering is commonly called panspermia, although the Greeks
also called it *pankarpia*. Both words signify a mixture of all kinds of
fruit. Such offerings were also brought to the dead at the ancient Greek
equivalent of All

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Souls' Day, the
Chytroi, on the third day of the Anthesteria. It is very interesting
that this usage seems to have persisted probably from prehistoric down
to modern times. We are told of a vessel, called *kernos*, with many
small cups which were filled with fruit of various kinds and with fluids
such as wine and oil. In the middle was a lamp. The women carried the
kernos on their heads in the Eleusinian Mysteries. Very similar is the
*liknon* or winnowing basket filled with fruit, among which a phallus
was fixed. It appears in the representations of the Dionysiac Mysteries
and is only another way of presenting offerings of the same kind.
Vessels of the same shape as the kernos have been found in Minoan Crete
and elsewhere, and the conclusion seems to be justified that offerings
of this kind were made in the prehistoric age ([Fig.
11](gpr15.htm#img_fig11)) . The custom has been taken over by the Greek
Church. The panspermia is offered to the dead on the modern Greek All
Souls' Day, the Psychosabbaton, which is celebrated in the churchyards
before Lent or before Whitsunday. It is offered as first fruits on
various occasions, but especially at the harvest and at the gathering of
the fruit. It is brought to the church, blessed by the priest, and eaten
in part, at least, by the celebrants. This modern panspermia varies
according to the seasons and consists of grapes, loaves, corn, wine, and
oil. Candles are fixed in the loaves, and there are candlesticks with
cups for corn, wine, and oil, which have been compared to the ancient
kernos. <span id="fr_25"></span>[9](#fn_25) The usual modern name of
these offerings is *kollyba*, which signified in late antiquity as well
as in modern times an offering of cooked wheat and fruit. The word
appears also in descriptions of ecclesiastical usages from the Middle
Ages. <span id="fr_26"></span>[10](#fn_26) Very seldom can the
continuity of a cult usage be followed

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

through the ages as this one can. These popular customs, which belong to
the oldest and, as some may say, the lowest stratum of religion, are the
most long-lived of all.

Up to this point we have dealt chiefly with customs and usages connected
with the cultivation of cereals, although in the later paragraphs we
have mentioned also some customs pertaining to fruit gathering. As I
have remarked, fruit was an important part of the daily food of the
Greeks, although we must keep in mind that certain kinds familiar to us,
such as oranges, were introduced in recent times. Of wine I need not
speak. The cultivation of the olive was very important. Olives were not
only eaten as a condiment with bread but also provided the fat which man
needs. The oil served for illumination and as a cosmetic. But no special
customs referring to the cultivation of the olive are recorded. We know
only that at Athens it was protected by Zeus and Athena and that there
were sacred olive trees from which came the oil distributed as prizes at
the Panathenaean games.

Starting from the beginning of the year, we find a festival celebrated
at Athens about the commencement of January. Our information about it
and even its name seem to be contradictory. The name, Haloa, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[11](#fn_27) is derived from *halos*, which means both
threshing floor and garden. Since the first sense of the word would be
inapplicable to a festival celebrated in January, it must have been a
gardening festival. It is said to have comprised Mysteries of Demeter,
Kore, and Dionysus and to have been celebrated by the women on the
occasion of the pruning of the vines and the tasting of the wine. It
bore a certain resemblance to the Thesmophoria, and sexual symbols were
conspicuous in it. If we think of the labors in the vineyards of modern
Greece, this account is intelligible though not quite correct. In
December the soil is hoed around the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

vines, and their roots are cut. At the same time the first fermentation
of the wine is ended, and the wine can be drunk, although it is not very
good. Thus, the description of the Haloa fits in with what we know about
the labors in the vine-yards. On the other hand, the Haloa is also said
to have been a festival of Demeter, and this, too, is possible. The
crops grow and thrive during the winter, and, as we have seen,
sacrifices were brought to Demeter Chloe at this time.

In February the vines are pruned, and the second fermentation of the
wine comes to an end. The wine is now ripe for drinking. One of the most
popular and most complex of the festivals at Athens, the Anthesteria,
fell in this season, when spring had come with plenty of flowers. The
name means "festival of flowers." We hear of festivals celebrated in
other parts of Greece at the season when the vines were pruned. The
Aiora, or swinging festival, of the Attic countryside seems to have been
of this nature. It was connected with the myth of Icarius, who taught
the culture of the vine, and with the Anthesteria. It was a rustic
merrymaking. Youths leaped on skin sacks filled with wine, and the girls
were swung in swings, a custom which is common in rustic festivals and
may perhaps be interpreted as a fertility charm <span
id="fr_28"></span>[12](#fn_28) ([Fig. 12](gpr15.htm#img_fig12)).

In the city of Athens the most prominent part of the Anthesteria was the
blessing and ceremonial drinking of the new wine. The first day, called
Pithoigia, had its name from the opening of the wine jars. In Boeotia a
similar custom was observed at about the same time, but it was devoted
to Agathos Daimon, the god to whom the libation after every meal was
made. At Athens the wine was brought to the sanctuary of Dionysus in the
Marshes, mixed by the priestesses, and blessed before the god. Everyone
took his portion in a small jug, and

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

hence this day is called "the Festival of the Jugs" (Choes). Even the
small children got their share and received small gifts, particularly
little painted jugs. The schools had a vacation, and the teachers
received their meager fee. The admission to this festival at the age of
about four years was a token that a child was no longer a mere baby.
Another rite pertaining to the Anthesteria was the ceremonial wedding
between Dionysus and the wife of the highest sacral official of Athens,
the king archon. This is an instance of a widespread rite intended to
promote fertility. Examples abound in the folklore of other countries.
In Greece they are mostly mythical. At Athens the god was driven into
the city in a ship set on wheels ([Fig. 13](gpr16.htm#img_fig13)). He
was the god of spring coming from the sea.

It is impossible to enter here into a discussion of the very complex
rites comprised in the Anthesteria. <span id="fr_29"></span>[13](#fn_29)
It should be re-marked, however, that the third day, or, more correctly,
the evening before it, was gloomy. It was the Athenian All Souls' Day.
Offerings of vegetables were brought to the dead, and libations of water
were poured out to them. The Anthesteria has a curious resemblance to
the popular celebration of Christmas in the Scandinavian countries. Many
of the customs observed there at Christmas evidently refer to fertility.
People eat and drink heartily and there is much merrymaking. But there
is also a gloomy side to the celebration. The dead visit their old
houses, where beds and food are prepared for them. There is of course no
connection between this festival and the Anthesteria, but only a curious
similarity. The popular customs of all countries and of all ages are
related.

Vintage festivals are rare in classical Greece. There was one at Athens,
the Oschophoria, which got its name from the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

vine branches laden with grapes which were carried by two youths from
the sanctuary of Dionysus to the temple of Athena Skiras. A race
followed, and the victor received for a prize a drink made up of five
ingredients. At Sparta there was a race of youths, called
*staphylodromoi* (grape-runners), at the great festival of the Carnea,
which was celebrated about the beginning of September. The name proves
that the custom had something to do with the vintage. One of the youths
put fillets on his head and ran on before the others, pronouncing
blessings upon the town. It was a good omen if he was overtaken by the
others and a bad omen if he was not. Many speculations concerning this
custom have been advanced, but we cannot with certainty say more than
that it seems to have been an old vintage custom. The race reminds one
of the race at the Oschophoria.

The association of Dionysus with festivals of viticulture is not nearly
so constant as that of Demeter with the cultivation of cereals. The
reason is not hard to find. Dionysus came to Greece at a fairly late
date--a little before the beginning of the historical age. Viticulture
is much older in Greece than he, and the rustic customs which have been
described here are very ancient, pre-deistic, magical rites which were
not associated with a god until a later time, when it seemed that every
festival should be dedicated to a god. The connection was not
indissoluble. The gods have vanished, but the customs still persist in
part. It is the general belief that Dionysus was above all the god of
wine ([Fig. 14](gpr16.htm#img_fig14)). Already in Hesiod and Homer wine
was his gift. He was not the god of wine alone, however, but of
vegetation and fertility in general, though not of cereals. The fig also
was a gift from him. <span id="fr_30"></span>[14](#fn_30) In the
festival of flowers, the Anthesteria, he appeared as the god of spring.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

This explains why the phallus was his symbol. The phallus was used in
other fertility cults, especially in the festivals of Demeter, but it
was nowhere so conspicuous as in the cult of Dionysus. It was carried in
all Dionysiac processions. The colonies of Athens were required to send
phalli to the Great Dionysia. The procession at this festival, during
which the great works of the tragic and comic poets were performed,
would make a grotesque impression upon us if we were able to see it with
its many indecent symbols. Another Dionysiac festival with a phallus
procession was the Rustic Dionysia, which is described by Aristophanes.
Rural customs of this sort are mentioned also by Plutarch, who complains
that these simple and merry festivals have been ousted by the luxurious
life of his times. Comedy had its origin in the jokes and funny songs of
the carriers of the phalli. Tragedy also originated in the cult of
Dionysus--the cult of Dionysus of Eleutherai, a village in the Boeotian
borderland. This cult was brought to Athens by Pisistratus. We ought to
keep in mind that in this cult Dionysus was called Melanaigis (he with
the black goat-skin) and that there was a myth which proves that a
combat between "the Light One" and "the Black One" was enacted. Whether
this was the same combat between winter and summer which is found in
later European folklore, as some scholars think, I dare not say. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[15](#fn_31) But it may not be useless to observe that
two of the highest achievements of the Greek spirit, the drama and
bucolic poetry, had their origin in simple rural customs.

I have mentioned the eiresione, the May bough, which was carried in the
festival of the fruit gathering, the Pyanopsia. It is described in a
fragment of a popular song as a branch with leaves hung with figs,
loaves, and cups of honey, wine,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

and oil. <span id="fr_32"></span>[16](#fn_32) So far it is reminiscent
of the panspermia, and it is an appropriate symbol for a festival of
fruit gathering. It was carried by a boy whose father and mother were
both alive, and it was set up before the temple of Apollo or before the
doors of private houses. There it remained until it was dry and likely
to take fire. We may guess that it was perhaps exchanged for a new one
the following year, just as the modern *bouquet de moisson*, a sheaf
decorated with flowers and ribbons, is nailed above the door of the barn
at harvest time and remains there until it is exchanged for a new one at
the next harvest. The eiresione was also carried at the late spring
festival of the Thargelia, mentioned above, and on the island of Samos
boys went around carrying the eiresione and asking for alms. The
biography of Homer falsely attributed to Herodotus has preserved many
precious bits of popular poetry, and among them is the song which the
boys sang when they carried the eiresione about. "We come," they sang,
"to the house of a rich man. Let the doors be opened, for Wealth enters,
and with him Joy and Peace. Let the jars always be filled and let a high
cap rise in the kneading trough. Let the son of the house marry and the
daughter weave a precious web." The procession and song strikingly
resemble modern rural customs in which youths go around asking for alms.
To adduce only one example out of many, in southern Sweden they carry
green branches, which they fasten to the houses, and sing a song like
the ancient Greek one containing wishes for good luck and fertility.
This is done on the morning of the first of May. We have already met a
similar procession, that of the bucoliasts in Sicily, who carried around
and distributed a panspermia, wished good luck, and asked for alms. On
the Cyclades the women went around singing a hymn to the Hyperborean

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

virgins and collecting alms for them. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[17](#fn_33) It may be supposed that this custom had
something to do with the myth of these virgins and the sheaves which
were brought from the Hyperboreans to Delos.

On the island of Rhodes the boys carried a swallow around at the
commencement of spring. They began by singing: "The swallow has come
bringing the good season and good years." They then asked for loaves,
wine, cheese, and wheat porridge. If they were not given anything, they
ended with threats. Such threats are often a feature in modern customs
also. <span id="fr_34"></span>[18](#fn_34) The poet Phoenix of Colophon,
who lived in the third century B.C., composed a similar song for boys
who carried a crow. <span id="fr_35"></span>[19](#fn_35) Not only has
this custom many parallels in modern times, but it can be demonstrated
that it has survived in Greece since antiquity. On the first of March
the boys make a wooden image of a swallow, which revolves on a pivot and
is adorned with flowers. The boys then go from house to house singing a
song, of which many variants have been written down, and receiving
various gifts in return. <span id="fr_36"></span>[20](#fn_36) The same
custom is recorded for the Middle Ages. It does not seem very much like
a religious practice, although it has its roots in religious or magical
beliefs, but it shows a greater tenacity than any of the lofty religious
ideas.

We return to the May bough which is often carried in such processions.
The green branch with its newly developed leaves is the symbol of life
and of the renewal of life, and there is no doubt that formerly the
purpose of bringing in green branches and setting them up was to confer
life and good luck.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The custom
persists, but its old significance has long been forgotten. The May
bough is only a lovely decoration. Nowadays we find it at all rural
festivals and at family festivals. The same custom prevailed in ancient
Greece, though the name of the May bough varied. We have found it in
several festivals, sometimes hung with fruits, flowers, and fillets like
the modern Maypole. Sometimes the ancient May bough was as elaborately
decorated as our Maypole. There is a graphic description of such a
Maypole which was carried around the city of Thebes. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[21](#fn_37) It was a laurel pole decorated with one
large and many small balls of copper, purple fillets, and a
saffron-colored garb. This Maypole was carried around at a festival of
Apollo, with whom also the May bough is connected. I think it likely
that the laurel became his holy tree because it was often used for May
boughs.

Sometimes the May bough is simply called by the same name as the loaves
which bring luck, *hygieia* (health, health-bringer), a name which
proves that it was supposed to confer good fortune. In the Mysteries it
was called *bacchos*, a name evidently connected with the role of
Dionysus as a god of vegetation. Hence, it is customary to call by this
name the bundles of branches tied together by fillets which appear in
representations of Eleusinian scenes. In my opinion, the thyrsus which
was carried by the maenads, a stick with a pine cone on its top and
wound round with ivy and fillets, was just a May bough. We also find
pine branches and stalks of the narthex plant in the hands of the
maenads. In Sparta there was a cult of Artemis Korythalia, in whose
honor lascivious dances were performed and to whose temple sucklings
were carried. Her epithet is derived from another name of the May bough,
*korythale*. It is said to have been the same as the eiresione. It was a
laurel branch which was erected before a house when

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the boys arrived at the age of ephebes and when the girls married, just
as in modern times the May bough is erected before a house for a
wedding.

The May bough was carried in numerous processions. I may recall the
*thallophoroi*--dignified old men carrying branches--represented on the
Parthenon frieze. The suppliant who sought protection carried a branch
wound with fillets, the *hiketeria*. Evidently the idea was that this
branch made the suppliant sacred and protected him from violence.
Finally, the crown of flowers which the Greeks wore at all sacrifices,
at banquets, and at symposia and which the citizen who rose to speak in
the popular assembly put on his head is another form of the May bough,
and like the May bough it confers good luck and divine protection.

It may perhaps seem that I have wandered far from religion and have
chiefly discussed folklore. But the distinction which has been made
between religion and folklore since Christianity vanquished the pagan
religions did not exist in antiquity. Scholars have been very busy
discovering survivals of old magical and religious ideas in our rustic
customs and beliefs. In ancient Greece such customs and beliefs were
part of religion. Greek religion had much higher aspects, but it had not
forsaken the simple old forms. They not only persisted among the people
of the countryside, but they also found a place in the festivals and in
the cults of the great gods.

These beliefs and customs are time honored and belong to the substratum
of religion. They have not much to do with the higher aspects of
religion, and they are for the most part magical in significance. They
seem quite nonreligious in character, and very often they have changed
into popular secular customs. This was not difficult in Greece, for, as
we shall see later, the sacred and the secular were intermingled in a
manner which is sometimes astonishing to us. But however profane

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

these customs and beliefs may seem to be, their tenacity is
extraordinary. Similar beliefs and customs occur everywhere in European
folklore, and while the old gods and their cults were so completely
ousted by a new religion that hardly a trace of them remains, the old
rural customs and beliefs survived the change of religion through the
Middle Ages to our own day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[23:1](gpr06.htm#fr_17) *Ethica Nicomachea*,
VIII, p. 1160a.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[23:2](gpr06.htm#fr_18) *Dissertationes*, 30.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[25:3](gpr06.htm#fr_19) See Chapter III.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[27:4](gpr06.htm#fr_20) A survey of the
discussion is in my *Griechische Feste von religiöser Bedeutung, mit
Ausschluss der attischen* (Leipzig, 1906), pp. 106 ff. See also L.
Deubner, *Attische Feste* (Berlin, 1932), pp. 179 ff.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[28:5](gpr06.htm#fr_21) See my paper, "Die
griechischen Prozessionstypen," *Jahrbuch des Deutschen archäol.
Instituts*, XXXI (1916), 319 ff.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[29:6](gpr06.htm#fr_22) See E. Gjerstad, "Tod
und Leben," *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXVI (1928), 182; for
another opinion see J. E. Harrison, *Themis; a Study of the Social
Origins of Greek Religion*, 2d ed., rev. (Cambridge, 1927), pp. 291 ff.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[30:7](gpr06.htm#fr_23) The passages in question
are collected in the introduction to *Scholia in Theocritum vetera*, ed.
C. Wendel (Leipzig, 1914), and discussed in my *Griechische Feste*, pp.
199 ff.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[30:8](gpr06.htm#fr_24) Exhaustively treated by
E. Samter, *Familienfeste der Griechen and Römer* (Berlin, 1901), but
with an interpretation of the custom with which I cannot agree.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[31:9](gpr06.htm#fr_25) S. Xanthoudides, "Cretan
Kernoi," *Annual of the British School at Athens*, XII (1905-6), 9 ff.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[31:10](gpr06.htm#fr_26) Aristophanes, *Plutus*,
vs. 678 and scholia. Cf. Hesychius: κόλλυβα, τρωγάλια.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[32:11](gpr06.htm#fr_27) Deubner, *Attische
Feste*, pp. 60 ff.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[33:12](gpr06.htm#fr_28) See my paper, "Die
Anthesterien and die Aiora," *Eranos*, XV (1916), 187 ff.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[34:13](gpr06.htm#fr_29) Deubner, *Attische
Feste*, pp. 93 ff. Deubner erroneously denies that the mixing of the
wine depicted on certain vases took place at this festival. See my
paper, "Die griechischen Prozessionstypen," referred to in note 9 of
this chapter.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[35:14](gpr06.htm#fr_30) He was called συκάτης
in Laconia (Hesychius s.v. συκίτης ) and, for the same reason, μειλίχιος
on Naxos (Athenaeus, III, p. 78c).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[36:15](gpr06.htm#fr_31) See my paper, "Der
Ursprung der griechischen Tragödie," *Neue Jahrbücher für klass.
Altertum*, XXVII (1911), 673 ff.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[37:16](gpr06.htm#fr_32) Plutarch, *Theseus*,
22.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[38:17](gpr06.htm#fr_33) Herodotus, IV, 35.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[38:18](gpr06.htm#fr_34) Athenaeus, VIII, p.
360b.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[38:19](gpr06.htm#fr_35) Athenaeus, VIII, p.
359e.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[38:20](gpr06.htm#fr_36) See G. F. Abbott,
*Macedonian Folklore* (Cambridge, 1903), p. 18. The songs are collected
in A. Passow, *Popularia carmina Graeciae recentioris* (Leipzig, 1860),
Nos. 291 ff.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[39:21](gpr06.htm#fr_37) Photius, *Bibliotheca*,
ed. Bekker (Berlin, 1824-25), p. 321b.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Religion of Eleusis](gpr07)
