[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr08)  [Next](gpr10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

### THE CITIES; THE PANEGYREIS

In a previous chapter I strongly emphasized the fact that in early times
Greece was a country of tillers of the soil and of herdsmen, who
subsisted on the products of their own labor. To these, of course, we
must add the owners of the great landed estates, the nobility. But I
have not forgotten that Greece was also a country of city-states. In
some of the towns industrial and commercial activities were started, and
these towns played the leading role in the development of Greek culture
and even in religion. In the eighth and seventh centuries B.C. Greece
was apparently overpopulated. The products of its soil were not
sufficient for the increasing number of its inhabitants. We know from
Hesiod how straitened were the circumstances of the small farmers. The
stress was relieved not only by emigration and the founding of colonies
around the Mediterranean, but also by the rise of industry and commerce
in certain towns. At that time the laborers in the many workshops were
not slaves, as they were in the classical age. The poor country
population crowded into the towns, where they could find work and earn a
livelihood which, although poor, was more certain than that provided by
the seasonal labor of agriculture. This is the background of the social
and political changes of the early historical age in Greece. The power
of the nobility broke down. In the towns which were ahead in the
development of industry and commerce

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

tyrants arose. The rule of the tyrants was founded on the broad mass of
the city population, and the tyrants strove to promote the interests of
the masses. But this was only an interlude. The tyrants were expelled
before the early age reached its end, and democracy, or at least a
mitigated aristocracy, was established. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

After this time the cities were the leaders in Greek culture, although
many parts of Greece remained rural and backward. We have heard how the
cities took over parts of the old rural religion in their festivals and
modified them accordingly. The great gods, who protected the state and
the citizens, had their home in the city, and their greatness was
enhanced by art and literature. We should not forget these gods, but we
should also like to know what the man in the street thought and what he
believed in. There was a popular religion of the townspeople also,
though little is said of it.

The great gods of the Greeks came down from various peoples and ages.
Some of them were derived from the pre-Greek population, others were
Greek, and still others were immigrants. Most of them were very complex.
Many of them were venerated by the rural population. We have met several
of them already. But the cults of the countryside were not responsible
for their greatness. For this they were indebted to the cults of the
cities and to art and literature. According to Herodotus, <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) Homer and Hesiod created the Greek gods,
and this statement is true to a certain degree. Homer impressed his
representations of the gods indelibly on the Greek mind. I may add that
the great temples of the gods adorned with works of art were, of course,
erected in the cities, except for a few erected in places which
attracted a

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

stream of visitors for special reasons--Olympia, Delphi, Delos, and at a
later time Epidaurus. I shall return to these later. The sanctuaries
described by Homer were simple rustic sanctuaries--an altar in a grove,
on the trees of which votive offerings were suspended. Great temples
were erected at the earliest in the seventh century B.C. That there was
a certain connection between this building activity and the rule of the
tyrants was already remarked by Aristotle, who says that the tyrants
erected great buildings in order to give occupation to the people. Their
wish to make a show of their power and glory was certainly another
reason. The great temple at Corinth, of which seven heavy columns are
still standing, belongs to the age of the tyrants. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104) At Athens, Pisistratus rebuilt the
temple of Athena on a magnificent scale and began building a colossal
temple of Zeus Olympios.

Very little is known concerning the policies of the tyrants in religious
matters, but we can be sure that they followed the course along which
democracy proceeded further, that of humoring the people by instituting
elaborate festivals and games. This is known to be true of Athens, where
Pisistratus introduced the Great Dionysia and made considerable
additions to the magnificent celebration of the Panathenaea.

After the great victory over the Persians, Athens took the lead in
commerce and culture. Its people were, of course, proud of its great
achievements and of the empire which it had acquired. Patriotic and even
chauvinistic feelings sprang up, and in this age they could find
expression only in religion. The state and the gods were a unity. The
gods had given victory, power, and glory to the Athenian state. The
Athenians gloried in being the most pious of all peoples and in
celebrating

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the most numerous and magnificent festivals in honor of the gods. They
were able to do this because they could afford the costs. Great
sacrifices, in which hundreds of animals were sometimes slaughtered,
accompanied the cult observances. Portions of the sacrifices were
distributed among the people, who were even permitted to take them home.
The people feasted at the expense of the gods, and they soon learned the
ad-vantages of this kind of piety. The great temples erected in this
age, of which the most famous is the Parthenon, enhanced not only the
glory of the gods but also the glory of the capital of the empire.

In the long run this kind of religion was no boon to the great gods.
Religion was to a certain degree secularized. When Aristophanes mentions
the festivals, he speaks only of the feasting and the markets connected
with them, and in one passage he refers to certain ceremonies of the
Dipolia as to something antediluvian. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[4](#fn_105) The great gods became greater and more
glorious, but religious feeling gave way to feelings of patriotism and
to display in festivals and sacrifices. The state gods, the great gods,
thus became more remote from human beings. We shall soon see examples of
this in the case of the city goddess Athena.

The population of the large industrial and commercial towns consisted to
a great extent of laborers, or, to speak more exactly, of artisans, for
the ancient factories were mere workshops and the methods of production
were those of handicraft. The crafts also needed divine protection. We
know a little about this, especially in regard to one craft which was of
extreme importance in this age, that of the potter. It gave its name to
a large district in the city of Athens, the Kerameikos. In the seventh
century it was of equal importance at Corinth. From the beginning the
potters addressed themselves

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

to the great gods of the town. In a sanctuary of Poseidon at Corinth was
found a great mass of painted clay tablets, some of which represent
scenes connected with the potters' art--the making and firing of
vessels, their exportation, and so forth. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[5](#fn_106) The tablets are votive offerings
dedicated to Poseidon by potters.

The potters feared lesser gods and daemons who might destroy their work.
Among the relics of popular poetry preserved in the biography of Homer
ascribed to Herodotus there is a potters' song. It begins with a prayer
that Athena may hold her hand over the potters' oven, and that the
vessels may be well fired, receive a beautiful black color, and yield a
good profit when they are sold. But if the potters do not reward the
poet, he conjures up daemons to destroy the vessels in the oven:
Smaragos, who makes them crack; Syntrips, who smashes them; Asbestos,
the inextinguishable one; Sabaktes, who shatters them; and Omodamos. The
significance of the last is not clear, though the first part of the
compound refers to crude clay. Finally the poet threatens to bring in
the witch Circe and the ferocious centaurs. He uses the common
mythology, of course; but it is interesting to note not only that Athena
is the potters' protectress, but also, and especially, that the potters
believed in a lot of mischievous goblins which were apt to destroy their
work. Perhaps some such goblin is depicted on one of the tablets from
the sanctuary of Poseidon.

In Athens, Athena was the protectress of the artisans. This was quite
natural, for she was already so in Homer. She protected the weaving of
the women and the art of the gold-smiths and the coppersmiths. An Attic
vase shows her in a potter's workshop (Fig. 34). For the popularity of
Athena among the artisans at this time some verses of Sophocles are

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

characteristic: "Come out in the street you, all the people of the
handicraftsmen, who venerate the daughter of Zeus, Ergane, with
sacrificial baskets and beside the heavy anvil, beaten with
hammers." <span id="fr_107"></span>[6](#fn_107) Evidently Sophocles
hints at some popular festival of Athena celebrated by the artisans in
the streets of the town. There was such a festival, the Chalkeia. The
word signifies the festival of the coppersmiths. It belonged to Athena,
but at a later date another god of the Athenian artisans, Hephaistos,
was associated with Athena. <span id="fr_108"></span>[7](#fn_108) These
two even had a common temple. In Homer, Hephaistos is the divine
goldsmith. He probably came from the island of Lemnos or, perhaps, from
Asia Minor. In origin he was a daemon of fire coming up from the earth.
Gas which takes fire and burns is considered by many peoples to be
divine. Later a volcano was considered to be his smithy. He had almost
no cults in Greece except in Athens. No doubt the Athenian artisans took
up his cult and placed him at the side of Athena. He seemed, perhaps, to
be nearer to them than the great city goddess. But in the early age it
was she who was the protectress of the Athenian craftsmen.

Many thousand shards of vases have been found in the debris left on the
Acropolis after its devastation by the Persians; some of these vases
were certainly dedicated by their makers. In the same debris a great
many inscriptions have been found on bases on which votive gifts had
been placed. Among the people who set them up were craftsmen. From the
point of view taken here their diminishing number in later times is very
significant. The second and third volumes of the Attic inscriptions,
which commence with the year 403 B.C., contain only thirty-three
dedications to Athena, and of these

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

twenty-two belong to the fourth century B.C., one to the Hellenistic
age, and ten to the Roman age. <span id="fr_109"></span>[8](#fn_109) The
few inscriptions from the time after 403 B.C. reflect the decline of
Athenian industry and Athenian importance, but the small number from the
fourth century B.C. is also significant. It cannot be explained except
on the ground that Athena had become too exalted to be a goddess of the
common people.

Man needs gods who are near to him. In the countryside there were minor
gods to whom the simple peasants prayed and made offerings. There were
minor gods in the town also, and they were certainly venerated. But
these minor gods were too insignificant; they were not able to satisfy
the human need for divine help and protection. When a gap exists it is
usually filled, and as the Greek gods did not meet the needs of the
Greek people, other gods were brought in from other peoples with whom
the Greeks had intercourse. First came Hecate from the southwestern
corner of Asia Minor, as early as the early archaic age. Propaganda was
resorted to on behalf of her cult, as is apparent in the *Homeric Hymn
to Demeter* and in a long passage inserted into Hesiod's *Theogony*, in
which she is praised as omnipotent. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[9](#fn_110) That Hecate originated in Caria is
proved by the fact that proper names compounded with her name are very
frequent in this district and rare or absent elsewhere. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[10](#fn_111) We do not know what kind of goddess
Hecate was in Caria. In Greece the attempt to make a great goddess of
her did not succeed. She was always the goddess of witchcraft and
sorcery who walked at the crossroads on moonless nights, accompanied by
evil ghosts and barking dogs. Offerings were thrown out to her at the
crossroads, and her image was triple because she had to look

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

in three directions. She was often called Enodia (she of the roads).
Some scholars think that Enodia was a native Greek goddess of
witchcraft, <span id="fr_112"></span>[11](#fn_112) but their arguments
are not very convincing. At all events Hecate was accepted by the Greeks
because there was a place for a goddess of witchcraft and ghosts. Her
popularity is accounted for by this fact, and it proves that base
superstition was only too common among the Greeks.

The Greeks also knew about other gross and uncanny specters: Mormo, with
whom imprudent nurses were wont to frighten small children; Gello;
Karko; Sybaris; Empousa, who according to Aristophanes was able to
change herself into a beast, a dog, a snake, or a fair woman; Onoskelis,
who had an ass's leg. These monsters attacked men, sucked their blood,
and ate their entrails. Educated people did not trouble about them, but
they found a refuge in nursery tales and were cherished by the people.
It is characteristic that they became still more popular in the Roman
age, during which superstition continually increased. A generic name for
such beings was lamia, and whereas the great gods are forgotten, the
lamia still lives on among the Greek people. The lamia is mentioned in
the Middle Ages, and nowadays it is customary to frighten children with
the name. If a child dies suddenly, it is said that the lamia strangled
it. An ugly or insatiable woman is called a lamia. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[12](#fn_113) Such ghosts seem to be immortal. The
gods were not so.

We return to the foreign gods who migrated into Greece. The Great Mother
of Asia Minor came to Athens before the Persian Wars, and a temple, the
Metroon, was built for her <span id="fr_114"></span>[13](#fn_114)

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ([Fig.
35](gpr24.htm#img_fig35)). Pindar celebrates her and mentions her
orgiastic cult with its cymbals, castanets, and torches. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[14](#fn_115) He also celebrates Ammon, the god from
the Great Oasis who had ram's horns, knowledge of whom was probably
transmitted by the Cyrenaeans, for from Cyrene there was a road to the
Great Oasis. <span id="fr_116"></span>[15](#fn_116) His oracle was
frequented by the Greeks when their belief in their own oracles began to
wane, and the Athenians brought him a sacrifice on behalf of the state
in the fourth century B.C. These cults seem, however, not to have been
very important for popular belief. The Great Mother was thoroughly
assimilated to the Greek Mother, Demeter, and her cult lost its
orgiastic character. In this case there was a return to native customs.
Ammon seems hardly to have been popular in the strict sense of the word.

Other foreign gods were popular. The Cabiri <span
id="fr_117"></span>[16](#fn_117) are mentioned in the fifth century B.C.
Aristophanes, in his comedy *The Peace*, makes Trygaios turn to the
spectators and ask the help of those who had been initiated into the
mysteries of the Cabiri on the island of Samothrace, for he sees a great
storm approaching. There must have been such men in the audience and the
mysteries of the Cabiri must have been well known. The Cabiri were
venerated by the Greeks as protectors of seafarers. Although they were a
seafaring people, the Greeks were apparently not content with their own
sea-gods.

The Thracian goddess Bendis was introduced by Thracians living at
Peiraeus ([Fig. 36](gpr24.htm#img_fig36)). She was so respected that the
state approved a great festival for her, which is described

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

by Plato, <span id="fr_118"></span>[17](#fn_118) and paid large sums for
sacrifices to her. There is, however, nothing to indicate that she had
any real religious importance. Another Thracian goddess, Kotyto, was
perhaps a little more popular at Corinth and in Sicily. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[18](#fn_119) One of the rites in her cult was
baptism, and her cult seems to have had an orgiastic character. The
Phrygian god Sabazios, who was another form of Dionysus, is better known
because of the graphic description of his cult in Demosthenes' speech
against Aeschines. He is mentioned by Aristophanes also. Demosthenes
says that Aeschines read the holy books when his mother performed the
initiations, wore a fawnskin at night, mixed the wine, purified those
who were to be initiated, wiped them with clay and bran, and made them
rise and cry out, "I escaped the evil, I found the better." By day he
led the crowds through the streets, crowned with fennel and poplar
twigs, carried snakes in his hands, danced, and cried out: *euoi,
saboi*. Scenes like this were to be seen in the streets of Athens at
that time. Apparently, not a few people felt the appeal of such
orgiastic cults.

Very characteristic of the age is the sudden rise of the cult of
Asclepius at the end of the fifth century B.C. ([Fig.
38](gpr25.htm#img_fig38)). He was a healing hero, mentioned by Homer
only as the father of the surgeons Machaon and Podaleirios. Apollo was
the great god of healing for the Greeks, but in many places various
heroes served as gods of healing, like the saints in Mohammedan
countries today. Asclepius supplanted them all. His most famous
sanctuary was at Epidaurus, but he had many derivative cults ([Fig.
37](gpr25.htm#img_fig37)). There was one on the island of Aegina, one at
Sicyon, one at Delphi, one at Pergamum, and no less than three in
Attica--one at Peiraeus, one near

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eleusis, and one
on the southern slope of the Acropolis. He came to Athens in 420 B.C.,
being introduced by Telemachos of Acharnae and received by the poet
Sophocles, who because of this was made a hero under the name of Dexion,
the Receiver. All these derivative cults, founded within a brief space
of time, did not interfere with the growth of his chief cult at
Epidaurus. In the secluded valley in which the sanctuary was situated,
buildings of an astonishingly large number and size were erected at the
beginning of the fourth century B.C.--a temple adorned with sculptures
by one of the best artists of the age, Timotheus, a very beautiful
theatre, and the famous tholos. The costs, which were quite
considerable, must have been defrayed by the income from the people who
flocked to Epidaurus in order to be healed of their diseases.

The masses were perhaps materialistic in this age. The Sophists had
begun to criticize belief in the gods and to prove its irrationality by
arguments. Aristophanes and other comic poets mocked the gods in an
incredible manner. The general public laughed at their jests and were
somewhat impressed by the criticism of the Sophists, but the old belief
lurked in the background. The Athenian people believed that the gods had
given them victory and had created their empire. They knew the
advantages of this, and they experienced them in the great mass
sacrifices. Generally they treated the unbelievers and mockers
leniently, but on certain occasions a real religious hysteria broke out.
The most outstanding examples are the trials for the profanation of the
Eleusinian Mysteries and for the smashing of the herms shortly before
the Athenian fleet sailed for Sicily. Certainly these trials had a
political background, and so had the other trials for denial of the
gods. We shall come back to them later. The good Athenian citizens
believed that they believed in the gods, but their belief was fading
away.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

But man needs divine help and comfort. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[19](#fn_120) The great gods had become too exalted
to give help in the concerns of daily life. Even if men were
materialistic they still needed aid and solace at least in sickness. In
our own day we have seen people stream to certain places and churches to
which they are attracted by miraculous healings. In modern Greece they
go to the famous Panagia Euangelistria on the island of Tenos. When
human skill is of no avail, men put their trust in the divine, in
miracles. At this time, when the old bonds imposed by tradition and the
state were beginning to be loosened and broken, men were not content
with the gods of the state and the family, with whom they were linked
from birth. They sought new gods for themselves. If the gods of the
ancestors could not help them, they turned to other gods. These
circumstances explain the sudden popularity of Asclepius, the great
healer and comforter in sickness and distress. They also explain why
foreign gods began to migrate into Greece.

We have seen that certain of these foreign gods represented mystic and
orgiastic cults. The Greek civic cult was sober and well regulated.
There was not much in it that was orgiastic and mystic, with the
exception of the Eleusinian Mysteries. But religion has its emotional
side, and if this is repressed it finally breaks out. This is the reason
why the cults mentioned took hold on some people, though in general they
were despised. On the whole, women are more emotional than men, a fact
which is very apparent in Greek religion. The Dionysiac orgies were
suppressed in the historical age and were celebrated chiefly in art and
literature, but there are traces enough to show that the Dionysiac
frenzy had once spread like fire in dry grass and had especially
affected the women.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Greek society was an extremely male society, especially in Athens and
the Ionian cities. Women were confined to their houses and seldom went
outdoors. But religion did not exclude them. There were priestesses in
many cults, and women regularly took part in the festivals and
sacrifices. Some festivals were reserved for them. Virgins carried the
sacred implements and provisions at the sacrifices. These *kanephoroi*,
as they were called, appeared in all processions. Women even had to be
allowed to take part in certain nocturnal festivals. The violating of a
virgin on such an occasion is a common motif in the New Comedy.
Aristophanes informs us that the women were proud of the sacred
ceremonies in which they had taken part. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[20](#fn_121)

Nevertheless, women had only a subordinate position. Men had fashioned
the religion according to their own ideas and had left too little room
for emotionalism. The women had a longing for an emotional religion, and
Aristophanes tells us that they found means of satisfying it. He says
that when the women gathered in the sanctuaries of Bacchos, Pan,
Genetyllis, or Kolias (Genetyllis and Kolias were special goddesses of
women) it was hardly possible to get through because of the cymbals, and
he gives us to understand that the women were devoted to the cults of
Sabazios and Adonis. <span id="fr_122"></span>[21](#fn_122) Sabazios has
already been mentioned. Adonis, according to the myth, was the beloved
of Aphrodite and was killed in his youth while hunting. His cult came
from the Orient and was highly emotional. One of the customs associated
with the cult was the growing of plants in pots, where they sprouted
quickly and soon withered ([Fig. 39](gpr25.htm#img_fig39)) They were
symbolic of the vegetation cycle, which Adonis represented. The women
bewailed him, tore their clothes,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

and beat their breasts. According to Plutarch, they did this when the
Athenian fleet was about to sail for Sicily. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[22](#fn_123)

It may be added that Hecate, the goddess of witchcraft, was one of the
deities to whom the women were especially devoted. Aristophanes makes a
woman pray to Hecate before the door when she leaves her house, <span
id="fr_124"></span>[23](#fn_124) and he records a game performed by
women in her honor. <span id="fr_125"></span>[24](#fn_125) The reason
for her popularity with women is that in ancient Greece sorcery and
witchcraft were the concern of women. It is a notable fact that we hear
of witches but not of sorcerers.

Thus we see that the religion of the women had its special features in
the classical age. It was much more emotional than the ordinary
religion. Women had scarcely any influence on the religious development
of this age, but one may guess that they contributed to the
dissemination, which was then beginning, of mystic and orgiastic forms
of religion. <span id="fr_126"></span>[25](#fn_126) In late antiquity
such forms became increasingly popular. In the long run, therefore, the
exclusion of women was disastrous to the old religion.

I wish now to discuss briefly a subject which students of Greek religion
generally pass over lightly because it seems to have little to do with
religion, although religion is its foundation. I mean the great
festivals and meetings which the Greeks called *panegyreis* (gatherings
of all). <span id="fr_127"></span>[26](#fn_127) They took place in some
sacred precinct, they were dedicated to some god, and they were
accompanied by sacrifices. In some of these gatherings games were the
most important element. There were great festivals, huge sacrifices, and
games in many cities

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

above all in the great and prosperous cities such as Athens--but
properly speaking these were not panegyreis. It was characteristic of a
panegyris that people flocked to it from more than one state. In fact
people came from all neighboring towns and even from all Greece. The
sanctuaries in which the panegyreis took place were thus in a certain
measure common to all parts of the Greek race, although the sanctuaries
were administered by the city in whose territory they were situated.
This gave rise to conflicts. The control of the Olympic games was
contested more than once. Pisa, to which Olympia belonged, was in early
times conquered by the Eleans. Sometimes a league of neighboring states
was formed in order to protect one of these sanctuaries. Such a league
was called an amphictyony. Examples are the league of Calauria and, most
famous of all, the league which took care of Delphi. The latter was
originally formed in order to protect a small sanctuary of Demeter at
Anthela near Thermopylae, but its protection was extended to the great
sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi. Delphi was situated in the territory of
Crisa. The Crisaeans were charged with harassing and extorting money
from the pilgrims who went to Delphi. At any rate, there were conflicts,
and in the early part of the sixth century B.C. a war broke out in which
Crisa was destroyed. Delphi became free and was placed under the
protection of the Amphictyons. Their part in the politics of a later age
is well known and is of slight importance in this connection. I have
recalled these facts in order to show how important these great assembly
places were for what one might call the international life of the
Greeks. The basis of their importance was religion.

The great games--the Olympia, the Pythia, the Isthmia, and the
Nemea--were preëminently panegyreis in this sense. Most famous are the
Olympic games. The interest in the games

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

themselves was so great that one hardly thinks of the religious element.
But we should bear in mind the great temples erected at Olympia, the
great sacrifices offered, and the many cults attended to by numerous
priests. All this is described at length by Pausanias. The celebration
at Olympia was the largest panegyris of the Greeks. People from all
towns and cities came together, and even the colonies took a large part
in the assembly. The great games were of the highest importance for
impressing upon the Greek mind a consciousness of the unity of the Greek
nation. All men were admitted provided that they spoke Greek, although
women were excluded. Anyone who had something on his mind that he wanted
to lay before the nation found the best opportunity for doing so at the
games. It was here that Gorgias, during the storms of the Peloponnesian
War, exhorted the Greeks to concord. Here many other Sophists exhibited
their art. Here also the rhapsodist Cleomenes is said to have recited to
the public the *Katharmoi* of Empedocles. The importance of the Olympic
games and similar assemblies for the development of national feeling and
the cultivation of interrelationships and even for the cultural life of
the Greeks can hardly be overestimated.

It must be added that a truce was proclaimed for a few months in order
to make it possible for everyone to visit the great games. This was
quite necessary, because the Greek cities were constantly warring
against each other. A truce was likewise proclaimed on the occasion of
the Eleusinian Mysteries. Among the Dorians the month of Karneios, in
which the Karneia was celebrated, was a holy month, during which an
armistice was to prevail. In the Hellenistic age several cities tried to
institute panegyreis and to get them acknowledged by the other Greek
states. Embassies were sent to such festivals from other states. Many
inscriptions referring to such diplomatic exchanges have come down to
us.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were in some
measure a substitute for large-scale politics, from which the Greek
cities were excluded in that age.

At all panegyreis there were fairs, and in some cases the fair seems to
have been the chief attraction. This was apparently so at the great
panegyris on the island of Delos, at which all Ionians assembled. At the
panegyris of the Aetolians at Thermos there was a great fair. Moreover,
it seems that a market was held at all great festivals. Aristophanes
speaks of them. Sometimes the word "panegyris" signifies simply "fair."
In later times special regulations were made for these fairs. A motley
sort of life took place at such assemblies. The great throng of people
who collected together needed shelter and food, for a panegyris lasted
several days. Tents and barracks were erected. *Skenein* (to set up a
tent or barrack) is the common word for taking part in such an assembly.
Hawkers and cooks set up their booths. Jugglers and acrobats gave
exhibitions. At certain sanctuaries situated in remote and desert places
buildings were erected to serve as lodginghouses and banquet halls.

Surely all this seems to have very little to do with religion. But the
panegyreis had a religious foundation in the cult of the gods, and
although they seem to be secular, they represent a side of Greek
religion which should not be ignored. I may recall what I said earlier
about the intimate relations between the cult of the gods and secular
life in ancient Greece, relations which are of such a character that
they sometimes astonish us. We are strongly under the influence of
Protestant and Puritan ideas, which make a sharp division between
matters pertaining to God and the affairs of our mundane life. They do
not allow sacred and secular occupations to be intermingled. It is
otherwise in southern Europe, and especially in Greece. Whoever has seen
a modern Greek panegyreis is strongly reminded of the ancient ones. The
cult is new, being

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

that of the Panagia or some saint, but the life is the same. Tents,
bowers, and booths are erected, and the people feast and make merry. Of
course religion has been secularized, but this form of religion, which
seems to us hardly to be religion at all, has shown an extreme tenacity.
It satisfies the need which men feel to get together, to enjoy
themselves, to feast, and to make merry, and likewise the need of
interrupting and lighting up the monotonous course of daily life. These
are social needs which should not be overlooked, and Greek religion
should not be blamed because it fulfilled them. In this respect it was
more lasting than in any other.

In concluding this chapter I may remark that I have treated the changes
which Greek popular religion underwent from a social point of view. The
increase of the population in certain towns and the life of the towns
remodeled the old rustic cults and made them insufficient for the new
wants which arose through the change in social conditions. The
development of the power and glory of the city exalted the great gods
too far above the common people. Such people needed a religion which was
nearer to them, gods who could help them in the affairs of daily life,
and a cult in which the emotional element had its due share. The way was
opened for new gods. On the other hand Greek religion did have a social
aspect. The cult of the gods provided opportunities for assembling and
feasting and for mutual intercourse between people from neighboring
towns and even from all Greek countries. The panegyreis were an
extremely important part of Greek social life, and the service which
Greek religion rendered through them should not be undervalued.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[85:1](gpr09.htm#fr_102) See my Dill lecture,
*The Age of the Early Greek Tyrants* (Belfast, 1936).

<span id="fn_103"></span>[85:2](gpr09.htm#fr_103) Herodotus, II, 53.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[86:3](gpr09.htm#fr_104) Weinberg in
*Hesperia*, VIII (1939), 191 ff., seems on archaeological grounds to
have proved that this temple was built about 540 B.C. and that it was
preceded by an earlier temple.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[87:4](gpr09.htm#fr_105) *Nubes*, vs. 984.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[88:5](gpr09.htm#fr_106) Published in *Antike
Denkmäler*, II (1908), Pls. 23, 24.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[89:6](gpr09.htm#fr_107) Frag. 760, in Nauck,
*Tragicorum Graecorum fragmenta*.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[89:7](gpr09.htm#fr_108) L. Malten,
"Hephaistos," *Jahrbuch des Deutschen archäol. Instituts*, XXVII (1912),
232 ff.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[90:8](gpr09.htm#fr_109) Noted by A. Körte in
Gnomon, XI (1935), 639.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[90:9](gpr09.htm#fr_110) *Theogony*, vss.
411-52.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[90:10](gpr09.htm#fr_111) E. Sittig, *De
Graecorum nominibus theophoris* (Dissertation, Halle, 1911), pp. 61 ff.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[91:11](gpr09.htm#fr_112) U. von
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, *Der Glaube der Hellenen* (Berlin, 1931-32), I,
169 ff.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[91:12](gpr09.htm#fr_113) Lawson, *Modern Greek
Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion*, pp. 173 ff.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[91:13](gpr09.htm#fr_114) See my forthcoming
*Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, 687 ff.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[92:14](gpr09.htm#fr_115) For Magna Mater see
Pindar, *Pythia*, III, vss. 77 ff., and frags. 79, 80, 95, in Bergk,
*Poetae lyrici Graeci*.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[92:15](gpr09.htm#fr_116) For Ammon see
*Pausanias*, IX, 16, 1.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[92:16](gpr09.htm#fr_117) See O. Kern,
"Kabeiros and Kabeiroi," in A. Pauly, *Real-encyclopädie der classischen
Altertumswissenschaft*, new ed. by G. Wissowa (Stuttgart, 1894-).

<span id="fn_118"></span>[93:17](gpr09.htm#fr_118) *Republic*, p. 327;
and *Inscriptiones Graecae*, Editio minor, Vols. II-III, Pt. 2, No.
1496, A, a, l. 86, and b, l. 117.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[93:18](gpr09.htm#fr_119) S. Srebrny, "Kult der
thrakischen Göttin Kotyto in Korinth and Sicilien," *Mélanges Franz
Cumont* (Brussels, 1936), pp. 423 ff.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[95:19](gpr09.htm#fr_120) See my paper,
"Reflexe von dem Durchbruch des Individualismus in der griechischen
Religion um die Wende des 5. and 4. Jhts. v. Chr.," *Mélanges Franz
Cumont*, pp. 365 ff.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[96:20](gpr09.htm#fr_121) *Lysistrata*, vss.
641 ff.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[96:21](gpr09.htm#fr_122) *Ibid*., vss. 388 ff.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[97:22](gpr09.htm#fr_123) *Nicias*, 13, and
*Alcibiades*, 18.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[97:23](gpr09.htm#fr_124) *Lysistrata*, vs. 64.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[97:24](gpr09.htm#fr_125) *Ibid*., vs. 700.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[97:25](gpr09.htm#fr_126) Cf. what is related
of the mother of Aeschines by Demosthenes, XVIII, 259 ff., and of the
priestess Ninos by Demosthenes, XVIII, 281 and scholion.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[97:26](gpr09.htm#fr_127) Little attention has
been paid to this subject. See my forthcoming *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*,
I, 778 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Legalism and Superstition; Hell](gpr10)
