[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr06)  [Next](gpr08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### THE RELIGION OF ELEUSIS

A chapter on the religion of Eleusis is a natural sequel to the
description of the rural customs and festivals, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) for the Eleusinian Mysteries are the
highest and finest bloom of Greek popular religion. Originally the
Eleusinian Mysteries were a festival celebrated at the autumn sowing.
This is proved by the testimony of Plutarch <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39.md) and by their very near kinship to the
Thesmophoria. Although it is acknowledged that the basis of the
Eleusinian Mysteries is an old agrarian cult, this fact has been pushed
into the background by the attempts to discover the secret rites of the
Mysteries. They have been discussed repeatedly by scholars and laymen,
and numerous hypotheses have been put forward, some of them intelligent,
others fantastic, none of them certain or even probable. Such a question
seems to cast an everlasting spell on mankind, for mankind wants to know
the unknowable. But the silence imposed upon the mystae has been well
kept.

We possess a knowledge of certain preliminary rites which were not so
important that it was forbidden to speak of them. In regard to the
central rites belonging to the grade of the *epopteia*, our knowledge
extends only to the general outlines. We know that there were things
said, things done, and things shown, but we do not know what these
things were, and that

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

is the essential point. The rites consisted, not in acts performed by
the mystae, as modern scholars would have us believe, but in the seeing
by the mystae of something which was shown to them. This is repeated
again and again from the *Homeric Hymn to Demeter* onward, and it is
proved by the very name of the highest grade, epopteia, but we do not
know what it was that was shown. The name of the high priest,
*hierophantes*, proves that his chief duty was to show some sacred
things. The names of the family from which he was always taken, the
Eumolpidae, and of its mythical ancestor, Eumolpos, prove that he was
famous for his beautiful voice. He recited or sang something, but what
it was we do not know. Words probably accompanied the showing, but the
showing, not the words, was the chief and culminating act of the
Mysteries. It should be kept well in mind that the highest mystery was
something shown and seen. It may be added that the Mysteries were
celebrated by night in the light of many torches, which added to their
impressiveness.

The silence imposed upon the mystae has, as I said, been well kept. Only
Christian authors, who paid no heed to the duty of silence, have given
information concerning the central rites of the Mysteries. But their
testimony is subject to the gravest doubts. In the first place, what did
they know? Had they any firsthand knowledge? Had they themselves been
initiated? Clement lived in Alexandria and the others in Asia or Africa.
It is much more probable that what they related was only hearsay.
Further, are they reliable? We should realize that their writings were
polemics against the perversity of the heathens and that in polemics of
this kind controversialists are not conscientious about the means they
use if only they hit the mark. Ecclesiastical authors certainly did not
trouble themselves much about truth and about such questions of fact as
whether a given rite belonged to the Eleusinian or to some

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

other Mysteries, if only they could succeed in impressing upon their
hearers or readers a sense of the contemptibility of the Mysteries. The
hearers and readers knew nothing for certain and were not able to
control the suggestions made to them.

Relying upon such unsafe evidence, modern scholars have tried to find
out the kernel of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Two lines of thought are
prominent in these attempts. One of these starts from the mysteries of
late antiquity, whose highest aim was to elevate man above the human
sphere into the divine and to assure his redemption by making him a god
and so conferring immortality upon him. It is very questionable whether
this idea existed at all in early times, when the gulf separating men
from gods was regarded as self-evident and impassable. The supposition
that it did exist is very popular in modern research, which has busied
itself a great deal with the syncretistic religions of late antiquity;
but this supposition should not be admitted without reliable evidence,
and of such evidence there is none at all. Sex appeal finds a place even
in the science of religion. Scholars have suggested that in the
Eleusinian Mysteries immortality was conferred upon the mystes by his
being made the son of the goddess through touching some sexual symbol.
He was born anew of the goddess in a symbolic way. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40.md) It is true that Christian authors do
ascribe sexual symbols to the Eleusinian Mysteries, and it is possible
that there were such symbols at Eleusis, as there were, for instance, in
the closely related festival of the Thesmophoria. But if such symbols
were used at Eleusis, they did not have the significance suggested above
but the old one of fertility charms, as in the Thesmophoria and other
ceremonies.

Perhaps a remark is needed on the much-discussed formula

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

which Clement of Alexandria gives as that of the Eleusinian Mysteries:
"I have fasted, I have drunk of the kykeon, I have taken from the chest,
and having worked, I have laid down into the basket and from the basket
into the chest." <span id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41.md) The first two of
these rites, the fasting and the drinking of the *kykeon*, are known to
have been practiced at Eleusis; but this is not true of the other rites,
and it is uncertain whether they belong to Eleusis at all. They may be
taken from the Mysteries of Demeter at Alexandria. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[5](#fn_42.md) In any case, this formula refers to the
preliminary rites performed by the neophyte, not to the highest mystery,
the epopteia. It was pronounced by the neophyte in order to show that he
had performed the preliminary rites necessary for being admitted to the
final initiation. On this evasive formula are founded the hypotheses
mentioned, which try to elucidate the kernel of the Mysteries.

Even if we are precluded from knowing the highest and most central rites
of the Eleusinian Mysteries, we are not precluded from knowing the
Eleusinian religion--the ideas which were at the bottom of the belief of
the initiated in the bliss conferred upon them in the Mysteries. 'We are
acquainted with the gods of the Mysteries, and we know something of the
impression made by the celebration and of the hopes which it evoked. We
have a document concerning the Eleusinian cult which is older and more
comprehensive than anything concerning any other Greek cult, namely, the
*Homeric Hymn to Demeter* composed in Attica before Eleusis was
incorporated into the Athenian state, not later than the end of the
seventh century B.C. We know that the basis of the Eleusinian Mysteries
was an old agrarian cult celebrated in the middle of the month
Boedromion (about October) and

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

closely akin to the Thesmophoria, a festival of the autumn sowing
celebrated by the women not quite a month later. I need not dwell upon
this connection, which is established by internal evidence as well as by
direct information.

According to all probability, the Eleusinian cult goes back to the
Mycenaean age. In the excavations of recent years a Mycenaean megaron
was discovered beneath the mystery hall. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[6](#fn_43.md) This hall is very unlike a Greek temple,
which was the house of a god. It was rebuilt several times, but always
according to the old plan. It was a square hall, with pillars supporting
the roof and with benches carved in the rock on three sides, destined
for the great assembly of the mystae. This hall was called *anaktoron*
(the royal house). It has been suggested that the name is reminiscent of
a time when the mystery assembly took place in the king's house. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[7](#fn_44.md) The family of the Eumolpidae were the
successors of the king, and the cult always remained the property of
this family, from which the high priest was taken. Originally the
Eleusinian Mysteries were a family cult to which the head of the family
admitted whom he pleased. This explains why it was a secret cult and why
not only citizens but also strangers and slaves had access to the
celebration.

After these preliminaries, we turn to the gods of Eleusis. There were
two pairs, one comprising the two goddesses Demeter and Kore, or, more
properly, the Mother and the Maid; the other, "the God" and "the
Goddess." Both pairs are represented on a relief which Lysimachides
dedicated at Eleusis in the fourth century B.C. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[8](#fn_45) ([Fig. 16](gpr17.htm#img_fig16).md) . The
inscription

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

above the heads of the second pair reads: "To the God, to the Goddess."
It is said that "the God" and "the Goddess" were anonymous, and
reference is made to the rule forbidding mention of the name of a man
who had become a hierophant; but this interdiction is an accretion
belonging to a late age, which loved to enhance the mystic character of
the cult. In the classical age the hierophants were called by their
proper names. Very often, when no misunderstanding was possible, the
Greeks said only "the God" or "the Goddess" instead of using proper
names. Thus, "the God" at Delphi is Apollo, and "the Goddess" at Athens
is Athena. "The God" and "the Goddess" at Eleusis were Plouton and
Persephone. They are represented, fortunately with their names
inscribed, in a similar scene in a vase painting <span
id="fr_46"></span>[9](#fn_46) ([Fig. 25](gpr21.htm#img_fig25).md), in which
Plouton holds his constant attribute, the cornucopia. They are also
represented on a badly mutilated tablet from Eleusis. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[10](#fn_47.md)

To each of these two pairs a hero was added, and so we get two triads:
Demeter, Kore, and Triptolemos; and "the God," "the Goddess," and
Eubouleus. They are seen on an Attic relief found at Mondragone near
Sinuessa in Italy, <span id="fr_48"></span>[11](#fn_48.md) with the
addition of a seventh figure clad in a Dionysiac costume--boots and
fawnskin. He is Iacchos. Iacchos is a personification of the Iacchic cry
heard in the great procession which went from Athens to Eleusis in order
to celebrate the Mysteries. The gay revels, the merry cries, and the
light of the torches in this procession were reminiscent of the
festivals of Dionysus, and the name of Iacchos suggested the second name
of this god, Bacchos. So Iacchos was represented in the likeness of
Dionysus. But he is a later creation, who owes his existence to the
procession mentioned; that is to say, he cannot

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

be older than the incorporation of Eleusis into the Athenian state, and
he was created at the earliest in the sixth century B.C. There is no
question of Dionysiac elements in the Eleusinian Mysteries at an early
age, but we shall see that from the late fifth and early fourth
centuries B.C., there was a certain mixing up of the Mysteries of
Eleusis and the cult of Dionysus.

The largest of all Eleusinian monuments, the relief dedicated by
Lakrateides, priest of "the God," "the Goddess," and Eubouleus, in the
year 97-96 B.C., <span id="fr_49"></span>[12](#fn_49.md) is peculiar.
Happily the names of the chief figures are inscribed, so that it can be
ascertained that both "the God" and Plouton are represented. The
splitting up of this deity into two is due to the late date of the
monument, for in this age the avoidance of proper names was current in
the Mysteries and thus "the God" and Plouton might appear as two
personages. The daughter of Demeter also was divided into two goddesses,
Kore and Persephone. The two are one and the same person, although they
are represented as two different goddesses. In order to understand how
this was possible, we must turn to the myth of the rape of Demeter's
daughter by Plouton. It is the central part of the *Homeric Hymn*, but
it was common to all Greeks. The Maiden was playing with her comrades in
a meadow strewn with flowers when the earth opened and up came the god
of the nether world in his car. Seizing the Maiden, he abducted her to
his subterranean realm.

Here I take the occasion to mention a legend told in later sources. A
herdsman, Eubouleus, was tending his herd of swine near by when the
earth opened. His swine were swallowed up by the chasm and then the
earth closed again. This

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

is an explanatory legend, invented to account for a sacred custom. At a
certain time of the year, perhaps at the festival of the threshing, pigs
were thrown into subterranean hollows. The putrefied remains were
brought up again at the festival of the autumn sowing--the
Thesmophoria--laid on altars, and mixed with the seed corn--a very
simple and old-fashioned fertility charm. The swine was the holy animal
of Demeter. Pigs were sacrificed by the mystae before their initiation,
and figures of swine are found in Demeter's sanctuaries at Eleusis, at
Cnidus, and elsewhere. The connection of Eubouleus with the Eleusinian
gods shows that this fertility charm belonged to Eleusis also, and it
proves that the Eleusinian festival referred to the autumn sowing. The
rite is one of the links between the Thesmophoria and the Eleusinian
Mysteries, proving that both were agrarian rites whose purpose was to
promote the fertility of the corn which was laid down in the earth.

We revert to the myth told in the *Homeric Hymn*. The Mother wandered
about, clad in black garments and carrying torches, in search of her
daughter. Coming to Eleusis, she sat down at the well of the maidens,
or, as some say, at "the laughless stone." At the well Demeter met King
Keleos' daughters, who came to fetch water, and followed them to their
father's house. Here she sat down on a seat spread with the skin of a
ram. She sat in grief and silence until Iambe by her obscene jests
contrived to make Demeter smile. She rejected a cup of wine offered to
her and ordered a drink of water mixed with barley meal and pennyroyal.
This drink is the kykeon. The story refers to the preliminary
initiation, which is represented on certain monuments of the Roman age.
Among these is a marble vase described by Countess Lovatelli <span
id="fr_50"></span>[13](#fn_50) ([Fig. 15](gpr17.htm#img_fig15).md). To the
right, a youth who is to be initiated

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

sacrifices a pig. Then we see him seated with veiled head on a seat
decked with a ramskin, while a priestess holds a winnowing basket over
his head. This agrarian implement is mentioned in several other
Mysteries, especially those of Dionysus, though not at Eleusis. It may
be an addition, but it goes well with the character of the Eleusinian
cult. Finally, we see the mystes playing with the snake of Demeter,
behind whom is Kore. I emphasize again that these were preliminary
rites, for this is the reason why they could be mentioned and
represented. They are the rites mentioned in the formula of Clement--the
fasting and the drinking of the kykeon.

In the house of Keleos, Demeter nursed Demophon, the child of the royal
pair. She put him into the fire in order to make him immortal, but her
intention was frustrated by the frightened mother, who discovered her in
the act. This story is based on an old folk-tale motif which has nothing
to do with the Eleusinian cult. It is introduced in order to let Demeter
reveal herself in her divine shape. King Keleos ordered a temple to be
built for her. Demeter sat in her temple in grief. Not a stalk sprouted
in the fields; the labor of the plow oxen was vain; men nearly died of
hunger. Zeus was compelled to interfere. He ordered Plouton to send Kore
back to the upper world; but Plouton had offered a pomegranate seed to
her, and, as she had eaten it, she was bound to the nether world. And so
Kore was compelled to dwell one third of the year in the nether world.
However, she dwells two thirds of the year in the upper world, reunited
with her mother.

This last is the essential point. The understanding of the Eleusinian
religion depends on the correct understanding of this myth. The fact
that the Maiden dwells two thirds of the year in the upper world and one
third in the nether world is manifestly connected with vegetation.
Demeter is a goddess of vegetation, but not of vegetation in general.
Philologists

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

disagree as to whether the syllable *de*- signifies "earth" or "corn."
The cult is decisive. Demeter presides at the threshing and at the
autumn sowing. She is the Corn Mother. According to Homer and Hesiod,
she united herself with Iasion on the thrice-plowed fallow land and bore
to him Ploutos, the god of wealth. The Homeric Hymn promises that the
goddesses will send him to the house of the man whom they love. Under
the conditions prevalent in early times, wealth is the store of corn on
which men live during the season when the gifts of nature are scarce.
Plouton is only a derivative form of the word *ploutos* and means "he
who has wealth." Everywhere in the Mediterranean countries the corn is
stored in subterranean silos. An inscription orders such silos to be
built at Eleusis for storing the tithes of corn which were brought to
the goddesses.

For people who live in a northerly country, where the soil is frozen and
covered by snow and ice during the winter and where the season during
which everything sprouts and is green comprises about two thirds of the
year, it is only natural to think that the Corn Maiden is absent during
the four winter months and dwells in the upper world during the eight
months of vegetation. And, in fact, this is what most people do think.
But it is an ill-considered opinion, for it does not take into account
the climatic conditions of Greece. In that country the corn is sown in
October. The crops sprout immediately, and they grow and thrive during
our winter except for the two or three coldest weeks in January, when
they come to a standstill for a short time. Snow is extremely rare and
soon melts away. The crops ripen and are reaped in May and threshed in
June. This description refers to Attica. The climate is of course
different in the mountains, but Eleusis is situated in Attica. The
cornfields are green and the crops grow and thrive during our winter,
and yet we are asked to believe that the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Corn Maiden is
absent during this period. There is a period of about four months from
the threshing in June to the autumn sowing in October during which the
fields are barren and desolate; they are burned by the sun, and not a
green stalk is seen on them. Yet we are asked to believe that during
these four months the Corn Maiden is present. Obviously she is
absent. <span id="fr_51"></span>[14](#fn_51.md)

Thus, we are enabled to reach a true understanding of the myth of the
absence of the Corn Maiden which agrees with the climatic conditions of
Greece. In June the crops are threshed, and the corn, which is the
wealth of man, is stored in subterranean silos. In Sicily a festival was
celebrated at the time of the threshing which was called the Descent of
Kore (*Katagoge Kores*). Down in the subterranean silos the Corn Maiden
is in the realm of Plouton, the god of wealth. Four months later, when
the time of the autumn sowing is approaching, the silos are opened and
the seed corn is brought up. This is the *anodos*, the ascent of the
Corn Maiden, and on this occasion the Eleusinian Mysteries took place.
The seed corn, the corn of the old crop which will soon sprout and
produce the new crop, is laid down in the fields. The Corn Maiden is
reunited with the Corn Mother, for at this time the old crop and the new
meet each other.

Thus, we are able to understand why Plouton, the god of wealth, had
become a god of the nether world. His abode was beneath the surface of
the earth, in the silos in which the corn was stored. In early times the
corn was often stored in great jars set down into the ground, and such
jars were often used for burials also. The myth of the abduction of the
vegetation goddess seems to be pre-Greek; and so is the name of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Persephone, which
occurs in curiously varying forms: Phersephassa and Periphone. It was
inevitable that those gods who dwelt beneath the earth should be fused
with the lords of the underworld, the king and queen of gloomy Hades.
The other aspect of the Corn Maiden was the dreary Persephone, as Homer
calls her. Her two aspects were so much at variance that it is not in
the least astonishing to find her appearing at Eleusis as Kore, the
daughter of Demeter, on the one hand, and as Persephone, the wife of
Plouton on the other. Probably two old goddesses were fused into one,
the pre-Greek queen of the underworld and the Greek Corn Maiden. These
diverse aspects referring to life and death were a source of wealth to
the Mysteries. The sprouting of the new crop is a symbol of the eternity
of life.

There is, however, another ascent of the Corn Maiden, which follows soon
after the fetching of the seed corn from the subterranean silos. It is
depicted in some vase paintings, <span id="fr_52"></span>[15](#fn_52.md) of
which one on a mixing bowl in the museum at Dresden is the most
remarkable ([Fig. 17](gpr18.htm#img_fig17).md). There we see Pherephatta
emerging from the ground, which reaches her knees, while Hermes assists
her, and three satyrs--nature daemons--dance around her. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[16](#fn_53.md) The meaning of this ascent of the Corn
Maiden is explained by other vase paintings which seem enigmatical. A
great female head emerges from the ground and satyrs strike it with
large hammers <span id="fr_54"></span>[17](#fn_54.md) ([Fig.
18](gpr18.htm#img_fig18).md). The explanation is not doubtful. A large
wooden hammer was a common rustic implement; it was used for smashing
the clods and smoothing

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the surface of the fields, which was very rough after the seed corn was
plowed under. This process, which corresponds to the rolling of the
present day, was carried out just when the corn had begun to sprout and
when it was still possible to walk on the fields without doing harm to
the crops. It concurred with the second ascent of the Corn Maiden, the
germinating of the new crop.

The reuniting of the Mother and the Maid was the kernel of the myth.
Judging from the nature of the festival, it must likewise have been the
kernel of the Eleusinian Mysteries, which were a celebration of the
ascent of the Corn Maiden in the autumn sowing. The old agrarian myth
was elevated into the human sphere. The grief and sorrow of the bereaved
mother, the despair of her search, touch upon the deepest feelings of
man. Demeter is rightly called the *mater dolorosa* of Greek religion.
To this heartbreaking sorrow, the reunion of mother and daughter
provided a joyful contrast, rousing the mystae to exultation and moving
their minds with the deepest emotions. The Mysteries were not a gloomy
festival; they conferred joy and happiness upon man. Not the rape and
separation but the reunion was its theme. The reunion is represented on
the famous tablet of Ninnion from the end of the fifth century B.C.,
found in the sacred precinct at Eleusis <span
id="fr_55"></span>[18](#fn_55) ([Fig. 21](gpr20.htm#img_fig21).md). In the
lower zone Demeter is seated, and at her side is a vacant seat; Kore is
absent. Demeter is approached by Iacchos, the leader of the great
procession to Eleusis, and by two mystae. In the upper zone we again see
Demeter seated. A stately woman approaches, carrying torches and
followed by mystae, a woman with a kernos (a vessel used in the
mysteries) on her head, a youth, and a man. It is Kore,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

brought back to her mother. This is, of course, not a direct
representation of a scene in the Mysteries, which it was forbidden to
divulge not only in words but also in pictures. It is a mythical scene
with features borrowed from the mystery procession. We do not know if
the reuniting of mother and daughter was enacted in the Mysteries, but
it must have been in the minds of all. Perhaps it was enacted in some
manner, perhaps it was only indicated symbolically. A Christian writer
says that the highest mystery of the epopteia at Eleusis was a reaped
ear of corn shown in silence. <span id="fr_56"></span>[19](#fn_56.md) It
may be that this statement is more trustworthy than others, for it
agrees exactly with the simple old agrarian character of the Eleusinian
cult. In this connection, mention is often made of the picture on an
Apulian tomb vase, which shows five ears of corn in a sacellum, very
carefully drawn <span id="fr_57"></span>[20](#fn_57.md) ([Fig.
20](gpr19.htm#img_fig20).md). Of course it has nothing to do with the
Eleusinian Mysteries, but it is an expression of the same belief in the
sacredness of the ear of corn, the symbol of the eternity of life. The
purpose of these rites at the autumn sowing, that which the celebrants
hoped for, was the new crop. Here it was--the ear held up in the hands
of the hierophant. All saw that their hopes would be fulfilled; nay,
were fulfilled. Here was she who had long been absent and had been
sought for in vain, the Corn Maiden, reunited with the Corn Mother. For,
if this information is reliable, I should like to call the ear of corn
the Corn Maiden.

The old agrarian cult was capable of carrying other ideas of a moral
character. We have heard that Triptolemos was added to the pair of
goddesses. Originally, this was not so.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the *Homeric
Hymn* he is barely mentioned as one of several Eleusinian noblemen. We
are able to trace his rise to a higher dignity. It was due to his name,
which may signify the "thrice warring," but which was understood as the
"thrice plowing." He became the hero of the thrice-plowed cornfield and
is sometimes represented with a plow in his hand <span
id="fr_58"></span>[21](#fn_58) ([Fig. 23](gpr20.htm#img_fig23).md).
Pausanias mentions the threshing floor of Triptolemos in the sacred
Rharian field near Eleusis, the cradle of agriculture, where corn was
sown for the first time. Triptolemos begins to appear in paintings on
black-figured vases in the late sixth century B.C., represented as a
bearded hero <span id="fr_59"></span>[22](#fn_59.md) ([Fig.
19](gpr19.htm#img_fig19).md). In the vase paintings of the early
red-figured style he is extremely popular. He is seated on a winged car
drawn by serpents and is placed between the two goddesses, who offer him
the cup of farewell as they send him out on his mission to propagate
agriculture <span id="fr_60"></span>[23](#fn_60.md) ([Fig.
22](gpr20.htm#img_fig22).md). Even when other gods are added, Triptolemos
is the central figure.

We know the meaning of this scene from the praises be-stowed upon Athens
as the cradle of civilization. Isocrates speaks in his *Panegyricus* of
the two greatest gifts granted the Athenians by Demeter--the corn, which
is the reason why men do not live like wild beasts, and the Mysteries,
from which they derive higher hopes in regard to their life and all
time. The *dadouchos* Kallias said something similar in the peace
negotiations at Sparta in 372 B.C. This praise of Athens is behind the
decree of 418 B.C., in which the Athenians invited all Greeks to bring
tithes to the Eleusinian goddesses

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

according to old custom and an oracle from Delphi. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[4](#fn_61.md) At this time Eleusis must have been
recognized as the cradle of agriculture.

The vase paintings mentioned show how strongly the benefits of
agriculture were felt at the end of the sixth and the beginning of the
fifth century B.C. This feeling was of course not limited to the
cultivation of cereals, but referred especially to the moral and social
consequences of agriculture. I should like to refer to a parallel, the
exploits of the Athenian national hero Theseus, which were very popular
in vase paintings of the same age. It is said that the Athenians wished
to create a counterpart of Heracles for themselves, but a great
difference between Heracles and Theseus is to be noted. While the
exploits of Heracles are those of an old mythical hero, Theseus conquers
highwaymen and robbers who resist civilization and are dangerous to it.
Theseus is the guardian and hero of a peaceful and civilized life, of
which agriculture is the foundation.

The peasant loved peace. In war his fields were burned and his trees cut
down. Hesiod says that for the wild beasts the law is to eat each other,
but Zeus has given justice to man. Hesiod preaches labor, through which
man earns his livelihood, and justice, which assures him of the fruits
of his labor. Hesiod has abandoned the ideal of the warring Homeric
knights and embraced a new, quite contrasted ideal of peace and justice
created by agriculture. Its hero is the Eleusinian Triptolemos. This is
a complete revolution in moral ideals, which ought to be appreciated to
its full extent. I venture to speak of an Eleusinian piety founded on
this idea that agriculture created a civilized and peaceful life worthy
of human

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

beings. Aristophanes speaks of it in some remarkable verses of his
comedy *The Frogs*. <span id="fr_62"></span>[25](#fn_62.md) The mystae
sing: "The sun and the gay light are only for us who are initiated and
live a pious life in regard to foreigners and private persons." In order
to attain to the better lot in the other world for which the mystae
hoped, it was necessary to have been initiated; but here there is added
to this requirement the further requirement of a pious life, specified
in a somewhat pedantic manner by the words "in regard to foreigners and
private persons." Among the private persons were also the slaves. Slaves
as well as foreigners were admitted to the Eleusinian Mysteries,
provided that they spoke Greek. In antiquity foreigners and slaves were
excluded from the protection of civil law. This traditional limit was
transcended in the Mysteries. They could not grant the protection of the
law, but they demanded the piety which implies the law and is more than
the law. In fact, an effort was made to break the traditional bonds of
the local city-state and to attain to the idea of humanity as a great
brotherhood. This morality issued from the agricultural conditions
prevalent in Attica in the early age and was developed in the old
agricultural cult of Eleusis.

The Eleusinian Mysteries had still more to offer to the initiated. The
*Homeric Hymn* promises: "Happy is he who has seen this. Who has not
taken part in the initiation will not have the same lot after death in
the gloomy darkness." <span id="fr_63"></span>[26](#fn_63.md) Sophocles
repeats the same idea in still more impressive words. He says that those
who have seen the Mysteries are thrice happy when they go to the
underworld, and adds that for them only is life, for others all is
evil. <span id="fr_64"></span>[27](#fn_64.md) Aristophanes in *The Frogs*
introduces a chorus of mystae in the scene which is laid in the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

underworld. I have already quoted his words. The mystae dance and revel
in a meadow strewn with flowers. This conviction of a happier lot in the
underworld, which filled the minds of the initiated, sprang from ancient
roots, the world-wide idea that the other life is a repetition of this
life. The idea is found, for example, in the eleventh book of the
*Odyssey*, which describes Odysseus' visit to the underworld. The simple
fact is that the initiated believed that they would continue to
celebrate the Mysteries in the underworld, as Aristophanes and
Euripides <span id="fr_65"></span>[28](#fn_65.md) show them doing. Since
the Mysteries were the most edifying event they knew of, such a
conception of a future state formed the brightest possible contrast to
the dark and gloomy Hades in which the Greeks believed.

This is really a very simple belief, and perhaps it satisfied the great
mass. But it may be permitted to ask whether deeper ideas of life and
death were not evoked by the Eleusinian Mysteries. Perhaps they were. In
a remarkable fragment Pindar says: "Happy is he who, having seen this,
goes beneath the earth; he knows the end of life and he knows its
god-sent beginning." <span id="fr_66"></span>[29](#fn_66.md) We do not know
if Pindar was initiated, but supposing that his words really refer to
Eleusinian beliefs, we will try to interpret them. What is the beginning
of life? If we remember that the Mysteries were a festival of the autumn
sowing, the ascent of the Corn Maiden, we are re-minded of the words in
the Gospel of St. John: "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and
die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much
fruit." <span id="fr_67"></span>[30](#fn_67.md) It is related that the
Athenians sowed corn on graves and that they called the dead
*demetreioi*. <span id="fr_68"></span>[31](#fn_68.md) In a well-known hymn,
the Christian poet

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prudentius uses
the same simile for the resurrection of the individual; but we have no
right to postulate this idea for an age when conscious individualism was
unknown and when the individual was only a link in the chain of the
generations. Such an age had no need of a belief in the immortality of
the individual, but it believed in the eternity of life in the sense
that life flows through the generations which spring from each other. No
clearer, no better expression of this belief can be found than the
sprouting of the new crop from the old crop which has been laid down in
the earth. It is the second ascent of the Corn Maiden, which was
familiar to that age from its labors and which was the immediate result
of the autumn sowing celebrated in the Eleusinian cult.

The latest monument of art which represents the mission of Triptolemos
is the famous Eleusinian relief (Frontispiece), which better than any
other conveys an idea of the high artistry and the deep religious
feeling of Phidias. Triptolemos is almost a boy standing between the two
goddesses. This relief was sculptured about 440 B.C. In later monuments
Triptolemos often appears, but only as a member of the assembly of the
Eleusinian deities. He is no longer the central figure. To the
Eleusinian deities, others are added: the city goddess of Athens;
Dionysus, who in this age had a certain connection with Eleusis; and
more heroes--Heracles and the Dioscuri. These heroes, the first
strangers to be initiated, recall the Panhellenic aspirations of the
Eleusinian Mysteries. Such representations are manifestly a product of
the interest taken in the Eleusinian Mysteries, but they do not express
any special idea, as the representations of Triptolemos and the Ninnion
tab-let do.

Certain other vase paintings are more interesting because they introduce
a novelty. A child appears among the Eleusinian

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

deities. Most remarkable is a hydria found in Rhodes <span
id="fr_69"></span>[32](#fn_69) ([Fig. 24](gpr21.htm#img_fig24).md). A woman
has partly emerged from the ground, which reaches to her breast. She
holds a cornucopia on which a child is seated. The child stretches out
its arms toward a goddess with a scepter, who must be Demeter, for on
the other side is Kore with two torches and above her is Triptolemos. A
pelike from Kertsch shows a woman rising from the ground and handing
over a child to Hermes, at whose side is Athena. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[33](#fn_70.md) To the left are Demeter and Kore, and to
the right are "the God" and "the Goddess," that is Plouton and
Persephone. On the other side, and on a vase in the collection at
Tubingen, the child is a little older. He stands at the side of Demeter
and holds a cornucopia. <span id="fr_71"></span>[34](#fn_71.md)

In these paintings the birth of a child is represented in Eleusinian
surroundings. The type is well known from the representations of the
birth of Erichthonios, but this Athenian hero has no connection with
Eleusis. The cornucopia which the child carries, and on which it is
seated in the picture on the hydria from Rhodes, puts us on the right
track. The cornucopia is the attribute of the god of wealth, Plouton.
The ideal embodied in this god was popular at the time to which these
vases belong. The most famous example is the group by Kephisodotos,
erected in 372 B.C., in which the goddess of peace carries the child
Ploutos in her arms. It is an expression of the hopes of the Athenian
people in those troubled times.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

In the foregoing we have heard of Plouton as a full-grown god, and he is
sometimes represented as a white-haired old man. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[35](#fn_72.md) But we have also mentioned the myth that
Demeter bore Ploutos, having united herself with Iasion on the
thrice-plowed fallow land. We find representations of Ploutos at all
stages of life, corresponding to the cycle of vegetation. Without any
doubt, Ploutos is the child who appears in the vase paintings mentioned.
Except for these vase paintings, we hear nothing of the child Ploutos at
Eleusis. The reason is very simple. By the side of the daughter of
Demeter, whose part was most prominent, there was no place for the son
of Demeter. He would have been completely out of accord with the idea
expressed in the Eleusinian myth. His reappearance in the fourth century
B.C. is a kind of atavism, due to the longing of that age for the
security of peace and wealth. Kephisodotos called the mother "Peace."
For the vase painters, her name was probably Ge (the earth), from which
the crops sprout. Ploutos appeared only for a brief time, and he
vanished as quickly as he had come, but that he did appear proves that
new ideas could find a place in the minds of those who were initiated
into the Eleusinian Mysteries.

At the same time, Dionysiac elements were introduced at Eleusis. One
connecting link was, of course, Iacchos, whose similarity to
Dionysus-Bacchos was pointed out above. But there were also internal
connections, for the cult of Dionysus in one of its aspects had to do
with the cycle of vegetation. At Delphi he was represented as a child in
a winnowing basket, awakened by the maenads. According to Furtwangler,
the child which is handed over to Hermes on the pelike from Kertsch is
wrapped in a fawnskin and crowned with ivy, and

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

on a vase from the Hope collection we see Dionysus emerging from the
ground like the Corn Maiden. <span id="fr_73"></span>[36](#fn_73.md) We
have seen further that in several late Eleusinian vase paintings
Dionysus is introduced among the Eleusinian deities. This is a
forerunner of the coalescence between various mystery cults, which
became common in a later age. There are traces of this syncretism in the
Roman age, with which I cannot deal here.

The rites of the Eleusinian Mysteries were persistently preserved from a
hoary antiquity, although they, too, may have been somewhat modified in
the course of time. There were no doctrines, however, but only some
simple fundamental ideas about life and death as symbolized in the
springing up of the new crop from the old. Every age might interpret
these according to its own propensities. Thus the persistence of the
most venerable religion of ancient Greece is explained. Its power was a
result of the absence of dogmas and of its close connection with the
deepest longings of the human soul.

So it was possible to develop on the foundation of the old agrarian cult
a hope of immortality and a belief in the eternity of life, not for the
individual but for the generations which spring one from another. Thus,
also, there was developed on the same foundation a morality of peace and
good will, which strove to embrace humanity in a brotherhood without
respect to state allegiance and civil standing. The hope and the belief
and the morality were those of the end of the archaic age. The
thoroughly industrialized and commercialized citizens of Athens in its
heyday had lost understanding of the old foundation of human
civilization--agriculture--and at the end of the fifth century B.C. the
individual was freed from the old fetters of family and tradition. The
foundations for the ideal-ism of the Eleusinian belief and morality were
removed. Man

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

was no longer content with the immortality of the generations but wanted
immortality for himself. The Eleusinian Mysteries promised even this in
a happy life in the underworld. If a man underwent initiation into the
Eleusinian Mysteries in this era, he did so because he hoped for a
happier life in the other world and because he found the celebration of
the Mysteries edifying. The hero of agriculture became only a
concomitant figure in the assembly of the Eleusinian gods. Dionysus was
added, and the child which brings wealth reappeared. But participation
in the mystery rites was still a religious experience, which had the
power of conferring happiness on man and of helping him through life.
For it was an experience that was rooted in the deepest feelings of man
and spoke to his heart, although its language changed with the changing
ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[42:1](gpr07.htm#fr_38.md) For a full presentation
of the materials and arguments see my paper, "Die eleusinischen
Gottheiten," *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXXII (1935), 79 ff.
See also my forthcoming *Geschichte der griechischen Religion*, Vol. I.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[42:2](gpr07.htm#fr_39.md) Frag. 23.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[44:3](gpr07.htm#fr_40.md) A. Dieterich, *Eine
Mithrasliturgie* (Leipzig, 1903), p. 125; A. Körte in *Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft*, XVIII (1915), 122 ff.; and C. Picard in *Revue
de l’histoire des religions*, XCV (1927), 220 ff.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[45:4](gpr07.htm#fr_41.md) *Protrepticus*, ed. O.
Stählin (Leipzig, 1905), p. 16, 11. 18-20.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[45:5](gpr07.htm#fr_42.md) H. G. Pringsheim,
*Archäologische Beiträge zur Geschichte des eleusintschen Kults*
(Dissertation, Bonn, 1905), p. 49 and note 1 on p. 58.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[46:6](gpr07.htm#fr_43.md) K. Kourouniotes, "Das
eleusinische Heiligtum," *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXXII
(1935), 52 ff.; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, 318, Fig. 4, and
319, Fig. 5.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[46:7](gpr07.htm#fr_44.md) Deubner, *Attische
Feste*, p. 90.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46:8](gpr07.htm#fr_45.md) *Ephemeris
archaiologike*, 1886, Pl. 3; L. R. Farnell, *The Cults of the Greek
States* (Oxford, 1896-1909), III, Pl. 1; and my *Gesch. der griech.
Rel.*, I, Pl. 39, Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47:9](gpr07.htm#fr_46.md) Farnell, *Cults of the
Greek States*, III, Pl. 8a.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47:10](gpr07.htm#fr_47.md) *Ephemeris
archaiologike*, 1901, Pl. 2; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl.
41, Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[47:11](gpr07.htm#fr_48.md) *Bulletin de
correspondance hellénique*, LV (1931), Pl. 2.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[48:12](gpr07.htm#fr_49.md) R. Heberdey in
*Festschrift Für Otto Benndorf zu seinem 60. Geburtstage* (Vienna,
1898), Pl. 4 and pp. iii ff.; Farnell, *Cults of the Greek States*, III,
Pl. 2; and my *Gesch. der Griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 40.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[49:13](gpr07.htm#fr_50.md) Farnell, *Cults of the
Greek States*, III, Pl. 15a; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl.
43, Fig. 2. This and kindred monuments are exhaustively treated by G. E.
Rizzo in *Römische Mitteilungen*, XXV (1910), 89 ff.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52:14](gpr07.htm#fr_51.md) This view is contested
by K. Kourouniotes in *Deltion archaiologikon*, XV (1934-35), 1 ff., but
I cannot find his arguments conclusive. He does not take into account
the fact that Demeter is not a goddess of vegetation in general but of
cereals.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53:15](gpr07.htm#fr_52.md) They are enumerated and
discussed in an appendix to my paper, "Die eleusinischen Gottheiten,"
pp. 131 ff., referred to in note 1 of this chapter.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53:16](gpr07.htm#fr_53.md) *Archäologischer
Anzeiger*, 1892, p. 166; J. E. Harrison, *Prolegomena to the Study of
Greek Religion*, 3d ed. (Cambridge, 1922), p. 277, Fig. 67; Farnell,
*Cults of the Greek States*, III, Pl. 6b; and my *Gesch. der griech.
Rel.*, I, Pl. 39, Fig. I.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[53:17](gpr07.htm#fr_54.md) Harrison,
*Prolegomena*, p. 279, Fig. 69; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl.
39, Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[54:18](gpr07.htm#fr_55.md) *Ephemeris
archaiologike*, 1901, Pl. 1; Farnell, *Cults of the Greek States*, III,
Pl. 16; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 41, Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[55:19](gpr07.htm#fr_56.md) Hippolytus, *Refutatio
haereseon*, V, 8, 39.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[55:20](gpr07.htm#fr_57.md) P. Wolters, "Die
goldenen Ähren," *Festschrift für James Loeb zum sechzigsten Geburtstag
gewidmet* (Munich, 1930), p. 124, Fig. 14; Farnell, *Cults of the Greek
States*, III, Pl. 3b; and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 42, Fig.
3.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[56:21](gpr07.htm#fr_58.md) *Athenische
Mitteilungen*, XXIV (1899), Pl. 7; and Harrison, *Prolegomena*, p. 273,
Fig. 65.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[56:22](gpr07.htm#fr_59.md) W. H. Roscher,
*Ausführliches Lexikon der griechischen and römischen Mythologie*
(Leipzig, 1884-1937), Vol. V, col. 1127, Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[56:23](gpr07.htm#fr_60.md) The most beautiful
example is a skyphos by Hieron. It is often reproduced. See A.
Furtwängler and K. Reichhold, *Griechische Vasenmalerei* (Munich,
1900-1932), Pl. 161; Farnell, *Cults of the Greek States*, III, Pl. 13;
and my Gesch. der griech. Rd., I, Pl. 43, Fig. 1 (part).

<span id="fn_61"></span>[57:4](gpr07.htm#fr_61.md) Isocrates,
*Panegyricus*, 28; Xenophon, *Hellenica*, VI, 3, 6; the decree in W.
Dittenberger, *Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum*, 3d ed. (Leipzig,
1915-24), Vol. I, No. 83.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[58:25](gpr07.htm#fr_62.md) *Ranae*, vss. 454 ff.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[58:26](gpr07.htm#fr_63.md) Homeric Hymn to
Demeter, vss. 480 ff.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[58:27](gpr07.htm#fr_64.md) Frag. 753, in A. Nauck,
*Tragicorum Graecorum fragmenta*, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1889).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[59:28](gpr07.htm#fr_65.md) Euripides, *Hercules
furens*, vs. 613.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[59:29](gpr07.htm#fr_66.md) Frag. 137, in T. Bergk,
*Poetae lyrici Graeci*, 4th ed. (Leipzig, 1878-82).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[59:30](gpr07.htm#fr_67.md) Gospel of St. John, 12:
24.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[59:31](gpr07.htm#fr_68.md) Cicero, *De legibus*,
II, 63, from Demetrius of Phaleron; Plutarch, *De facie in orbe lunae*,
p. 943b.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[61:32](gpr07.htm#fr_69.md) It is often reproduced.
See Harrison, *Prolegomena*, p. 525, Fig. 151; and my *Gesch. der
griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 44, Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[61:33](gpr07.htm#fr_70.md) Admirably reproduced in
Furtwängler and Reichhold, *Griechische Vasenmalerei*, Pl. 70. See also
Farnell, *Cults of the Greek States*, III, Pl. 21a (the side with
Hermes); and my *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 46.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[61:34](gpr07.htm#fr_71.md) C. Watzinger,
Griechische Vasen in Tubingen (Reutlingen, 1924), Pi. 40; and my *Gesch.
der griech. Rel.*, I, Pl. 45, Fig. 1. Unfortunately this vase was
overlooked in my paper, "Die eleusinischen Gottheiten," referred to in
note 1 of this chapter. On the interpretation see my *Gesch. der griech.
Rel.*, I, 295, note 4.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[62:35](gpr07.htm#fr_72.md) On a Nolan hydria; see
British Museum, *Corpus vasorum antiquorum* (London, 1925-), Fasc. 6,
Pl. 84, Figs. 2a-c. For Plouton alone see Farnell, *Cults of the Greek
States*, III, Pl. 32a.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[63:36](gpr07.htm#fr_73.md) E. M. W. Tillyard, *The
Hope Vases* (Cambridge, 1923), No. 163, Pl. 26, and pp. 97 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The House and the Family](gpr08.md)
