[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr09)  [Next](gpr11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### LEGALISM AND SUPERSTITION; HELL

I have spoken of the religion of the countryside. Its cults certainly do
not exhibit the gods in their highest aspects, nor do the rustic customs
belong to the higher strata of religion. But they are near the bedrock
of primitive ideas and they have survived the high gods, lasting on into
our own day in Greece, as very similar forms of religion have in other
European countries. I have spoken also of the religion of the
townspeople. I have emphasized the fact that when a great number of
people came together in a town and engaged in industry and commerce,
their mode of life was profoundly changed as a result of their
separation from nature and the cultivation of the soil and that as a
consequence their religious needs and outlook also changed. There were
other religious movements which were not a result of the difference
between town and country, although they were connected with social
conditions. This is especially true of the early age before the Persian
Wars. I have said that this was, in part at least, an age of poverty and
social distress. On the other hand it was an age of brisk and
diversified activity, of sea voyages and colonization, of discoveries
and of progress in all directions. The foundations of Greek science were
laid at this time. Religion, too, was involved in these changes and
developments. The new movements in Greek religion originated in this
age, and they did not leave popular religion untouched.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

In times of distress and need man is prone to seek relief and
consolation in religion. The hardships of the age we are considering
certainly intensified its religious movements and helped to spread
certain ideas widely among the people. There are two main streams of
contrasting ideas which appear in all religion, including that of the
Greeks. Man may seek union with God in mystic and ecstatic forms of
religion, or he may seek to make peace with God and win His favor by
fulfilling His commandments to the last item. The latter is legalism.
The mystic and ecstatic movement is well known and has often been
expounded, as in the admirable and much read book by Erwin Rohde. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) Its herald was Dionysus, whose
popularity was based on the longing of humanity for mystic and ecstatic
experiences. The violent diffusion of the Dionysiac orgies took place in
so early an age that it has left traces only in myths and cults. When
our historical information begins the Dionysiac frenzy had already been
tamed by the joint activity of the state and the Delphic oracle.
Mysticism was not dead, only repressed, and it took refuge in certain
religious movements of an almost sectarian character, especially
Orphism. Although these movements seem to have been widespread in the
early age, they cannot be called popular in the strict sense of the
word, and I must pass over them here. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_129.md)

There were some very curious men, characteristic of this age, who were
not unlike the medicine men of primitive peoples. They went around
fasting and doing wonders, and their souls were able to leave their
bodies, make journeys, and enter them again. At the same time they were
purificatory priests connected with Apollo. They were mystics, of
course,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

but they were also associated with legalism, for purification from
trespasses is a necessary complement of legalism and is imposed by it.

The legalistic tendency has been much less noticed than the mystical and
ecstatic, but it is at least as important, and it finally carried the
day in its higher, political forms. Here I propose to treat of its
popular forms, which were in great part suppressed. We turn to the
oldest work of Greek poetry next to Homer, Hesiod's *Works and
Days*. <span id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_130.md) Hesiod was a peasant from a
miserable village in Boeotia, although he had learned the minstrel's
profession. He wrote for his fellows, giving them good counsel in regard
to their occupation and their life. He passionately preaches labor, by
which man earns his livelihood, and justice, which allows him to enjoy
its fruits. It is interesting to see that the wisdom of Hesiod is often
expressed in the same forms as the wisdom of the peasants of other
nations. He has a like predilection for proverbs, maxims, and
enigmatical expressions; for example, he calls the snail "he who carries
his house." He takes notice of the stars, the migrating birds, and other
indications of the change of the seasons.

It is not this, however, which is of interest in this connection, but
his rules for the religious life and for the conduct of man, two things
which for him are inseparable. There are in his writings expressions of
a piety pervading the life of man such as is seldom found among the
Greeks. He prescribes a prayer to Demeter and Zeus in the earth when the
hand is laid to the plow to begin the autumn sowing, in order that the
ears of corn may be full and heavy. This is a hallowing of labor which
is not far from Protestant ideas. He prescribes the bringing of animal
sacrifices to the gods in a chaste and pure manner according to each
man's ability and

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the pouring out of libations and offering of frankincense in the morning
when one rises and in the evening when one retires. This seems like
ardent piety. But ritualism, which is only another name for legalism, is
much more prominent in Hesiod. He gives rules for good behavior, mixed
with religious rules. These are on a superstitious level, being
characterized by a fear of offending gods or daemons. The words cited
above, which testify to a genuine piety, are followed by a collection of
maxims concerning intercourse with friends, neighbors, and relatives. At
the end of the poem there is another collection of maxims beginning with
more rules. You must not cross a river without praying while looking
into its water, or without washing your hands, for the gods are angry
with those who cross a river without washing away their wickedness and
washing their hands. You must not take your food from a vessel which has
not been consecrated. Ordinary rules of purity are numerous, for example
the prohibition against pouring out a libation to Zeus with unwashed
hands. There are also a number of superstitious rules, most of which are
well known from modern folklore: you may not cut your nails at a
sacrificial meal, a boy may not sit down on that which it is not
permitted to move, a man may not bathe in a bath for women.

Such prescriptions occur elsewhere. They were especially taken up by the
exoteric school of the Pythagoreans, the so-called *akousmatikoi*. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[4](#fn_131.md) Pious and ritual and superstitious and
merely secular rules of conduct are blended without any distinction.
Especially interesting from our point of view is the addition to
Hesiod's poem, which is properly called *The Days*. It is generally
recognized that it was not composed by Hesiod himself, and this is
probably true of the second collection of maxims also. But the date of
composition is not

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

much later, and from our point of view the diversity of authorship does
not matter. On the contrary it is valuable because it proves that the
same train of thought was common and that the same ideas were widely
disseminated. *The Days* enumerates most of the days of the lunar month,
though not all of them, and characterizes them in accordance with the
maxim that a day is sometimes a mother, sometimes a stepmother. *The
Days* prescribes on which days certain of the tasks of agriculture and
stockbreeding should be performed and describes the significance of the
days for family life and birth. It is very similar to the popular
astrological predictions which are found in late antiquity, printed in
handbooks (*Bauernpraktik*) and not yet completely forgotten. We do not
include these things in religion. In late antiquity it was otherwise,
for these predictions are part of astrology, which in that age was a
dominant form of religion, culminating in sun worship. The calendar of
lucky and unlucky days in Hesiod also belongs to a religious system,
probably of Babylonian origin. Its religious importance is proved by the
fact that certain days of the lunar month are designated as birthdays of
the gods. Two such birthdays are mentioned in Hesiod.

About the same time the calendars of the Greek states were regulated,
probably at the instigation of the Delphic oracle. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[5](#fn_132.md) The eight year intercalary cycle was
introduced, and the festivals were fixed on certain days of the lunar
month. This regulation of the calendar is connected with the belief in
the different virtues of the days of the lunar month, but there is a
notable difference. Apollo paid attention to the cult of the gods only.
The people wanted the guidance of religion in all matters, even those
belonging to practical life. Apollo did not satisfy this demand. He
cared only for the cult.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

According to our notions, much of this has little or nothing to do with
religion, but all these rules are to a certain degree cognate. They are
an outcome of legalism, of the endeavor to lay down definite
prescriptions for all actions. In religion this is called ritualism, and
ritualism, extended to the whole of human life, is a dominant factor in
certain religions. But the Greek gods, fortunately for their people, did
not care about the details of daily life, provided that the simple
prescriptions of the cult were observed. Apollo required purity of
hands, especially in regard to bloodguilt, and he did a great work in
impressing upon the people a respect for human life. But the ritualism
which Apollo promoted concerned cult, not daily life. Hesiod refers not
to Apollo but to Zeus as the protector of his prescriptions. In Hesiod
there appears a tendency towards a more severe kind of ritualism, such
as is found among the Jews, fastening its fetters on the whole of man's
life. But it was only a tendency, for the Greeks were too sensible to
push legalism to the bitter end. It is, however, very interesting to see
how strongly this tendency took hold of the people and how the
representatives of religion, especially the Delphic oracle, saved it
from these restraints, endorsing ritualism in cult only, not in daily
life. The appeal of cultual ritualism was, however, so great in that age
that Apollo at Delphi founded his dominant position upon it.

The tendency to legalism as well as to mysticism belongs to the early
age before the Persian Wars. In the last century of this era social
conditions began to improve. In politics the lead was taken by statesmen
belonging to the middle class who wanted peace and quiet. In the sphere
of religion they were supported by the Delphic oracle, the leading
authority in religious matters. This oracle maintained the ancestral
customs and the more orderly forms of cult and

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

religion, and it was hostile to the excesses both of legalism and of
mysticism. The representatives of this trend were the so-called Seven
Sages, and their slogans, which were inscribed on the temple of Apollo
at Delphi, were "Nothing too much" and "Know thyself," that is, know
that thou art only a man. An Apolline piety was developed which taught
the inferiority of man to the gods. Man must bow to the will of the gods
and he must not be proud of his pious works and of his offerings to
them.

A great change came about with the victory over the Persians. It was a
victory of the Greek gods and heroes, that is of the Greek state
religion. If we know the character of this religion, of which I have
spoken earlier, we know that the consequence was the still further
repression of the mystical and legalistic movements which had sprung
from the depths of the popular mind.

Another dominant issue in the early age was the problem of justice.
Although its greatest importance lay on the social plane, it influenced
religion also in many respects. I cannot expatiate on this here. I will
only make the following brief remarks. From of old, Zeus was the
protector of justice, and he is celebrated as such by Hesiod, Aeschylus,
and many others. But he was a theoretical more than a practical
protector. His rule was too arbitrary to allow him to appear as a true
guardian of justice, and the same was true of the behavior of the Greek
gods in general. The demand for social justice was a demand for the
equalization of social rights. One of its motives was a very human envy
of the rich and mighty. It found an argument in the vicissitudes of
human life. The higher a man rose, the greater was his fall. This was
proved by the fate of many men, not to speak of the tyrants. So the
conception of the *hybris* of man and the *nemesis* of the gods came
into existence. The translations "wantonness"

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

and "jealousy" do not quite hit the mark. Hybris is the feeling of being
supported by good luck, nemesis is the feeling of something unjust,
improper. The idea of hybris and the corresponding idea of nemesis are
akin to the slogan "Know thyself." Both teach man the humble position
which befits him.

These ideas are very often found in literature, and it may be asked how
far they belonged not only to the educated classes but also to the
people. The people demanded justice, but the battle for justice was
fought on the social rather than on the religious plane. The conceptions
of hybris and nemesis had a popular background in what the Greeks called
*baskania*, the belief, still common in southern Europe, that excessive
praise is dangerous and a cause of misfortune. Even we are accustomed to
saying "touch wood" if things go exceptionally well with us. It was
customary, and is so still, to avert such a danger by spitting into
one's bosom or by making an obscene gesture. The impressive scene in the
*Agamemnon* of Aeschylus, in which the king fears to tread on purple
carpets when entering his palace lest the envy of some evil eye should
harm him, is taken from real life. <span id="fr_133"></span>[6](#fn_133.md)
Herodotus' story of the tyrant Polycrates contains a folk-tale motif
which is still current. <span id="fr_134"></span>[7](#fn_134.md) When King
Amasis heard of Polycrates' exceptional good luck he advised him to
offset it by throwing away something which he valued very highly.
Polycrates obeyed and threw a costly ring into the sea, but it was found
again in the stomach of a fish which was brought to him a few days later
by a fisherman. When Amasis heard this he renounced so dangerous a
friendship, and Polycrates ended his life on the cross. This belief was
popular, but it may be doubted if it was religious in the true sense of
the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

word. Fate is the work of the gods; but in Herodotus, at least, this is
never said of a specific god, but always of "the gods" collectively or
of "the divine" in the abstract. The belief comes very near to fatalism.
It is a kind of philosophy of life and its vicissitudes rather than a
religious conception.

I remarked that certain kinds of legalism come very near to superstition
and that Hesiod has prescriptions which are also current in modern
folklore. We are accustomed to making a clear-cut distinction between
religion and superstition. Superstition is something which is not
allowed in a Christian and which is unworthy of him. The situation was
somewhat different in ancient Greece. The Greek word which we usually
translate by "superstition" is *deisidaimonia*, fear of the *daimones*.
But these include the gods also, as in Homer and elsewhere. Consequently
the word can and sometimes must be translated "fear of the gods."
Xenophon still uses it in this good sense when he praises King Agesilaus
for his deisidaimonia, his reverence for the gods. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[8](#fn_135.md) In Theophrastus' characterization of the
*deisidaimon* <span id="fr_136"></span>[9](#fn_136.md) the sense has
deteriorated and the word can rightly be translated by "superstition."
The superstitious man is one who, if something happens, washes his
hands, sprinkles himself with holy water, and walks about the whole day
with laurel leaves in his mouth. If a weasel crosses his path, he waits
for another person walking the same way or he throws three stones over
the road. If he sees a snake in his house, he invokes Sabazios if it is
a *pareias*. If it is a so-called holy snake, he erects a hero shrine on
the place. He pours out oil on the stones at the crossroads when he
passes and, falling on his knees, he venerates them before he continues
on his way. If a mouse has gnawed a hole in his flour sack, he goes to
the exegete and asks what

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

to do. If the exegete replies that he is to give it to the leatherworker
to be repaired, he does not listen to him but turns away and carries out
purifications and the like. We see that popular superstitions and the
purificatory customs of the common religion were mixed up, and from the
last sentence quoted it appears that official representatives of
religion treated such exaggerated fears humorously. In ancient Greece
the difference between religion and superstition was a difference of
degree rather than of kind. There were also merely popular
superstitions, but even these were not sharply distinguishable from
certain religious ideas.

The general opinion is that the Greeks of the classical age were happily
free from superstition. I am sorry that I am obliged to refute this
opinion. There was a great deal of superstition in Greece, even when
Greek culture was at its height and even in the center of that culture,
Athens. Superstition is very seldom mentioned in the literature of the
period simply because great writers found such base things not worth
mentioning. But the Greeks borrowed Hecate from Caria because they
needed a goddess of witchcraft and ghosts, and in the classical age her
triple image was erected before every house in order to avert evils of
that kind. Aristophanes is a witness to the fact that witchcraft was
well known. <span id="fr_137"></span>[10](#fn_137.md) He makes Strepsiades
say that he wants to buy a Thessalian witch to bring down the moon and
shut it up, and he mentions necromantics, the calling up of the dead to
foretell the future, a kind of mantic which was almost completely absent
from Greece in early times.

Very important is the tract on the holy disease, that is, epilepsy. It
is one of the earliest in the collection ascribed to Hippocrates, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[11](#fn_138.md) and was probably written by him. At any

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

rate it belongs to the fifth century B.C. It should be read by everyone
who wants to become acquainted with the religious situation of the time.
The author says that the men who call this disease holy are of the same
kind as the magicians, charlatans, and purificatory and begging priests
and that they cover up their ignorance and helplessness by the pretext
that this disease is holy. They resort to purifications and spells. They
prescribe the avoidance of black garments and of putting one foot on
another or one hand on another. These are the methods of magic, well
known from folklore. The author further tells us that some people
pretended to be able by certain secret rites to bring down the moon,
eclipse the sun, cause storm or calm, bring rain or drought, call forth
water, or make the earth sterile. He includes a catalogue of magical
achievements of the sort described in the Roman age and generally
believed to belong to that age only. As a matter of fact they were much
older, although they were more in evidence at a later time, when the
soberness of the old religion had vanished. Our author informs us that
these people had drawn the gods also into the circle of their
superstitious ideas. If the sick man bellows or has convulsions, they
say that the Great Mother is responsible. If his cries resemble
neighing, Poseidon is the cause; if they resemble the chirping of birds,
Apollo Nomios is to blame; and if he foams at the mouth and kicks with
his feet, it is Ares' doing. Finally, if he has evil dreams by night,
sees frightful figures, and leaps up from his bed, they say that he has
been attacked by Hecate or by some hero.

The last words call for some comment. Ghost stories like those current
even in our day were current in antiquity also. In literature they do
not appear until the Roman age. Their apparent absence in the classical
age is deceptive. Ghosts went by the name of heroes, and genuine ghost
stories are

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

related of the heroes. I have mentioned the hero of Temesa, to whom the
inhabitants were compelled to sacrifice yearly the fairest virgin of
their town until a well-known pugilist by the sheer force of his fists
drove him into the sea, and Orestes, whom no Athenian liked to meet by
night because he was likely to give him a thrashing and to rob him of
his clothes. There was also Actaeon, who devastated the fields of the
Boeotians until on the advice of the oracle his statue was chained to a
rock. Plautus' comedy *Mostellaria*, which was copied from the Greek
poet Philemon, is a ghost story of a very common type. A guest-friend
has been killed and buried in a certain house. He walks about at night,
disquieting and frightening people, so that nobody dares to live in the
haunted house.

The account in Hippocrates concerns disease, and in cases where human
resources fail superstition flourishes strongly even in our day. Even
Pericles, who was above such base things, had to tolerate the tying of
an amulet to him by the women when he was ill. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[12](#fn_139.md) Of the cures in the Asclepieion at
Epidaurus, the most miraculous and unbelievable tales are related. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[13](#fn_140.md) I will not enter into the sane and
sober views of Hippocrates on religion, although they are worth reading.
I turn instead to another author who has much to say about magic and
magicians, Plato. He prescribes the severest punishments for men who
pretend to be able to call up the dead; to coerce the gods through the
magical powers of sacrifices, prayers, and spells; and to destroy
individuals, whole families, and towns. He speaks of several tricks,
spells, and imprecations of black magic and of wax dolls which

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

are seen at doors, at crossroads, and on tombs. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[14](#fn_141.md) It is a well-known fact, and one
frequently mentioned in a later age, that witches and sorcerers used
dolls for their purposes, burning them, transfixing them, and so forth,
in order to affect with like pain the persons whom they represented.
Plato's description is much more suggestive of the witchcraft of late
antiquity than of the fourth century B.C., but it is impossible to doubt
that he took it from the life of his own times.

This can be corroborated. When Plato speaks of imprecations he uses the
word *katadeseis*. These are leaden tablets inscribed with imprecations
directed against persons named on them and deposited in tombs in order
to devote these cursed persons to the gods of the nether world. A great
number of these *tabellae defixionis* have been found and
published, <span id="fr_142"></span>[15](#fn_142.md) but it has been too
little remarked that many of them belong to the fourth century B.C. A
curious unpublished inscription on the shard of a cup, which reads "I
put quartan fever on Aristion to the death," is probably as early as the
end of the fifth century B.C. Numerous leaden tablets have been found at
Athens, and it is a very interesting and important fact that many of the
names mentioned on them are names of historically known persons. We find
two brothers of the well-known politician Callistratus, who was exiled
in 361 B.C.; Callias and Hipponicus, from the wealthy and famous house
of the *dadouchoi*; Demophilus, the prosecutor of Aristotle and Phocion;
Demosthenes; Lycurgus; and other orators and politicians. This is
astonishing. The names mentioned show that belief in the magical power
of these imprecations was not confined to artisans, hawkers, and such

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

people, who also appear among those cursed. It must have been current
even in the best society.

Most of these curses refer to lawsuits. The gods, especially Hecate and
Hermes of the nether world, are asked to tie the soul, the intellect,
the tongue, and the limbs of the per-son cursed. It is manifest that
these imprecations are connected with the degeneration of the Athenian
democracy and law courts and with the abuses and cavils of the
sycophants. I am obliged to state, although I am very sorry to do it,
that superstition and a belief in magic and witchcraft were very common
and widespread in the heyday of the classical age. If this was so in
Athens, it can hardly have been less so in backward districts of Greece.
Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that this recrudescence of
superstition and magic is connected with the decay of the old religion,
which was secularized by the state and attacked by the Sophists. When
such a void is created in religion, the opportunity is present for the
flourishing of superstition and magic and the immigration of new gods.

The leaden tablets with imprecations were deposited in tombs, a sure
sign of the belief in the power of the dead to do harm. Belief in the
power of the dead appears in the old tomb cult. It was supposed to
belong to the individual who was buried in the tomb and venerated there,
and who was called up to help his family. Our notions of the cult of the
dead are derived from literature, especially from the tragedies, which
cling to what is old. The cult of the dead had, however, been suppressed
for political and social reasons and had lost much of its vigor. The
belief in ghosts remained. The general Greek idea of the other world was
of something else, the dark and gloomy Hades with its pale, dumb,
powerless shadows. It was so ingrained in the Greek mind that, in spite
of the fact that Christianity has preached quite a different

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

conception for nearly two thousand years, the nether world of the Greek
peasant is the same today. Its lord has kept the name of the ancient
ferryman, Charon or Charos, although he is represented as a horseman and
hunter. The shadows were powerless. They were supposed to have the same
appearance which the man had during his life or at the moment of his
death. Odysseus recognizes his deceased comrades in Hades. This is
constantly so among all peoples. The life of this world is the pattern
after which the other life is pictured, although the shadows may be
darker or lighter. There is one exemption from the gloominess of Hades,
the bliss awaiting those initiated in the Eleusinian Mysteries. But even
this consists in a repetition of the celebration of the Mysteries, and
nothing was required for it but initiation.

While for Homer the body is the man himself and the soul is a pale
shadow worth nothing, the Orphics considered the soul as immortal and
the body as its prison. <span id="fr_143"></span>[16](#fn_143.md) The soul
was able to leave the body temporarily in dreams and left it once for
all in death. The consequence of this doctrine was a new evaluation of
the other life. For the Orphics, also, initiation and the accompanying
purification were necessary, but they added a demand for righteousness
and moral purity. He who has not been purified in this life will
continue in his impurity in the other life. "He will lie in the mud" is
the keynote of the new ideas of the other world. There is here a
recurrence of the old idea of the repetition of this life, modified only
in so far as the repetition in itself is regarded as a punishment. This
is not infrequently the case in modern folk-lore.

The Orphic idea is expressed in certain myths, including that of the
Danaids. The figures which are generally called Danaids were represented
in the picture by Polygnotus at Delphi

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

as those who had not been initiated and who were compelled in the other
life to carry water for their purification, unceasingly and in vain. If
the idea took hold on the popular mind, this was because it was coupled
with another idea dear to the Greeks, that of retributive justice. In
early times the individual was only a link in the chain of the family.
Children and children's. children had to pay for the trespasses of their
ancestors. There came a time when it seemed unjust that one individual
should pay for the trespasses of another. It was demanded that the man
who had trespassed should be punished, that he himself and no other
should pay for his guilt. We find this demand in Solon. But experience
taught that a man who had committed unjust deeds sometimes died without
having suffered the fitting punishment. The solution of the dilemma was
found in the Orphic doctrine. The punishment due was transferred to the
life after death.

Sinners punished in the underworld, such as Tantalus and Sisyphus, are
familiar from mythology. Originally they were enemies of the gods who
were punished by the gods in the upper world, and only later were they
transferred to the underworld. This underworld is described in the
eleventh book of the *Odyssey*, and it was depicted by the great painter
Polygnotus in a famous picture at Delphi. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[17](#fn_144.md) But this picture contained something
new. It represented a man who, having killed his father, was strangled
by him, and a man who, having robbed a temple, was punished by a woman
in various ways. Punishments were invented in accordance with the old
*jus talionis*, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, or were taken
from human justice. This idea of punishment in the other world was
fatally extended, and occasions were found for the invention and
addition of ever new modes of torture

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

and punishment. The driving force was the idea of retributive justice.

Before long the underworld was pictured as a place of horror, a hell in
the full sense of the word. Aristophanes describes it in *The Frogs*. He
fills it with frightful beasts, snakes, and monsters like Empousa. There
in the mud and ever-flowing mire lie those who have committed wrongs to
guest-friends, frauds, or perjury or who have beaten their fathers.
Aristophanes also gives a detailed enumeration of the most frightful
pains which can be inflicted upon a man, copied from the mythological
punishments, and enlarged upon and extended in a grotesque manner.

All this is known well enough, but it is generally set aside on the
ground that it is mythology and has as little importance for real belief
as myths ordinarily have. But it had a very serious background.
Aristophanes would not have been able to give such a long and
picturesque description of hell and its horrors if the subject had not
been familiar to his audience. Elsewhere in literature such things are
not mentioned. Like superstition, they were too base and grotesque. But
there are two exceptions, two very important passages which prove beyond
doubt that the idea of punishment in the other world had taken strong
hold on the popular mind in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. The
philosopher Democritus says: "Many people who do not know that human
nature is dissolved in death, but who know that they have committed much
wrong, live constantly in fear and anxiety, composing lying fables
concerning the time after death." <span id="fr_145"></span>[18](#fn_145.md)
And in the introduction to his great work the *Republic*, Plato makes
the aged Kephalos say that a man who sees the hour of death approaching
is seized by fright and begins to think about

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

things that had not troubled him before. For while the myths that are
told of the underworld, according to which he who has committed wrongs
in this world will be punished in that world, seemed ridiculous to him
hitherto, now his soul is anxious, for they may be true. He is
disquieted and he makes up his account, considering whether he has done
wrong to anybody. If he finds that he has committed many unjust actions,
he is filled with alarm; he often leaps up from his bed in sleep as
children do, and he lives in fear. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[19](#fn_146.md) This is a striking picture and drawn
from life. Plato's own detailed accounts of the other world and of
metempsychosis must be passed over here, for they are myths created by
him and have nothing to do with popular ideas. Their influence on the
future, however, was great and fateful.

A reference may be added to the paintings of the Apulian tomb vases,
which belong to the fourth century B.C. and are an offshoot of Attic
vase painting. They represent the palace of Hades and the mythological
criminals punished in the underworld. That such subjects were chosen for
tomb monuments proves that these ideas were popular in southern Italy.
This is, perhaps, especially due to the strong Orphic influence in that
country.

Long ago Dieterich tried to prove that hell was created by the
Greeks. <span id="fr_147"></span>[20](#fn_147.md) Another great scholar,
Cumont, has, on the contrary, derived it from the Orient. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[21](#fn_148.md) But if we take the earliest Christian
vision of hell, the so-called Apocalypse of St. Peter, which was the
starting point of Dieterich's research, it appears that Dieterich was
right. The description of the punishments for moral sins, which were
sins for the heathens also,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

is detailed, and the old keynote, the lying in the mud, recurs
constantly in many variations. On the other hand, the description of the
punishments of unbelievers is briefer, less detailed, and evidently
copied from the former. The background is Greek.

I have dwelt here on the dark and base sides of Greek
religion--superstition, magic, and the idea of punishment in the other
world. For I am of the opinion that it is necessary to know these also
if we are to have a true conception of Greek popular religion. We know
that such ideas became dominant in late antiquity. The way was prepared
by the decay of the old religion. Man needs some kind of religion. If
his old faith is destroyed, he turns to superstition and magic and to
new gods who are imported from foreign countries or who rise from the
dark depths of the human mind. There were such depths in the Greek mind
also. That mind was not so exclusively bright as is sometimes said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[103:1](gpr10.htm#fr_128.md) Psyche; *Seelencult
and Unsterblichkeitsglaube der Griechen* (Freiburg i. B., 1894).

<span id="fn_129"></span>[103:2](gpr10.htm#fr_129.md) See my paper, "Early
Orphism and Kindred Religious Movements," *Harvard Theological Review*,
XXVIII (1935), 181 ff.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[104:3](gpr10.htm#fr_130.md) Hesiod, *Works and
Days*, ed. T. A. Sinclair (London, 1932).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[105:4](gpr10.htm#fr_131.md) See my forthcoming
*Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, 665 ff.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[106:5](gpr10.htm#fr_132.md) See my "Entstehung
and religiöse Bedeutung des griechischen Kalenders," *Lunds universitets
årsskrift*, XIV: 2 (1918), No. 21.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[109:6](gpr10.htm#fr_133.md) *Agamemnon*, vss. 945
ff.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[109:7](gpr10.htm#fr_134.md) Herodotus, III, 40
ff.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[110:8](gpr10.htm#fr_135.md) Agesilaus, XI, 8.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[110:9](gpr10.htm#fr_136.md) Characteres, 16.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[111:10](gpr10.htm#fr_137.md) *Nubes*, vss. 749
ff., and *Aves*, vss. 1553 ff.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[111:11](gpr10.htm#fr_138.md) *De morbo sacro*, I.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[113:12](gpr10.htm#fr_139.md) Plutarch,
*Pericles*, 38.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[113:13](gpr10.htm#fr_140.md) The inscriptions are
collected in *Inscriptiones Graecae*, Editio minor, Vol. IV, Fasc. i,
Nos. 121-27. See also R. Herzog, "Die Wunderheilungen von Epidauros,"
*Philologus*, Supplementary Vol. XXII(1931), No. 3.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[114:14](gpr10.htm#fr_141.md) Laws, X, p. 909b;
see also p. 908d and XI, p. 933.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[114:15](gpr10.htm#fr_142.md) The Attic tabellae
defixionis have been published by R. Wünsch in an appendix to
*Inscriptiones Graecae*, III. Several important finds have appeared
later. See my forthcoming *Gesch. der griech. Rel.*, I, 757 ff.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[116:16](gpr10.htm#fr_143.md) Plato, *Cratylus*,
p. 400c.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[117:17](gpr10.htm#fr_144.md) Described by
Pausanias, X, 28 ff.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[118:18](gpr10.htm#fr_145.md) Frag. 297, in H.
Diels, *Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker*, 5th ed. (Berlin, 1934-37), II,
206-7.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[119:19](gpr10.htm#fr_146.md) Plato, Republic, I,
pp. 330d ff.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[119:20](gpr10.htm#fr_147.md) A. Dieterich,
Nekyia; *Beiträge zur Erklärung der neuentdeckten Petrusapokalypse*
(Leipzig, 1893; 2d ed., 1913).

<span id="fn_148"></span>[119:21](gpr10.htm#fr_148.md) F. Cumont, *After
Life in Roman Paganism* (New Haven, 1922), pp. 88 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seers and Oracles](gpr11.md)
