[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr10)  [Next](gpr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### SEERS AND ORACLES

The religious situation in Greece was complicated in the fifth and
fourth centuries B.C., even in regard to popular religion. It was simple
enough in backward districts, where the old faith survived without being
disturbed and where the people kept the rustic customs, celebrated the
old festivals, and venerated the gods and heroes without doing much
thinking about the high gods. The background of this simple faith has
survived until our own day. The situation was different elsewhere,
especially in the cities, where religion had to encounter political life
and the new enlightenment. The people ascribed the greatness and glory
of the state, its freedom and independence, to its great gods; they
feasted gladly on the sacrifices offered by the state; and they gathered
with others at the panegyreis. But the cult of the great gods was too
cold. These gods did not offer help in human needs and consolation to a
contrite heart. The old bonds of state and family were loosened, the
individual became conscious of himself. The state claimed as great
authority as ever, but, as a matter of fact, the abuses of democracy
turned people away from it and made them try to find the way that
pleased them best. Man was no longer born to his gods as in earlier
times. He wanted to find his gods for himself. And so he turned to gods
who could help him--to Asclepius, the great healer of diseases; to the
Cabiri, who brought help in distress at sea; or to gods who were able to
stir his religious feelings deeply, as Sabazios could. In this movement
the women seem to have played an

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

important part. The criticism of religious beliefs by the Sophists and
the improper jests at the expense of the gods by men like Aristophanes
did their work. Atheists were not unknown, nor were statesmen who
treated religion as only a means to their ends. The faith of the masses
was shaken, but it was not destroyed.

On occasion it broke out violently, and the people were seized by a kind
of religious hysteria when they believed that their welfare and that of
their city was threatened by impiety against the gods. The Athenian
trials for impiety are famous. <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149) The
trials of Pericles' mistress, Aspasia, and of his friend, the
philosopher Anaxagoras, had a very obvious political background. This is
apparent also in the trial of Alcibiades for profanation of the
Eleusinian Mysteries and in the famous trial for the smashing of the
herms in 415 B.C. On this occasion a real religious hysteria broke out,
for these events took place just before the great fleet sailed for
Syracuse. The people feared that the wrath of the gods would imperil
this great and dangerous undertaking, or at least they found an evil
omen in the event. About the same time the Sophist Protagoras and the
atheist Diagoras were condemned for impiety. Most famous of all is the
trial and death of Socrates. Socrates was accused of seducing youths and
of not having the same gods as the state but other new gods. His
accusers were good citizens who tried to heal the terrible wounds left
by the war and by the terrorism of the Thirty Tyrants, and they
sincerely believed that they would attain their goal by removing the
adversary of the old faith and old customs. They made a tragic mistake,
for they struck at the man who overcame the sophistical criticism. Such
trials also took place later. Even Aristotle was threatened with one.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

Except in the case of the simple rustic cults, it was the fate of Greek
religion to be closely interconnected with political life. We should
remember that the people of whose religion we speak made up the popular
assembly and that the assembly made decisions in religious matters, even
if in such matters it acknowledged a superior authority and asked the
Delphic or some other oracle for advice. This intermingling of religion
and politics is especially apparent in another field of religion which
was of the greatest importance in practical life. I refer to the
foretelling of the future. We can hardly imagine how great its
importance was in private as well as in public life. In my opinion it
was the part of religion which was of most current interest in that age.

The cities asked the oracles for advice not only in religious but also
in other matters, and private persons did so on all occasions of any
importance. Furthermore, guidance was sought from sacrifices, birds,
dreams, and other omens. We may take Xenophon as an example. He was a
brave and well-educated man, a skilled officer, and a good writer, but
without philosophical understanding. His religious views were certainly
those of the Athenian middle class. He turned to oracles and seers on
all occasions. Before Xenophon went to Asia Minor to join the expedition
of Cyrus he asked the Delphic oracle to which gods he should sacrifice
in order that he might make the voyage and return in safety. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150) When the Army of the Ten Thousand was at
discord, he sacrificed and asked the gods if he should go back home. He
did likewise when the chief command was offered to him and when he was
thinking of settling the soldiers at Kotyora. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_151) He firmly believed he was led by
presages and omens. A dream in which he saw a thunderbolt strike his
father's house was the immediate cause

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of his assembling the officers after the death of Cyrus in order to take
counsel in the difficult situation of the army. A dream showed him the
means of crossing the river Tigris when the army seemed to be cut off by
the river and the mountains. <span id="fr_152"></span>[4](#fn_152) When
he was riding from Ephesus in order to meet Cyrus, he heard the cry of a
seated eagle to the right, and the seer who accompanied him said that it
signified glory but many hardships. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[5](#fn_153) And, finally, when someone sneezed
during an exhortatory speech to the soldiers after the murder of
Clearchus, all the soldiers venerated the gods. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[6](#fn_154) Xenophon firmly believed in presages,
and when they seemed to fail he took pains to explain that they finally
proved to be true. I hardly need to refer to the many oracles and
presages related by Herodotus.

The wish to be able to cast a glance into the future is common to all
humanity. Even in our day there are plenty of soothsayers and sibyls,
and many people still believe in dreams and omens. It is no wonder that
the ancients did so, too. But we should keep well in mind that while
these arts are now despised by educated people and ranked with
superstition they were an acknowledged part of Greek religion. The great
popularity of the Delphic oracle was based on its supposed ability to
foretell the future. There were numerous oracles in Greece, and, to
judge from Herodotus, they seem especially to have flourished before and
during the Persian Wars. But they were consulted eagerly in the
following age too, although a certain decline in their prestige is
perhaps to be found in the fact that at this time the Greeks turned to
foreign oracles, especially that of Ammon in the Great Oasis. In the
Hellenistic age the old oracles of Greece lost their popularity.

The writers preserve only the more important questions put

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

to the oracles. We can be certain that people applied to the oracles on
all occasions which were of some importance to them. But these questions
pertaining to ordinary life are lost, with one exception. At Dodona
there have been found several leaden tablets inscribed with questions
which people asked the oracle. <span id="fr_155"></span>[7](#fn_155) It
is interesting to see what they were like. One Heraclides asks whether
his wife will bear him a child, and Lysanias asks whether the child with
which Amyla is pregnant is his. One man asks if it will be profitable
for him to buy a house and land in the town, another if he will do well
by breeding sheep, a third if he will make a profit by carrying goods
around and doing business where he likes. We see what sort of advice
people wanted in family life and business, and we can understand the
important part which the oracles played in practical life. We should not
forget that other omens and dreams were eagerly observed also.

Whoever has read the accounts of Greek historians knows that no battle
was waged, no river crossed, before victims had been slaughtered and the
signs of the sacrifice were favorable. If the signs were unfavorable a
second and even a third victim were slaughtered until favorable signs
appeared, and it sometimes happened that a general held his army back
and waited for favorable signs even when the enemy had already begun to
attack. It sometimes happened also that a plan was given up if the signs
were unfavorable. Seers always accompanied the armies; among the Ten
Thousand there were several of them.

To us it seems paradoxical to wait for sacrificial omens before a battle
when quick action is required or before a march which is demanded by
strategical considerations. The Greeks thought otherwise, or they would
have abolished these hindrances to military action. We should not
overlook the psychological influence of these god-sent signs on the
soldiers and

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

on their conduct in battle, for the soldiers believed in the signs as
Xenophon did. Of course there were cunning seers who interpreted the
signs from the victim sacrificed in accordance with military necessity,
and there were generals who imposed their will upon the seers and used
these sacrifices as a means to their military ends. In the battle at
Plataea, Pausanias held his soldiers back, under the pretext that the
signs were unfavorable, until the enemy could be attacked by the
hoplites at a reasonable distance. But there were also bigoted generals
who obeyed the seers rather than military necessity. The most tragic
example is Nicias and the defeat of the Athenians before Syracuse. When
the retreat was decided on the moon was eclipsed, and the seers
interpreted this to mean that the army had to remain on the spot thrice
nine days. Nicias obeyed, and the delay sealed their doom. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[8](#fn_156) In his biography of Nicias, Plutarch
deplores the untimely death of the seer Stilbides because after that no
wise seer was at the side of Nicias. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[9](#fn_157)

There were seers who intrigued on their own account. The seer Silanos,
who was asked by Xenophon to consult the gods in regard to his plan to
settle the soldiers at Kotyora, frustrated his intention because he
wanted to go back to Greece. <span id="fr_158"></span>[10](#fn_158) In a
military writer of the same age there is a very instructive prescription
to the effect that a general should have a strict eye upon the seers
during a siege and not allow them to sacrifice on their own account in
the absence of the general. <span id="fr_159"></span>[11](#fn_159) They
might have a fatal influence on public opinion.

The part played by the seers in war may seem to be of a special kind,
but wars were only too common in Greece. Between the great and
historically famous wars some small war

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

was almost always going on in some corner of the country. The gods were
constantly consulted in time of war for the sake of the psychological
effect on the minds of the combatants. From the account in Xenophon of
the events in Troas, <span id="fr_160"></span>[12](#fn_160) it seems
that seers circulated everywhere and offered their services to those who
wanted and paid for them. It is striking that the seers whom he mentions
were from backward provinces of Greece--Arcadia and Acarnania. Belief in
the art was perhaps firmer in these regions. Some seers acquired a great
fame. One of these was Tisamenus, who belonged to a famous family of
seers from Olympia, the Iamidae, <span id="fr_161"></span>[13](#fn_161)
and served as a seer in the great battles fought with the Persians. He
even acquired Spartan citizenship.

If the seers were able to influence the minds of men in war, they, of
course, had the same power in peace and in political life. Still more
important were, however, the numerous oracle mongers, the
*chresmologoi*, who circulated among the people oracles which were
anonymous or which were ascribed to some old prophet, such as Musaeus or
Bacis, or to some oracle. These oracles were not signs given by the gods
in sacrifices or in other ways, but words--verses which the people
learned by heart and which went from mouth to mouth. I hardly need to
remark what a powerful means this was for influencing public opinion
when an important decision was pending. But the part played by oracles
and seers in such matters is not sufficiently appreciated, and so I must
dwell upon it at some length. The oracles played a part in political
agitation similar to that of newspapers and political pamphlets in our
own times. Examples of their fateful influence will be given below.

This role of the oracles began before the Persian Wars.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Herodotus relates
that when the Spartan king Cleomenes in 510 B.C. drove out the sons of
Pisistratus and took the Acropolis of Athens, he seized in the temple a
collection of oracles which had belonged to the Pisistratidae. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[14](#fn_162) These oracles foretold many heavy blows
that would be dealt by the Athenians to the Spartans. In this connection
I may also recall the fact that the political adversaries of the
Pisistratidae, the Alcmaeonidae, whom they had exiled, secured the help
of the Delphic oracle and through it of the Spartans. What had happened
is clear enough. The Pisistratidae knew that the Spartans were their
most powerful enemies, and they collected these oracles not for their
own pleasure but in order to prepare the minds of the people for the war
with the Spartans which they foresaw--to exhort the people and to give
them courage in the fight with the formidable foe.

Another story is told by Herodotus about Onomacritus, who is known
chiefly because he seems to have promoted Orphism. He was exiled by
Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus, because another poet, Lasus of
Hermione, had caught him falsely inserting into a collection of oracles
ascribed to Musaeus an oracle prophesying that the islands around Lemnos
would be engulfed by the sea. I do not think that the real reason for
the exile was that Onomacritus had committed a literary forgery. If we
recall that Lemnos was occupied by Miltiades about 512 B.C., certainly
not without the consent of the Pisistratidae, and that it afforded
support to the commercial and political influence of Athens in the
northeastern part of the Aegean for which the Pisistratidae cared much
(I recall that they seized Sigeum at the mouth of the Hellespont), the
political background becomes clear. Such an oracle was unfavorable to
their political plans. After his exile Onomacritus went to the court of
the Persian king, where he used his

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

oracles in order to persuade the king to undertake the campaign against
Greece. He read a mass of oracles, and if something was unfavorable to
the Persians, he concealed it, picking out the most favorable
oracles. <span id="fr_163"></span>[15](#fn_163) We see what oracles were
good for.

There were many such collections of oracles, and their authority was
enhanced by ascribing them to some famous old prophet. The most esteemed
of these was Bacis. Herodotus quotes oracles at length only from him and
from the Pythia. In one passage he makes an interesting remark which
proves that criticism had begun to awaken. Speaking of a notorious *ex
eventu* oracle referring to the battle at Artemisium, Herodotus says
that he is unable to deny that oracles are true and that, as Bacis
speaks so clearly, he is not willing to put forward or to tolerate any
contradiction in this regard. <span id="fr_164"></span>[16](#fn_164) The
home of the Sibyl was not in Greece but in Asia Minor. Another
collection ascribed to her was brought from the Greek colony of Cumae to
Rome at about the same time. It is the famous *Sibylline Books*. A
Sibylline oracle ascribed to 125 B.C. is preserved in Phlegon. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[17](#fn_165) It is certainly not genuine. We need
only remark that it consists chiefly of prescriptions for sacrifices and
purifications, though it also contains certain political allusions. In
judging the much discussed problem of the *Sibylline Books*, it is
important to realize that it was only one of the many collections of
oracles circulating in Greece at the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

end of the sixth century B.C. Of course, such collections circulated
also in the Greek colonies.

Thucydides gives an illuminating account of the role of the oracles
during the Peloponnesian War. He is a child of the enlightenment of the
age of the Sophists and does not believe in them. He mentions them only
in order to show their psychological influence and the impression they
made on men's minds. It was of course a great advantage for the Spartans
that when they asked Apollo at Delphi about the war he declared that
they would conquer and that he would help them whether called upon or
not. This increased the willingness of Sparta's allies to take part in
the war. But this was also an example of the oracle's interference in
politics which ended by depriving it of its authority. When the great
plague broke out during the first years of the war, there was an
animated discussion in regard to the true wording of an old oracle.
Should it read: "The Dorian war will come and with it famine (*limos*)"?
Or should the last word be "plague" (*loimos*)? An oracle of Pythia
prohibited people from settling in the Pelargikon on the southern slope
of the Acropolis. As this was necessarily done when the country was
evacuated and the people crowded into the town, many thought that this
infringement of the divine prohibition was the cause of the calamities.
Thucydides remarks dryly that, on the contrary, the calamity of the war
was the reason why the Pelargikon was inhabited. When the Spartans
invaded Attica for the first time and devastated the fields, the
Athenians were at discord as to whether they should go and fight the
enemy, and the oracle mongers proffered numerous oracles which all were
eager to hear. <span id="fr_166"></span>[18](#fn_166)

The most outstanding and flagrant example of the role of oracles and
seers in political discussions and of their use to influence public
opinion occurred in the preparation for the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

expedition to Sicily. The undertaking was hotly disputed. There were two
parties, one of which found the risk too great and rejected the
proposal, while the other adhered to it ardently. The leader of the
party favoring the expedition was Alcibiades, whose motives were
selfish. Whatever he thought of it, he promoted the plan in order to win
glory and power for himself. It was all important for him to control
public opinion. He had a seer who prophesied that the Athenians would
earn great glory in Sicily. His adversaries and even priests used the
same methods. An embassy sent to the oracle of Ammon in the Great Oasis
came back with the answer that the Athenians would take all Syracusans.
Unfavorable sayings were concealed. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[19](#fn_167) One of these oracles, one which came
from Dodona, is preserved, together with the interpretation given after
the catastrophe. <span id="fr_168"></span>[20](#fn_168) It said that the
Athenians would settle on Sikelia. According to the interpretation, the
oracle meant a small hill with this name outside the gates of Athens.
Thucydides relates that after the great catastrophe the wrath of the
people turned not only against the politicians but also against the
oracle mongers and seers who, pretending divine inspiration, had raised
false hopes in them. <span id="fr_169"></span>[21](#fn_169)

Plutarch relates several terrible omens which foreboded the catastrophe,
beginning with the smashing of the herms and ending with the women's
lament for Adonis about the time when the fleet sailed for Sicily. A man
leaped up on the altar of the twelve gods and castrated himself. Ravens
picked off a large part of a votive gift which the Athenians had erected
at Delphi in memory of their victory over the Persians, a Palladium
standing on a date palm of bronze. When, on the advice of the oracle,
the Athenians fetched a priestess of

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Athena from
Clazomenae, it turned out that her name was Hesychia (quiet). These
stories may have been invented after the terrible end of the expedition,
but at all events they are characteristic of the mentality of the age,
the search for presages and omens everywhere and the great attention
paid to them. Of course, the exegetes were asked to interpret them. The
importance of seers, oracles, presages, omens, and the like for the
popular mind will, I hope, be evident from these examples.

Seers and oracle mongers were omnipresent. Aristophanes is illuminating
in this respect. In his comedy *The Birds*, when the City of the Birds
in the Clouds is founded, among the charlatans who present themselves is
an oracle monger who reads beautiful oracles from his book. He is chased
away by Peisthetairos with another oracle. The intrigue in Aristophanes'
comedy *The Knights* is a regular battle for the favor of old Demos, the
personification of the Athenian people, fought by means of oracle
collections. Cleon, the leading politician of this time, is represented
as a Paphlagonian slave who has ousted the two other slaves of Demos,
Nicias and Demosthenes, the two well-known generals. Cleon feeds the old
Demos with oracles and wins his favor. The other two steal his book. In
it they find an oracle saying that the leather-seller, that is, the
tanner Cleon, will be vanquished by a sausage-seller, who is still more
impudent than he. The sausage-seller is sought and found, and now the
battle begins. The sausage-seller carries the day because his oracles
promise much more to Demos. It is a bold joke, but it has a very serious
background and throws light on the means by which the opinions of the
people and of the popular assembly were influenced. Evidently seers and
oracle mongers had the ear of the people and helped to determine the
direction of public opinion.

Many of the seers, oracle mongers, and interpreters of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

dreams, presages, and omens were charlatans. But they were not all so
contemptible as they are represented by Aristophanes and as moderns are
apt to think. Some of them were influential politicians, and among them
were the exegetes, the official interpreters of sacred law chosen by the
people and the Delphic oracle. The most prominent of these was Lampon,
who was a very well-known personage in the latter part of the fifth
century B.C. He took a prominent part in the founding of the Athenian
colony Thurii, and a decree preserved in an inscription proves that he
moved proposals in the popular assembly concerning sacred matters. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[22](#fn_170) He was one of the official exegetes.
Together with Lampon is mentioned Hierocles. Aristophanes derides
Hierocles as an oracle monger, but the people commissioned him to
arrange certain sacrifices for Euboea which were prescribed by the
oracle and perhaps gave him a plot of land on Euboea. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[23](#fn_171) We shall later mention Diopeithes, a
friend of Nicias, whom Aristophanes calls avaricious in one passage and
a great man in another. <span id="fr_172"></span>[24](#fn_172) He had a
namesake at Sparta who must have been a person of consequence, for in
the contest over the throne between Agesilaus and Leotychides he
produced an oracle of Apollo directing the Spartans to beware of a lame
kingship. Agesilaus had a lame leg. But the cunning Lysander outdid the
Spartan Diopeithes, saying that the oracle referred to the illegitimate
birth of Leotychides, for there was a rumor that he was the son not of
King Agis but of Alcibiades. <span id="fr_173"></span>[25](#fn_173)

By virtue of their profession these men were the defenders of the old
religion when Sophists and unbelievers directed their attacks against
it. The trials for atheism were initiated

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

by the seer Diopeithes. According to the biographer Satyros, Anaxagoras
was accused by Thucydides, the son of Melesias, the chief political
adversary of Pericles; but according to Plutarch, Diopeithes was the
accuser. <span id="fr_174"></span>[26](#fn_174) Probably the two worked
together. Diopeithes carried a law in the popular assembly authorizing
trials of persons who did not believe in the divine and who disseminated
teachings about the celestial phenomena. Here we find the kernel of the
matter, the clash between the old religion and the new philosophy. The
heavenly bodies were mythological gods who had hardly any cult. The
contention that the sun was a glowing lump and the moon another
inhabited world could hardly be counted as atheism. On the other hand
such celestial phenomena as eclipses had a very important place as omens
in the art of the seers. The seers became aware of the danger to their
art, which some people had already begun to doubt, of the physical
explanation of such phenomena.

Another story about the seer Lampon which is told by Plutarch is very
illuminating in regard to the situation. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[27](#fn_175) A ram with one horn only was brought to
Pericles. According to the notions of the ancients this was an ominous
portent. Lampon interpreted it to mean that of the two rivals in
Athenian politics, Pericles and Thucydides, the one to whom this ram had
been brought should carry the day. But Anaxagoras had the skull of the
ram cut open and showed that the brain had the form of an egg with its
small end turned toward the root of the single horn. He gave a physical
explanation of the portent. Plutarch adds that the people admired the
sagacity of Anaxagoras much but shortly afterward, when Thucydides had
been ostracized, that of Lampon much more.

The moderns generally think that the clash took place between

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the old religion and the criticism advanced by the Sophists. This view
is at best one-sided. A very severe criticism of the gods and of their
cult had been made by Xenophanes and Heraclitus without doing much harm.
The Sophists, in fact, were not so aggressive as these philosophers,
although their criticism without doubt undermined faith in the gods.
Critias advanced the opinion that some wise man had invented the gods in
order to deter men from doing wrong in secret. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[28](#fn_176) Prodicus took up the metonymical use of
the names of the gods which was already common in Homer and concluded
that man considered as a god everything that was useful to him and that
hence wine was called Dionysus, fire Hephaistos, bread Demeter, and so
forth. <span id="fr_177"></span>[29](#fn_177) Protagoras was cautious,
stating that he was not able to say of the gods whether they existed or
not, nor what shape they had; he said that much prevents knowing
this--the obscurity of the matter and the brevity of human life. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[30](#fn_178) This is philosophy and must be passed
over in an exposition of popular religion. The discussions of the
Sophists were beyond the horizon of the common people, who listened to
them partly in amusement and partly in irritation. It is characteristic
that Euripides, the spokesman of the new wisdom on the stage, won few
victories, while many fell to Sophocles. Sophocles won the favor of the
people because he was a good Athenian citizen who believed in the gods.
But his religion was conventional, if this word is not taken in a bad
sense. It is very characteristic that the only part of religion for
which he shows genuine zeal is the belief in oracles.

The intellectual arguments of the Sophists were above the understanding
of the common people. The arguments of natural philosophy, at least to a
certain degree, were not. Aristophanes

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

popularized them. In *The Clouds* he makes Socrates prove that Zeus does
not exist by the fact that the thunderbolt hits not the wrongdoers but
temples, mountaintops, and tall oaks. This the people understood. In
another passage he gives a grotesque explanation of the rain which Zeus
pours down. <span id="fr_179"></span>[31](#fn_179)

Moderns are astonished that natural philosophy and sophistic are
confused, that Aristophanes makes Socrates represent them both. From the
point of view of the good Athenian citizen it is not astonishing at all.
They were not so educated or lettered as to be able to distinguish
between the hairsplitting of the Sophists and the hypotheses of the
natural philosophers, of whose doctrines the Sophists were not ignorant.
The people confused them, and Aristophanes reflects popular opinion by
doing the same, although his exposition of their doctrines in *The
Clouds* was a little too much for the audience. This comedy was not a
success.

The real clash took place between that part of religion which interfered
most in practical life and with which everyone came in contact every
day, namely, the art of foretelling the future, and the attempts of
natural philosophy to give physical explanations of celestial and
atmospheric phenomena, of portents, and of other events. Such
explanations undermined the belief in the art of the seers and made it
superfluous. For if these phenomena were to be explained in a natural
way, the art of the seers came to naught. Belief in the oracles also was
weakened. The prejudices shown by the oracles, as in the case of the
favor shown by the Delphic oracle for the Spartans, contributed to the
disbelief. The belief in the oracles was the business not only of the
priests and seers but also of the politicians. Only one method of
foretelling the future--dreams--was not attacked. Everyone believed in
dreams, and even

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aristotle treated
of the divine nature of dreams. <span id="fr_180"></span>[32](#fn_180)
Everyone wanted to look into the future, as people still do. The defense
of the oracles and of the art of the seers was a very important matter.

Naturally the seers and interpreters of oracles and omens defended their
art, and since their art was implied in the old religion, the defense of
the old religion also fell to their lot. For the real point where belief
and disbelief clashed was the opposition between the art of foretelling
the future and the physical explanations of natural philosophy. The
clash occurred not in intellectual discussion but in practical life, and
consequently it became the business of the whole people. That it was so
is proved by the fact that the seers rose up to defend the old religion
when they became aware of the danger. Diopeithes introduced the trials
for atheism, and the first man to be accused was Anaxagoras, the Ionian
natural philosopher who lived at Athens. The denunciation of Socrates
contained the same accusation, that he searched for things beneath the
earth and above the sky. But in his case a reference to sophistic was
added, for he was also accused of making the weaker case appear the
stronger.

The trials for atheism were useless. They were not able to check the
increasing disbelief, and they ceased in the course of time. They are no
honor to Athens, but we should try to understand the situation from
which they arose. This situation was created by the interference of
religion in practical life and politics, and it explains why men who
were at the same time politicians and seers thought it possible to
dispel the danger by means of laws and courts. They were supported by
the Athenian people, for the people disliked the attacks on the gods who
had given glory and power to their city and in emergencies they feared
the wrath of these gods. Disbelief in

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

the gods was manifest in the physical explanations of the phenomena of
nature, which the seers interpreted as signs of the wrath of the gods.
The people understood this, and the trials for atheism were the
consequence. The fate of the old religion was sealed, but the belief in
the art of foretelling the future did not cease. In late antiquity it
was stronger than ever. It was a part of popular religion, and I have
wished to put its importance in the right light.

I have tried to expound the popular religion of the ancient Greeks. To
many popular religion is religion in folklore, and I have dwelt at
length on this part of the religion. The great gods also have their
roots in popular religion, although they come to us magnified by art and
literature. Certain moral and social ideas formed a part of the life of
the people, and these also found religious expression and were placed
under the protection of the gods. They are an important part of popular
religion.

Religion is dependent on the conditions of life. When these change new
needs arise and old forms wane, and popular religion undergoes
corresponding changes. Such changes were effected when people crowded
into the towns and began to earn their livelihood not by agriculture and
stockbreeding but by industry and commerce. Changes in political life
and the rise of democracy also caused certain changes in religion. We
should bear in mind that in the democratic states the people formed the
popular assembly to which all decisions pertained, even in religious
matters. The result was that religion was secularized to a certain
degree. But it was not dead. Religion tried to find new forms
corresponding to the new needs and the new ideas of the people. This
movement was only beginning in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. The
real turning point is the age of the Sophists. It came to an issue in
late antiquity.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

I take the liberty to conclude with a simile. Religion is like a grove
with tall and stately trees, which reach the sky and strike the eye from
afar, and with an undergrowth of brushwood and grass. It is easy to fell
the trees, and, like the pines in the proverb which King Croesus
referred to when he threatened to eradicate the Milesians like a pine,
they do not put forth new shoots, although new trees can be planted
instead of the old ones. But the undergrowth persists. The brushwood and
the grass may be cut down or even burned off; it springs up again. Every
year the undergrowth brings forth the same simple leaves and blossoms.
It changes only if the mother soil is changed. This took place in
ancient Greece, as it does today, through the rise of new conditions of
life, industry, commerce, democracy, and intercourse between peoples and
classes. Popular religion changed accordingly. In backward parts of the
country, however, the old mode of life and the old popular religion
persisted and have continued to persist down to our own day, but they
are giving way again because conditions of life are once more being
profoundly changed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[122:1](gpr11.htm#fr_149) E. Derenne, Les
Procès d’impiété intentés aux philosopher à Athènes au V<sup>me</sup> et
au IV<sup>me</sup> siècles avant J.-C. (Liege, 1930).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[123:2](gpr11.htm#fr_150) *Anabasis*, III, 1, 5
ff.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[123:3](gpr11.htm#fr_151) *Ibid*., V, 6, 16 ff.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[124:4](gpr11.htm#fr_152) *Ibid*., III, 1, 11
ff.; see also VI, 1, 22, and IV, 3, 8 ff.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[124:5](gpr11.htm#fr_153) Ibid., VI, 1, 23.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[124:6](gpr11.htm#fr_154) *Ibid*., III, 2, 9.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[125:7](gpr11.htm#fr_155) C. Carapanos, *Dodone
et ses ruines* (Paris, 1878), pp. 68 ff.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[126:8](gpr11.htm#fr_156) Thucydides, VII, 50.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[126:9](gpr11.htm#fr_157) *Nicias*, 23.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[126:10](gpr11.htm#fr_158) Xenophon,
*Anabasis*, V, 6, 29.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[126:11](gpr11.htm#fr_159) Aeneas Tacticus,
*Poliorcetica*, 10, 4.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[127:12](gpr11.htm#fr_160) *Anabasis*, VII, 8.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[127:13](gpr11.htm#fr_161) L. Weniger, "Die
Seher von Olympia," *Archiv Für Religionswissenschaft*, XVIII (1915), 53
ff.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[128:14](gpr11.htm#fr_162) Herodotus, V, 90.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[129:15](gpr11.htm#fr_163) Herodotus, VII, 6.
See also H. Diels, "Über Epimenides von Kreta," *Sitzungsberichte der
Königlich preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften* (Berlin), 1891, pp.
396 ff., and H. Bengtson, "Einzelpersönlichkeit and athenischer Staat
zur Zeit des Peisistratos and des Miltiades," *Sitzungsberichte der
Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philos.-hist. Abt.* (Munich),
1939, No. 1, pp. 26 ff.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[129:16](gpr11.htm#fr_164) Herodotus, VIII, 77.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[129:17](gpr11.htm#fr_165) The text is printed
in H. Diels, *Sibyllinische Blätter* (Berlin, 1890), pp. 111 ff.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[130:18](gpr11.htm#fr_166) Thucydides, II, 54,
17, 21.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[131:19](gpr11.htm#fr_167) Plutarch, *Nicias*,
13.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[131:20](gpr11.htm#fr_168) Pausanias, VIII, 11,
12.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[131:21](gpr11.htm#fr_169) Thucydides, VIII, 1.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[133:22](gpr11.htm#fr_170) Aristophanes,
*Nubes*, vs. 332 and scholion; *Inscriptiones Graecae*, Editio minor,
Vol. I, No. 76.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[133:23](gpr11.htm#fr_171) Aristophanes, *Pax*,
vss. 1046 ff., and scholion.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[133:24](gpr11.htm#fr_172) *Equites*, vs. 1085,
*Vespae*, vs. 380, and *Aves*, vs. 988.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[133:25](gpr11.htm#fr_173) Plutarch,
*Agesilaus*, 3.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[134:26](gpr11.htm#fr_174) Diogenes Laertius,
II, 12 ff.; Plutarch, *Pericles*, 32.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[134:27](gpr11.htm#fr_175) Pericles, 6.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[135:28](gpr11.htm#fr_176) *Sisyphus*, in
Nauck, *Tragicorum Graecorum fragmenta*, pp. 771 ff.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[135:29](gpr11.htm#fr_177) Frag. 5, in Diels,
*Fragmente der Vorsokratiker*, II, 316.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[135:30](gpr11.htm#fr_178) Frag. 4, in Diels,
*Fragmente der Vorsokratiker*, II, 265.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[136:31](gpr11.htm#fr_179) *Nubes*, vss. 399
ff.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[137:32](gpr11.htm#fr_180) *On Dreams* and *On
Prophecy in Sleep*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Illustrations 1-3](gpr12)
