[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp01)  [Next](dwp03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# DISCOURSE ON THE WORSHIP OF PRIAPUS

## PART I

MEN, considered collectively, are at all times the same animals,
employing the same organs, and endowed with the same faculties: their
passions, prejudices, and conceptions, will of course be formed upon the
same internal principles, although directed to various ends, and
modified in various ways, by the variety of external circumstances
operating upon them. Education and science may correct, restrain, and
extend; but neither can annihilate or create: they may turn and
embellish the currents; but can neither stop nor enlarge the springs,
which, continuing to flow with a perpetual and equal tide, return to
their ancient channels, when the causes that perverted them are
withdrawn.

The first principles of the human mind will be more directly brought
into action, in proportion to the earnestness and affection with which
it contemplates its object; and passion and prejudice will acquire
dominion over it, in proportion as its first principles

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

are more directly brought into action. On all common subjects, this
dominion of passion and prejudice is restrained by the evidence of sense
and perception; but, when the mind is led to the contemplation of things
beyond its comprehension, all such restraints vanish: reason has then
nothing to oppose to the phantoms of imagination, which acquire terrors
from their obscurity, and dictate uncontrolled, because unknown. Such is
the case in all religious subjects, which, being beyond the reach of
sense or reason, are always embraced or rejected with violence and heat.
Men think they know, because they are sure they feel; and are firmly
convinced, because strongly agitated. Hence proceed that haste and
violence with which devout persons of all religions condemn the rites
and doctrines of others, and the furious zeal and bigotry with which
they maintain their own; while perhaps, if both were equally well
understood, both would be found to have the same meaning, and only to
differ in the modes of conveying it.

Of all the profane rites which belonged to the ancient polytheism, none
were more furiously inveighed against by the zealous propagators of the
Christian faith, than the obscene ceremonies performed in the worship of
Priapus; which appeared not only contrary to the gravity and sanctity of
religion, but subversive

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

of the first principles of decency and good order in society. Even the
form itself, under which the god was represented, appeared to them a
mockery of all piety and devotion, and more fit to be placed in a
brothel than a temple. But the forms and ceremonials of a religion are
not always to be understood in their direct and obvious sense; but are
to be considered as symbolical representations of some hidden meaning,
which may be extremely wise and just, though the symbols themselves, to
those who know not their true signification, may appear in the highest
degree absurd and extravagant. It has often happened, that avarice and
superstition have continued these symbolical representations for ages
after their original meaning has been lost and forgotten; when they must
of course appear nonsensical and ridiculous, if not impious and
extravagant.

Such is the case with the rite now under consideration, than which
nothing can be more monstrous and indecent, if considered in its plain
and obvious meaning, or as a part of the Christian worship; but which
will be found to be a very natural symbol of a very natural and
philosophical system of religion, if considered according to its
original use and intention.

What this was, I shall endeavour in the following sheets to explain as
concisely and clearly as possible. Those who wish to know how generally
the symbol,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and the religion which it represented, once prevailed, will consult the
great and elaborate work of Mr. D'Hancarville, who, with infinite
learning and ingenuity, has traced its progress over the whole earth. My
endeavour will be merely to show, from what original principles in the
human mind it was first adopted, and how it was connected with the
ancient theology: matters of very curious inquiry, which will serve,
better perhaps than any others, to illustrate that truth, which ought to
be present in every man's mind when be judges of the actions of others,
*that in morals, as well as physics, there is no effect without an
adequate cause*. If in doing this, I frequently find it necessary to
differ in opinion with the learned author above-mentioned, it will be
always with the utmost deference and respect; as it is to him that we
are indebted for the only reasonable method of explaining the
emblematical works of the ancient artists.

Whatever the Greeks and Egyptians meant by the symbol in question, it
was certainly nothing ludicrous or licentious; of which we need no other
proof, than its having been carried in solemn procession at the
celebration of those mysteries in which the first principles of their
religion, the knowledge of the God of Nature, the First, the Supreme,
the Intellectual, <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) were

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

preserved free from the vulgar superstitions, and communicated, under
the strictest oaths of secrecy, to the iniated (initiated); who were
obliged to purify themselves, prior to their initiation, by abstaining
from venery, and all impure food. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) We
may therefore be assured, that no impure meaning could be conveyed by
this symbol; but that it represented some fundamental principle of their
faith. What this was, it is difficult to obtain any direct information,
on account of the secrecy under which this part of their religion was
guarded. Plutarch tells us, that the Egyptians represented Osiris with
the organ of veneration erect, to show his generative and prolific
power: he also tells us, that Osiris was the same Diety as the Bacchus
of the Greek Mythology; who was also the same as the first begotten Love
(πρωτογονος) of Orpheus and Hesiod. <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md)
This deity is celebrated by the ancient poets as the creator of all
things, the father of gods and men; <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9.md)
and it appears, by the passage above referred to, that the organ of
veneration was the symbol of his great characteristic attribute. This is
perfectly consistent with the general practice of the Greek artists, who
(as will be made appear hereafter) uniformly represented the attributes
of the deity by the corresponding properties

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

observed in the objects of sight. They thus personified the epithets and
titles applied to him in the hymns and litanies, and conveyed their
ideas of him by forms, only intelligible to the initiated, instead of
sounds, which were intelligible to all. The organ of generation
represented the generative or creative attribute, and in the language of
painting and sculpture, signified the same as the epithet παλλενετωζ, in
the Orphic litanies.

This interpretation will perhaps surprise those who have not been
accustomed to divest their minds of the prejudices of education and
fashion; but I doubt not, but it will appear just and reasonable to
those who consider manners and customs as relative to the natural causes
which produced them, rather than to the artificial opinions and
prejudices of any particular age or country. There is naturally no
impurity or licentiousness in the moderate and regular gratification of
any natural appetite; the turpitude consisting wholly in the excess or
perversion. Neither are organs of one species of enjoyment naturally to
be considered as subjects of shame and concealment more than those of
another; every refinement of modern manners on this head being derived
from acquired habit, not from nature: habit, indeed, long established;
for it seems to have been as general in Homer's days as at present; but
which certainly did

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

not exist when the mystic symbols of the ancient worship were first
adopted. As these symbols were intended to express abstract ideas by
objects of sight, the contrivers of them naturally selected those
objects whose characteristic properties seemed to have the greatest
analogy with the Divine attributes which they wished to represent. In an
age, therefore, when no prejudices of artificial decency existed, what
more just and natural image could they find, by which to express their
idea of the beneficent power of the great Creator, than that organ which
endowed them with the power of procreation, and made them partakers, not
only of the felicity of the Deity, but of his great characteristic
attribute, that of multiplying his own image, communicating his
blessings, and extending them to generations yet unborn?

In the ancient theology of Greece, preserved in the Orphic Fragments,
this Deity, the Ερως πρωτογονος, or first-begotten Love, is said to have
been produced, together with Æther, by Time, or Eternity (Κρονος), and
Necessity (Αναγχη), operating upon inert matter (Χαος). He is described
as eternally begetting (αειγνητης); the Father of Night, called in later
times, the lucid or splendid, (φανης), because he first appeared in
splendour; of a double nature, (διφυης), as possessing the general power
of creation and generation, both active and passive, both

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

male and female. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) Light is his
necessary and primary

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

attribute, co-eternal with himself, and with him brought forth from
inert matter by necessity. Hence the purity and sanctity always
attributed to light by the Greeks. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md)
He is called the Father of Night, because by attracting the light to
himself, and becoming the fountain which distributed it to the world, he
produced night, which is called eternally-begotten, because it had
eternally existed, although mixed and lost in the general mass. He is
said to pervade the world with the motion of his wings, bringing pure
light; and thence to be called the splendid, the ruling Priapus, and
Self-illumined (αντανγης <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12).md). It is to
be observed that the word Πριηπος, afterwards the name of a subordinate
deity, is here used as a title relating to one of his attributes; the
reasons for which I shall endeavour to explain hereafter. Wings are
figuratively attributed to him as being the emblems of swiftness and
incubation; by the first of which he pervaded matter, and by the second
fructified the egg of Chaos. The egg was carried in procession at the
celebration of the mysteries, because, as Plutarch it was the material
of generation (νλη της γενεσεως <span id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13).md)
containing the seeds and germs of life and motion, without being
actually possessed of either.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

\[paragraph continues\] For this reason, it was a very proper symbol of
Chaos, containing the seeds and materials of all things, which, however,
were barren and useless, until the Creator fructified them by the
incubation of his vital spirit, and released them from the restraints of
inert matter, by the efforts of his divine strength. The incubation of
the vital spirit is represented on the colonial medals of Tyre, by a
serpent wreathed around an egg; <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) for
the serpent, having the power of casting his skin, and apparently
renewing his youth, became the symbol of life and vigour, and as such is
always made an attendant on the mythological deities presiding over
health. <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md) It is also observed, that
animals of the serpent kind retain life more pertinaciously than any
others except the Polypus, which is sometimes represented upon the Greek
Medals, <span id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16.md) probably in its stead. I
have myself seen the heart of an adder continue its vital motions for
many minutes after it has been taken from the body, and even renew them,
after it has been cold, upon being moistened with warm water, and
touched with a stimulus.

The Creator, delivering the fructified seeds of things from the
restraints of inert matter by his divine

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

 

<span id="img_pl03"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl03.jpg.md)  
PLATE III  
ANTIQUE GEMS AND GREEK MEDALS

 

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

strength, is represented on innumerable Greek medals by the Urns, or
wild Bull, in the act of butting against the Egg of Chaos, and breaking
it with his horns. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) It is true, that
the egg is not represented with the bull on any of those which I have
seen; but Mr. D'Hancarville <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) has
brought examples from other countries, where the same system prevailed,
which, as well as the general analogy of the Greek theology prove that
the egg must have been understood, and that the attitude of the bull
could have no other meaning. I shall also have occasion hereafter to
show by other examples, that it was no uncommon practice, in these
mystic monuments, to make a part of a group represent the whole. It was
from this horned symbol of the power of the Deity that horns were placed
in the portraits of kings to show that their power was derived from
Heaven, and acknowledged no earthly superior. The moderns have indeed
changed the meaning of this symbol, and given it a sense of which,
perhaps, it would be difficult to find the origin, though I have often
wondered that it has never exercised the sagacity of those learned
gentlemen

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

who make British antiquities the subjects of their laborious inquiries.
At present, it certainly does not bear any character of dignity or
power; nor does it ever imply that those to whom it is attributed have
been particularly favoured by the generative or creative powers. But
this is a subject much too important to be discussed in a digression; I
shall therefore leave it to those learned antiquarians who have done
themselves so much honour, and the public so much service, by their
successful inquiries into customs of the same kind. To their
indefatigable industry and exquisite ingenuity I earnestly recommend it,
only observing that this modern acceptation of the symbol is of
considerable antiquity, for it is mentioned as proverbial in the
Oneirocritics of Artemidorus; <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) and
that it is not now confined to Great Britain, but prevails in most parts
of Christendom, as the ancient acceptation of it did formerly in most
parts of the world, even among that people from whose religion
Christianity is derived; for it is a common mode of expression in the
Old Testament, to say that the horns of any one shall be exalted, in
order to signify that he shall be raised into power or pre-eminence; and
when Moses descended from the Mount with the spirit of God still upon
him, his head appeared horned. <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 

<span id="img_pl04"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl04.jpg.md)  
PLATE IV  
MEDALS POSSESSED BY PAYNE KNIGHT

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

To the head of the bull was sometimes joined the organ of generation,
which represented not only the strength of the Creator, but the peculiar
direction of it to the most beneficial purpose, the propagation of
sensitive beings. Of this there is a small bronze in the Museum of Mr.
Townley, of which an engraving is given in Plate III. Fig. 2. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

Sometimes this generative attribute is represented by the symbol of the
goat, supposed to be the most salacious of animals, and therefore
adopted upon the same principles as the bull and the serpent. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22.md) The choral odes, sung in honour of the
generator Bacchus, were hence called τραγωδιαι, or songs of the goat; a
title which is now applied to the dramatic dialogues anciently inserted
in these odes, to break their uniformity . On a medal, struck in honour
of Augustus, the goat terminates in the tail of a fish, to show the
generative power incorporated with water. Under his feet is the globe of
the earth, supposed to be fertilised by this union; and upon his back,
the cornucopia, representing the result of this fertility. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23.md)

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Mr. D'Hancarville attributes the origin of all these symbols to the
ambiguity of words; the same term being employed in the primitive
language to signify God and a Bull, the Universe and a Goat, Life and a
Serpent. But words are only the types and symbols of ideas, and
therefore must be posterior to them, in the same manner as ideas are to
their objects. The words of a primitive language, being imitative of the
ideas from which they sprung, and of the objects they meant to express,
as far as the imperfections of the organs of speech will admit, there
must necessarily be the same kind of analogy between them as between the
ideas and objects themselves. It is impossible, therefore, that in such
a language any ambiguity of this sort could exist, as it does in
secondary languages; the words of which, being collected from various
sources, and blended together without having any natural connection,
become arbitrary signs of convention, instead of imitative
representations of ideas. In this case it often happens, that words,
similar in form, but different in meaning, have been adopted from
different sources, which, being blended together, lose their little
difference of form, and retain their entire difference of meaning. Hence
ambiguities arise, such as those above mentioned, which could not
possibly exist in an original tongue.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

The Greek poets and artists frequently give the personification of a
particular attribute for the Deity himself; hence he is called
Τανροζοας, Τανρωπος, Τανρομορφος <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md),
&c., and hence the initials and monograms of the Orphic epithets applied
to the Creator, are found with the bull, and other symbols, on the Greek
medals <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25.md). It must not be imagined from
hence, that the ancients supposed the Deity to exist under the form of a
bull, a goat, or a serpent: on the contrary, he is always described in
the Orphic theology as a general pervading Spirit, without form, or
distinct locality of any kind; and appears, by a curious fragment
preserved by Proclus <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26.md), to have been
no other than *attraction* personified. The self-created mind (νοας
αυτογενεθλος) of the Eternal Father is said to have spread the heavy
bond of love through all things (πασιν ενεοπειρεν δεσμον περιζριθη
Ερωτος), in order that they might endure for ever. This Eternal Father
is Κρονος, time or eternity, personified; and so taken for the unknown
Being that fills eternity and infinity. The ancient theologists knew
that we could form no positive idea of infinity, whether of power,
space, or time; it being

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

fleeting and fugitive, and eluding the understanding by a continued and
boundless progression. The only notion we have of it is from the
addition or division of finite things, which suggest the idea of
infinite, only from a power we feel in ourselves of still multiplying
and dividing without end. The Schoolmen indeed were bolder, and, by a
summary mode of reasoning, in which they were very expert, proved that
they had as clear and adequate an idea of infinity, as of any finite
substance whatever. Infinity, said they, is that which has no bounds.
This negation, being a positive assertion, must be founded on a positive
idea. We have therefore a positive idea of infinity.

The Eclectic Jews, and their followers, the Ammonian and Christian
Platonics, who endeavoured to make their own philosophy and religion
conform to the ancient theology, held infinity of space to be only the
immensity of the divine presence. Ὁ Θεος ἑαντσ τοπος εστι <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) was their dogma, which is now inserted
into the Confessional of the Greek Church. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md) This infinity was distinguished by them
from common space, as time was from eternity. Whatever is eternal or
infinite, said they, must be absolutely indivisible; because division is
in itself inconsistent

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

with infinite continuity and duration: therefore space and time are
distinct from infinity and eternity, which are void of all parts and
gradations whatever. Time is measured by years, days, hours, &c., and
distinguished by past, present, and future; but these, being divisions,
are excluded from eternity, as locality is from infinity, and as both
are from the Being who fills both; who can therefore feel no succession
of events, nor know any gradation of distance; but must comprehend
infinite duration as if it were one moment, and infinite extent as if it
were but a single point. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) Hence the
Ammonian Platonics speak of him as concentered in his own unity, and
extended through all things, but participated of by none. Being of a
nature more refined and elevated than intelligence itself, he could not
be known by sense, perception, or reason; and being the cause of all, he
must be anterior to all, even to eternity itself, if considered as
eternity of time, and not as the intellectual unity, which is the Deity
himself, by whose emanations all things exist, and to whose proximity or
distances they owe their degrees of excellence or baseness. *Being*
itself, in its most abstract sense, is derived from him; for that which
is the cause and beginning of all *Being*, cannot be a part of that
*All* which

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

sprung from himself: therefore he is not *Being*, nor is *Being* his
*Attribute*; for that which has an attribute cannot have the abstract
simplicity of pure unity. All *Being* is in its nature finite; for, if
it was otherwise, it must be without bounds every way; and therefore
could have no gradation of proximity to the first cause, or consequent
pre-eminence of one part over another: for, as all distinctions of time
are excluded from infinite duration, and all divisions of locality from
infinite extent, so are all degrees of priority from infinite
progression. The mind *is* and *acts* in itself; but the abstract unity
of the first cause is neither in itself, nor in another;--not in itself,
because that would imply modification, from which abstract simplicity is
necessarily exempt; nor in another, because then there would be an
hypostatical duality, instead of absolute unity. In both cases there
would be a locality of hypostasis, inconsistent with intellectual
infinity. As all physical attributes were excluded from this
metaphysical abstraction, which they called their first cause, he must
of course be destitute of all moral ones, which are only generalized
modes of action of the former. Even simple abstract truth was denied
him; for truth, as Proclus says, is merely the relative to falsehood;
and no relative can exist without a positive or correlative. The

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Deity therefore who has no falsehood, can have no truth, in our sense of
the word. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

As metaphysical theology is a study very generally, and very deservedly,
neglected at present, I thought this little specimen of it might be
entertaining, from its novelty, to most readers; especially as it is
intimately connected with the ancient system, which I have here
undertaken to examine. Those, who wish to know more of it, may consult
Proclus on the Theology of Plato, where they will find the most
exquisite ingenuity most wantonly wasted. No persons ever showed greater
acuteness or strength of reasoning than the Platonics and Scholastics;
but having quitted common sense, and attempted to mount into the
intellectual world, they expended it all in abortive efforts which may
amuse the imagination, but cannot satisfy the understanding.

The ancient Theologists showed more discretion; for, finding that they
could conceive no idea of infinity, they were content to revere the
Infinite Being in the most general and efficient exertion of his power,
attraction; whose agency is perceptible through all matter, and to which
all motion may, perhaps, be ultimately traced. This power, being
personified, became the secondary Deity, to whom all

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

adoration and worship were directed, and who is therefore frequently
considered as the sole and supreme cause of all things. His agency being
supposed to extend through the whole material world, and to produce all
the various revolutions by which its system is sustained, his attributes
were of course extremely numerous and varied. These were expressed by
various titles and epithets in the mystic hymns and litanies, which the
artists endeavoured to represent by various forms and characters of men
and animals. The great characteristic attribute was represented by the
organ of generation in that state of tension and rigidity which is
necessary to the due performance of its functions. Many small images of
this kind have been found among the ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii,
attached to the bracelets, which the chaste and pious matrons of
antiquity wore round their necks and arms. In these, the organ of
generation appears alone, or only accompanied with the wings of
incubation, <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) in order to show that
the devout wearer devoted herself wholly and solely to procreation, the
great end for which she was ordained. So expressive a symbol, being
constantly in her view, must keep her attention fixed on its natural
object, and continually remind her of the gratitude she owed

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

 

<span id="img_pl05"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl05.jpg.md)  
PLATE V  
FIGURES OF PAN AND GEMS

 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the Creator, for having taken her into his service, made her a partaker
of his most valuable blessings, and employed her as the passive
instrument in the exertion of his most beneficial power.

The female organs of generation were revered <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) as symbols of the generative powers of
nature or matter, as the male were of the generative powers of God. They
are usually represented emblematically, by the Shell, or *Concha
Veneris*, which was therefore worn by devout persons of antiquity, as it
still continues to be by pilgrims, and many of the common women of
Italy. The union of both was expressed by the hand mentioned in Sir
William Hamilton's letter; <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md) which
being a less explicit symbol, has escaped the attention of the
reformers, and is still worn, as well as the shell, by the women of
Italy, though without being understood. It represented the act of
generation, which was considered as a solemn sacrament, in honour of the
Creator, as will be more fully shown hereafter.

The male organs of generation are sometimes found represented by signs
of the same sort, which might properly be called the symbols of symbols.
One of the most remarkable of these is a cross,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

in the form of the letter T, <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) which
thus served as the emblem of creation and generation, before the church
adopted it as the sign of salvation; a lucky coincidence of ideas,
which, without doubt, facilitated the reception of it among the
faithful. To the representative of the male organs was sometimes added a
human head, which gives it the exact appearance of a crucifix; as it has
on a medal of Cyzicus, published by M. Pellerin. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md) On an ancient medal, found in Cyprus,
which, from the style of workmanship, is certainly anterior to the
Macedonian conquest, it appears with the chaplet or rosary, such as is
now used in the Romish churches; <span id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36.md) the
beads of which were used, anciently, to reckon time. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[4](#fn_37.md) Their being placed in a circle, marked its
progressive continuity; while their separation from each other marked
the divisions, by which it is made to return on itself, and thus produce
years, months, and days. The symbol of the creative power is placed upon
them, because these divisions were particularly under his influence and
protection; the sun being his visible image, and the centre of his
power, from which his emanations

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

extended through the universe. Hence the Egyptians, in their sacred
hymns, called upon Osiris, as the being who dwelt concealed in the
embraces of the sun; <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) and hence the
great luminary itself is called Κοσμοκρατωζ (Ruler of the World) in the
Orphic Hymns. <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39.md)

This general emanation of the pervading Spirit of God, by which all
things are generated and maintained, is beautifully described by Virgil,
in the following lines:

                        Deum namque ire per omnes  
Terrasque, tractusque maris, cœlumque profundum.  
Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,  
Quemque sibi tenues nascentum arcessere vitas.  
Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri  
Omnia: nec morti esse locum, sed viva volare  
Sideris in numerum, atque alto succedere cœlo. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40.md)

The Ethereal Spirit is here described as expanding itself through the
universe, and giving life and motion to the inhabitants of earth, water,
and air, by a participation of its own essence, each particle of which
returned to its native source, at the dissolution of the body which it
animated. Hence, not only men, but all animals, and even vegetables,
were supposed to be impregnated with some particles of the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Divine Nature infused into them, from which
their various qualities and dispositions, as well as their powers of
propagation, were supposed to be derived. These appeared to be so many
emanations of the Divine attributes, operating in different modes and
degrees, according to the nature of the beings to which they belonged.
Hence the characteristic properties of animals and plants were not only
regarded as representations, but as actual emanations of the Divine
Power, consubstantial with his own essence. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) For this reason, the symbols were treated
with greater respect and veneration than if they had been merely signs
and characters of convention. Plutarch says, that most of the Egyptian
priests held the bull Apis, who was worshipped with so much ceremony, to
be only an image of the Spirit of Osiris. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42.md) This I take to have been the real meaning
of all the animal worship of the Egyptians, about which so much has been
written, and so little discovered. Those animals or plants, in which any
particular attribute of the Deity seemed to predominate, became the
symbols of that attribute, and were accordingly worshipped as the images
of Divine Providence, acting in that particular direction. Like many

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

 

<span id="img_pl06"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl06.jpg.md)  
PLATE VI  
THE TAURIC DIANA

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

other customs, both of ancient and modern worship, the practice,
probably, continued long after the reasons upon which it was founded
were either wholly lost, or only partially preserved, in vague
traditions. This was the case in Egypt; for, though many of the priests
knew or conjectured the origin of the worship of the bull, they could
give no rational account why the crocodile, the ichneumon, and the ibis,
received similar honours. The symbolical characters, called
hieroglyphics, continued to be esteemed by them as more holy and
venerable than the conventional representations of sounds,
notwithstanding their manifest inferiority; yet it does not appear, from
any accounts extant, that they were able to assign any reason for this
preference. On the contrary, Strabo tells us that the Egyptians of his
time were wholly ignorant of their ancient learning and religion, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) though impostors continually pretended to
explain it. Their ignorance in these points is not to be wondered at,
considering that the most ancient Egyptians, of whom we have any
authentic accounts, lived after the subversion of their monarchy and
destruction of their temples by the Persians, who used every endeavour
to annihilate their religion; first, by command of Cambyses, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) and then of Ochus. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45.md) What they

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

were before this calamity, we have no direct information; for Herodotus
is the earliest traveller, and he visited this country when in ruins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[28:1](dwp02.htm#fr_6.md) Plut. *de Is. et Os*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[29:1](dwp02.htm#fr_7.md) Plut. *de Is. et Os*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[29:2](dwp02.htm#fr_8.md) Ibid.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[29:3](dwp02.htm#fr_9.md) Orph. *Argon*. 422.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[32:1](dwp02.htm#fr_10.md) Orph. *Argon*., ver. 12.
This poem of the Argonautic Expedition is not of the ancient Orpheus,
but written in his name by some poet posterior to Homer; as appears by
the allusion to Orpheus's descent into hell; a fable invented after the
Homeric times. It is, however, of very great antiquity, as both the
style and manner sufficiently prove; and, I think, cannot be later than
the age of Pisistratus, to which it has been generally attributed. The
passage here referred to is cited from another poem, which, at the time
this was written, passed for a genuine work of the Thracian bard:
whether justly or not, matters little; for its being thought so at that
time proves it to be of the remotest antiquity. The other Orphic poems
cited in this discourse are the Hymns, or Litanies, which are attributed
by the early Christian and later Platonic writers to Onomacritus, a poet
of the age of Pisistratus; but which are probably of various authors
(See Brucker. *Hist. Crit. Philos.*, vol. I., part 2, lib., c. i.) They
contain, however, nothing which proves them to he later than the Trojan
times; and if Onomacritus, or any later author, had anything to do with
them, it seems to have been only in new-versifying them, and changing
the dialect (See Gesner. *Proleg. Orphica*, p. 26). Had he forged them,
and attempted to impose them upon the world, as the genuine compositions
of an ancient bard, there can be no doubt but that he would have stuffed
them with antiquated words and obsolete phrases; which is by no means
the case, the language being pure and worthy the age of Pisistratus.
These Poems are not properly hymns, for the hymns of the Greeks
contained the nativities and actions of the gods, like those of Homer
and Callimachus; but these are compositions of a different kind, and are
properly invocations or prayers used in the Orphic mysteries, and seem
nearly of the same class as the Psalms of the Hebrews. The reason why
they are so seldom mentioned by any of the early writers, and so
perpetually referred to by the later, is that they belonged to the
mystic worship, where everything was kept concealed under the strictest
oaths of secrecy. But after the rise of Christianity, this sacred
silence <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> was broken by the Greek converts
who revealed everything which they thought would depreciate the old
religion or recommend the now; whilst the heathen priests revealed
whatever they thought would have contrary tendency; and endeavoured to
show, by publishing the real mystic creed of their religion, that the
principles of it were not so absurd as its outward structure seemed to
infer; but that, when stripped of poetical allegory and vulgar fable,
their theology was pure, reasonable, and sublime (Gesner. *Proleg.
Orphica*). The collection of these poems now extant, being probably
compiled and versified by several hands, with some forged, and other
interpolated and altered, must be read with great caution; more
especially the Fragments preserved by the Fathers of the Church and
Ammonian Platonics; for these writers made no scruple of forging any
monuments of antiquity which suited their purposes; particularly the
former, who, in addition to their natural zeal, having the interests of
a confederate body to support, thought every means by which they could
benefit that body, by extending the lights of revelation, and gaining
proselytes to the true faith, not only allowable, but meritorious (See
Clementina, Hom. vii., see. 10. Recogn. lib. i., sec. 65. Origen, *apud
Hieronom. Apolog*. i., *contra Ruf*. et Chrysostom. *de Sacerdot*., lib.
i. Chrysostom, in particular, not only Justifies, but warmly commends,
any frauds that can be practiced for the advantage of the Church of
Christ). Pausanias says (lib. ix.), that the Hymns of Orpheus were few
and short; but next In poetical merit to those of Homer, and superior to
them in sanctity (θεολογικωτεροι) These are probably the same as the
genuine part of the collection now extant; but they are so intermixed,
that it is difficult to say which are genuine and which are not. Perhaps
there is no surer rule for judging than to compare the epithets and
allegories with the symbols and monograms on the Greek medals, and to
make their agreement the test of authenticity. The medals were the
public acts and records of the State, made under the direction of the
magistrates, who were generally initiated into the mysteries. We may
therefore be assured, that whatever theological and mythological
allusions are found upon them were part of the ancient religion of
Greece. It is <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> from these that many of
the Orphic Hymns and Fragments are proved to contain the pure theology
or mystic faith of the ancients, which is called Orphic by Pausanias
(lib. i., c. 39), and which is so unlike the vulgar religion, or
poetical mythology, that one can scarcely Imagine at first sight that it
belonged to the same people; but which will nevertheless appear, upon
accurate investigation, to be the source from whence it flowed, and the
cause of all its extravagance.

The history of Orpheus himself is so confused and obscured by fable,
that it is impossible to obtain any certain Information concerning him.
According to general tradition, he was a Thracian, and introduced the
mysteries, in which a more pure system of religion was taught, into
Greece (Brucker, vol. i., part 2, lib. i., c. i.) He is also said to
have travelled into Egypt (Diodor. Sic. lib. i., p. 80); but as the
Egyptians pretended that all foreigners received their sciences from
them, at a time when all foreigners who entered the country were put to
death or enslaved (Diodor. Sic. lib. i., pp. 78 et 107), this account
may be rejected, with many others of the same kind. The Egyptians
certainly could not have taught Orpheus the plurality of worlds, and
true solar system, which appear to have been the fundamental principles
of his philosophy and religion (Plutarch. *de Placit. Philos*., lib.
ii., c. 13. Brucker *in loc. citat*.) Nor could he have gained this
knowledge from any people which history has preserved any memorials; for
we know of none among whom science had made such a progress, that a
truth so remote from common observation, and so contradictory to the
evidence of unimproved sense, would not have been rejected, as it was by
all the sects of Greek philosophy except the Pythagoreans, who rather
revered it as an article of faith, than understood it as a discovery of
science. Thrace was certainly inhabited by a civilized nation at some
remote period; for, when Philip of Macedon opened the gold mines in that
country, he found that they had been worked before with great expense
and ingenuity, by a people well versed in mechanics, of whom no
memorials whatever were then extant. Of these, probably, was Orpheus, as
well as Thamyris, both of whose poems, Plato says, could be read with
pleasure in his time.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[35:1](dwp02.htm#fr_11.md) See Sophocl. *Œdip.
Tyr.*, ver. 1436.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[35:2](dwp02.htm#fr_12.md) Orph. Hym. 5.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[35:3](dwp02.htm#fr_13.md) Symph. l. 2.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[36:1](dwp02.htm#fr_14.md) See Plate XXI. Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[36:2](dwp02.htm#fr_15.md) Macrob. Sat. i. c. 20.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[36:3](dwp02.htm#fr_16.md) See Goltz, Tab. II.
Figs. 7 and 8.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[39:1](dwp02.htm#fr_17.md) See Plate IV. Fig. 1,
and Recherches sur les Arts, vol. i. Pl. VIII. The Hebrew word *Chroub*,
or *Cherub*, signified originally strong or robust; but is usually
employed metaphorically, signifying a Bull. See Cleric. In Exod. c. XXV.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[39:2](dwp02.htm#fr_18.md) Recherches sur les Arts,
lib. 1.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[40:1](dwp02.htm#fr_19.md) Lib. i. c. 12.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[40:2](dwp02.htm#fr_20.md) Exod. c. XXXIV. v. 35,
ed. Vulgat. Other translators understand <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>
the expression metaphorically, and suppose it to mean radiated, or
luminous.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[43:1](dwp02.htm#fr_21.md) See Plate III.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[43:2](dwp02.htm#fr_22.md) Τον δε τραγον αωεθεωσαν
(οι Αιγνωτιοι) χαθαωερ και ωαρα τοις Ελλησι τετιησθαι λεγξι τον Πριαωον,
δια το γεννητικον μοριον. DIODOR. lib. i. p. 78.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[43:3](dwp02.htm#fr_23.md) Plate X. Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[45:1](dwp02.htm#fr_24.md) Orph. Hymn. v. et xxix.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[45:2](dwp02.htm#fr_25.md) Numm. Vet. Pop. et Urb.
Tab. xxxix. Figs 19 et 20. They are on most of the medals of Marseilles,
Naples, Thurium and many other cities.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[45:3](dwp02.htm#fr_26.md) In *Tim*. III., et
*Frag. Orphic.*, ed. Gesner.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[46:1](dwp02.htm#fr_27.md) Philo. *de Leg. Alleg*.
lib. 1. Jo Damasc *de Orth Fid*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[46:2](dwp02.htm#fr_28.md) Mosheim. Nota in Sec.
xxiv. Cudw. *Syst. Intellect*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[47:1](dwp02.htm#fr_29.md) See Boeth. *de Consol.
Philos.* lib. iv. prof. 6.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[49:1](dwp02.htm#fr_30.md) Proclus *in Theolog.
Platon*. lib. i. et ii.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[50:1](dwp02.htm#fr_31.md) Plate II. Fig. 2,
engraved from one in the British Museum.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[53:1](dwp02.htm#fr_32.md) August. *de Civ. Dei,
Lib*. VI. c. 9.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[53:2](dwp02.htm#fr_33.md) See Plate II, Fig. 1.
from one in the British Museum, in which both symbols are united.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[54:1](dwp02.htm#fr_34.md) Recherches our les Arts,
lib. i. c. 3.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[54:2](dwp02.htm#fr_35.md) See Plate IX. Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[54:3](dwp02.htm#fr_36.md) Plate IX. Fig. 2, from
Pellerin. Similar medals are in the Hunter Collection, and are evidently
of Phœnician work.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[54:4](dwp02.htm#fr_37.md) Recherches our les Arts,
lib. i. c. 3.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[55:1](dwp02.htm#fr_38.md) Plutarch. *de Is. et
Osir*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[55:2](dwp02.htm#fr_39.md) See Hymn VII.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[55:3](dwp02.htm#fr_40.md) Georgic. lib. iv. ver.
221.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[56:1](dwp02.htm#fr_41.md) Proclus *in Theol.
Plat.* lib. i. pp. 56, 57.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[56:2](dwp02.htm#fr_42.md) *De Is. et Os*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[59:1](dwp02.htm#fr_43.md) Lib. xvii.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[59:2](dwp02.htm#fr_44.md) Herodot. lib. iii.
Strabo, lib. xvii.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[59:3](dwp02.htm#fr_45.md) Plutarch. *de Is. et
Os*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](dwp03.md)
