[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp07)  [Next](dwp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART VII

From a passage of Hecatæus, preserved by Diodorus Siculus, I think it is
evident that Stonehenge, and all the other monuments of the same kind
found in the North, belonged to the same religion, which appears, at
some remote period, to have prevailed over the whole northern
hemisphere. According to that ancient historian, *the Hyperboreans
inhabited an island beyond Gaul, as large as Sicily, in which Apollo was
worshipped in a circular temple considerable for its size and
riches*. <span id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_167) Apollo, we know, in the
language of the Greeks of that age, can mean no other than the sun,
which, according to Caesar, was worshipped by the Germans, when they
knew of no other deities except fire and the moon. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[3](#fn_168) The island I think can be no other than
Britain, which at that time was only known to the Greeks by the vague
reports of Phœnician mariners, so uncertain and obscure, that Herodotus,
the most inquisitive and credulous of historians, doubts of its
existence. <span id="fr_170"></span>[4](#fn_169) The circular temple of
the sun being noticed in such

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

 

<span id="img_pl16"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl16.jpg)  
PLATE XVI  
ORNAMENT FROM PUZZUOLI TEMPLE

 

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

slight and imperfect accounts, proves that it must have been something
singular and important; for, if had been an inconsiderable structure, it
would not have been mentioned at all; and, if there had been many such
in the country, the historian would not have employed the singular
number. Stonehenge has certainly been a circular temple, nearly the same
as that already described of the Bacchus περικιονιος at Puzzuoli, except
that in the latter the nice execution, and beautiful symmetry of the
parts, are in every respect the reverse of the rude but majestic
simplicity of the former; in the original design they differ but in the
form of the area. <span id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_170) It may therefore
be reasonably supposed, that we have still the ruins of the identical
temple described by Hecatæus, who, being an Asiatic Greek, might have
received his information from some Phœnician merchant, who had visited
the interior parts of Britain when trading there for tin. Macrobius
mentions a temple of the same kind and form upon Mount Zilmissus in
Thrace,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

dedicated to the sun under the title of Bacchus Sebazius. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_171) The large obeliscs of stone found in
many parts of the North, such as those at Rudstone, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_172) and near Boroughbridge in
Yorkshire, <span id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_173) belong to the same
religion; obeliscs being, as Pliny observes, sacred to the sun, whose
rays they represented both by their form and name. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[4](#fn_174) An ancient medal of Apollonia in
Illyria, belonging to the Museum of the late Dr. Hunter, has the head of
Apollo crowned with laurel on one side, and on the other an obelisc
terminating in a cross, the least explicit representation of the male
organs of generation. <span id="fr_176"></span>[5](#fn_175) This has
exactly the appearance of one of those crosses, which were erected in
church-yards and cross roads for the adoration of devout persons, when
devotion was more prevalent than at present. Many of these were
undoubtedly erected before the establishment of Christianity, and
converted, together with their worshippers, to the true faith. Anciently
they represented the generative power of light, the essence of God; *for
God is light, and never but in unapproached light dwelt from* 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

eternity, says Milton, who in this, as well as many other instances, has
followed the Ammonian Platonics, who were both the restorers and
corrupters of the ancient theology. They restored it from the mass of
poetical mythology, under which it was buried, but refined and
sublimated it with abstract metaphysics, which soared as far above human
reason as the poetical mythology sunk below it. From the ancient solar
obeliscs came the spires and pinnacles with which our churches are still
decorated, so many ages after their mystic meaning has been forgotten.
Happily for the beauty of these edifices, it was forgotten; otherwise
the reformers of the last century would have destroyed them, as they did
the crosses and images; for they might with equal propriety have been
pronounced heathenish and prophane.

As the obelisc was the symbol of light, so was the pyramid of fire,
deemed to be essentially the same. The Egyptians, among whom these forms
are the most frequent, held that there were two opposite powers in the
world, perpetually acting contrary to each other, the one creating, and
the other destroying the former they called Osiris, and the latter
Typhon. <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176) By the contention of these
two, that mixture

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of good and evil, which, according to some verses of Euripides quoted by
Plutarch, <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_177) constituted the harmony
of the world was supposed to be produced. This opinion of the necessary
mixture of good and evil was, according to Plutarch, of immemorial
antiquity, derived from the oldest theologists and legislators, not only
in traditions and reports, but in mysteries and sacrifices, both Greek
and barbarian. <span id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_178) Fire was the
efficient principle of both, and, according to some of the Egyptians,
that ætherial fire which concentred in the sun. This opinion Plutarch
controverts, saying that Typhon, the evil or destroying power, was a
terrestrial or material fire, essentially different from the ætherial.
But Plutarch here argues from his own prejudices, rather than from the
evidence of the case; for he believed in an original evil principle
coeternal with the good, and acting in perpetual opposition to it; an
error into which men have been led by forming false notions of good and
evil, and considering them as self-existing inherent properties, instead
of accidental modifications, variable with every circumstance with which
causes and events are connected. This error, though adopted by
individuals, never formed a part either of the theology

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

or mythology of Greece. Homer, in the beautiful allegory of the two
casks, makes Jupiter, the supreme god, the distributor of both good and
evil. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_179) The name of Jupiter, Ζευς,
was originally one of the titles or Epithets of the sun, signifying,
according to its etymology, *aweful* or *terrible*; <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_180) in which sense it is used in the Orphic
litanies. <span id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_181) Pan, the universal
substance, is called the horned Jupiter (Ζευς ο κεραστης); and in an
Orphic fragment preserved by Macrobius <span
id="fr_183"></span>[4](#fn_182) the names of Jupiter and Bacchus appear
to be only titles of the all-creating power of the sun.

Αγλαε Ζεν, Λιοννσε, πατεζ ποντον, πατεζ αιης,  
Ἡλιε παλλενετοζ.

In another fragment preserved by the same author, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[5](#fn_183) the name of Pluto, Αιδης, is used as a
title of the same deity; who appears therefore to have presided over the
dead as well as over the living, and to have been the lord of
destruction as well as creation and preservation. We accordingly find
that in one of the Orphic litanies now extant, he is expressly called
the giver of life, and the destroyer. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[6](#fn_184)

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

The Egyptians represented Typhon, the destroying power, under the figure
of the hippopotamus or river-horse, the most fierce and destructive
animal they knew; <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_185) and the Chorus
in the *Bacchae* of Euripides invoke their inspirer Bacchus to appear
under the form of a bull, a many-headed serpent, or flaming lion; <span
id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_186) which shows that the most bloody and
destructive, as well as the most useful of animals, was employed by the
Greeks to represent some personified attribute of the god. M.
D'Hancarville has also observed, that the lion is frequently employed by
the ancient artists as a symbol of the sun; <span
id="fr_188"></span>[3](#fn_187) and I am inclined to believe that it was
to express this destroying power, no less requisite to preserve the
harmony of the universe than the generating. In most of the monuments of
ancient art where the lion is represented, he appears with expressions
of rage and violence, and often in the act of killing and devouring some
other animal. On an ancient sarcophagus found in Sicily he is
represented devouring a horse, <span id="fr_189"></span>[4](#fn_188) and
on the medals of Velia in Italy, devouring a deer; <span
id="fr_190"></span>[5](#fn_189) the former, as sacred to Neptune,
represented

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

 

<span id="img_pl17"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl17.jpg)  
PLATE XVII  
ORNAMENT FROM PUZZUOLI TEMPLE

 

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the sea; and the latter, as sacred to Diana, the produce of the earth;
for Diana was the fertility of the earth personified, and therefore is
said to have received her nymphs or productive ministers from the ocean,
the source of fecundity. <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190) The lion,
therefore, in the former instance, appears as a symbol of the sun
exhaling the waters; and in the latter, as whithering and putrifying the
produce of the earth. On the frieze of the Temple of Apollo Didymæus,
near Miletus, are monsters composed of the mixt forms of the goat and
lion, resting their fore feet upon the lyre of the god, which stands
between them. <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_191) The goat, as I have
already shown, represented the creative attribute, and the lyre, harmony
and order; therefore, if we admit that the lion represented the
destroying attribute, this composition will signify, in the symbolical
language of sculpture, the harmony and order of the universe preserved
by the regular and periodical operations of the creative and destructive
powers. This is a notion to which men would be naturally led by
observing the common order and progression of things. The same heat of
the sun, which scorched and withered the grass in summer, ripened the
fruits in autumn, and cloathed the earth

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

with verdure in the spring. In one season it dried up the waters from
the earth, and in another returned them in rain. It caused fermentation
and putrefaction, which destroy one generation of plants and animals,
and produce another in constant and regular succession. This contention
between the powers of creation and destruction is represented on an
ancient medal of Acanthus, in the museum of the late Dr. Hunter, by a
combat between the bull and lion. <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_192)
The bull alone is represented on other medals in exactly the same
attitude and gesture as when fighting with the lion; <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_193) whence I conclude that the lion is there
understood. On the medals of Celenderis, the goat appears instead of the
bull in exactly the same attitude of struggle and contention, but
without the lion; <span id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_194) and in a curious
one of very ancient but excellent workmanship, belonging to me, the ivy
of Bacchus is placed over the back of the goat, to denote the power
which he represents. <span id="fr_196"></span>[4](#fn_195)

The mutual operation which was the result of this contention was
signified, in the mythological tales of the poets, by the loves of Mars
and Venus, the one

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the active power of destruction, and the other the passive power of
generation. From their union is said to have sprung the goddess
*Harmony*, who was the physical order of the universe personified. The
fable of Ceres and Proserpine is the same allegory inverted; Ceres being
the prolific power of the earth personified, and hence called by the
Greeks *Mother Earth* (Γη or Λη-μητηζ). The Latin name Ceres also
signifying *Earth*, the Roman C being the same originally, both in
figure and power as the Greek Γ, <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196)
which Homer often uses as a mere guttural aspirate, and adds it
arbitrarily to his words, to make them more solemn and sonorous. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_197) The guttural aspirates and hissing
terminations more particularly belonged to the Æolic dialect, from which
the Latin was derived; wherefore we need not wonder that the same word,
which by the Dorians and Ionians was written Ερα and Ερε, should by the
Æolians be written Γερες or Ceres, the Greeks always accommodating their
orthography to their pronunciation. In an ancient bronze at Strawberry
Hill this goddess is represented sitting, with a cup in one hand, and
various sorts of fruits in the other; and the bull, the emblem of the
power of the Creator, in her lap. <span id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_198)
This composition

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

shows the fructification of the earth by the descent of the creative
spirit in the same manner as described by Virgil:--

Vere tument terræ, et genitalia semina poseunt;  
Tum pater omnipotens fœcundis imbribus æther  
Conjugis in gremium lætæ descendit, & omnes  
Magnus alit, magno commixtus corpore, fœtus. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199)

Æther and water are here introduced by the poet as the two prolific
elements which fertilize the earth, according to the ancient system of
Orphic philosophy, upon which the mystic theology was founded.
Proserpine, or Περσιφονεια, the daughter of Ceres, was, as her Greek
name indicates, the goddess of destruction, in which character she is
invoked by Althaea in the ninth Iliad; but nevertheless we often find
her on the Greek medals crowned with ears of corn, as being the goddess
of fertility as well as destruction. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_200) She is, in fact, a personification of
the heat or fire that pervades the earth, which is at once the cause and
effect of fertility and destruction, for it is at once the cause and
effect of fermentation, from which both proceed. The Libitina, or
goddess of death of the Romans, was the same as the Persiphoneia of the
Greeks; and yet, as Plutarch observes,

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

 

<span id="img_pl18"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl18.jpg)  
PLATE XVIII  
EGYPTIAN FIGURES AND ORNAMENTS

 

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the most learned of that people allowed her to be the same as Venus, the
goddess of generation. <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](dwp09.htm#fn_201)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[130:1](dwp07.htm#fr_167) See Proclus. *in
Theol. Platon*. lib. i. c. 19.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[130:2](dwp08.htm#fr_168) Ναον αξιολογον,
αναθημασι πολλοις κεκος μημενον, σφαιροειδη τωσχηματι. Diod. Sic. lib.
ii.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[130:3](dwp08.htm#fr_169) *De B. Gal*. lib. vi.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[130:4](dwp08.htm#fr_170) Lib. iii. c. 15.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[133:1](dwp08.htm#fr_171) See Plate XV. Fig. 2
and S. I have preferred Webb's plan of Stonehenge to Stukeley's and
Smith's, after comparing each with the ruins now existing. They differ
materially only in the cell, which Webb supposes to have been a hexagon,
and Stukeley a section of an ellipsis. The position of the altar is
merely conjectural; wherefore I have omitted it; and I much doubt
whether either be right in their plans of the cell, which seems, as in
other Druidical temples, to have been meant for a circle, but
incorrectly executed.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[134:1](dwp08.htm#fr_172) *Sat*. lib. i. c. 18.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[134:2](dwp08.htm#fr_173) *Archaeologia*, vol.
v.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[134:3](dwp08.htm#fr_174) Now called the
Devil's Arrows. See Stukeley's *Itin*. vol. i. Table xc.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[134:4](dwp08.htm#fr_175) *Hist. Nat. lib*.
xxxvi. sec. 14.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[134:5](dwp08.htm#fr_176) Plate X. Fig. i, and
*Nummi Pop. & Urb*. Table X. Fig. 7.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[135:1](dwp08.htm#fr_177) Plutarch. *de Is. &
Os*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[136:1](dwp08.htm#fr_178) Plutarch. de Is. &
Os.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[136:2](dwp08.htm#fr_179) Ibid. Ed. Relskii.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[137:1](dwp08.htm#fr_180) *It. w*, V. 527.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[137:2](dwp08.htm#fr_181) Damm. *Lex. Etymol*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[137:3](dwp08.htm#fr_182) Hymn. x. v. 13.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[137:4](dwp08.htm#fr_183) Sat. lib. i. c. 23.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[137:5](dwp08.htm#fr_184) Sat. lib. i. c. 8 .

<span id="fn_184"></span>[137:6](dwp08.htm#fr_185) Hymn. lxxii. *Ed.
Gesn*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[138:1](dwp08.htm#fr_186) Plutarch. *de Is. d
Os*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[138:2](dwp08.htm#fr_187) V. 1015.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[138:3](dwp08.htm#fr_188) *Recherches sur les
Arts*. See also Macrob. *Sat*. i. c. 21.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[138:4](dwp08.htm#fr_189) Houel, *Voyage de la
Sicile*. Plate XXXVI.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[138:5](dwp08.htm#fr_190) Plate IX. Fig. 5,
engraved from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[141:1](dwp08.htm#fr_191) Callimach. *Hymn ad
Dian*. v. 13. *Genitor Nympharum Oceanus*. Catullus *in Gell*. v. 84.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[141:2](dwp08.htm#fr_192) *Ionian Antiquities*,
vol. i. c. 3. Plate IX.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[142:1](dwp08.htm#fr_193) Plate IX. Fig. 4, *&
Nummi Vet. Pop. & Urb*. Table I. Fig. 16.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[142:2](dwp08.htm#fr_194) Plate IX. Fig. 12,
from one of Aspendus in the same Collection. See Nummi *Vet. Pop. &
Urb*. Table VIII. Fig. 20.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[142:3](dwp08.htm#fr_195) *Nummi Vet. Pop. &
Urb*. Table XVI. Fig. 13.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[142:4](dwp08.htm#fr_196) Plate IX. Fig. 13.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[143:1](dwp08.htm#fr_197) See S. C. Marcian,
and the medals of Gela and Agrigentum.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[143:2](dwp08.htm#fr_198) As in the word
εριδψπος, usually written by him εριγδψπος.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[143:3](dwp08.htm#fr_199) See Plate VIII.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[144:1](dwp08.htm#fr_200) *Georgic*. lib. it.
v. 324.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[144:2](dwp08.htm#fr_201) Plate iv. Fig. 5,
from a medal of Agathocles, belonging to me. The same head is upon many
others, of Syracuse, Metapontum, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VIII](dwp09)
