[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp09)  [Next](dwp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART IX

At Lycopolis in Egypt the destroying power of the sun was represented by
a wolf; which, as Macrobius says, was worshipped there as Apollo. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_239) The wolf appears devouring grapes in the
ornaments of the temple of Bacchus περικιονιος at Puzzuoli; <span
id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_240) and on the medals of Cartha he is
surrounded with rays, which plainly proves that he is there meant as a
symbol of the sun. <span id="fr_242"></span>[3](#fn_241) He is also
represented on most of the coins of Argos, <span
id="fr_243"></span>[4](#fn_242) where I have already shown that the
diurnal sun Apollo, the light-extending god, was peculiarly worshipped.
We may therefore conclude, that this animal is meant for one of the
mystic

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

symbols of the primitive worship, and not, as some antiquarians have
supposed, to commemorate the mythological tales of Danaus or Lycaon,
which were probably invented, like many others of the same kind, to
satisfy the inquisitive ignorance of the vulgar, from whom the meaning
of the mystic symbols, the usual devices on the medals, was strictly
concealed. In the Celtic mythology, the same symbol was employed,
apparently in the same sense, Lok, the great destroying power of the
universe, being represented under the form of a wolf. <span
id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_243)

The Apollo Didymæus, or *double Apollo*, was probably the two
personifications, that of the *destroying*, and that of the creating
power, united; whence we may perceive the reason why the ornaments
before described should be upon his temple. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_244) On the medals of Antigonus, king of
Asia, is a figure with his hair hanging in artificial ringlets over his
shoulders, like that of a woman, and the whole composition, both of his
limbs and countenance, remarkable for extreme delicacy, and feminine
elegance. <span id="fr_246"></span>[3](#fn_245) He is sitting on the
prow of a ship, as god of the waters; and we should, without hesitation,
pronounce him to be

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

the Bacchus διφυης, were it not for the bow that he carries in his hand,
which evidently shows him to be Apollo. This I take to be the figure
under which the refinement of art (and more was never shown than in this
medal) represented the Apollo Didymæus, or union of the creative and
destructive powers of both sexes in one body.

As fire was the primary essence of the active or male powers of creation
and generation, so was water of the passive or female. Appian says, that
the goddess worshipped at Hierapolis in Syria was *called by some*
Venus, by others Juno, *and by others held to be the cause which
produced the beginning and seeds of things from humidity*. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_246) Plutarch describes her nearly in the
same words; <span id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_247) and the author of the
treatise attributed to Lucian <span id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_248)
says, *she was Nature, the parent of things, or the creatress*. She was
therefore the same as Isis, who was the prolific material upon which
both the creative and destructive attributes operated. <span
id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_249) As water was her terrestrial essence, so
was the moon her celestial image, whose attractive power, heaving the
waters of the ocean, naturally led men to associate them. The moon was

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

also supposed to return the dews which the sun exhaled from the earth;
and hence her warmth was reckoned to be moistening, as that of the sun
was drying. <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_250) The Egyptians called
her the Mother of the World, because she sowed and scattered into the
air the prolific principles with which she had been impregnated by the
sun. <span id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_251) These principles, as well as
the light by which she was illumined, being supposed to emanate from the
great fountain of all life and motion, partook of the nature of the
being from which they were derived. Hence the Egyptians attributed to
the moon, as well is to the sun, the active and passive powers of
generation, <span id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_252) which were both, to
use the language of the scholastics, *essentially* the same, though
*formally* different. This union is represented on a medal of Demetrius
the second, king of Syria, <span id="fr_254"></span>[4](#fn_253) where
the goddess of Hierapolis appears with the male organs of generation
sticking out of her robe, and holding the thyrsus of Bacchus, the emblem
of fire, in one hand, and the terrestrial globe, representing the
subordinate elements, in the other. Her head is crowned with various
plants, and on each side is in asterisc representing (probably) the
diurnal

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

and nocturnal sun, in the same manner as when placed over the caps of
Castor and Pollux. <span id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_254) This is not the
form under which she was represented in the temple at Hierapolis, when
the author of the account attributed to Lucian visited it; which is not
to be wondered at, for the figures of this universal goddess, being
merely emblematical, were composed according to the attributes which the
artists meant particularly to express. She is probably represented here
in the form under which she was worshipped in the neighbourhood of
Cyzicus, where she was called Αρτεμις Πριαπινη, the *Priapic
Diana*. <span id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_255) In the temple at
Hierapolis the active powers imparted to her by the Creator were
represented by immense images of the male organs of generation placed on
each side of the door. The measures of these must necessarily be corrupt
in the present text of Lucian; but that they were of an enormous size we
may conclude from what is related of a man's going to the top of one of
them every year, and residing there days, in order to have a more
intimate communication with the deity, while praying for the prosperity
of Syria. <span id="fr_257"></span>[3](#fn_256) Athenæus relates, that
Ptolemy Philadelphus had one of 120 cubits long carried in

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

procession at Alexandria, <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257) of which
the poet might justly have said--

                  Horrendum protendit Mentula contum  
Quanta queat vastos Thetidis spumantis hiatus;  
Quanta queat priscamque Rheam, magnamque parentem  
Naturam, solidis naturam implere medullis,  
Si foret immensos, quot ad astra volantia currunt,  
Conceptura globos, et tela trisulca tonantis,  
Et vaga concussum motura tonitrua mundum.

This was the real meaning of the enormous figures at Hierapolis:--they
were the generative organs of the creator personified, with which he was
supposed to have impregnated the heavens, the earth, and the waters.
Within the temple were many small statues of men with these organs
disproportionably large. These were the angels or attendants of the
goddess, who acted as her ministers of creation in peopling and
fructifying the earth. The statue of the goddess herself was in the
sanctuary of the temple; and near it was the statue of the creator, whom
the author calls Jupiter, as he does the goddess, Juno; by which he only
means that they were the supreme deities of the country where
worshipped. She was borne by lions, and he by bulls, to show that
nature, the passive productive power of matter, was sustained by
anterior destruction, whilst the ætherial spirit, or active productive
power, was sustained by his own

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

strength only, of which the bulls were symbols. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_258) Between both was a third figure, with a
dove on his head, which some thought to be Bacchus. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[2](#fn_259) This was the Holy Spirit, the
first-begotten love, or plastic nature, (of which the dove was the image
when it really deigned to descend upon man, <span
id="fr_261"></span>[3](#fn_260)) proceeding from, and consubstantial
with *both*; for all *three* were but personifications of *one*. The
dove, or some fowl like it, appears on the medals of Gortyna in Crete,
acting the same part with Dictynna, the Cretan Diana, as the swan is
usually represented acting with Leda. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[4](#fn_261) This composition has nearly the same
signification as that before described of the bull in the lap of Ceres,
Diana being equally a personification of the productive power of the
earth. It may seem extraordinary, that after this adventure with the
dove, she should still remain a virgin; but mysteries of this kind are
to be found in all religions. Juno is said to have renewed her virginity
every year by bathing

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

in a certain fountain; <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](dwp11.htm#fn_262) a
miracle which I believe even modern legends cannot parallel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[163:1](dwp10.htm#fr_240) *Sat*. lib. i. c. 17.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[163:2](dwp10.htm#fr_241) Plate XVI. Fig. x.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[163:3](dwp10.htm#fr_242) Plate X, Fig. 8, from
one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[163:4](dwp10.htm#fr_243) Plate IX, Fig. 7,
from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[164:1](dwp10.htm#fr_244) Mallet, *Introd. à
l'Hist. de Danemarc*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[164:2](dwp10.htm#fr_245) See *Ionian Antiq*.
vol. L c. 3, Pl. IX.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[164:3](dwp10.htm#fr_246) See Plate X. Fig. 7,
from one belonging to me. Similar figures are on the coins of most of
the Seleucidæ.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[165:1](dwp10.htm#fr_247) *De Bello Parthico*.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[165:2](dwp10.htm#fr_248) *In Crasso*.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[165:3](dwp10.htm#fr_249) *De Dea Syriâ*.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[165:4](dwp10.htm#fr_250) Plutarch. *de Is. &
Os*.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[166:1](dwp10.htm#fr_251) *Calor solis
arefacit, lunaris humectat*. Macrob. *Sat*. vii. c. 10.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[166:2](dwp10.htm#fr_252) Plutarch. *de Is. &
Os*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[166:3](dwp10.htm#fr_253) Ibid.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[166:4](dwp10.htm#fr_254) Plate X. Fig. 5, from
Haym. *Tes. Brit*. p. 70.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[167:1](dwp10.htm#fr_255) See Plate IX. Fig. 7.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[167:2](dwp10.htm#fr_256) Plutarch. *in
Lucullo*.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[167:3](dwp10.htm#fr_257) Lucian. *de Dea
Syriâ*.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[168:1](dwp10.htm#fr_258) *Deipnos. lib*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[169:1](dwp10.htm#fr_259) The *active* and
*passive* powers of creation are called *male* and *female* by the
Ammonian Platonics. See Proclus *in Theol. Platon*. lib. i. c. 28.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[169:2](dwp10.htm#fr_260) Lucian, de Dea Syria.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[169:3](dwp10.htm#fr_261) Matth. ch. iii. ver.
17.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[169:4](dwp10.htm#fr_262) See Plate m. Fig. 5.
Καλψσι δε την Αρτεμιν Θρακες Βενδειαν, Κρητες δε Δικτυνναν. Palæph. *de
Incred*. Tab. XXXI. See also Diodor. Sic. lib. v. & Euripid. *Hippol*.
v. 145.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part X](dwp11)
