[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tot10)  [Next](tot12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Talks on Truth*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson X The Lord's Body 

THE TEACHING of Christianity is that the human race was originally in a
beautiful garden, a state of consciousness described as Paradise. There
were placed before the race two ways of attaining knowledge--one through
experience, the other through the inspiration and guidance of God; and
the race chose the diverse or hard way of experience. They followed
Satan, thinking that through experience they would get wisdom and
pleasure. In their ignorance they fell short of the law. They did not
know how to take advantage of the forces of mind, and the result was the
death of their bodies.

2\. But there was promise of restoration; that men should come back into
that paradise or place where eternal joy and satisfaction exist, that
through Jesus the original life of man should be restored. Jesus
understood the law of God, and came to show us the way to live our
lives, to resurrect ourselves out of sin and death into immortality. He

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

resurrected His body and promised that those who keep His sayings and
follow His law shall likewise resurrect their bodies; yet nearly two
thousand years have passed and no man has demonstrated the resurrection,
so far as we know. The teaching has been sidetracked and misunderstood.
The popular Christianity of the day tells us that resurrection is of the
soul, that it is to take place after death, or at some future time, and
that everybody must die.

3\. Now a new consciousness, a new understanding of this great teaching
of Jesus is needed. We are beginning to understand it scientifically.
Our physical scientists are showing us in their laboratories that life
should be continuous. They tell us that the functions of our body are
self-perpetuating if rightly directed. There is no reason why it should
be destroyed. All about us are the forces that enter into the body, and
the elements that are found in chemistry are also in the body of flesh.

4\. The inner intelligence is able to reconstruct the body; the elements
for rebuilding are around us and in us. All conditions join to make
possible the development of an immortal structure that shall express man
in his true nature. The intuitions of the soul emphasize the point that
deathless life here and now is the life that God has appointed us to
recall and to develop. Not until we have done this can it be said that
we have availed ourselves of the Jesus Christ redemption or that we have
our abiding place in the Lord's body.

5\. Why have we failed for these two thousand years? Because we have not
understood and applied

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the divine law. The early disciples evidently caught sight of the great
fact that man has within himself this resurrecting power to overcome
disease and sickness, but they did not fasten it strongly enough in the
race experience, and man has slipped back into the old adverse thought.

6\. We must first reduce our religion to facts. What do we know about
it? Verily, "by their fruits ye shall know them." The fruit of your
thought is your body, and you can judge your thought by the character of
your body. So also you can change your body by changing your thoughts.
Then here is the key to the situation: To resurrect the body we must
change our thoughts. Every thought must be in accordance with absolute
Truth; there must be no adverse thought. We must separate ourselves from
all thought of sickness, weakness, and death. They must have no part in
the consciousness of the one who would follow Jesus. "And you did he
make alive, when ye were dead through your trespasses and sins."

7\. Divine metaphysicians take special care that they are logical in
their reasoning. They hold that all truth has its origin in Divine Mind.
Whatever we can conceive as being true must work itself out in creation,
and if the creation seems to fall short of the divine perfection in any
way, that is our fault; either we are not seeing the whole or we are
lacking in understanding. If we hold to our logic that the good can
create nothing but good, it will bring us to the right conclusion, and
the manifestation will always prove itself. Holding to this logic of the
mind

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and the conclusions of the mind, we find that there are two creations;
Divine Mind idealizes that which it afterward brings forth, just as a
man works out his invention in his mind before he makes the model. God
is the all-potential mind. God creates first in idea; His idea of
creation is perfect, and that idea exists as a perfect model upon which
all manifestation rests. The body of man must rest upon a divine body
idea in Divine Mind, and it logically follows that the inner life,
substance, and intelligence of all flesh are perfect. But you say, "I
have not a perfect body; my body is not the perfect idea, because I can
see that it is material." It may be that you do not understand; that you
do not discern the Lord's body, which lack, Paul said, is the cause of
weakness and sickness and death.

8\. Every person has a perfect body in mind, and that perfect mind body
is expressing itself through his I AM or the Lord God in him; it is
bringing itself into manifestation just as fast as he will let it, just
as fast as he perceives God in the flesh. Do you not see how closely you
must follow and hold yourself in the true logic? Plato said, "Pure
reason is the highest faculty of the mind." Many people wander away from
pure reason because it does not seem to agree with the sight of sense.
They say that there is evil and error everywhere; that it cannot be,
then, that good is the reality of God, of man, and of the universe. The
creative law makes man responsible for the bringing forth of the divine
perfection. God finished His work--in the ideal, and we are making it
manifest. If your body is not perfect, it is because

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

you have not let into your consciousness all the perfections that exist
for you in Divine Mind, perfections that would be fully expressed in
you, as they were in Jesus, if you would discern the truth of the ideal
real body called the Lord's body.

9\. Then if I want to see the real expression of Divine Mind in my body,
all I have to do is to image it mentally. I must put my I AM identity
into it and affirm that the perfect body, as idealized by God, is now
manifest in my hands, in my feet, in my heart, and in every part of my
organism. Is that good logic? Of course it is. Will it work? Of course
it will. This is the real secret of metaphysical healing. In the
beginning the Word was God, but the Word became flesh and dwelt among
men and they saw His body, His glory, and His perfection. Then Jesus
Christ was the Word or idea of Divine Mind made manifest in form. Jesus
saved His body from dissolution and raised it up to the heavenly estate,
which is substance so pure that no disintegrating force can be found in
it. This gives an importance to the body beyond the usual estimate.
People think that soul salvation is the object of the Christian life,
but Jesus, in speaking of the body, mentioned His ability to "lay it
down, and . . . take it again," even this "temple of God"; and on
another occasion He said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do
shall he do also: and greater works than these shall he do."

10\. Can we save our body from death? Yes; by seeing it as the very
temple of God; and that means more than looking at it as if we were
looking

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

through telescopes. We must see our body with our mind; see it with
something more than the intellectual mind; see it with Jehovah, the Lord
God within us.

11\. When the perfect man is conceived in pure reason, the reason of
Spirit, and man sees himself as he is in God's mind, the Lord's body
begins at once to appear. We all can see our body with the single eye of
which Jesus spoke, and through this faith in the reality of the
invisible body we can regenerate the flesh. The body is wonderfully
obedient to the I AM mind, hastens to do its bidding, and is renewed and
transformed by a thought. But so many of us see the body as it appears
to mortal sense, and by thus seeing it, we put it under the laws
governing the sense body. "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind."

12\. The real continues; the seeming passes away. We know that we are
healed by right thought, that we can and do raise these sick bodies and
restore them to health. Where is the limit to that healing? There is
none. We can go right on and perfect the manifestation of the body idea
as it is conceived in Divine Mind. That is where pure reason and logic
sustain us. No matter how many people have died or how many are going to
die, the logic is good if it proves the healing of even one ill. It is a
real pleasure to know that there is a power behind this universe; that
there is a real God; that life is something more than the mere piling up
of material things; that we can become the real man and that all pure
ideals can be fulfilled here and now.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

13\. The real body of God is a live body. It knows. It is a living body.
Above all, it is a beautiful body. God Himself is to be in that temple,
and it will not be necessary to have any external light, for the light
celestial will illuminate the redeemed body in which God takes up an
eternal habitation. It is wonderful how quickly the body responds to
thoughts of life and health, and how you can get a flow of health
instantly if you hold the right thoughts. Just closing the outer sense
and holding the thought that you are the perfect manifestation of Divine
Mind will often heal the body of its ills. Sense mind sees the disease
and clings to it, when it is trying to get away. Disease is not natural,
and it knows it. Then relax the will of the flesh and let Spirit carry
on its perfect work in you, and evil or sick conditions will disappear
and you will be whole. All good healers will tell you that their best
work is done by simply letting go of sense appearances and realizing
that there is but one universal Mind, and that that Mind makes a perfect
body for every man.

14\. We see this law proved again and again in the healing power of
nature. Virtually all doctors admit that the body is naturally restored
to health; that neither they nor their drugs do the healing. What causes
this restoration? The divine idea of perfection. So our body really is
the temple of the living God. This so-called material body has within it
and about it the divine perfection. Do not make any separation. Hold
that your body is spiritual, and hold nothing less, no matter how much
your flesh cries out. It may be that flesh and blood and

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

bones can be expressed in a larger and better way; that is for you to
determine--but insist upon the truth. Carry out that living, true Word
which every one of us knows to be the offspring of Divine Mind. "And the
Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we behold his glory, glory as
of the only begotten from the Father), full of grace and truth."

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 11](tot12)
