[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38109)  [Next](sbe38111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. The absence of that (i.e. of dreams, i.e. dreamless sleep) takes
place in the nâ*d*îs and in the Self; according to scriptural statement.

The state of dream has been discussed; we are now going to enquire into
the state of deep sleep. A number of scriptural passages refer to that
state. In one place we read, 'When a man is asleep, reposing and at
perfect rest so that he sees no dream, then he has entered into those
nâ*d*îs' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 6, 3). In another place it is said with
reference to the nâ*d*îs, 'Through them he moves forth and rests in the
surrounding body' (B*ri*. Up. II, 1, 19). So also in another place, 'In
these the person is when sleeping he sees no dream. Then he becomes one
with the prâ*n*a alone' (Kau. Up. IV, 20). Again in another place, 'That
ether which is within the heart in that he reposes' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4,
22). Again, 'Then he becomes united with that which is; he is gone to
his Self (*Kh*. Up. VI, 8, i). And, 'Embraced by the highest Self
(prâ*gñ*a) he knows nothing that is without, nothing that is within'
(B*ri*. Up. IV, 3, 21). Here the doubt arises whether the nâ*d*îs, &c.,
mentioned in the above passages are independent from each other and
constitute various places for the soul in the state of deep sleep, or if
they stand in mutual relation so as to constitute one such place only.
The pûrvapakshin takes the former view on account of the various places
mentioned serving one and the same purpose. Things serving the same
purpose, as, e.g. rice and barley <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104),
are never seen to be dependent

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

on each other. That the nâ*d*îs, &c., actually serve the same purpose
appears from the circumstance of their being all of them exhibited
equally in the locative case, 'he has entered into the nâ*d*îs,' 'he
rests in the pericardium,' &c. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105)--But in some of the passages quoted the
locative case is not employed, so, e.g. in 'He becomes united with that
which is' (satâ, instrumental case)!--That makes no difference, we
reply, because there also the locative case is meant. For in the
complementary passage the text states that the soul desirous of rest
enters into the Self, 'Finding no rest elsewhere it settles down on
breath' (*Kh*. Up. VI, 8, 2); a passage in which the word 'breath'
refers to that which is (the sat). A place of rest of course implies the
idea of the locative case. The latter case is, moreover, actually
exhibited in a further complementary passage, 'When they have become
merged in that which is (sati), they know not that they are merged in
it.'--In all these passages one and the same state is referred to, viz.
the state of deep sleep which is characterised by the suspension of all
special cognition. Hence we conclude that in the state of deep sleep the
soul optionally goes to any one of those places, either the nâ*d*îs, or
that which is, &c.

To this we make the following reply--'The absence of that,' i.e. the
absence of dreams--which absence constitutes the essence of deep
sleep-takes place 'in the nâ*d*îs and in the Self;' i.e. in deep sleep
the soul goes into both together, not optionally into either.--How is
this known?--'From scripture.'--Scripture says of all those things, the
nâ*d*îs, &c., that they are the place of deep sleep; and those
statements we must combine into one, as the hypothesis of option would
involve partial refutation <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106). The
assertion

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

made above that we are compelled to allow option because the nâ*d*îs,
&c., serve one and the same purpose, is without foundation; for from the
mere fact of two things being exhibited in the same case it does not
follow by any means that they serve the same purpose, and that for that
reason we have to choose between them. We on the contrary see that one
and the same case is employed even where things serve different purposes
and have to be combined; we say, e.g. 'he sleeps in the palace, he
sleeps on the couch <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107).' So in the
present case also the different statements can be combined into one, 'He
sleeps in the nâ*d*îs, in the surrounding body, in Brahman.' Moreover,
the scriptural passage, 'In these the person is when sleeping he sees no
dream; then he becomes one with the prâ*n*a alone,' declares, by
mentioning them together in one sentence, that the nâ*d*îs and the
prâ*n*a are to be combined in the state of deep sleep. That by prâ*n*a
Brahman is meant we have already shown (I, 1, 28). Although in another
text the nâ*d*îs are spoken of as an independent place of deep sleep as
it were ('then he has entered into those nâ*d*îs'), yet, in order not to
contradict other passages in which Brahman is spoken of as the place of
deep sleep, we must explain that text to mean that the soul abides in
Brahman through the nâ*d*îs. Nor is this interpretation opposed to the
employment of the locative case ('into--or in--those nâ*d*îs'); for if
the soul enters into Brahman by means of the nâ*d*îs it is at the same
time in the nâ*d*îs; just as a man who descends to the sea by means of
the river Gaṅgâ is at the same time on the Gaṅgâ.--Moreover that passage
about the nâ*d*îs, because its purpose is to describe the road,
consisting of the rays and nâ*d*îs, to the Brahma world, mentions the
entering of the soul into the nâ*d*îs in order to glorify the latter
(not in order to describe the state of deep sleep); for the clause
following upon the one which refers to the entering

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

praises the nâ*d*îs, 'There no evil touches him.' The text, moreover,
adds a reason for the absence of all evil, in the words, 'For then he
has become united with the light.' That means that on account of the
light contained in the nâ*d*îs (which is called bile) having overpowered
the organs the person no longer sees the sense-objects. Or else Brahman
may be meant by the 'light;' which term is applied to Brahman in another
passage also, 'It is Brahman only, light only' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 7).
The passage would then mean that the soul becomes, by means of the
nâ*d*îs, united with Brahman, and that hence no evil touches it. That
the union with Brahman is the reason for the absence of all contact with
evil, is known from other scriptural passages, such as, 'All evils turn
back from it; for the world of Brahman is free from all evil' (*Kh*. Up.
VIII, 4, 1). On that account we have to combine the nâ*d*îs with
Brahman, which from other passages is known to be the place of deep
sleep.--Analogously we conclude that the pericardium also, because it is
mentioned in a passage treating of Brahman, is a place of deep sleep
only in subordination to Brahman. For the ether within the heart is at
first spoken of as the place of sleep ('He lies in the ether which is in
the heart,' B*ri*. Up. II, 1, 17), and with reference thereto it is said
later on, 'He rests in the pericardium' (II, 1, 19). Pericardium
(purîtat) is a name of that which envelops the heart; hence that which
rests within the ether of the heart--which is contained in the
pericardium--can itself be said to rest within the pericardium; just as
a man living in a town surrounded by walls is said to live within the
walls. That the ether within the heart is Brahman has already been shown
(I, 3, l4).--That again the nâ*d*îs and the pericardium have to be
combined as places of deep sleep appears from their being mentioned
together in one sentence ('Through them he moves forth and rests in the
purîtat). That that which is (sat) and the intelligent Self (prâ*gñ*a)
are only names of Brahman is well known; hence scripture mentions only
three places of deep sleep, viz. the nâ*d*îs, the pericardium, and
Brahman. Among these three again Brahman alone is the lasting place of
deep sleep; the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

nâ*d*îs and the pericardium are mere roads leading to it. Moreover (to
explain further the difference of the manner in which the soul, in deep
sleep, enters into the nâ*d*îs, the pericardium and Brahman
respectively), the nâ*d*îs and the pericardium are (in deep sleep)
merely the abode of the limiting adjuncts of the soul; in them the
soul's organs abide <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108). For apart
from its connexion with the limiting adjuncts it is impossible for the
soul in itself to abide anywhere, because being non-different from
Brahman it rests in its own glory. And if we say that, in deep sleep, it
abides in Brahman we do not mean thereby that there is a difference
between the abode and that which abides, but that there is absolute
identity of the two. For the text says, 'With that which is he becomes
united, he is gone to his Self;' which means that the sleeping person
has entered into his true nature.--It cannot, moreover, be said that the
soul is at any time not united with Brahman--for its true nature can
never pass away--; but considering that in the state of waking and that
of dreaming it passes, owing to the contact with its limiting adjuncts,
into something else, as it were, it may be said that when those adjuncts
cease in deep sleep it passes back into its true nature. Hence it would
be entirely wrong to assume that, in deep sleep, it sometimes becomes
united with Brahman and sometimes not <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109). Moreover, even if we admit that there
are different places for the soul in deep sleep, still there does not
result, from that difference of place, any difference in the quality of
deep sleep which is in all cases characterised by the cessation of
special cognition; it is, therefore, more appropriate to say that the
soul does (in deep sleep) not cognize on account of its oneness, having
become united with Brahman; according to the *S*ruti, 'How should he
know another?' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 5, l5).--If, further, the sleeping soul
did rest in the nâ*d*îs and the purîtat, it would be impossible

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

to assign any reason for its not cognizing, because in that case it
would continue to have diversity for its object; according to the
*S*ruti, 'When there is, as it were, duality, then one sees the other,'
&c.--But in the case of him also who has diversity for his object, great
distance and the like may be reasons for absence of cognition!--What you
say might indeed apply to our case if the soul were acknowledged to be
limited in itself; then its case would be analogous to that of
Vish*n*umitra, who, when staying in a foreign land, cannot see his home.
But, apart from its adjuncts, the soul knows no limitation.--Well, then,
great distance, &c., residing in the adjuncts may be the reason of
non-cognition!--Yes, but that leads us to the conclusion already arrived
at, viz. that the soul does not cognize when, the limiting adjuncts
having ceased, it has become one with Brahman.

Nor do we finally maintain that the nâ*d*îs, the pericardium, and
Brahman are to be added to each other as being equally places of deep
sleep. For by the knowledge that the nâ*d*îs and the pericardium are
places of sleep, nothing is gained, as scripture teaches neither that
some special fruit is connected with that knowledge nor that it is the
subordinate member of some work, &c., connected with certain results.
We, on the other hand, do want to prove that that Brahman is the lasting
abode of the soul in the state of deep sleep; that is a knowledge which
has its own uses, viz. the ascertainment of Brahman being the Self of
the soul, and the ascertainment of the soul being essentially
non-connected with the worlds that appear in the waking and in the
dreaming state. Hence the Self alone is the place of deep sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[141:1](sbe38110.htm#fr_104) Either of which
may be employed for making the sacrificial cake.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[142:1](sbe38110.htm#fr_105) The argument of
the pûrvapakshin is that the different places in which the soul is said
to abide in the state of deep sleep are all exhibited by the text in the
same case and are on that account co-ordinate. Mutual relation implying
subordination would require them to be exhibited in different cases
enabling us to infer the exact manner and degree of relation.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[142:2](sbe38110.htm#fr_106) By allowing option
between two Vedic statements we lessen the <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> authority of the Veda; for the adoption of either alternative
sublates, for the time, the other alternative.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[143:1](sbe38110.htm#fr_107) Where the two
locatives are to be combined into one statement, 'he sleeps on the couch
in the palace.'

<span id="fn_108"></span>[145:1](sbe38110.htm#fr_108) Ân. Gi. explains
kara*n*âni by karmâ*n*i: nâ*d*îshu purîtati *k*a
*g*îvasyopâdhyantarbhûtani kara*n*âni karmâ*n*i tish*th*antîty
upâdhyâ-dhâratvam, *g*îvasya tv âdhâro brahmaiva.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[145:2](sbe38110.htm#fr_109) But with the
nâ*d*îs or the pericardium only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 2, 8](sbe38111)
