[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38264)  [Next](sbe38266) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4\. Not in the symbol (is the Self to be contemplated); for he (the
meditating person) (may) not (view symbols as being the Self).

'Let a man meditate on mind as Brahman; this is said with reference to
the body. Let a man meditate on ether as Brahman; this is said with
reference to the Devas' (*Kh*. Up. III, 18, 1); 'Âditya is Brahman, this
is the doctrine'

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*Kh*. Up. III,
19, 1); 'He who meditates on name as Brahman' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 1, 5).
With regard to these and similar meditations on symbols a doubt arises
whether the Self is to be apprehended in them also, or not.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that it is right to apprehend the Self in
them also because Brahman is known from scriptural passages as the
(universal) Self. For those symbols also are of the nature of Brahman in
so far as they are effects of it, and therefore are of the nature of the
Self as well.

We must not, our reply runs, attach to symbols the idea of Brahman. For
he, i.e. the meditating person, cannot comprehend the heterogeneous
symbols as being of the nature of the Self.--Nor is it true that the
symbols are of the nature of the Self, because as being effects of
Brahman they are of the nature of Brahman; for (from their being of the
nature of Brahman) there results the non-existence of (them as) symbols.
For the aggregate of names and so on can be viewed as of the nature of
Brahman only in so far as the individual character of those effects of
Brahman is sublated; and when that character is sublated how then can
they be viewed as symbols, and how can the Self be apprehended in them?
Nor does it follow from the fact of Brahman being the Self that a
contemplation of the Self can be established on the ground of texts
teaching a contemplation on Brahman (in certain symbols), since a
contemplation of the latter kind does not do away with agentship and the
like. For the instruction that Brahman is the Self depends on the doing
away with agentship and all other characteristics of transmigratory
existence; the injunction of meditations, on the other hand, depends on
the non-removal of those characteristics. Hence we cannot establish the
apprehension of the Self (in the symbols) on the ground of the
meditating person being the same as the symbols. For golden ornaments
and figures made of gold are not identical with each other, but only in
so far as gold constitutes the Self of both. And that from that oneness
(of symbol and meditating person) which depends on Brahman being the
Self of all there results non-existence of the symbols (and hence
impossibility of the meditations

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

enjoined), we have explained above.--For these reasons the Self is not
contemplated in symbols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 5](sbe38266)
