[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38053)  [Next](sbe38055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

53\. (Should it be said that distinction of pleasure, pain, &c.,
results) from (difference of) place; we say no, on account of the
(Self's) being within (all things).

Here it might be objected that, although all Selfs are all-pervading,
yet their conjunction with the internal organ which is seated in the
body must take place in that part of each Self which is limited by the
body; and that thus there may result from difference of locality a
limitative distinction of resolutions, &c., of the ad*ri*sh*t*a, and of
pleasure and pain.--This also, we reply, is not possible 'on account of
the being within.' For, as being equally infinite, all Selfs are within
all bodies. Thus the Vai*s*eshikas have no right whatever to assume any
part of the Self to be limited by the body. And if they do assume such a
part of the Self which in reality is without any parts, that part
because merely assumptive will be incapable of limiting a real effect.
Moreover, it is impossible to limit the body which originates in
proximity to all (omnipresent) Selfs to one particular Self to the
exclusion of all others. Moreover, on the doctrine of limitation due

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

to difference of place, it would follow that sometimes two Selfs
enjoying the same pleasure or pain might effect their fruition by one
and the same body, since it may happen that the unseen principle of two
Selfs occupies the same place. For we may observe, e.g. that after
Devadatta's body has moved away from a certain spot in which Devadatta
had enjoyed a certain amount of pleasure or pain, and the body of
Ya*gñ*adatta has moved into that very same place, Ya*gñ*adatta enjoys an
equal amount of pleasure or pain; a thing which (on the theory
discussed) could not happen if the unseen principles of the two men did
not occupy the same place. From the doctrine that the unseen principles
occupy fixed places it would, moreover, follow that no enjoyment of the
heavenly world, &c. can take place; for the ad*ri*sh*t*a is effected in
definite places such as e.g. the body of a Brâhma*n*a, and the enjoyment
of the heavenly world is bound to a definite different place.--It
further <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) is impossible to maintain
that there exist many all-pervading Selfs <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49), as there are no parallel instances.
Mention if you can a plurality of other things occupying the same
place!--You will perhaps bring forward colour and so on <span
id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50). But we refuse to accept that instance as
parallel, because colour, &c., although non-different in so far as they
are attributes of one substance, yet differ through their essential
characteristics. On the other hand there is no difference of
characteristics between your (alleged) many Selfs. If you say that a
difference of characteristics can be established on the ground of the
ultimate special differences (of all substances), we point out that you
implicate yourself in a logical circle as the assumption of difference
of characteristics and the assumption of ultimate differences presuppose
each other.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Should you adduce
as parallel instances the all-pervadingness of ether, &c. (the '&c.'
implying place and time), we reply that their all-pervadingness is not
proved for him who holds the doctrine of Brahman and looks upon ether
and so on as mere effects.

All which establishes the conclusion that the only doctrine not open to
any objections is the doctrine of the unity of the Self.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[72:1](sbe38054.htm#fr_48) And this is an attack
on the basis of the position of the Sâṅkhyas as well as of the
Vai*s*eshikas.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[72:2](sbe38054.htm#fr_49) Which being equally
omnipresent would all occupy the same space.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[72:3](sbe38054.htm#fr_50) Many attributes such
as colour, smell, touch, &c. reside in one place as belonging to one
material object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 1](sbe38055)
