[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38272)  [Next](sbe38274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12\. Up to death (meditations have to be repeated); for then also it is
thus seen in scripture.

The first adhikara*n*a (of the present adhyâya) has established that
repetition is to be observed with regard to all meditations. But now a
distinction is made. Those meditations which aim at complete knowledge,
terminate--in the same way as the beating of the rice grains is
terminated by the husks becoming detached from the grains--with their
effect being accomplished; for as soon as the effect, i.e. perfect
knowledge, has been obtained, no further effort can be commanded since
scriptural instruction does not apply to him who knows that
Brahman--which is not the object of injunction--constitutes his Self. On
the other hand a doubt arises whether the devotee is to repeat those
meditations which aim at certain forms of

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

exaltation for a certain time only and then may stop; or whether he is
to repeat them again and again as long as he lives.

Here the pûrvapakshin maintains that such meditations are to be carried
on for some time only and then to be given up, since this satisfies the
demands of those scriptural passages which teach meditations
distinguished by repetition.

To this we make the following reply. The devotee is to reiterate those
meditations up to his death, since the supersensuous result (of such
meditations) is reached by means of the extreme meditation. For such
works also as originate a fruit to be enjoyed in a future state of
existence presuppose, at the time of death, a creative cognition
analogous to the fruit to be produced; as appears from such passages as,
'Endowed with knowledge (i.e. the conception of the fruit to be
obtained) he (i.e. the individual soul) goes after that (viz. the fruit)
which is connected with that knowledge' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 2); 'Whatever
his thought (at the time of death), with that he goes into Prâ*n*a, and
the Prâ*n*a united with light, together with the individual Self, leads
on to the world as conceived (at the moment of death)' (Pr. Up. IV, 2,
10). This also follows from the comparison to the caterpillar (B*ri*.
Up. IV, 4, 3). But the meditations under discussion do not, at the time
of death, require any other creative cognition but a repetition of
themselves. Such meditations therefore as consist in the creative
conception of a fruit to be obtained must be repeated up to the moment
of death. Analogously the scriptural text, Sat. Brâ. X, 6, 3, 1--'With
whatever thought he passes away from this world'--declares that the
meditation extends up to the time of death. Similarly Sm*ri*ti says,
'Remembering whatever form of being he in the end leaves this body, into
that same form he ever passes, assimilated to its being' (Bha. Gîtâ
VIII, 6); and 'At the time of death with unmoved mind' (Bha. Gîtâ VIII,
10). And that at the moment of death also there remains something to be
done, the scriptural passage (*Kh*. Up. III, 17. 6) also proves. 'Let a
man, at the time of death, take refuge with this triad.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 13](sbe38274)
