[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38055)  [Next](sbe38057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. On account of the impossibility of a secondary (origin of the
prâ*n*as).

Against the objection that the origin of the prâ*n*as must be understood
in a secondary sense because the text states that they existed before
the origin of the world, the Sûtrakâra declares 'on account of the
impossibility of a secondary origin.' The statement as to the origin of
the prâ*n*as cannot be taken in a secondary sense because therefrom
would result the abandonment of a general assertion. For after the text
has asserted that the knowledge of everything depends on the knowledge
of one ('What is that through which when it is known everything else
becomes known?' Mu. Up. I, 1, 3), it goes on to say, in order to prove
that assertion, that 'From him is born prâ*n*a,' &c. (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3).
Now the assertion is made good only if the whole world including the
prâ*n*as is an effect of Brahman, because then there is no effect
independent of the material cause; if on the other hand the statement as
to the origin of the prâ*n*as were taken in a secondary sense, the
assertion would thereby be stultified. The text, moreover, makes some
concluding statements about the matter asserted, 'The Person is all
this, sacrifice, penance, Brahman, the highest Immortal' (II, 1, 10),
and 'Brahman alone is all this; it is the Best.'--That same

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

assertion is to be connected with such passages as the following, 'When
we see, hear, perceive, and know the Self, then all this is known'
(B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 5).--How then have we to account for the statement
that the prâ*n*as existed before the creation?--That statement, we
reply, does not refer to the fundamental causal substance; for we
ascertain from scriptural passages, such as Mu. Up. II, 1, 2 ('That
heavenly Person is without breath and without mind, pure, higher than
the high Imperishable'), that the fundamental causal substance is devoid
of all distinctions such as breath and the like. We must rather view the
statement about the existence of the prâ*n*as before the creation as
having for its object a subordinate causal substance <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52), and being made with reference to the
effects of the latter only. For it is known from *S*ruti and Sm*ri*ti
that even in the universe of evolved things many states of being may
stand to each other in the relation of causal substance and effect.--In
the adhikara*n*a treating of the ether there occurred a Sûtra (composed
of the same syllables) 'gau*n*yasambhavât,' which as being the
pûrvapaksha-sûtra had to be explained as 'gau*n*î asambhavât,' 'the
statement about the origin of ether must be taken in a secondary sense
on account of the impossibility (of the primary sense).' There the final
conclusion was established by means of the abandonment of the general
assertion. Here on the other hand the Sûtra is the Siddhânta Sûtra and
we have therefore explained it as meaning 'on account of the
impossibility of a secondary meaning.'--Those who explain the present
Sûtra in the same way as the previous Sûtra overlook the fact of the
general assertion being abandoned (viz. if the passages referring to the
origin of the prâ*n*as were taken in a secondary sense).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[77:1](sbe38056.htm#fr_52) Such as
Hira*n*yagarbha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 3](sbe38057)
