[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38151)  [Next](sbe38153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

9\. And on account of the (omkâra) extending over the whole (Veda), (the
view that the term udgîtha expresses a specialisation) is appropriate.

In the passage, 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om (as) the
udgîtha,' the two words 'omkâra' and 'udgîtha' are placed in
co-ordination. <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) The question then
arises

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

whether the relation in which the ideas conveyed by these two words
stand to each other is the relation of super-imposition (adhyâsa) or
sublation (apavâda) or unity (ekatva) or specification (vi*s*esha*n*a);
for primâ facie each of these relations may present itself to the
mind.--Adhyâsa takes place when the idea of one of two things not being
dismissed from the mind, the idea of the second thing is superimposed on
that of the first thing; so that together with the superimposed idea the
former idea remains attached to the thing on which the second idea is
superimposed. When e.g. the idea of (the entity) Brahman superimposes
itself upon the idea of the name, the latter idea continues in the mind
and is not driven out by the former. A similar instance is furnished by
the superimposition of the idea of the god Vishnu on a statue of Vishnu.
So, in the case under discussion also, the idea of the udgîtha may be
superimposed on the omkâra or the idea of the omkâra on the
udgîtha.--We, in the second place, have apavâda when an idea previously
attached to some object is recognised as false and driven out by the
true idea springing up after the false one. So e.g. when the false idea
of the body, the senses, and so on being the Self is driven out by the
true idea springing up later--and expressed by judgments such as 'Thou
art that'--that the idea of the Self is to be attached to the Self only.
Or, to quote another example, when a previous mistaken notion as to the
direction of the points of the compass is replaced by the true notion.
So here also the idea of the udgîtha may drive out the idea of the
omkâra or vice versâ.--The relation would, in the third place, be that
of 'unity' if the terms 'omkâra' and 'udgîtha' were co-extensive in
meaning; just as the terms, 'the Best of the Twice-born,' 'the
Brâhma*n*a,' 'the god among men,' all denote an individual of the
noblest caste.--The relation will, finally, be that of specification if,
there being a possibility of our understanding the omkâra in so far as
co-extensive with all the Vedas, the term 'udgîtha' calls up the idea of
the sphere of action of the udgât*ri*. The passage would then mean, 'Let
a man meditate on that omkâra which is the udgîtha,' and would

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

be analogous to an injunction such as 'Let him bring that lotus-flower
which is blue.'

All these alterations present themselves to the mind, and as there is no
reason for deciding in favour of any one, the question must remain an
unsettled one.

To this pûrvapaksha-view the Sûtra replies, 'And on account of extending
over the whole, it is appropriate.'

The word 'and' stands here in place of 'but,' and is meant to discard
the three other alternatives. Three out of the four alternatives are to
be set aside as objectionable; the fourth, against which nothing can be
urged, is to be adopted.--The objections lying against the first three
alternatives are as follows. In the case of adhyâsa we should have to
admit that the word which expresses the idea superimposed is not to be
taken in its direct sense, but in an implied sense <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133); and we should moreover have to imagine
some fruit for a meditation of that kind. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) Nor can it be said that we need not
imagine such a fruit, as scripture itself mentions it in the passage,
'He becomes indeed a fulfiller of desires' (I, 1, 7); for this passage
indicates the fruit, not of the ideal superimposition of the udgîtha on
the omkâra, but of the meditation in which the omkâra is viewed as the
fulfilment of desires.--Against the hypothesis of an apavâda there
likewise lies the objection that no fruit is to be seen. The cessation
of wrong knowledge can certainly not be alleged as such; for we see no
reason why the cessation of the idea that the omkâra is udgîtha and not
omkâra or vice versâ should be beneficial to man. Sublation of the one
idea by the other is moreover not even possible in our case; for to the
omkâra the idea of the omkâra remains always attached, and so to the
udgîtha the idea of the udgîtha. The passage, moreover, does not aim at
teaching the true

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

nature of something, but at enjoining a meditation of a certain
kind.--The hypothesis of unity again is precluded by the consideration
that as in that case one term would suffice to convey the intended
meaning, the employment of two terms would be purposeless. And moreover
the term 'udgîtha' is never used to denote the omkâra in its connexion
with the *Ri*g-veda and Ya*g*ur-veda; nor is the word 'omkâra' used to
denote that entire second subdivision of a sâman which is denoted by the
word 'udgîtha.' Hence it cannot be said that we have to do with
different words only denoting one and the same thing.--There thus
remains the fourth alternative, 'On account of its comprising all the
Vedas.' That means: In order that the omkâra may not be understood here
as that one which comprises all the Vedas, it is specified by means of
the word 'udgîtha,' in order that that omkâra which constitutes a part
of the udgîtha may be apprehended.--But does not this interpretation
also involve the admission of implication, as according to it the word
'udgîtha' denotes not the whole udgîtha but only a part of it, viz. the
omkâra?--True, but we have to distinguish those cases in which the
implied meaning is not far remote from the direct meaning and those in
which it is remote. If, in the present case, we embrace the alternative
of adhyâsa, we have to assume an altogether remote implication, the idea
of one matter being superimposed on the idea of an altogether different
matter. If, on the other hand, we adopt the alternative of
specification, the implication connected therewith is an easy one, the
word which in its direct sense denotes the whole being understood to
denote the part. And that words denoting the whole do duty for words
denoting the part is a matter of common occurrence; the words 'cloth,'
'village,' and many others are used in this fashion <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135).--For all these reasons we declare that
the appropriate view of the *Kh*ândogya-passage is to take the word
'udgîtha' as specialising the term 'omkâra <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[196:1](sbe38152.htm#fr_132)
Sâmânâdhikara*n*ya, i.e. literally, 'the relation of abiding in a common
substratum.'--The two words are shown to stand in that relation by their
being exhibited in the same case.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[198:1](sbe38152.htm#fr_133) i.e. in the
present case we should have to assume that the word udgîtha means, by
implication, the omkâra.--Recourse may be had to implied meanings only
when the direct meaning is clearly impossible.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[198:2](sbe38152.htm#fr_134) For a special
adhyâsa-meditation must be attended with a special result.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[199:1](sbe38152.htm#fr_135) We say, e.g. 'the
cloth is burned,' even if only a part of the cloth is burned.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[199:2](sbe38152.htm#fr_136) We therefore,
according to, *S*aṅkara, have to render the passage <span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> under discussion as follows, 'Let a man
meditate on the syllable Om which is (i.e. which is a part of) the
udgîtha.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 10](sbe38153)
