[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38274)  [Next](sbe38276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

14\. Of the other (i.e. good works) also there is, in the same way,
non-clinging; but at death.

In the preceding adhikara*n*a it has been shown that, according to
scriptural statements, all natural sin--which is the cause of the soul's
bondage--does, owing to the power of knowledge, either not cling to the
soul or undergo destruction. One might now think that works of religious
duty which are enjoined by scripture are not opposed to knowledge also
founded on scripture. In order to dispel this notion the reasoning of
the last adhikara*n*a is formally extended to the case under discussion.
For him who knows there is 'in the same way,' i.e. as in the case of
sin, 'non-clinging' and destruction 'of the other also,' i.e. of good
works also; because such works also, as productive of their own results,
would be apt to obstruct thereby the result of knowledge. Scripture
also--in passages such as 'He overcomes both' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4,
22)--declares that good works are extinguished no less than evil ones,
and the extinction of works which depends on the cognition of the Self
not being an agent is the same in the case of good and of evil works,
and moreover there is a passage making a general statement without any
distinction, viz. 'And his works are extinguished' (Mu. Up. II, 2, 8).
And even there where the text mentions evil works only, we must consider
good works also to be implied therein, because the results of the latter
also are inferior to the result of knowledge. Moreover scripture
directly applies the term 'evil works' to good works also, viz. in the
passage, *Kh*. Up. VIII, 4, i, 'Day and night do not pass that bank,'
where good works are mentioned together with evil works, and finally the
term 'evil' is without any distinction applied to all things mentioned
before, 'All evil things

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

turn back from it.'--'But at death.' The word 'but' is meant for
emphatical assertion. As it is established that good as well as evil
works--which are both causes of bondage--do, owing to the strength of
knowledge, on the one hand not cling and on the other hand undergo
destruction, there necessarily results final release of him who knows as
soon as death takes place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 15](sbe38276)
