[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38236)  [Next](sbe38238) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

28\. And there is permission of all food, (only) in the case of danger
of life; on account of this being shown (by scripture).

In the colloquy of the prâ*n*as the *Kh*andogas record, 'To him who
knows this there is nothing which is not food' (*Kh*. Up. V, 1, 2); and
the Vâ*g*asaneyins,' By him nothing is eaten that is not food, nothing
is received that is not food' (B*ri*. Up. VI, 1, 14). The sense of the
two passages is that anything may be eaten by him.--A doubt here arises
whether the texts enjoin the permission of eating anything

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

as an auxiliary to knowledge--as calmness of mind, &c., are--or mention
them for the purpose of glorification.--The pûrvapakshin maintains that
the passages are injunctions because thus we gain an instruction which
causes a special kind of activity. What, therefore, the text teaches is
the non-operation of a definite rule, in so far as auxiliary to the
knowledge of the prâ*n*as in proximity to which it is taught. But this
interpretation implies the sublation of the scriptural rules as to the
distinction of lawful and unlawful food!--Such sublation, we reply, is
possible, because the present case is one of general rule and special
exception. The prohibition of doing harm to any living creature is
sublated by the injunction of the killing of the sacrificial animal; the
general rule which distinguishes between such women as may be approached
and such as may not, is sublated by the text prescribing, with reference
to the knowledge of the Vâmadevya, that no woman is to be avoided ('Let
him avoid no woman, that is the vow,' *Kh*. Up. II, 13, 2); analogously
the passage which enjoins, with reference to the knowledge of the
prâ*n*as, the eating of all food may sublate the general rule as to the
distinction of lawful and unlawful food.

To this we reply as follows. The permission to eat any food whatever is
not enjoined, since the passages do not contain any word of injunctive
power; for the clause, 'To him who knows this there is nothing,' &c.,
expresses only something actually going on. And where the conception of
an injunction does not naturally arise we may not assume one from the
mere wish of something causing a special line of activity. Moreover the
text says that 'for him who knows this there is nothing that is not
food,' only after having said that everything even unto dogs and the
like is food for the Prâ*n*a. Now food such as dogs and the like cannot
be enjoyed by the human body; but all this can be thought of as food of
the Prâ*n*a. From this it follows that the passage is an arthavâda meant
to glorify the knowledge of the food of the Prâ*n*a, not an injunction
of the permission of all food.--This the Sûtra indicates in the words,
'and there is permission of all food

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

in danger of life.' That means: Only in danger of life, in cases of
highest need, food of any kind is permitted to be eaten. 'On account of
scripture showing this.' For scripture shows that the *ri*shi
*K*âkrâya*n*a when in evil plight proceeded to eat unlawful food. In the
brâhma*n*a beginning, 'when the Kurus had been destroyed by hailstones,'
it is told how the *ri*shi *K*âkrâya*n*a having fallen into great
wretchedness ate the beans half eaten by a chief, but refused to drink
what had been offered on the ground of its being a mere leaving; and
explained his proceeding as follows: 'I should not have lived if I had
not eaten them; but water I can drink wherever I like.' And again on the
following day he ate the stale beans left by himself and another person.
Scripture, in thus showing how the stale leaving of a leaving was eaten,
intimates as its principle that in order to preserve one's life when in
danger one may eat even unlawful food. That, on the other hand, in
normal circumstances not even a man possessing knowledge must do this,
appears from *K*âkrâya*n*a refusing to drink. From this it follows that
the passage, 'For to him who knows this,' &c., is an arthavâda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[309:1](sbe38236.htm#fr_197) The passage quoted
occurs in the Veda under the heading of the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa. But as
Pûshan has no share in the fundamental form of that sacrifice, we
conclude that the injunction implied in the passage is valid for those
vik*ri*tis of the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa in which offerings are made to
Pûshan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 29](sbe38238)
