[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38197)  [Next](sbe38199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

55\. But the (meditations) connected with members (of sacrificial acts
are) not (restricted) to (particular) *S*âkhâs, according to the Veda
(to which they belong).

The above occasional discussion being terminated, we return to the
discussion of the matter in hand.--We meet in the different *S*âkhâs of
each Veda with injunctions of vidyâs connected with certain members of
sacrificial acts, such as the udgîtha and the like. Cp. e.g. 'Let a man
meditate on the syllable Om (as) the udgîtha' (*Kh*. Up. I, 1, 1); 'Let
a man meditate on the fivefold Sâman as the five worlds' (*Kh*. Up. II,
2, I); 'People say: "Hymns, hymns!" the hymn is truly this earth' (Ait.
Âr. II, 1, 2, 1); 'The piled up fire-altar truly is this world' (*S*at.
Brâ. X, 5, 4, 1). A doubt here arises whether the vidyâs are enjoined
with reference to the udgîtha and so on as belonging to a certain
*S*âkhâ only or as belonging to all *S*âkhâs. The doubt is raised on the
supposition that the udgîtha and so on differ in the different *S*âkhâs
because the accents, &c. differ.

Here the pûrvapakshin maintains that the vidyâs are enjoined only with
reference to the udgîtha and so on which belong to the particular
*S*âkhâ (to which the vidyâ belongs).--Why?--On account of proximity.
For as such general injunctions as 'Let a man meditate on the udgîtha'
are in need of a specification, and as this need is satisfied by the
specifications given in the same *S*âkhâ which stand in immediate
proximity, there is no reason for passing over that *S*âkhâ and having
recourse to specifications enjoined

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

in other *S*âkhâs. Hence the vidyâs are to be held apart, according to
the *S*âkhâs to which they belong.

To this the Sûtra replies 'but those connected with members,' &c.--The
word 'but' discards the primâ facie view. The meditations are not
restricted to their own *S*âkhâs according to the Veda to which they
belong, but are valid for all *S*âkhâs.--Why?--Because the direct
statements of the texts about the udgîtha and so on enounce no
specification. For to such general injunctions as 'Let a man meditate on
the udgîtha'--which say nothing about specifications--violence would be
done, if on the ground of proximity we restricted them to something
special belonging to its own *S*âkhâ, and that would be objectionable
because direct statement has greater weight than proximity. There is, on
the other hand, no reason why the vidyâ should not be of general
reference. We therefore conclude that, although the *S*âkhâs differ as
to accents and the like, the vidyâs mentioned refer to the udgîtha and
so on belonging to all *S*âkhâs, because the text speaks only of the
udgîtha and so on in general.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 56](sbe38199)
