[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38148)  [Next](sbe38150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6\. If it be said that (the udgîtha vidyâ of the B*ri*. Up. and that of
the *Kh*ând. Up.) are separate on account (of the difference) of the
texts; we deny this on the ground of their (essential) non-difference.

We read in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka I, 3, 1, 'The Devas said, well, let us
overcome the Asuras at the sacrifices by means of the Udgîtha. They said
to speech: Do thou sing out for us.--Yes, said speech,' &c. The text
thereupon relates how speech and the other prâ*n*as were pierced by the
Asuras with evil, and therefore unable to effect what was expected from
them, and how in the end recourse was had to the chief vital air, 'Then
they said to the breath in the mouth: Do thou sing for us.--Yes, said
the breath, and sang.'--A similar story is met with in the *Kh*ândogya
I, 2. There we read at first that 'the devas took the udgîtha, thinking
they would vanquish the Asuras with it;' the text then relates how the
other prâ*n*as were pierced with evil and thus foiled by the Asuras, and
how the Devas in the end had recourse to the chief vital air, 'Then
comes this chief vital air; on that they meditated as udgîtha.'--As both
these passages glorify the chief vital air, it follows that they both
are injunctions of a meditation on the vital air. A doubt, however,
arises whether the two vidyâs are separate vidyâs or one vidyâ only.

Here the pûrvapakshin maintains that for the reasons specified in the
first adhikara*n*a of the present pâda the two

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

vidyâs have to be considered as one.--But, an objection is raised, there
is a difference of procedure which contradicts the assumption of unity.
The Vâ*g*asaneyins represent the chief vital air as the producer of the
udgîtha ('Do thou sing out for us'), while the *Kh*andogas speak of it
as itself being the udgîtha ('on that they meditated as udgîtha'). How
can this divergence be reconciled with the assumption of the unity of
the vidyâs?--The difference pointed out, the pûrvapakshin replies, is
not important enough to bring about a separation of the two vidyâs,
since we observe that the two both agree in a plurality of points. Both
texts relate that the Devas and the Asuras were fighting; both at first
glorify speech and the other prâ*n*as in their relation to the udgîtha,
and thereupon, finding fault with them, pass on to the chief vital air;
both tell how through the strength of the latter the Asuras were
scattered as a ball of earth is scattered when hitting a solid stone.
And, moreover, the text of the Vâ*g*asaneyaka also coordinates the chief
vital air and the udgîtha in the clause, 'He is udgîtha' (B*ri*. Up. I,
3, 23). We therefore have to assume that in the *Kh*ândogya also the
chief prâ*n*a has secondarily to be looked upon as the producer of the
udgîtha.--The two texts thus constitute one vidyâ only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 7](sbe38150)
