[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38081)  [Next](sbe38083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6\. (Should it be said that the souls are not enveloped by water) on
account of this not being stated by scripture, we refute the objection
on the ground of those who perform ish*t*is, &c., being understood.

Well, let it be granted that, on account of question and answer, water,
passing through the forms of *s*raddhâ, &c., may in the fifth oblation
obtain the shape of man. But still we cannot allow that the souls when
moving from one body into another are enveloped by water. For this is
not directly stated by scripture, there being in the whole passage no
word referring to the souls, while there are words referring to water.
Hence the assertion that the soul goes enveloped by water is
unfounded.--This objection is invalid, we reply, 'on account of those
who perform ish*t*is, &c., being understood.' For in the passage
beginning 'But they who living in a village practise sacrifices, works
of public utility and alms, they go to the smoke' (V, 3, 10), it is said
that those who perform ish*t*is reach, on the road of the fathers
leading through smoke. &c.. the moon, 'From ether they go to the moon;
that is Soma, the king.' Now these same persons are meant in the passage
about the five fires also, as we conclude from the equality of
scriptural statement in the passage, 'In that fire the devas offer

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *s*raddhâ. From
that oblation rises Soma the king <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74).'
To those <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) (persons who have performed
ish*t*is, &c.) water is supplied in the shape of the materials employed
to perform the agnihotra dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa and other sacrifices, viz.
sour milk, milk, &c., which substances, as consisting mostly of water,
may directly be considered as water. Of these, when offered in the
âhavanîya, the subtle parts assume the form of an apûrva resulting from
the oblation <span id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76), and attach themselves
to the performer of the sacrifice. Then (when the sacrificer dies) the
priests offer his body, with the funeral ceremonies <span
id="fr_77"></span>[4](#fn_77), into the crematory fire, with the mantra,
'(may) he (go) to the heavenly world, svâhâ.' Then the water forming the
oblation--which has connected with deeds resulting from faith <span
id="fr_78"></span>[5](#fn_78)--having assumed the form of an apûrva
envelops the souls of those who had performed the sacrifices, and leads
them up to the heavenly world to receive their reward.--In accordance
with the preceding interpretation scripture says in the agnihotra
chapter also--in the complementary passage constituting the reply to the
six questions--that the two agnihotra-obligations go up to the other
world in order to originate the fruit (of the work of the sacrificer),
'Those two oblations when offered go up, &c.' (*S*at. Br. XI, 6, 2,
6).--Hence we conclude that the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

souls, when going to the enjoyment of the fruits of their works, are
enveloped by the water of which the oblations consist <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79).

But how can it be maintained that those who perform sacrifices, &c., go
to the enjoyment of the fruit of their works, considering that scripture
declares them when having reached the moon--by the path leading through
smoke, &c.--to become food, 'That is Soma the king; that is the food of
the gods; the gods do eat it' (*Kh*. Up. V, 10, 4); and the
corresponding passage, 'Having reached the moon they become food, and
then the Devas feed on them there as sacrificers feed on Soma as it
increases and decreases' (B*ri*. Up. VI, 2, 16)? If, in accordance with
these passages, they are eaten by the gods as by tigers, &c., it is not
possible that they should enjoy the fruit of their deeds.--To this the
following Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[109:1](sbe38082.htm#fr_74) Both passages speak
of something reaching, i.e. becoming the moon. Now, as that something
is, in the passage about the road of the fathers, the *g*îvas of those
who have performed ish*t*is, &c., we conclude that by the *s*raddhâ
also, from which in the other passage the moon is said to rise, those
*g*îvas are meant, or, properly speaking, the subtle body of water which
envelops those *g*îvas.--Dhûmâdivâkye pa*ñk*âgnivâkye *k*a
somara*g*atvaprâpti*s*rava*n*âvi*s*eshâd ish*t*âdikâri*n*a*h*
*s*raddhâ*s*abditâdbhir vesh*th*itâ dyuloka*m* yântîti bhâtîty artha*h*.
Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[109:2](sbe38082.htm#fr_75) An. Gi. introduces
this clause by: nanu mahad iha *s*rutyor vailaksha*n*ya*m*,
*s*raddhâ*s*abditânâm apâ*m* kva*k*id dyuloke homa*h* sruta*h* kva*k*id
ish*t*âdikâri*n*âm dhûmâdikrame*n*âkâ*s*aprâptir na *k*a teshâm âpa*h*
santi yena tadvesh*th*itânâ*m* gatis tatrâha teshâ*m* *k*eti.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[109:3](sbe38082.htm#fr_76) I read, with a MS.
of An. Gi., âhutyapûrvarûpâ*h*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[109:4](sbe38082.htm#fr_77) The so-called
antyesh*t*i.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[109:5](sbe38082.htm#fr_78) And is on that
account properly called *s*raddhâ.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[110:1](sbe38082.htm#fr_79) *S*aṅkara's attempts
to render plausible the interpretation of *s*raddhâ by 'water,' and to
base thereon the doctrine of the souls when going to a new body being
enveloped by a subtle involucrum of water (and the other elements
contained therein) are, of course, altogether artificial. I do not,
however, see that he can be taxed with inconsistency (as he is by
Deussen, p. 408). Sraddhâ is to him in the first place the gross water
which constitutes the chief material employed in the sacrifices; in the
second place the apûrva which results from the sacrifice, and which is
imagined to consist of the subtle parts of the water whose gross parts
have been consumed by the sacrificial fire. These subtle parts attach
themselves to the soul, accompany it as an involucrum when it goes to
another world, and form the base of any new body which the soul may have
to assume in accordance with its previous deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 7](sbe38083)
