[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38183)  [Next](sbe38185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

41\. When (eating) is taking place, (the prâ*n*âgnihotra has to be
performed) from that (i.e. the food first eaten); on the ground of the
passage declaring this.

When eating is actually taking place, 'from that,' i.e. with that
material of food which first presents itself, the agnihotra offered to
the prâ*n*as is to be effected.--On what

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

ground?--' On the ground of the passage declaring this.' For the clause,
'The first food which a man may take is in the place of a homa,' enjoins
the circumstance of the oblations to the prâ*n*as being effected by
means of a material (primarily) subserving another purpose (viz.
eating), as appears from its referring to the presentation of food as
something accomplished (i.e. accomplished independently of the
oblations; not tending to accomplish the oblations). How then should
these oblations--which are characterised as not having any motive power
with regard to the employment of the food--be capable of causing us to
substitute, in the absence of eating, some other material (than
food)?--Nor is it true that there are already established, for the
prâ*n*âgnihotra, all the details belonging to the fundamental agnihotra.
In the case of the ayana of the Ku*nd*apâyins, the term 'agnihotra'
forms part of the injunctive passage, 'They offer the agnihotra during a
month,' and therefore may have the force of enjoining a general
character of the sacrifice identical with that of the fundamental
agnihotra; and it is therefore appropriate to consider the details of
the latter as valid for the agnihotra of the Ku*nd*apâyins also. In the
case of the so-called prâ*n*âgnihotra, on the other hand, the term
'agnihotra' occurs in an arthavâda-passage only, and does not therefore
possess an analogous injunctive force. If, again, we admitted that the
details of the fundamental agnihotra are valid for the prâ*n*âgnihotra
also, such details as the transference of the fire (from the gârhapatya
fire to the two other fires) would be likewise valid. But this is
impossible, as the transference of the fire is made for the purpose of
establishing a fireplace in which the oblations are made; in our case,
on the other hand, the oblations are not made in the fire at
all--because that would interfere with their being used as food, and
because they are connected with a material procured for the purpose of
eating,--but are made in the mouth (of the eater). Thus the text of the
*G*âbâlas also, 'He is to eat before the guests,' shows that the
accomplishment of the oblation has the mouth for its abode. For the same
reason (i.e. because the details of the fundamental agnihotra are

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

not valid for the prâ*n*âgnihotra) the text declares the subordinate
members of the agnihotra to be present here (i.e. in the
prâ*n*âgnihotra) in the way of fanciful combination only, 'the chest is
the vedi, the hairs the sacrificial grass, the heart the Gârhapatya
fire, the mind the Anvâhâryapa*k*ana fire, the mouth the Âhavanîya
fire.' By the vedi mentioned in this passage we have to understand a
levelled spot, as in the fundamental agnihotra there is no vedi, and as
the intention of the passage is to effect a fanciful combination of the
members of the fundamental agnihotra (with members of the
prâ*n*âgnihotra).--And as the prâ*n*âgnihotra is connected with eating
which has its definite times, it is also not possible that it should be
restricted to the time enjoined for the fundamental agnihotra. In the
same way other particulars also of the fundamental agnihotra, such as
the so-called upasthâna, cannot be reconciled with the requirements of
the prâ*n*âgnihotra. From all this it follows that the five oblations,
as connected with their respective mantras, materials, and divinities,
have to be performed only in the case of food being eaten.--With
reference to the passage showing 'respect,' we remark that it is meant
to intimate priority (of the host), in the case of food being actually
eaten. But the passage has no power to declare that the offering of the
prâ*n*âgnihotra is of permanent obligation.--It therefore is a settled
conclusion that the prâ*n*âgnihotra is omitted when the eating of food
is omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 42](sbe38185)
