[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38201)  [Next](sbe38203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

59\. There is (restriction to) option (between the vidyâs), on account
of their having non-differing results.

The difference of the vidyâs having been determined, we now enter on an
inquiry whether, according to one's liking, there should be cumulation
of the different vidyâs or option between them; or else restriction to
an optional proceeding (to the exclusion of cumulation). For restriction
to cumulation (which might be mentioned as a third alternative) there is
no reason, because the separation of the vidyâs has been
established.--But we observe that in the case of the sacrifices,
agnihotra, dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa and so on, there is restriction to
cumulation (i.e. that those sacrifices have all of them to be performed,
not optionally one or the Other) although they are different from each
other.--True; but the reason for the obligatory cumulation of those
sacrifices lies therein that scripture teaches them to be of absolute
obligation. No scriptural passage, on the other hand, teaches the
absolute obligatoriness of the vidyâs, and it cannot therefore be a rule
that they must be cumulated.--Nor can it be a rule that there must be
option between them, because a person entitled to one vidyâ cannot be
excluded from another vidyâ. It therefore only remains to conclude that
one may proceed as one likes.--But--an objection is raised--we must
rather conclude that option between them is the rule, because their
fruits are non-different. For vidyâs such as 'He who consists of mind,
whose body is prâ*n*a;' 'Brahman is Ka, Brahman is Kha;' 'He whose
wishes are true, whose purposes are true,' have all of them equally the
obtaining of the Lord for their fruit.--This does not affect our
conclusion; for we see that it is allowed to proceed as one likes also
with regard to certain sacrificial acts which are the means of obtaining
the heavenly world, and thus have all of them the same result. It
therefore remains a settled conclusion that in the case of vidyâs one
may proceed as one likes.

To this we reply as follows. There must be option between the vidyâs,
not cumulation, because they have the

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

same fruit. For the fruit of all of them is the intuition of the object
meditated upon, and when this object, e.g. the Lord, has once been
intuited through one meditation a second meditation would be
purposeless. It would, moreover, be impossible even to effect an
intuition through the cumulation of several meditations, since that
would cause distraction of attention. And that the fruit of a vidyâ is
to be effected through intuition various scriptural passages declare;
cp. *Kh*. Up. III, 14, 4, 'He who has this faith and no doubt;' B*ri*.
Up. IV, i, 3, 'Having become a god he goes to the gods,' and others.
Also Sm*ri*ti-passages such as Bha. Gîtâ VIII, 6, and others.--One
therefore has to select one of those vidyâs the fruit of which is the
same, and to remain intent on it until, through the intuition of the
object to be meditated upon, the fruit of the vidyâ is obtained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 60](sbe38203)
