[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38173)  [Next](sbe38175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

31\. There is no restriction (as to the going on the path of the gods)
for any vidyâ; nor any contradiction

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

(of the general subject-matter), according to scripture and inference
(i.e. Sm*ri*ti).

We have shown that the going on the path of the gods is valid only for
the vidyâs of the qualified Brahman, not for the knowledge of the
highest Brahman which is destitute of all qualities.--Now we observe
that the going on the path of the gods is mentioned only in some of the
qualified vidyâs such as the paryaṅka-vidyâ, the pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, the
upako*s*ala-vidyâ, the dahara-vidyâ; while it is not mentioned in
others, such as the madhu-vidyâ, the sâ*nd*ilya-vidyâ, the
sho*d*a*s*akala-vidyâ, the vai*s*vânara-vidyâ.--The doubt then arises
whether the going on the path of the gods is to be connected with those
vidyâs only in which it is actually mentioned or generally with all
vidyâs of that kind.

The pûrvapakshin maintains the former view; for, he says, the limitative
force of the general subject-matter of each particular section compels
us to connect the going on the path of the gods with those vidyâs only
which actually mention it. If we transferred it to other vidyâs also,
the authoritativeness of scripture would suffer; for then anything might
be the sense of anything. Moreover, the details about the path of the
gods beginning with light and so on are given equally in the
upako*s*ala-vidyâ and the pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, which would be a useless
repetition if as a matter of course the going on the path of the gods
were connected with all vidyâs.

To this we make the following reply. The going on the path of the gods
is not to be restricted but to be connected equally with all those
qualified vidyâs which have exaltation (abhyudaya) for their result. The
objection above raised by the pûrvapakshin that thereby we contradict
the general subject-matter, we refute by appealing to scripture and
Sm*ri*ti. Scripture in the first place declares that not only those 'who
know this,' i.e. the pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ (*Kh*. Up. V, 10, 1), proceed on
the path of the gods, but also those who understand other vidyâs, 'and
also those who in the forest follow faith and austerities.'--But how do
we know that the latter passage refers to those who are conversant with
other

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

vidyâs? The text certainly speaks of those only who are intent on faith
and austerities!--Not by faith and austerities alone, we reply, unaided
by knowledge, can that path be attained; for another scriptural passage
says, 'Through knowledge they mount to that place from which all wishes
have passed away; those who are skilled in works only do not go there,
nor penitents devoid of knowledge' (*S*at. Brâ. X,5, 4,16). We therefore
conclude that faith and austerities denote at the same time other
vidyâs.--The Vâ*g*asaneyins again read in the Pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, 'Those
who thus know this and those who in the forest worship faith and the
True.' The latter part of this passage we must explain to mean, 'Those
who in the forest with faith worship the True, i.e. Brahman;' the term
'the True' being often employed to denote Brahman. And as those who know
the pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ are in the above passage referred to as 'those who
thus know this,' we must understand the clause, 'and those who in the
forest,' &c., as referring to men in the possession of other vidyâs.
And, moreover, also the passage, 'Those, however, who know neither of
these two paths become worms, birds, and creeping things' (VI, 2, 16),
which teaches that those who miss the two paths have to go downwards,
intimates that those who possess other vidyâs have to proceed either on
the path of the gods or that of the fathers, and as their vidyâs are as
such not different from the pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, we conclude that they
proceed on the path of the gods (not on that of the fathers) <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150)

In the second place Sm*ri*ti also confirms the same doctrine, 'These
two, the white and the black path, are known as the eternal paths of the
world; on the one man goes not to return, on the other he again returns'
(Bha. Gî. VIII, 26).

With regard, finally, to the circumstance that the details about the
path of the gods are given in the Upako*s*ala-vidyâ

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

as well as the Pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, we remark that the repetition is meant
to assist reflection.

For all these reasons the going on the path of the gods is not limited
to those vidyâs in which it is actually mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[234:1](sbe38174.htm#fr_150) Ita*s* *k*a
vidyântara*s*îlinâ*m* gatir iti liṅgadar*s*ana*m* samu*kh*inoti atheti,
etân iti vidyântaraparâ g*ri*hyante, tathâpi katha*m* devayânayogas
teshâm ity â*s*aṅkya yogyatayety âha tatrâpîti. Ân. Gi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 32](sbe38175)
