[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38228)  [Next](sbe38230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

20\. Or (the passage rather is) an injunction, as in the case of the
carrying (of the firewood).

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

Or the passage is rather to be understood as containing an injunction,
not a mere reference.--But, an objection is raised, if we assume it to
be an injunction we thereby oppose the conception of the entire passage
as a coherent whole, while yet the passage has clearly to be conceived
as constituting such a whole, viz. as meaning that while the three
branches of the law have for their result the world of the blessed, the
condition of being grounded in Brahman has immortality for its
result.--True, but all the same we must set aside the conception of the
passage as a whole--well founded as it is--and assume it to be an
injunction. For it is a new injunction because no other injunction is
observed, and as the conception of the other stage of life clearly
arises from the passage it is impossible to interpret it as a coherent
whole by means of the assumption that it is a mere gu*n*avâda <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192).

The case is analogous to that of the 'carrying.' There is a scriptural
text (relating to the Agnihotra which forms part of the
mahâpit*ri*ya*gñ*a), 'Let him approach carrying the firewood below (the
ladle holding the offering); for above he carries it for the gods.' Now
this passage may be conceived as an unbroken whole if we view it as
referring to the carrying below only; nevertheless we determine that it
enjoins the carrying above because that

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

is not enjoined anywhere else <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193).
This is explained in the chapter treating of 'complement,' in the Sûtra,
'But it is an injunction,' &c. (Pû. Mîm. Sû.). In the same way we assume
that our passage referring to the different â*s*ramas is an injunctory
passage only.

Even if (to state an alternative conclusion) the passage contains
references only to the other â*s*ramas, it must be viewed as enjoining
at any rate the condition of being grounded in Brahman, owing to the
glorification of that condition. The question here arises whether that
state belongs to any one comprised within the four â*s*ramas, or only to
the wandering mendicant. If now a reference to the mendicant also is
contained within the references to the â*s*ramas up to the Brahma*k*ârin
(i.e. the three â*s*ramas the text refers to before the passage about
the brahmasa*m*stha); then, as all four â*s*ramas are referred to
equally and as somebody not belonging to any â*s*rama could not possibly
be called brahmasa*m*stha, it follows that the term 'brahmasa*m*stha'
denotes any one standing within one of the four â*s*ramas. If, on the
other hand, the mendicant is not comprised within the references to the
three â*s*ramas, he alone remains, and this establishes the conclusion
that the brahmasa*m*stha is the mendicant only. (We therefore have to
inquire which of the two alternatives stated has to be adopted.)--Here
some maintain that the term 'austerity' which denotes the hermit in the
woods implies a reference to the mendicant also. But this is wrong. For
as long as any other explanation is possible, we must not assume that a
term which expresses a distinctive attribute of the hermits living in
the forest comprises the wandering mendicants also. Both the
Brahma*k*ârin and the householder are

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

referred to by distinctive terms applying to them only, and we therefore
expect that the mendicant and the hermit also should be referred to by
analogous terms. Now 'austerity' is a distinctive attribute of the
hermits living in the woods; for the principal conventional meaning of
the word 'austerity' is mortification of the body. The distinctive
attribute of the mendicant, on the other hand, viz. restraint of the
senses and so on, cannot be denoted by the term 'austerity.' Moreover it
would be an illegitimate assumption that the â*s*ramas which are known
to be four should here be referred to as three. And further the text
notifies a distinction, viz. by saying that those three reach the world
of the blessed, while one enjoys immortality. Now there is room for such
a distinction if the hermits and the mendicants are separate; for we do
not say 'Devadatta and Ya*gñ*adatta are stupid, but one of them is
clever,' but we say 'Devadatta and Ya*gñ*adatta are stupid, but
Vish*n*umitra is clever.' The passage therefore has to be understood in
that sense, that those belonging to the three former â*s*ramas obtain
the world of the blessed, while the remaining one, i.e. the wandering
mendicant, enjoys immortality.--But how can the term 'brahmasa*m*stha,'
which according to its etymological meaning may be applied to members of
all â*s*ramas, be restricted to the mendicant? and, if we agree to take
it in its conventional meaning, it follows that immortality may be
reached by merely belonging to an â*s*rama, and hence that knowledge is
useless!--To these objections we make the following reply. The term
'brahmasa*m*stha' denotes fulfilment in Brahman, a state of being
grounded in Brahman to the exclusion of all other activity. Now such a
state is impossible for persons belonging to the three former â*s*ramas,
as scripture declares that they suffer loss through the non-performance
of the works enjoined on their â*s*rama. The mendicant, on the other
hand, who has discarded all works can suffer no loss owing to
non-performance. Such duties as are incumbent on him, viz. restraint of
the senses and the like, arc not opposed to the state of being grounded
in Brahman, but rather helpful

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

to it. For the only work enjoined on him by his â*s*rama. is the state
of being firmly grounded in Brahman, wherein he is strengthened by
restraint of the senses and so on--just as sacrifices and the like are
prescribed for the other â*s*ramas--and loss he incurs only by
neglecting that work. In agreement herewith texts from scripture and
Sm*ri*ti declare that for him who is grounded in Brahman there are no
works. Compare 'Renunciation is Brahman; for Brahman is the highest; for
the highest is Brahman; above those lower penances, indeed, there rises
renunciation;' 'Those anchorites who have well ascertained the object of
the knowledge of the Vedanta and have purified their nature by the Yoga
of renunciation' (Mu. Up. III, 2, 6); and similar scriptural passages.
And Sm*ri*ti-texts to the same effect, such as 'They whose minds are
fixed on him, who have their Self in him, their stand on him, their end
in him' (Bha. Gîtâ V, 17). All these passages teach that for him who is
founded on Brahman there are no works. From this there also follows the
non-validity of the second objection raised above, viz. that the
mendicant's reaching immortality through the mere stage of life in which
he stands would imply the uselessness of knowledge.--In this way we
understand that, although there is a reference to the other stages of
life, that which is indicated by the quality of being grounded in
Brahman is the state of the wandering mendicant.

This whole discussion has been carried on by the teacher without taking
into account the text of the *G*âbâlas, which enjoins the other stage of
life. But there exists that text which directly enjoins the other stage,
'Having completed his studentship he is to become a householder; having
been a householder he is to become a dweller in the forest; having been
a dweller in the forest he is to wander forth; or else he may wander
forth from the student's state; or from the house; or from the forest.'
Nor can this text be interpreted as referring to those who are not
qualified for works; for it states no difference, and there is a
separate injunction (of the pârivrâ*g*ya-state) for those who are not
qualified, viz. in the passage, 'May he have

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

taken vows upon himself or not, may he be a snâtaka or not, may he be
one whose fire has gone out or one who has no fire,' &c. That the text
does not refer to such only as are not qualified for works, further
follows from the fact that the state of the mendicant is meant to
subserve the development of the knowledge of Brahman <span
id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194), as scripture declares, 'The wandering
mendicant, with colourless dress, shaven, wifeless, pure, guileless,
living on alms, qualifies himself for the intuition of Brahman.'--From
all this it follows that the stages of life for which chastity is
obligatory are established by scripture, and that knowledge--because
enjoined on persons who have entered on those stages--is independent of
works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[299:1](sbe38229.htm#fr_192) In the clause
'vidhyantarâdar*s*arnât' I can see nothing more than an explanation
of--or reason for--the 'apûrvatvât.' If we viewed the passage as
glorifying the brahmasa*m*sthatâ compared to the three branches of the
law through the statement of its super-sensuous results (so that it
would constitute an arthavâda of the kind called gu*n*avâda), we should
indeed preserve the unity of the passage--which is destroyed if we view
it as enjoining the different stages of life. But all the same the
latter explanation is the true one; for a glorificatory passage
presupposes an injunctive one, and as no such injunctive passage is met
with elsewhere, it is simpler to assume that the present passage is
itself injunctive than to construe (on the basis of it if viewed as a
gu*n*avâda) another injunctive passage. (In Ânanda Giri's gloss on this
passage--Biblioth. Indica edition--read 'vihitatvopagamaprasaktyâ' and
'stutilaksha*n*ayaika°.')

<span id="fn_193"></span>[300:1](sbe38229.htm#fr_193) The ekavâkyatâ is
preserved if we take the clause from 'above' as an arthavâda meant to
give the reason why in sacrifices offered to the Fathers the firewood
has to be carried below. Nevertheless the clause must be taken as a
vidhi enjoining the carrying above in all sacrifices offered to the
gods, because this particular is not enjoined elsewhere.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[303:1](sbe38229.htm#fr_194) Which has to be
acquired in the regular proscribed way of Brahmanical studentship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 21](sbe38230)
