[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38067)  [Next](sbe38069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

14\. But there is guidance (of the prâ*n*as) by fire, &c., on account of
that being declared by scripture.

Here there arises a discussion whether the prâ*n*as of which we have
been treating are able to produce their effects by their own power or
only in so far as guided by divinities.--The pûrvapakshin maintains that
the prâ*n*as being endowed with the capacity of producing their effects
act from their own power. If we, moreover, admitted that the prâ*n*as
act only in so far as guided by divinities, it would follow that those
guiding divinities are the enjoyers (of the fruits of the actions), and
the individual soul would thus cease to be an enjoyer. Hence the
prâ*n*as act from their own power.--To this we reply as follows. 'But
there takes place guidance by fire,' &c.--The word 'but' excludes the
pûrvapaksha. The different classes of organs, speech, &c., the Sûtra
says, enter on their peculiar activities, guided by the divinities
animating fire, and so on. The words, 'on account of that being declared
by scripture,' state the reason. For different passages declare this,
cp. Ait. Âr, II, 4, 2, 4, 'Agni having become speech entered the mouth.'
This statement about Agni (fire) becoming speech and entering the mouth
is made on the assumption of Agni acting as a ruler with his divine Self
(not as a mere element). For if we abstract from the connexion with the
divinity we do not see that there is any special connexion of fire
either with speech or the mouth. The subsequent passages, 'Vâyu having
become breath entered into the nostrils,' &c, are to be explained in the
same way.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --This conclusion
is confirmed by other passages also, such as 'Speech is indeed the
fourth foot of Brahman; that foot shines with Agni as its light and
warms' (*Kh*. Up. IV, 18, 3), which passage declares that speech is made
of the light of Agni. Other passages intimate the same thing by
declaring that speech, &c., pass over into Agni, &c., cp. B*ri*. Up. I,
3, 12, 'He carried speech across first; when speech had become freed
from death it became Agni.' Everywhere the enumeration of speech and so
on on the one side and Agni and so on on the other side--wherein is
implied a distinction of the personal and the divine element--proceeds
on the ground of the same relation (viz. of that which is guided and
that which guides). Sm*ri*ti-passages also declare at length that
speech, &c., are guided by Agni and the other divinities, cp. for
instance,' Brâhma*n*as knowing the truth call speech the personal
element, that which is spoken the natural element and fire (Agni) the
divine element.'--The assertion that the prâ*n*as being endowed with the
capability of producing their effects act from their own power is
unfounded, as we see that some things which possess the capability of
motion, e.g. cars, actually move only if dragged by bulls and the like.
Hence, as both alternatives are possible <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60), we decide on the ground of scripture that
the prâ*n*as act under the guidance of the divinities.--The next Sûtra
refutes the assertion that from the fact of the divinities guiding the
prâ*n*as it would follow that they--and not the embodied soul--are the
enjoyers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[92:1](sbe38068.htm#fr_60) Viz. that something
should act by itself, and that it should act under guidance only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 15](sbe38069)
