[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38248)  [Next](sbe38250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

40\. But of him who has become that (i.e. entered on a higher â*s*rama)
there is no becoming not that (i.e. descending to a lower one),
according to *G*aimini also, on account of restrictive rule, absence of
such like (i.e. statements of descent), and non-existence (of good
custom).

It has been established that there are stages of life for which chastity
is obligatory. A doubt here arises whether one who has entered them may
for some reason or other fall from them or not.--The pûrvapakshin
maintains that as there is no difference a person may descend to a lower
stage, either from the wish of well performing the duties of that stage,
or influenced by passion and the like.--To this we reply as follows, 'Of
him who has become that,' i.e. of him who has reached the stages for
which chastity is obligatory, there is no 'becoming not. that,' i.e.
descending thence.--Why?--'On account of restrictive rule, absence of
such like, and non-existence.' That means: there are, in the first
place, restrictive rules declaring that a descent may not take place.
Compare 'for life mortifying the body in the house of a tutor' (*Kh*.
Up. II, 23. 2); 'He is to go into the forest, that is he is not to
return thence, that is the Upanishad;' 'Having been dismissed by the
teacher he is to follow one of the four â*s*ramas, according to rule, up
to release from the body.'--In the second place there are texts teaching
the ascent to higher â*s*ramas ('Having completed the Brahma*k*arya
state he is to become a householder; he may wander forth from the
Brahma*k*arya state'); but there are none teaching the descent to lower
â*s*ramas.--And in the third place there exists no good custom of that
kind.--The descent to a lower â*s*rama can in no way be based on the
wish of well performing the duties of that â*s*rama; for

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sm*ri*ti says,
'One's own duty, however badly performed, is better than another duty
well carried out' (Bha. Gîtâ III, 35). And the principle is that
whatever is enjoined on a certain person constitutes his duty, not what
a person is able to perform well; for all duty is characterised by
injunction. Nor is a descent allowed owing to the influence of passion,
&c.; for restrictive rules are weightier than passion.--By the word
'also' the Sûtrakâra indicates the consensus of *G*aimini and
Bâdarâya*n*a on this point, in order to confirm thereby the view
adopted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 41](sbe38250)
