[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38152)  [Next](sbe38154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

10\. Those (qualities which are attributed to the subject of a vidyâ in
one *S*âkhâ only) (are to be inserted) in other places (also), since
(the vidyâs) are non-different on the whole.

In the colloquy of the prâ*n*as recorded by the Vâ*g*asaneyins and the
*Kh*andogas the prâ*n*a, endowed with various qualities such as being
the best and so on, is represented as the object of meditation, and
various qualities such as being the richest and the like are ascribed to
speech and the other organs. And these latter qualities are in the end
attributed to the prâ*n*a also, 'If I am the richest thou art the
richest,' &c. Now in other *S*âkhâs also, as e.g. that of the
Kaushîtakins, the former set of qualities such as being the best and so
on is ascribed to the prâ*n*a (cp. Kau. Up. II, 14, 'Now follows the
Ni*hs*reyasâdâna,' &c.), but at the same time the latter set of
attributes, viz. being the richest and so on, is not mentioned.--The
question then is whether those qualities which are mentioned in some
places only are, for the purposes of meditation, to be inserted there
also where nothing is said about them.

They are not so to be inserted, the pûrvapakshin maintains, on account
of the employment of the word 'thus.' In the Kaushîtakin-text we meet
with the clause, 'He who knows thus, having recognised the pre-eminence
in prâ*n*a.' Now the word 'thus' which here indicates the object of
knowledge always refers to something mentioned not far off, and cannot
therefore denote a set of qualities mentioned in other *S*âkhâs only. We
therefore maintain that each of the colloquies of the prâ*n*as must be
considered complete with the qualities stated in itself.

To this we make the following reply. The qualities mentioned in one text
are to be inserted in the other corresponding texts also, 'Since on the
whole they are non-different,' i.e. because the prâ*n*a-vidyâs are
recognised to be the same in all essential points. And if they are the
same,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

why should the qualities stated in one not be inserted in the others
also?--But how about the objection founded by the pûrvapakshin on the
employment of the word 'thus?'--Although it is true, we reply, that the
word 'thus' in the Kaushtîakin-brâhma*n*a does not denote the set of
qualities mentioned in the Vâ*g*asaneyin-brâhma*n*a, yet that set of
qualities is denoted by the 'thus' met within the
Vâ*g*asaneyin-brâhma*n*a, while the vidyâ is, as proved by us, one and
the same; hence no difference has to be made between qualities mentioned
in one's own *S*âkhâ and qualities mentioned in another *S*âkhâ, as long
as the vidyâ is one and the same. Nor does this by any means imply a
disregard of the text of scripture, and the assumption of things not
warranted by the text. The qualities declared in one *S*âkhâ are valid
for all scripture as long as the thing to which the qualities belong is
the same. Devadatta, who in his own country is known to possess valour
and certain other qualities, does not lose those qualities by going to a
foreign land, although the inhabitants of that land may know nothing
about them. And through better acquaintance his qualities will become
manifest to the people of the foreign country also. Similarly the
qualities stated in one *S*âkhâ may, through special application, be
inserted in another *S*âkhâ.--Hence the attributes belonging to one and
the same subject have to be combined wherever that subject is referred
to, although they may be expressly stated in one place only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 11](sbe38154)
