[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38185)  [Next](sbe38187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

43\. As in the case of the offerings, (Vâyu and Prâ*n*a. must be held
apart). This has been explained (in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtra).

The section of the Vâ*g*asaneyaka which begins, 'Voice held, I shall
speak' (B*ri*. Up. I. 5, 21). determines Prâ*n*a to be the best among
the organs of the body, viz. speech and so on, and Vâyu to be the best
among the Devas, viz. Agni and so on.--Similarly in the *Kh*ândogya,
Vâyu is affirmed to be the general absorber of the Devas, 'Vâyu indeed
is the absorber' (IV, 3, 1), while Prâ*n*a is said to be the general
absorber of the organs of the body, 'Breath indeed is the absorber' (IV,
3, 3).--The doubt here arises whether Vâyu and Prâ*n*a are to be
conceived as separate or not.

As non-separate, the pûrvapakshin maintains; because in

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

their true nature they do not differ. And as their true nature does not
differ they must not be meditated upon separately. Another scriptural
passage also declares that the organs of the body and the divinities are
non-different in their true nature, 'Agni having become speech entered
the mouth,' &c. (Ait. Âr. II, 4, 2, 4). Moreover, the passage B*ri*. Up.
I, 5, 13, 'These are all alike, all endless,' declares that the powers
of the Devas constitute the Self of the organs of the body. And various
other passages also testify to the fundamental non-difference of the
two. In some places we have even a direct identification of the two,
'What Prâ*n*a is, that is Vâyu.' And in the *s*loka concluding the
Vâ*g*asaneyaka-chapter to which the passage under discussion belongs,
the text refers to prâ*n*a only ('He verily rises from the breath and
sets in the breath'), and thus shows the breath to be one with the
previously mentioned Vâyu. This conclusion is moreover confirmed by the
fact that the observance enjoined in the end refers to prâ*n*a only,
'Therefore let a man perform one observance only, let him breathe up and
let him breathe down' (B*ri*. Up. I, 5, 23). Similarly, the
*Kh*ândogya-passage, IV, 3, 6, 'One god swallowed the four great ones,'
intimates that there is one absorber only, and does not say that one god
is the absorber of the one set of four, and another the absorber of the
other set of four.--From all this it follows that Vâyu and Prâ*n*a are
to be conceived as one.

To this we make the following reply. Vâyu and Prâ*n*a are to be
conceived separately, because the text teaches them in separation. The
separate instruction given by the text with reference to the organs and
the Devas for the purposes of meditation would be meaningless if the
meditations were not held apart.--But the pûrvapakshin maintains that
owing to the essential non-difference of Vâyu and Prâ*n*a the
meditations are not to be separated!--Although, we reply, there may be
non-difference of true nature, yet there may be difference of condition
giving rise to difference of instruction, and, through the latter, to
difference of meditation. And although the introduction of the
concluding *s*loka. may be accounted for on the ground of its

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

showing the fundamental non-difference of the two, it yet has no power
to sublate the previously declared difference of the objects of
meditation. Moreover, the text institutes a comparison between Vâyu and
Prâ*n*a, which again shows that the two are different, 'And as it was
with the central breath among the breaths, so it was with Vâyu, the wind
among those deities' (B*ri*. Up. I, 5, 22).--This explains also the
mention made of the observance (I, 5, 23). The word 'only' (in 'Let a
man perform one observance only') has the purpose of establishing the
observance with regard to Prâ*n*a, by sublating the observances with
regard to speech and so on, regarding which the text had remarked
previously that they were disturbed by Death ('Death having become
weariness took them'), and does not by any means aim at sublating the
observance with regard to Vâyu; for the section beginning 'Next follows
the consideration of the observances' distinctly asserts that the
observances of Vâyu and Prâ*n*a were equally unbroken.--Moreover, the
text, after having said, 'Let a man perform one observance only,'
declares in the end that the fruit of that observance is the obtaining
of (union with) Vâyu ('Then he obtains through it union and oneness with
that deity'), and thus shows that the observance with regard to Vâyu is
not to be considered as sublated. That by that 'deity' we have to
understand Vâyu, we conclude from the circumstance that what the
worshipper wishes to obtain is non-limitation of his Self <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163), and that previously the term 'deity'
had been applied to Vâyu, 'Vâyu is the deity that never
sets.'--Analogously in the *Kh*ândogya-passage the text represents Vâyu
and Prâ*n*a as different, 'These are the two absorbers, Vâyu among the
Devas, Prâ*n*a among the prâ*n*as,' and in the concluding paragraph also
(IV, 3,8) refers to them as distinct, 'These five and the other five
make ten, and that is the K*ri*ta.'--For these reasons Vâyu and Prâ*n*a
are to be conceived as different.

The Sûtra compares the case under discussion to a

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

parallel one from the karmakâ*nd*a, by means of the clause, 'as in the
case of the offerings.' With regard to the ish*t*i comprising three
sacrificial cakes, which is enjoined in the passage, Taitt. Sa*m*h. II,
3, 6, 'A puro*d*â*s*a on eleven potsherds to Indra the ruler, to Indra
the over-ruler, to Indra the self-ruler,' it might be supposed that the
three cakes are to be offered together because they are offered to one
and the same Indra, and because the concluding sentence says, 'conveying
to all (gods) he cuts off to preclude purposelessness.' But as the
attributes (viz. 'ruler' and so on) differ, and as scripture enjoins
that the yâ*g*yâ and anuvâkyâmantras are to exchange places with regard
to the different cakes <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164), the
divinity is each time a different one according to the address, and from
this it follows that the three offerings also are separate.--Thus, in
the case under discussion, Vâyu and Prâ*n*a, although fundamentally
non-different, are to be held apart as objects of meditation, and we
have therefore to do with two separate meditations.--This is explained
in the Saṅkarsha-kâ*nd*a, 'The divinities are separate on account of
their being cognized thus.'

But while in the case of the three puro*d*â*s*as the difference of
material and divinity involves a difference on the part of the
oblations, we have in the case under discussion to do with one vidyâ
only; for that the text enjoins one vidyâ only we conclude from the
introductory and concluding statements. There is contained, however, in
this one vidyâ a double meditative activity with regard to the bodily
organs and the divinities, just as the agnihotra which is offered in the
morning as well as in the evening requires a double activity. In this
sense the Sûtra says, 'as in the case of the offerings.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[258:1](sbe38186.htm#fr_163) Agnyâdîn
apekshyânava*kkh*ino devo vâyus te tu tenaivâva*kkh*innâ iti
sa*m*vargagu*n*o vâyur anava*kkh*innâ devatâ. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[239:1](sbe38186.htm#fr_164) The yâ*g*yâ-mantra
of the first offering being used as anuvâkyâ in the second one and so
on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 44](sbe38187)
