[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38062)  [Next](sbe38064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

9\. (The chief prâ*n*a is) neither air nor function, on account of its
being mentioned separately.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

An inquiry is now started concerning the nature of that chief
prâ*n*a.--The pûrvapakshin maintains that the prâ*n*a is, according to
*S*ruti, nothing but air. For *S*ruti says, 'Breath is air; that air
assuming five forms is prâ*n*a, apâna, vyâna, udâna, samâna.'--Or else
the pûrvapaksha may be formulated according to the view of another
philosophical doctrine, and prâ*n*a may be considered as the combined
function of all organs. For so the followers of another doctrine (viz.
the Sâṅkhyas) teach, 'The five airs, prâ*n*a, &c., are the common
function of the instruments <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56).'

To this we reply that the prâ*n*a is neither air nor the function of an
organ; for it is mentioned separately. From air prâ*n*a is distinguished
in the following passage, 'Breath indeed is the fourth foot of Brahman.
That foot shines as Agni with its light and warms.' If prâ*n*a were mere
air, it would not be mentioned separately from air.--Thus it is also
mentioned separately from the functions of the organs; for the texts
enumerate speech and the other organs and mention prâ*n*a separately
from them, and the function and that to which the function belongs (the
organ) are identical. If it were a mere function of an organ, it would
not be mentioned separately from the organs. Other passages also in
which the prâ*n*a is mentioned separately from air and the organs are
here to be considered so, e.g. 'From him is born breath, mind, and all
organs of sense, ether, air,' &c. (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3). Nor is it possible
that all the organs together should have one function (and that that
function should be the prâ*n*a); for each organ has its own special
function and the aggregate of them has no active power of its
own.--But--an objection may be raised--the thing may take place in the
manner of the moving bird-cage. Just as eleven birds shut up in one cage
may, although each makes a separate effort, move the cage by the
combination of their efforts; so the eleven

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

prâ*n*as which abide in one body may, although each has its own special
function, by the combination of these functions, produce one common
function called prâ*n*a.--This objection, we reply, is without force.
The birds indeed may, by means of their separate subordinate efforts,
which all favour the movement of the cage, move the cage by combination;
that is a matter of observation. But we have no right to assume that the
different prâ*n*as with their subordinate functions such as hearing &c.
can, by combination, produce the function of vital breath; for there is
no means to prove this, and the vital breath is in kind absolutely
different from hearing and so on.--Moreover, if the vital breath were
the mere function of an organ (or the organs) it could not be glorified
as the 'best,' and speech and so on could not be represented as
subordinate to it. Hence the vital breath is different from air and the
functions (of the organs).--How then have we to understand the
scriptural passage, 'The prâ*n*a is air,' &c.?--The air, we reply,
passing into the adhyâtma-state, dividing itself fivefold and thus
abiding in a specialized condition is called prâ*n*a. It therefore is
neither a different being nor is it mere air. Hence there is room for
those passages as well which identify it with air as those which do
not.--Well, let this be granted. The prâ*n*a then also must be
considered to be independent in this body like the individual soul, as
scripture declares it to be the 'best' and the organs such as speech,
&c., to be subordinate to it. For various powers are ascribed to it in
scriptural passages. It is said, for instance, that when speech and the
other (organs) are asleep the prâ*n*a alone is awake; that the prâ*n*a
alone is not reached by death; that the prâ*n*a is the absorber, it
absorbs speech, &c.; that the prâ*n*a guards the other senses (prâ*n*as)
as a mother her sons <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57). Hence it
follows that the prâ*n*a is independent in the same way as the
individual soul.--This view is impugned in the next Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[86:1](sbe38063.htm#fr_56) Sâṅkhya Sû. II, 31;
where, however, the reading is 'sâmânya-*k*ara*n*av*ri*tti*h*,'
explained by the Comm. as sâdhâra*n*î *k*ara*n*asya
anta*hk*ara*n*atrayasya v*ri*tti*h* pari*n*âmabhedâ iti. *S*aṅkara, on
the other hand, understands by *k*ara*n*a the eleven prâ*n*as discussed
previously.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[87:1](sbe38063.htm#fr_57) Cp. Ka. Up. II, 5, 8;
B*ri*. Up. I, 5, 21; *Kh*. Up. IV, 3, 3; Pr. Up. II, 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 10](sbe38064)
