[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38001)  [Next](sbe38003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# VEDÂNTA-SÛTRAS

###### WITH

# *S*AṄKARA BHÂSHYA.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# SECOND ADHYÂYA.

### THIRD PÂDA.

REVERENCE TO THE HIGHEST SELF!

1\. Ether <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) (does) not (originate), on
account of the absence of scriptural statement.

In the Vedânta-texts we meet in different places with different
statements concerning the origination of various things. Some of those
passages declare that ether originated; some do not. Some record the
origination of air; others do not. Other passages again make analogous
statements concerning the individual soul and the vital airs.--Similarly
we observe that other scriptural texts contradict one another concerning
order of succession and the like.--Now, as we ourselves have inferred
the worthlessness of other philosophical doctrines from their mutual
contradictions, a suspicion might arise that our doctrine is equally
worthless, owing to its intrinsic contradictions. Hence a new discussion
is begun in order to clear from all doubt the sense of all those
Vedânta-texts which refer to creation, and thus to remove the suspicion
alluded to.

Here we have to consider in the first place the question

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

whether ether has an origin or not.--The pûrvapakshin maintains that
ether does not originate, since there is no scriptural statement to that
effect. For in the chapter which treats of the origin (of the world)
ether is not mentioned at all. In the passage 'In the beginning there
was that only which is, one only, without a second' the *Kh*ândogya at
first introduces Brahman as the general subject-matter, by means of the
clause 'that which is,' and thereupon (in the passages 'It thought,' 'It
sent forth fire,' &c.) records the origin of three elements, viz. fire,
water, and earth; giving the first place to fire which (ordinarily)
occupies the middle place among the five elements. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Now, as scriptural statement is our (only)
authority in the origination of the knowledge of supersensuous things,
and as there is no scriptural statement declaring the origin of ether,
ether must be considered to have no origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](sbe38002.htm#fr_0) Here, as generally in
the preceding parts of this translation, âkâ*s*a is rendered by 'ether.'
There is no doubt that occasionally the appropriate--and in some cases
the only possible-rendering is not 'ether' but 'space;' but the former
rendering, after all, best agrees with the general Vedântic view of
âkâ*s*a. The Vedântins do not clearly distinguish between empty space
and an exceedingly line matter filling all space, and thus it happens
that in many cases where we speak of the former they speak of âkâ*s*a,
i.e. the all-pervading substratum of sound; which howsoever attenuated
is yet one of the material elements, and as such belongs to the same
category as air, fire, water, and earth.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](sbe38002.htm#fr_1) The usual order being
ether, air, fire, water, earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 3, 2](sbe38003)
