[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk07)  [Next](tpk09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW TO FAST

The King of Kings of creation the first and last said "Blessed are they
that searcheth the deep things on the tree of life for His wisdom is
deep and is past all finding out."

Thus said the living God and owner of life, to overcome white bondage
and filth and black hypocrisy amongst your own black skin you have to
fast hard or the white man is very filthy and the black man is an
hypocrite and hypocrite means a crook, a filthy man that class of white
folks who cut with the crook [they](errata.htm#1) are called
Black-White.

Always have a basin of fine or coarse salt on your fast table as long as
God is your ruler. When you break your fast do not throw the water over
your heads the trouble will fall on you. When you are all ready with
your cup in hand the Elder will ask is it all well with thee, everybody
shall say together all is well with me Then the Elder shall ask again
"Who will bear a true witness for the Tree of Life?" All shall say by
the Living God will God help me for life, and the leader shall say
follow me with your cup of trouble to the burying place of sin and
shame.

Then everybody walk quietly and respectfully throw away the water, then
come in and wash your hands and face and be happy feeling satisfied and
revived and lovely. House to house fasting is very powerful, it lifts
the work and removes devils from homes of those in distress. Once a week
for the general assembly is all right. A love feast every three or six
months is needed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Department](tpk09)
