[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk00)  [Next](tpk02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MYSTERY COUNTRY

I wish to state to you my dear Readers, that Ethiopia is a Country of
great contrasts largely unexplored and is populated by Black People
whose attitude towards this so called Western civilization has not
changed within the last six thousand years.

The people are Christians while retaining Primitive customs. The result
is that the Black People of Ethiopia are extraordinarily blended into a
refined fashion that cannot be met with in any other part of the world.

In 1930 the Duke of Gloucester undertook one of the most interesting
duties he had been called upon to execute up to this date. The occasion
was the Coronation of His Majesty Ras Tafari the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords the conquering Lion of Judah, the Elect of God and the Light of
the world.

The Duke was to represent his father The Anglo-Saxon King. The Duke
handed to His Majesty Rastafari the King of Kings and Lord of lords a
Scepter of solid gold twenty seven inches long, which had been taken
from the hands of Ethiopia some thousand years ago.

The Duke fell down on bending knees before His Majesty Ras Tafari the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords and spoke in a loud voice and said,
"Master, Master my father has sent me to represent him sir. He is unable
to come and he said that he will serve you to the end Master." See Psalm
72: 9 to 11 verses, also see Gen. 49 chap. 10 verse.

On one side of the Scepter was inscribed Ethiopia shall make her hands
reach unto God, and on the other side the King of Kings of Ethiopia,
 the top of the shaft was finished with a seal and above was a clen
cross in which a single carbuncle was set.

The Scepter was a magnificent piece of workmanship and had been designed
from an historic piece in which the special ceremonies of His Royal
Highness of Ethiopia, Earth's Rightful Ruler.

The Duke also handed to Queen Omega the Empress of Ethiopia a Scepter of
gold and ivory. The shaft is in the form of a spray of lilies and at the
top a spray of lilies in bloom.

It was a brilliant ceremony, the church began to be filled. The
Ethiopians were brilliant in special robes having discarded their
precious white robes, and wore Jewels of great value.

The men's swords were being heavily ornamented with gems. On their heads
they wore gold braided hats, in which the covered lion's manes were to
be seen. In contraction then were the solar note struck by the women who
were heavily veiled, and wore heavy cloaks.

His and Her Majesty King Alpha and Queen Omega the King of Kings drove
to the Cathedral in a Coach drawn by six white Arab horses.

Queen Omega in a Robe of Silver and the escort on mules wearing lion's
skin over their shoulders, forming into procession outside the
Cathedral.

King Ras Tafari and Queen Omega the Royal pair, the escort and a line of
Bishops and Priests entered the guest rank obeisance.

King Alpha sitting on his Throne homage was done to him by the Bishops
and Priests fulfilling the 21st. Psalm. The ceremony took 10 days from
the second day to the eleventh day of November 1930.

King Alpha was presented with the orb spurs, and spears and many other
mighty emblems of His High Office, Dignitaries of the world power
presented King Alpha with the wealth of oceans.

The Emperor attended to most of his preparations for the reception of
his thousands of guests himself, and day after day could be seen rushing
about in his scarlet car seeing how the white laborers were getting on
with the new road he had ordered that the lawns he had laid down be
attended to and that the extension of the electric lights throughout the
city were being hurried on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The False Religion](tpk02)
