[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk13)  [Next](tpk15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ETHIOPIAN QUESTION

The Ethiopian Question is this: The continent of Ethiopia is that
national. She is that rich national woman that has charmed the men of
nations to be with her.

After a time when they all have lived and cohabited with her they all
broke her down and left her and persecuted her.

That is just how all nations manage to soak through the Ethiopian woman
of prosperity. She had too much sympathy for the perishing nations whose
lives are riotously lived until this day.

Slave traders went into Ethiopia and damaged her seeds, beyond any
earthly cure. Because she had too much sympathy for willful idlers of
various nations. They went into her robbed her lands, money and took her
seeds to be slaves.

Today she and her children have no power in her own land, or abroad. All
that Ethiopians have to do now, is build anew. Get out a new dictionary
and a new Bible, and a new Board of Education and Money Mint. The outfit
shall be called Black supremacy; signed by His and Her Majesty Ras
Tafari and Queen omega the King of Kings, head of this world.

The lesson learnt by slave traders through Black Histories is well
preserved. We have given our blood, souls, bodies and spirits to redeem
Adam Abraham Anglo Saxon the white A. D. second score at his astonishing
stop. He is still infested with indomitable, incurable, accursed, deadly
disease. We have given him access to the tree of life, we gave him the
Garden of Eden, we gave him Egypt, we gave them Daniel and the body of
the Black Virgin, the mother of Jesus and they took Joseph also.

We gave ourselves to be slaves for hundred of years. We gave up King
Alpha and Queen Omega the first and the last. Now we are disgusted with
them, we wash our hands of them for life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First and the Last](tpk15)
