[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk16)  [Next](tpk18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BLACK PEOPLE BLACK PEOPLE ARISE AND SHINE

Black People, Black People arise and shine for the light has come and
the glory of the King of Kings is now risen upon thee. Let not the
preachers of the white man's doctrine persuade you to turn your back
against H. M. Ras Tafari the Lord God of Israel. Every man was created
for the earth in order that he might have and enjoy the fullness of the
richness of the Earth.

The white man's doctrine has forced the black man to forsake silver and
gold and seek Heaven after death. It has brought us to live in disgrace
and die in dishonor. Now we the black man have found out that their
doctrine was only a trick, and all their intention was to make
themselves strong and to fool the black man.

As I G. G. Maragh speak unto you, this is a very serious affair and must
not be forsaken. The wise black man woman and children gaining knowledge
diligently toward the truth of H. M. Ras Tafari Kingdom must be had
before one could possibly receive the truth, for he is King of Kings and
Lords of Lords, therefore he is earth's rightful ruler. In this name
alone will the black people receive happiness. His throne is forever and
ever and a Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of his Kingdom.

Woe be unto the preacher of the white man's doctrine a hypocrisy or
devil worship. There are millions of persons of good will who see the
cruel unjust and wicked things done in the Church organizations in the
name of God.

It is the will of H. M. Ras Tafari that such persons of good will may
have an opportunity to get knowledge of truth. May I state that all
reasonable persons who hear the truth should readily see that the Pope
of Rome and his preachers are Ras Tafari who is the Lord God of Israel's
great opposer and greatest enemy. Persons of good will to the Kingdom of
H. I. M. will live forever. The other\[s\] will remain dead forever.

Woe be unto them that forsaketh H. M. Ras Tafari as being God Almighty,
they shall be cast into hell both body and soul.

PEACE BE UNTO YOU, PEACE BE UNTO YOU.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Forward to the King of Kings](tpk18)
