[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](bkt00) [Next](bkt02.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

## TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   D<span class="small">R.</span> W<span class="small">EIL</span> has
stated, in his Introduction to these Legends, that he chiefly extracted
them from original Arabic records, which are still received by
Mohammedans as the inspired biographies of the ancient patriarchs and
prophets.

   It must still farther be added that the leading ideas of these
Mohammedan legends, *i. e.*, their prominent historical narratives, and
the doctrines and precepts which they either state expressly or imply,
are contained in the Koran. In some instances it gives their minutest
particulars. Indeed, it would seem as if these legends formed part, at
least, of what the founder of the Mohammedan faith terms "the mother of
the book," indicating that they preceded his Koran in order of time, and
embodied the germ of that faith which he subsequently developed.

   This idea is suggested by the learned German compiler, and is
corroborated by the fact that <span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> the
legends were unknown to the Arabs before Mohammed began to preach, while
in the Koran he refers to them as already familiar to his hearers.

   But, be this as it may, it is certain that the fact of their leading
ideas being found in the Koran invests them with divine authority to the
faithful Moslem, for it is a primary article of his creed that every
thing contained in the Koran is of Allah. On first reading these
legends, it therefore occurred to the writer that they might be a
valuable acquisition, as an epitome of Mohammedan theology and morals.
And their peculiar character, their constant allusion to scriptural
facts, with which most Bible readers strongly identify themselves, their
novel, and gorgeous, and often sublime inventions, investing them at
once with the fidelity of historical detail, and the freshness and
fascination of Oriental fiction, seem to fit them especially for popular
instruction. If it be asked what benefit may be derived from
promulgating the tenets of a professedly erroneous system, it is replied
that a distinction ought to be observed between the false systems that
have ceased to be believed, <span id="page_v">p. v</span> and those
which are still maintained as divine truths by any portion of mankind.

   It may be questioned whether the former ought at all to be taught,
although there are reasons why even the exploded mythology of the
ancients should be known; but respecting the second class, to which the
religion of Mohammed belongs, there should be but one opinion.

   Our Redeemer has committed to us, in part, the propagation of his
holy faith, by which alone he declares that mankind shall attain to that
holiness, peace, and glory for which they have been created. The
exhibition, therefore, in the stewards of the Gospel, of a false
religion, in which, as in the case before us, one hundred and twenty
millions of our immortal race are at this moment staking their all, can
not but be important, at once to awaken within us feelings of deep and
active charity for these benighted multitudes, and to furnish us with
the requisite intelligence for effectually combating their grievous
errors with the weapons of truth.

   Should the public feel any interest in this work, the translator
proposes, in a future volume, <span id="page_vi">p. vi</span> to discuss
the legendary principle at some length, and to show the analogy of its
practical working in the Jewish, the Mohammedan, and Roman Catholic
systems of religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bkt02.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
