[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Prophecy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msi04)  [Next](msi06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

# Chapter Fifth

A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE MOTHER SHIPTON LITERATURE--MODERN AND
ANCIENT FABRICATIONS--THE CAREER AND WORKS OF RICHARD HEAD,
"GENTLEMAN"--A CURIOUS EXPERIMENT IN DISTILLATION--THE PLAGIARISMS OF
THOMPSON THE PLAYWRIGHT--A POSSIBLE ORIGIN OF THE FIRST RECORD--GENERAL
AGREEMENT IN THE OLDEST VERSIONS OF MOTHER SHIPTON'S PROPHECIES--HAD
MOTHER SHIPTON AN ACTUAL EXISTENCE?--THE BALANCE OF PROBABILITIES.

Sufficient materials have been brought together in the preceding pages,
to give some scope now for critical examination.

The three earliest records in the British Museum Library, in relation to
Mother Shipton, -agree closely with each other, and none of them contain
the lines printed on page 13, in my first Chapter, ending with the too
celebrated couplet:--

"The world to an end shall come,  
In eighteen hundred and eighty one."

The lines in question, and the notorious prophecy about the end of the
world, were fabricated about twenty years ago, by Mr. Charles Hindley.
The editor of *Notes and Queries* says, in the issue of that journal
dated April 26th, 1873:--

"Mr. Charles Hindley, of Brighton, in a letter to us, has made a clean
breast of having fabricated the Prophecy quoted at page 450 of our last
volume, with some ten others included in his reprint of a chap-book
version, published in 1862."

Most of the precise details in Chapter I, about the birth, life and
death of Mother Shipton, are fabrications which have been reproduced
time after time in chap-books. There is no absolute evidence that any
one of the details is true, but there may be some foundation for the
incident narrated about Cardinal Wolsey.

The whole of the details in Chapter II, which have interested the public
for 200 years, are fabrications. "Richard Head, *gentleman*," drew the
contents of every page of his book from his own inner consciousness. His
preface to the oldest edition of his work extant (16 4), is amusing, and
among other items sets forth as follows, bow he obtained and dealt with
the alleged Shipton manuscript:--

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

"Many old Manuscripts and rusty Records I turned over, but all in vain;
at *last* I was Informed by a Gentleman (whose Ancestors by the Gift of
King *Henry* the Eighth, enjoyed a. *Monastary* in these parts) that he
had in his keeping some Ancient Writings which would in that point
satisfie my desire, were they not so Injured by Time, as now not legible
to Read; however, I not despairing to find out their meaning, with much
Importunity desired to have a sight of them; which having obtained, I
took of the best Galls I could get, beat them grosly, and laid them to
steep one day in good White-wine, that done, I distilled them with the
Wine; and with the Distilled Water that came off them, I wetted
handsomely the old Letters, whereby they seemed as fresh and fair as if
they had been but newly Written."

From the above it would appear that even in Head's days there was a
desire for earlier manuscripts about Mother Shipton.

Chemists will appreciate the novelty of the distilling operation, in
which, on the application of heat as described, water came over before
alcohol.

The Richard Head, who has so long misdirected the thoughts of large
numbers of people, was the son of a minister in Ireland. Head's father
was massacred "with many thousands more" in 1641. Mrs. Head then brought
her son to England, and he completed his studies at Oxford. He could not
afford to remain until he obtained a degree, so turned bookseller. He
married, and soon afterwards became a ruined man, in consequence, says
Erskine Baker, "of two pernicious passions, viz., poetry and gaming, the
one of which is for the most part unprofitable, and the other almost
always destructive." He retired to Ireland, where, in 1663, he wrote his
only dramatic piece, *Hic et Ubique*, by which piece he acquired great
reputation, and some money. As a literary man he had several ups and
down in the world; his writings had a strong tinge of indecency. He was
drowned in the year 1678, while crossing to the Isle of Wight.

The other piece of fiction of high antiquity, relating to our heroine,
is the comedy of the *Life of Mother Shipton*, mentioned on page 25,
which is said to have been acted nine days with great applause. The
author was one T. Thompson. The British Museum authorities consider the
date of the Mother Shipton comedy, to be about 1660, so it ranks with
the earliest existing narratives relating to the subject.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

In the "Lives and Characters of the *English Dramatick* Poets . . . . .
First begun by Mr. *Langbain*, improv'd and continued down to this Time,
by a Careful Hand, *London*: Printed for *William Turner*, at the *White
Horse*, without *Temple Bar*, 1699," Langbain describes Thomas Thompson
as--

A Poor Plagiary, that could not disguise or improve his Thefts. Those
two following Plays go under his Name; viz.

The *English Rogue*, a Comedy, 4*to*. 1688, acted (says the Title)
before several Persons of Honour, with great Applause, and dedicated to
Mrs. *Alice Barrett*.

Mother Shipton, her Life; 4*to*. The Author hereof says, 'twas acted
Nine Days together, with great Applause. Plot from a Book so called in
the Prose, 4*to*., but most of the Characters and Language from *The
City Madam*, and *The Chast Maid of Cheapside*.

Thompson's play of The English Rogue, was also dramatised from a book by
Richard Head, for whose dubious writings Thompson, therefore, seems to
have [had](errata.htm#0) admiration.

There may be other ancient versions of Mother Shipton's prophecies, but
none are known of an earlier date than 1641, and I have dealt with the
oldest I can find in the British Museum Library. *Notes and Queries*, of
July 25th, 1868, contains a letter from an anonymous writer, making
mention of some old editions which may be in other collections. His
exceptionally valuable remarks about Mother Shipton and her history I
abridge as follows:--

Although the fact of the existence of Mother Shipton rests wholly upon
Yorkshire tradition, she can scarcely be regarded as a myth. According
to the tradition, the place of her birth was on the picturesque banks of
the river Nidd, opposite to the frowning towers of Knaresborough Castle,
and at a short distance from St. Robert's Cave--a spot famous for
mediæval legends and modern horrors. She first saw the light a few years
after the accession of Henry VII. It was not until fourscore years after
her death that any account of her extraordinary predictions was recorded
in print. A few years before the breaking out of the Civil War, King
Charles I frequently passed through Yorkshire, and perhaps the
prophecies of the Yorkshire witch then prevalent in the county,
captivated the imagination of some follower of the Court, who on his
return to London concocted the first pamphlet. It soon became popular,
and the following year two reprints appeared, with some additional
prophecies. In 1643 a third edition was published, which was followed by
two others a few years afterwards. In 1662 and 1663, after the
Restoration, the tracts already described were reprinted with some
additional matter, and in 1667 the notorious Richard Head, author of
several works of a loose description,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

invented her biography, and gave to the world a new version of her
prophecies. This production has been accepted by the popular taste as
the authentic history of the Yorkshire witch, and has been reprinted and
sold in all parts of the kingdom. Drake, the historian of York, states
that Cardinal Wolsey never came nearer to York than Cawood, which makes
good a prophecy of Mother Shipton. "I should not have noticed this idle
story," he adds, "but that it is fresh in the mouths of our country
people at this day; but whether it was a real prediction, or raised
after the event, I shall not take upon me to determine. It is more than
probable, like all the rest of these kind of tales, the accident gave
occasion to the story." (See Eboracum, p. 450, and get date of it). In a
*History of Knaresborough*, published by Harcourt about a hundred years
ago, Mother Shipton's traditionary prophecies are described as being
still familiar in her native town. The much mutilated sculptured stone
near Clifton, Yorkshire, universally called "Mother Shipton," was the
figure of a warrior in armour, which had been a recumbent monumental
statue; it was probably brought from the neighbouring Abbey of St. Mary,
and placed upright as a boundary stone. It has been removed to the
museum of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society.

After clearing palpable fiction out of the way, we are left face to face
with three of the earliest editions of Mother Shipton's prophecies,
published respectively in 1641, 1645, and 1663. These agree closely with
each other in their details, the variations being few and unimportant.
They appear to have been written seriously and with a desire for truth,
in which they differ marvellously from the Shipton literature of the
last 200 years.

A critical examination of the oldest record, reprinted in full in
Chapter III, reveals indications that the first part was written by one
man, and the second part by another; the former was the most able of the
two. The latter part consists of Besley's statements, evidently made
originally in doggerel verse, but set by the printer, for the most part,
in prose. The rhymes can be traced.

Lilly's 1645 version is the best of the three, and it preserves more of
Master Besley's rhymes in their original form. For instance, the 1641
edition contains the following lines:--

Then Warres shall begin in the spring,  
Much woe to England it shall bring:  
Then shall the Ladyes cry well-away,  
That ever we liv'd to see this day.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Lilly's edition gives the following more complete quotation from an
older version:--

The North shall rue it wondrous sore,  
But the South shall rue it for evermore.  
When wars shall begin in the spring  
Much wo to England it wild bring:  
Then shall the Ladies cry well a-day,  
That we ever liv'd to see this day.  
Then best for them that have the least  
And worst for them that have the most.

Not only is there this internal evidence of the pamphlets being more or
less true copies of earlier records, but Lilly, in his *Collection of
Ancient and Modern Prophecies*, published in 1645, makes this direct
statement in the "introduction to the reader:"--

"Mother Shipton's" \[prophecy\] "was never yet questioned either for the
verity or antiquity; the North of England hath many more of hers."

Did such a person as Mother Shipton ever live? Cardinal Wolsey was at
Cawood in 1530, and the earliest record in existence of Mother Shipton,
is dated 1641, leaving a gap of 111 years between the chief incident of
her career and the oldest record thereof. But Lilly in 1045 speaks of
various earlier records of her prophecy being then in existence, and of
the facts being in his day undisputed. Some of those older records,
which between 1641 and 1663 were reprinted with much fidelity, might
possibly have been issued, if not in the lifetime of the sibyl herself,
at all events in the lifetime of some of those who dwelt in York when
the occurrences took place. After Cardinal Wolsey's death, Mother
Shipton told Master Besley to take a jewelled pillar out of York
Cathedral and to present it to Henry VIII. It might be asked how Master
Besley could do this at the more instigation of an old woman, and
without the consent of the Archbishop. But history shows that the See of
York was vacant for nearly a year after Cardinal Wolsey's death, so that
while it was in the charge of underlings, at a time when Henry VIII
began to seize church property in all directions, this Mr. Besley may
have had the power to do what is recorded of him. Besley's name is spelt
"Beasley " in Lilly's reprint of the Shipton prophecy, and I find in
Drake's *Eboracum* that in the year 1486 a John Beasley was one of the
Sheriffs of York.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The admirer of Mother Shipton may have been his
son; at all events people of that name *were* living in York before the
incident with Cardinal Wolsey is said to have occurred.

In 1539, Richard Layton, Dean of York, pawned some of the jewels of the
Cathedral, which is a corroborative illustration of the treatment of
church property at that period.

Not so very long after the event, then, a clear record of the interview
of Mother Shipton with the three lords found its way into print, and the
writer lengthened the narrative by tacking some of Master Besley's
doggerel verses to the end of it. If there were no truth in the story,
it was one which would have given much offence to the immediate
descendants of the noblemen whose names had been so freely used in
public.

Lilly, as already stated, makes no question that Mother Shipton existed,
and says that in his time the authenticity of her prophecies was
undisputed. He had means, which we in modern times have not, of drawing
a conclusion, and altogether it is tolerably certain that Mother Shipton
had an actual existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Sixth](msi06)
