[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Prophecy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msi02)  [Next](msi04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# Chapter Third

A VERBATIM REPRINT OF THE EARLIEST EXISTING RECORD RELATING TO MOTHER
SHIPTON--HER PROPHECIES IN RELATION TO CARDINAL WOLSEY, THE DUKE OF
SUFFOLK, LORD PERCY, AND LORD D'ARCY--MASTER BESLEY'S RECORD OF HER
SAYINGS--MOTHER SHIPTON'S PROPHECIES IN RELATION TO NATIONAL AND LOCAL
EVENTS.

The earliest known record at present in existence relating to Mother
Shipton, is a pamphlet in good preservation, dated 1641, presented to
the British Museum by King George III. The following is a verbatim
reprint of the whole of it, printer's errors and all:--

"The Prophesie of Mother *Shipton*, In the Raigne of King *Henry* the
Eighth. Fortelling the death of Cardinall *Wolsey*, the Lord *Percy* and
others, as also what should happen in insuing times. London, Printed for
*Richard Lownds*, at his shop adjoining to Ludgate, 1641." \[*This is
the title-page*.\]

"The Prophecie of Mother *Shipton*, in the Raigne of King *Henry*
eighth."

"When shee heard King *Henry* the eighth should be King, and Cardinall
*Wolsey* should be at *Yorke*, shee said that Cardinall *Wolsey* should
never come to *Yorke* with the King, and the Cardinall hearing, being
angry, sent the Duke of *Suffolke*, the Lord *Piercy*, and the Lord
D*arcy* to her, who came with their men disguised to the King's house
neere *Yorke*, where leaving their men, they went to Master *Besley* to
*Yorke*, and desired him to goe with them to Mother *Shipton's* house,
where when they came they knocked at the doore, shee said Come in Master
*Besley*, and those honourable Lords with you, and Master *Besley* would
have put in the Lords before him, but she said, come in Master *Besley*,
you know the way, but they doe not. This they thought strange that she
should know them, and never saw them; and then they went into the house,
where there was a great fire, and she bade them welcome, calling them
all by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and they drunke and
were very merry. Mother *Shipton*, said the Duke, if you knew what wee
come about, you would not make us so welcome, and shee said the
messenger

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

should not be hanged; Mother *Shipton*, said the Duke, you said the
Cardinall should never see *Yorke*; Yea, said shee, I said hee might see
Yorke, but never come at it; But said the Duke, when he comes to *Yorke*
thou shalt be burned; We shall see that, said shee, and plucking her
Handkerchieffe off her head shee threw it into the fire, and it would
not burne, then she tooke her staffe and turned it into the fire, and it
would not burne, then she tooke it and put it on againe; Now (said the
Duke) what meane you by this? If this had burn'd (said shee) I might
have burned. Mother *Shipton* (quoth the Duke) what thinke you of me? My
love, said she, the time will come when you will be as low as I am, and
that's a low one indeed. My Lord *Percy* said, what say you of me? My
Lord (said she) shooe your Horse in the quicke, and you shall doe well,
but your body will bee buried in *Yorke* pavement, and your head shall
be stolne from the barre and carried into *France*. Then said Lord
D*arcy*, and what thinke you of me? Shee said, you have made a great
Gun, shoot it off, for it will doe you no good, you are going to warre,
you will paine many a man, but you will kill none, so they went away.

"Not long after the Cardinall came to *Cawood*, and going to the top of
the Tower, hee asked where Yorke was, and how farre it was thither, and
said that one had said hee should never see *Yorke*; Nay, said one, shee
said you might see *Yorke*, but never come at it. He vowed to burne her
when he came to *Yorke*. Then they shewed him *York*, and told him it
was but eight miles thence; he said he will soone be there: but being
sent for by the King, hee dyed in the way to *London* at *Lecester* of a
laske; And Shipton's wife said to Master *Besley*, yonder is a fine
stall built for the Cardinall in the Minster, of Gold, Pearle, and
precious stone, goe and present one of the pillers to King *Henry*, and
hee did so.

"Master *Besley* seeing these things fall out as shee had foretold,
desired him to tell him some more of her prophesies; Master, said she,
before that *Owes* Bridge and Trinitie Church meet, they shall build on
the day,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and it shall fall in the night, untill they get the highest stone of
Trinitie Church, to be the lowest stone of *Owes* bridge, then the day
shall come when the North shall rue it wondrous sore, but the South
shall rue it for evermore; When Hares kinle on cold harth stones, and
Lads shall marry Ladyes, and bring them home, then shall you have a
yeare of pyning hungar, and then a dearth without Corne; A woful day
shall be seen in England, a King and Queene, the first comming of the
King of *Scots* shall be at *Holgate* Towne, but he shall not come
through the barre, and when King of the North shall bee at *London*
Bridge, his Tayle shall be at *Edenborough*; After this shall water come
over *Owes* bridge, and a Windmill shall be set on a Tower, and an
Elme-tree shall lye at at every mans doore, at that time women shall
weare great hats and great bands, and when there is a Lord Major at
Yorke let him beware of a stab. When two Knights shall fall out in the
Castle yard, they shall never bee kindly all their lives after; When
*Colton* Hagge hath borne seven yeares Crops of corne, seven yeares
after you heare newes, there shall two Judges goe in and out at Mungate
barre.

"*Then, Warres shall begin in the spring,  
Much woe to England it shall bring:  
Then shall the Ladyes cry well-away,  
That ever we liv'd to see this day*.

"Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have
the most, you shall not know of the War over night, yet you shall have
it in the morning, and and when it comes it shall last three yeares,
betweene *Cadron* and *Aire* shall be great warfare, when all the world
is as a lost, it shall be called Christs crost, when the battell begins,
it shall be where Crookbackt *Richard* made his fray, they shall say, To
warfare for your King, for halfe a crown a day, but stirre not (she will
say) to warfare for your King, on paine on hanging, but stirre not, for
he that goes to complaine, shall not come backe again. The time will
come when *England* shall tremble and quake for feare of a dead man that
shall bee heard to speake, then will the Dragon give the Bull a great
snap, and

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

when the one is downe they will go to *London* Towne; Then there will be
a great battell betweene *England* and *Scotland*, and they will be
pacified for a time, and when they come to *Brammammore*, they fight and
are again pacified for a time; then there will be a great Battle at
*Knavesmore*, and they will be pacified for a while; Then there will be
a great battell betweene *England* and *Scotland* at *Stoknmore*; Then
will Ravens sit on the Crosse and drinke as much bloud of the nobles, as
of the Commons, then woe is mee, for *London* shall be destroyed for
ever after; Then there shall come a woman with one eye, and she shall
tread in many mens blond to the knee, and a man leaning on a staffe by
her, and she shall say to him, What art thou? and he shall say, I am
King of the *Scots*, and she shall say, Goe with me to my house, for
there are three Knights, and he will go with her, and stay there three
days and three nights, then will *England* be lost; and they will cry
twice of a day *England* is lost; Then there will be three knights in
*Petergate in Yorke* and the one shall not know of the other; There
shall be a childe born in *Pomfret* with three thumbes, and those three
Knights will give him three Horses to hold, while they win England, and
all the Noble bloud shall be gone but one, and they shall carry him to
Sheriffe Nutton's Castle, six miles from Yorke, and he shall dye there,
and they shall choose there an Earle in the field, and hanging their
Horses on a thorne, And rue the time that ever they were borne, to see
so much bloudshed; Then they will come to Yorke to besiege it, and they
shall keepe out three dayes and three nights, and a penny loafe shall
bee within the barre at halfe a crowne, and without the barre at a
penny; And they will sweare if they will not yeeld, to blow up the Towne
walls. Then they will let them in, and they will hang up the Major,
Sheriffs and Aldermen, and they will goe into Crouch Church; there will
be three Knights goe in, and but one come out againe; and he will cause
Proclamation to be made, that any man may take House, Tower, or Bower
for twentie one yeares, and whilest the world endureth, there shall
never be

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

warfare againe, nor any more Kings or Queenes, but the Kingdome shall be
governed by three Lords, and then *York* shall be *London*; And after
this shall be a white Harvest of corne gotten in by women. Then shall be
in the North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have seen
a man to day, and for one man there shall be a thousand women, there
shall be a man sitting upon St. James's Church hill weeping his fill;
And after that a Ship come sayling up the Thames till it come against
*London*, and the Master of the Ship shall weepe, and the Marriners
shall aske him why hee weepeth, being he hath made so good a voyage, and
he shall say; Ah what a goodly Citie this was, none in the world
comparable to it, and now there is scarce left any house that can let us
have drinke for our money.

*Vnhappy he that lives to see these days,  
But happy are the dead Shiptons wife sayes*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Fourth](msi04)
