[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aph00)  [Next](aph02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000EP89M2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Aphrodite*, by Pierre Louys, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__004"></span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# APHRODITE

### AUTHOR'S PREFACE

The erudite Prodicos of Ceos, who flourished toward the end of the first
century before our era, is the author of the celebrated apologue which
St. Basil recommended to Christian meditation: "Herakles between virtue
and voluptuousness." We know that Herakles decided for the first, and
was thus enabled to accomplish a certain number of great crimes against
the Hinds, the Amazons, the Golden Apples and the Giants. If Prodicos
had limited himself to that, he would have written only a fable of
readily comprehended symbolism, but he was a clever philosopher and his
repertory of tales, "The Hours," which was divided into three parts,
presented the moral truths under their three different aspects which
correspond to the three ages of life. For little children he was pleased
to propose as an example the austere choice of Herakles; to youths he
doubtless related the voluptuous choice of Paris; and I imagine that, to
ripe men, he said nearly this:

"Odysseus was wandering in the chase one day, at the foot of the
mountains of Delphi, when he met on his path two virgins who held each
other by the hand. The one had hair of violets, transparent eyes, and
grave lips; she said to him: 'I am Arete.' The other had softly tinted
eyelids, delicate hands and tender breasts; she said to him: 'I am
Tryphe.' And they said together: 'Choose between us.' But the subtle
Odysseus responded wisely: 'How could I choose—you are inseparable. The
eyes which have

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

seen you pass—one without the other—have glimpsed but a sterile shadow.
Just as sincere virtue does not deprive itself of the eternal joys which
voluptuousness brings to it, so luxury would go ill without a certain
grandeur of soul. I will follow you both. Show me the way.' As he
finished, the two visions melted together and Odysseus knew that he had
spoken with the great goddess Aphrodite."

<sub>\*</sub> <sup>\*</sup> <sub>\*</sub>

The feminine personage who occupies the principal place in the romance
whose pages you are about to turn, is an antique courtesan; but be
reassured: she will not convert herself.

She will be loved neither by a monk, a prophet, nor a god. In
present-day literature, this is an originality.

Rather she will be a courtesan, with all the frankness, the ardor and
the pride of every human being who has a vocation and who holds in
society a freely chosen place; she will aspire to raise herself to the
highest point; she will not even imagine a need for excuse or mystery in
her life. And this requires explanation.

Up to this day, the modern writers who have addressed themselves to a
public free from the prejudices of young girls and school boys have
employed a laborious stratagem whose hypocrisy displeases me: "I have
depicted voluptuousness as it is," they say, "in order to exalt virtue."
But I, at the beginning of a romance whose intrigue develops at
Alexandria, refuse absolutely to commit this anachronism.

Love, with all its consequences, was, for the ancient Greeks, the
sentiment most virtuous and most fecund in grandeurs. They did not
attach to it those ideas of shamelessness and immodesty

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

which Israelite tradition, along with the Christian doctrine, has handed
down to us. Herodotos (1.10) says to us, quite naturally:—"Among some
barbarous races it is considered disgraceful to appear naked." When the
Greeks or the Latins wished to insult a man who frequented "daughters of
love," they called him «μοῖχος» or Moechus, which merely signifies
"adulterer." On the other hand, a man and a woman who, being free from
other bonds, united themselves, even though this were in public and
whatever their youth might be, were considered as injuring no one and
were left at liberty.

One sees that the life of the ancients could not be judged after the
moral ideas which come to us at the present time from Geneva.

As for me, I have written this book with the simplicity an Athenian
would have brought to a relation of the same adventures. And I hope that
it will be read in the same spirit.

Judging the ancient Greeks by the ideas actually received, *not* one
exact translation of their greatest writers could be left in the hands
of a young student. If M. Mounet-Sully should play his rôle of Œdipos
without cuts, the police would suspend the representation. If M. Leconte
de Lisle had not prudently expurgated Théocritos, his version would have
been suppressed the same day it was put on sale.

One considers Aristophanes exceptional? Yet we possess important
fragments of fourteen hundred and forty comedies, due to one hundred and
thirty-two other Greek poets, some of whom, such as Alexis, Philetor,
Strattis, Eubolos and Cratinos, have left us admirable verse, and no one
has yet dared translate this shameless and sublime collection.

One quotes always, for the purpose of defending Greek customs,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the teachings of some philosophers who condemned the sexual pleasures.
There is confusion here. Those scattered moralists reproved all excesses
of the senses indiscriminately, without the existence, for them, of a
difference between the debauch of the bed and that of the table.

He who, today, at a restaurant in Paris, orders with impunity a
six-louis dinner for himself alone, would have been judged by them as
guilty and no less so than another who would give a too intimate
assignation in the middle of the street, being for that condemned by the
existing laws to a year of prison. Moreover, these austere philosophers
were generally regarded by antique society as abnormal and dangerous
madmen; they were mocked on the stage, treated with blows in the
streets, seized by tyrants to serve as court buffoons and exiled by free
citizens who judged them unworthy of submitting to capital punishment.

It is then by a conscious and voluntary deceit that modern educators
from the Renaissance to the present time have represented the antique
moral system as the inspiration of their narrow virtues. If this moral
system were great—if it merited indeed to be taken for a model and to be
obeyed—it is precisely because no system has better known how to
distinguish the just from the unjust according to a criterion of beauty:
to proclaim the right of every man to seek individual happiness within
the limits set by the rights of others and to declare that there is
nothing under the sun more sacred than physical love—nothing more
beautiful than the human body.

Such was the morality of the people who built the Acropolis; and if I
add that it has remained that of all great minds, I will but state the
value of a common-place, so well is it proven that

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the superior intelligences of artists, writers, warriors or statesmen
have never held its majestic tolerance to be illicit. Aristotle began
life by dissipating his patrimony in the company of debauched women;
Sappho gave her name to a special vice; Cæsar was the *moechus
calvas:*—nor can we imagine Racine avoiding girls of the theater and
Napoleon practicing abstinence. The romances of Mirabeau, the Greek
verses of Chemier, the correspondence of Diderot and the minor works of
Montesquieu equal in boldness even the writings of Catullus. And, of all
French authors the most austere, the most pious, the most
laborious—Buffon—does one wish to know by what maxim he guides his
counsel of sentimental intrigues? "Love! Why dost thou form the happy
state of all beings and the misfortune of man?—It is because, in this
passion, *only the physical* is good, and because the moral side is
worthless."

<sub>\*</sub> <sup>\*</sup> <sub>\*</sub>

Whence comes this? And how does it happen that across the upsetting of
antique ideas the great Greek sensuality remains like a ray of light
upon the noblest foreheads?

It is because sensuality is a condition, mysterious but necessary and
creative, of intellectual development. Those who have not felt to their
limit the strongest demands of the flesh, whether as a blessing or as a
curse, are incapable of understanding fully the demands of the spirit.
Just as the beauty of the soul illumines the features, so only the
virility of the body nourishes the brain. The worst insult that
Delacroix could address to men—that which he threw indiscriminately at
the railers of Rubens and at the detractors of Ingres—was this terrible
word: "Eunuchs!"

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Better yet, it seems that the genius of races, like that of individuals,
is, before all, sensual. All the cities which have reigned over the
world—Babylon, Alexandria, Athens, Rome, Venice,' Paris—have been, by a
general law, all the more licentious as they were more powerful, as
though their dissoluteness were necessary, to their splendor. The cities
where the legislator has attempted to implant artificially narrow and
unproductive virtue have been, from the first day, condemned to absolute
death. It was thus with Lacedæmonia which, in the midst of the most
prodigious flight to which the human soul has ever risen—between Corinth
and Alexandria, between Syracuse and Miletus—has left us neither a poet,
a painter, a philosopher, an historian nor a scientist; barely the
popular renown of a sort of Bobillot who, with his three hundred men,
met death in a mountain pass without even gaining a victory. For this
reason, after two thousand years measuring the emptiness of this Spartan
virtue, we can, according to the exhortation of Renan: "Curse the soil
where this mistress of sombre errors existed and insult her because she
is no more."

<sub>\*</sub> <sup>\*</sup> <sub>\*</sub>

Shall we ever see a return of the days of Ephesos and Cyrene? Alas! the
modern world succumbs under an invasion of ugliness; the civilizations
move toward the North and enter into the fog, the cold, the mud. What
darkness! People clothed in black circulate through infected streets. Of
what are they thinking?—we know not; but our twenty-five years shudder
at being thus exiled among old men.

As for those who ever regret that they knew not this earth-intoxicated

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

youth which we call antique life, let them be permitted to live again,
through a fecund illusion, in the time when human nudity—the most
perfect form, since we believe in the image of God, which we can know or
even conceive—could reveal itself through the features of a sacred
courtesan before the twenty thousand pilgrims upon the strands of
Eleusis; where the most sensual love—the divine love whence we are
born—was without stain, without shame and without sin; may they be
permitted to forget eighteen barbarous, hypocritical and ugly centuries;
to move from the marsh to the spring; to return piously to original
beauty; amidst the sound of enchanted flutes to rebuild the Great
Temple; and to consecrate enthusiastically to the sanctuaries of the
true faith their hearts ever enthralled by the immortal Aphrodite.

<span class="smallcaps">Pierre Louys</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One. Chrysis](aph02.md)
