[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aph32)  [Next](aph34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000EP89M2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Aphrodite*, by Pierre Louys, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

### Chapter Five

### PIETY

AFTER the turning of the second street, they put down the body a second
time to do on their sandals. Rhodis’s feet, too delicate to walk bare,
were raw and bleeding.

The night was very brilliant. All the town was silent. The iron-colored
shadows were outlined sharply in the middle of the street according to
the profile of the houses.

The little virgins took up their burden.

"Where are we going?" asked the child. "Where shall we lay her in the
earth?"

"In the cemetery of Hermanubis. It is always deserted. She will be in
peace there."

"Poor Chrysis! Would I have thought that on the day of her end I would
carry her body, without torches and without a funeral car, secretly,
like a stolen thing?"

Then both began to speak volubly as though they were afraid of the
silence, side by side with the corpse. The last day of Chrysis’s life
overwhelmed them with astonishment. Whence had she the mirror, the comb
and the necklace? She herself could not have taken the pearls of the
goddess; the temple was so well guarded that a courtesan could not have
entered there. Then someone had acted for her? But who? She was not
known to have a

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

lover among the stolistes charged with the care of the divine statue.
And then, if someone had acted in her place, why had she not denounced
him? And, of all things, why these three crimes? To what had they served
her, except to deliver her to punishment? A woman does not commit such
follies without object, unless she be in love. Was Chrysis, then, in
love? And with whom?

"We shall never know," concluded the flute-player. "She has taken her
secret with her and even if she has an accomplice it is not he who will
tell us of it."

Here Rhodis, who had already staggered for some moments, sighed, "I can
do no more, Myrto; I can carry her no longer. I should fall on my knees.
I am broken with weariness and sorrow."

Myrtocleia put her arm about her neck.

"Try again, my dear. We must carry her. It is for her life in the
underworld. If she has no sepulcher and no obolos in her hand, she will
wander forever on the brink of the river of hell and when, in our turn,
Rhodis, we descend to the dead, she will reproach us for our impiety and
we will not know how to answer her."

But the child, in her weakness, burst into tears in her embrace.

"Quick, quick," continued Myrtocleia. "Here comes someone from the end
of the street. Place thyself with me before the body. Hide it behind our
tunics. If they see it, all will be lost . . ."

She interrupted herself.

"It is Timon, I recognize him. Timon with four women . . . Ah! Gods!
what will happen! He who laughs at everything will make fun of us . . .
But no; stay here, Rhodis, I am going to speak to him."

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

And, seized by a sudden idea, she ran into the street before the little
group.

"Timon," she said, and her voice was full of pleading. "Timon, stop. I
beg thee to hear me. I have grave words in my mouth. I must speak them
to thee alone."

"My poor little girl," said the young man, "how thou art moved! Hast
thou lost thy shoulder knot, or has thy doll broken her nose in-falling?
That would be a quite irreparable event."

The young girl threw him a sorrowful look; but already the four women,
Philotis, Seso of Knidos, Callistion and Tryphera, fidgeted about her.

"Come, little idiot!" said Tryphera, "if thou hast drained thy nurse
dry, we cannot help thee. It is almost day, thou shouldst be in bed;
since when do children wander in the moonlight?"

"Her nurse!" said Philotis. "It is Timon she wants.

"Spank her. She deserves a spanking!"

And Callistion, an arm around Myrto's waist, lifted her from the ground,
raising her little blue tunic.

But Seso interposed.

"You are mad," she cried. "Myrto does not run after men. If she calls
Timon, she has other reasons. Leave her in peace and let them get it
over with!"

"Well," said Timon, "what wilt thou of me? Come over here. Speak in my
ear. Is it really serious?"

"Chrysis’s body is there, in the street," said the still trembling young
girl. "We are carrying it to the cemetery, my little friend and I, but
it is heavy and we ask if thou art willing to aid us . . It will not
take long . . . Immediately after, thou canst rejoin thy women . . ."

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

Timon looked at her sincerely.

"Poor girls! And I laughed! You are better than we . . . Certainly I
will help you. Go rejoin thy friend and wait for me—I will come."

Turning toward the four women: "Go to my house," he said, "by the Street
of the Potters. I will be there in a little while. Do not follow me."

Rhodis was still seated by the head of the corpse. When she saw Timon
coming, she besought: "Do not tell this! We have stolen her to save her
shade. Keep our secret, we will love thee well, Timon."

"Be reassured," said the young man.

He took the body under the shoulders and Myrto took it under the knees.
They walked in silence and Rhodis followed, with short and tottering
steps.

Timon did not speak. For the second time in two days, human wrath had
taken from him one of his friends; and he asked himself what
extravagance thus swept spirits aside from the enchanted road which
leads to unclouded happiness.

"Ataraxia!" he thought, "indifference, repose, O voluptuous serenity!
Who among men will appreciate you? Man agitates himself, struggles,
hopes, when but one thing is precious: to know how to draw from the
passing moments all the joys they can give and to leave one's bed as
seldom as possible."

They arrived at the gate of the ruined necropolis.

"Where shall we put her?" asked Myrto.

"Near the god."

"Where is the statue? I have never entered here. I was afraid of the
tombs and of the steles. I do not know the Hermanubis."

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

"It must be in the center of the little garden. Let us seek it. I came
here once when I was a child, while pursuing a lost gazelle. Let us
start through the avenue of the white sycamores. We cannot fail to
discover it."

They came to it, in fact.

The violet tints of the first dawn mingled with the moonlight on the
marbles. Vague and distant harmony floated among the cypress branches.
The rhythmic rustle of the palms, so like to drops of falling rain, shed
an illusion of coolness.

Timon opened with effort a pink stone buried in the earth. The sepulcher
was hollowed out beneath the hands of the funerary god who made the
gesture of the embalmer. It must have contained a cadaver, formerly, but
nothing more was found in the cavity save a heap of brownish dust.

The young man descended waist-deep and held out his arms: "Give her to
me," he said to Myrto. "I will lay her well within and we will close the
tomb . . ."

But Rhodis threw herself upon the body.

"No! do not bury her so quickly! I want to see her again! A last time! A
last time! Chrysis! my poor Chrysis! Ah! horror . . . What has she
become! . . ."

Myrtocleia had put aside the covering rolled about the dead and the face
had appeared, so rapidly altered that the two young girls recoiled. The
cheeks had taken on a square shape, the eyelids and the lips were
swollen like six white cushions. Already nothing remained of the more
than human beauty. They closed the thick shroud. But
[Myrto](errata.htm#4) slipped her hand under the stuff to place the
obolos destined for Charon in Chrysis’s fingers.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

Then both, shaken by interminable sobs, placed the relaxed, inert body
in Timon's arms.

And when Chrysis was placed in the depths of the sandy tomb, Timon
reopened the winding sheet. He secured the silver obolos in the relaxed
fingers, he supported the head with a flat stone; over the body, from
the forehead to the knees, he spread the long mass of shadowy golden
hair.

Then he came forth from the pit, and the musicians, kneeling before the
gaping opening, cut off each other's young hair, bound it in a single
sheaf and buried it with the dead.

 

 

ΤΟΙΟΝΔΕ ΠΕΡΑΣ ΕΣΧΕ ΤΟ ΣΥΝΤΑΓΜΑ  
ΤΩΝ ΠΕΡΙ ΧΡΥΣΙΔΑ ΚΑΙ ΔΗΜΗΤΡΙΟΝ

 

 

 

THE END

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](aph34)
