[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aph29)  [Next](aph31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000EP89M2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Aphrodite*, by Pierre Louys, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### Chapter Two

### THE DUST RETURNS TO THE EARTH

"DEMETRIOS!" she cried.

And she sprang forward . . .

But after having carefully closed the wooden latch, the young man had
not moved, and he maintained in his look so profound a tranquillity that
Chrysis was suddenly frozen.

She had hoped for a transport, a movement of his arms, his lips,
something, an outstretched hand . . .

Demetrios did not move.

He waited an instant in silence, with a perfect correctness, as though
he wished to establish clearly his disengagement.

Then, seeing that nothing was demanded of him, he made four steps to the
window and leaned back in the opening, watching the day appear.

Chrysis had seated herself on the low bed, her look fixed and almost
stupid.

Then Demetrios spoke to himself.

"It is better," he said, "that it should be thus. Such plays in the
moment of death would, after all, be dismal enough. I wonder only that
she would not have had a presentiment from the beginning and that she
should have welcomed me with this enthusiasm. For me, it is a finished
adventure. I regret a little that it

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

should have ended thus, for after all, Chrysis has done no other wrong
than to express very frankly an ambition which, without doubt, might
have been that of most women; and had it not been necessary to throw a
victim to the public indignation, I would have contented myself in
having this too ardent girl banished, in order to deliver myself of her
and yet leave her the joys of life. But there has been a scandal and
nothing else can avail. Such are the effects of passion. Voluptuousness
without thought—or the contrary, the idea without enjoyment—have no such
sad result. One may have many mistresses but must keep himself, with the
help of the gods, from forgetting that all lips are alike."

Having thus summed up one of his moral theories by an audacious
aphorism, he resumed, easily, the normal current of his ideas.

He recalled vaguely an invitation to dine which he had accepted for the
evening before, then forgotten in the whirlwind of events, and he
promised to send an apology.

He reflected whether he should offer his tailor-slave for sale—an old
man who remained attached to the cutting traditions of the preceding
reign and was but imperfectly successful with the cup-shaped folds of
the new tunics.

His mind was so free that he even drew, upon the wall, with the point of
his modeling tool, a hasty study for his group of "Zagreus and the
Titans," a variant which modified the movement of the right arm of the
principal personage.

Hardly was it finished when someone knocked gently upon the door.
Demetrios opened it without haste. The old executioner entered, followed
by two helmeted hoplites.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

"I bring the little cup," he said with an obsequious smile, to the
address of the royal lover.

Demetrios kept silence.

Chrysis raised her head frantically.

"Come, my girl," continued the gaoler. "The moment has come. The hemlock
is all crushed. There is truly nothing to do but take it. Do not be
afraid. One does not suffer at all."

Chrysis looked at Demetrios, who did not turn aside his eyes.

Holding ever upon him her large black eyes surrounded by green light,
she held out her right hand, took the cup and slowly carried it to her
mouth.

She touched it with her lips. The bitterness of the poison and also the
pains of the poisoning had been tempered by a honeyed narcotic.

She drank half of the cup, then, with a gesture she might have seen at
the theater, in the Thyestes of Agathan, or which really issued from a
spontaneous sentiment, she offered the rest to Demetrios . . . But with
raised hand, the young man declined this indiscreet proposition.

Then the Galilæan swallowed the remainder of the brew, down to the green
dregs which remained at the bottom. And there came to her lips a
heart-rending smile which contained, indeed, a little scorn.

"What must I do?" she asked the gaoler.

"Walk around the room, my girl, until thy legs feel heavy. Then thou
wilt lie down upon thy back and the poison will act by itself."

Chrysis walked to the window, leaned her hand upon the wall,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

her temple on her hand, and cast toward the violet dawn the final look
of lost youth.

The east was drowned in a lake of color. A long, livid band, like a
strip of water, enveloped the horizon in an olive girdle. Above, many
tints were born, one from the other, liquid pools of iridescent sky,
sea-green or lilac, which melted imperceptibly into the leaden azure of
the heavens. Then these degrees of shade lifted slowly, a golden line
appeared, ascended, enlarged: a slender thread of crimson lighted this
morose dawn and, in a deluge of blood, the sun was born.

 

"It is written:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*—The light is sweet* . . ."

</div>

She remained thus, standing as long as her legs could sustain her. The
hoplites were obliged to carry her to the bed when she made a sign that
she staggered.

There the old man disposed the white folds of her robe along her
outstretched limbs. Then he touched her feet and asked her: "Dost thou
feel?"

She replied:

"No."

He touched her knees and asked her:

"Dost thou feel?"

She made a negative sign and, suddenly, with a movement of her mouth and
of her shoulders (for even her hands were dead), seized again by a
supreme ardor and perhaps by regret for this sterile hour, she lifted
herself toward Demetrios . . . But before

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

he could have replied, she fell back lifeless, her eyes darkened
forever.

Then the executioner drew the upper folds of her garment over her face;
and one of the attendant soldiers, supposing that a more tender past has
once united this young man and woman, cut off, with the end of his
sword, the extreme ringlet of her hair upon the stones.

Demetrios touched it with his hand and, in truth, it was Chrysis
herself, the surviving gold of her beauty, itself the pretext of her
name . . .

He took the warm lock between thumb and fingers, separated it slowly,
little by little, and under the sole of his shoe he ground it into the
dust.

<span id="img_11100"></span> ![](img/11100.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three. Chrysis Immortal](aph31)
