<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt17)  [Next](ettt19) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### CHAPTER NINE

### THE TRANSFORMATION YOGA

The ramifications or sub-instructions of the main path are given as
follows:

1\. The teaching of going above to the pure land—(instructions on the
Transformation Yoga).

2\. The teaching of entering into another's body (instruction on the
Yoga of Entering Another's Body).

The teaching of transforming one's consciousness to the Pure Land, is a
special teaching of the Unparalleled \[i.e. Anuttara Ed.\] Tantra. It is
found in both the *Tantra of Bde-mchog's Teaching* and that of *Jerdo*,
and their common *Tantra Sambhuda;* in the *Tantra of Vajra Dakini*, a
special Tantra of Bde-mchog; in the *Two Tantras of Sdom-abyung*
(Bde-mchog's teaching) and in the *Admonishment of the Holy Mañjuśri*,
etc. If one intends to get well acquainted with the pith-instructions of
the Transformation Yoga, one may study these Tantras and their special
commentaries. The instructions given here are all based upon these
sources, with careful arrangement.

The merit of this practice is stated in the *Tantra of Vajra Dakini:*

"If one has committed the sin of killing a kinsman,  
 Of slaughtering the Brahmins;  
 Or has committed the Five Paramount
Crimes[100](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:100)<span id="an_r_nar:100"></span>,  
 Or has stolen or robbed from others for pleasure  
 All these sins can be cleansed  
 By practicing this superb teaching.  
 No evils or sins can ever defile it, <span id="page_251">p.
251</span>  
 It stays aloof and far apart from all wickednesses of Saṃsara."

Its advantages are also claimed by the *Tantra of G’a-sbyor and
Gdan-bzhi*. Therefore, this yoga is of utmost importance and should
receive greater attention. These sources say that this teaching can
liberate one from falling into the miserable path, cleanse one's sins,
and bring one to the happy land.

The time to apply this yoga is instructed by the *Tantra of
Vajra-Dakini* as follows:

"When the time (of death) comes,  
 This teaching is applied.  
 If the time (of death) is not near when anyone applies the teaching,  
 He is committing the crime of slaughtering Buddha;  
 He will certainly fall into hell and be scourged.  
 Therefore, one should carefully and diligently study the signs of
death."

This point is also stressed by the *Gdan-bzhi* and the *G’a-sbyor*–if
the yogi uses this teaching at the wrong time, he has thus murdered the
Buddha-like self body. If he has taken the precepts of Tantra, he is
then violating the eighth rule of the basic precepts of Tantra, and he
is exposed to the danger of falling into hell. Therefore, he should
clearly understand the time factor, and industriously study the signs of
death to [foresee](errata.htm#60) the coming of death. When the signs
appear, he should try to prevent it by all possible means. If everything
is done but to no avail, he should know that it is the right time to
apply this teaching. According to the commentary on Gdan-bzhi, *Bhaba
Bhadras*, he should practise this teaching, or make his preparations six
months before the time of death. For this reason one

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

should carefully study the lines in the books concerning the signs of
death.

Furthermore the *Tantra of Gdan-bzhi* says:

"The best condition under which one transforms (his soul)  
 Is without disease or other illness."

The Transformation Yoga is applied under condition that one has not
caught any disease. If the practitioner is caught by disease, he cannot
perform the transformation in a perfect way, though he may have tried
his utmost.

In the case of an old, miserable man with great sufferings who foresees
the coming of his death and intends to leave this world by means of the
Transformation Yoga before the time of death comes, it is still
forbidden. It is also forbidden in the case of one who suffers from an
unbearable sickness. Some ignorant people say that in the former case,
the old man is allowed to use the Transformation Yoga (before his time
comes). <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18)

The main instruction on the Transformation Yoga consists of two
practices. The *Tantra of Vajra* says:

"The foundation of all (feelings) should be purified.  
 After the purification the transformation from existence is applied;  
 Otherwise it will be futile."

"The foundation of all (feelings)" implies that the human body is the
foundation or base of all agreeable or disagreeable feelings.
(Purification means that through the practice of Heat Yoga the body and
mind are purified.) Without purifying the body through practicing the
Heat

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yoga it will be
useless and futile to perform the Transformation Yoga. This is said in
*Bhaba Bhadras*, because the Tumo practice is the very foundation of
Transformation Yoga. The *Tantra of Vajra Dakini* also says:

"By means of the Vase Breathing the door is bound (opened).  
 Thus, the hole of the door is purified."

The *Tantra of Gdan-bzhi* as well as the *Tantra of Sambhuda* says the
same thing. They stress the necessity of having a (tamed) prana for
practicing the (Transformation Yoga), only because through practicing
the Vase Breathing can the pranas, which run wild toward all organs and
gates in the body, be fairly gathered (or tamed). Some people say that,
if one reaches the lowest stage of Vase-Breathing practice, one is
qualified to perform the Transformation Yoga. This shows their ignorance
of the teaching of Tantra.

In performing the Transformation Yoga, all the nine gates of the
body[101](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:101)<span id="an_r_nar:101"></span> except
the Golden Gate on \[top of the\] the head should first be closed to
prevent the [escape](errata.htm#61) of the consciousness through these
gates. The consciousness should be allowed to exit only from the Golden
Gate. According to Tantras, these conditions are required to meet the
qualifications of a perfect ground upon which the qualified Tantric
yogis may perform the Yoga of Transformation.

Furthermore, a perfect visualization on the exit of consciousness
described by the Tantras is required. The procedure of the visualization
is profusely described in the *Fourth Book of Transformation Yoga* as
well as in the *Book of Transformation Yoga* of the Rngog School.
However, the instructions I give here are mostly based upon the verbal

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

instruction from the gurus who primarily follow the teaching of this
school.

One may ask, "Upon which deity's body should one practice the
Transformation Yoga?" According to the gurus, one may depend on any
patron Buddha of his own choosing. Though the *Tantra of G’a-sbyor* and
*Gdan-bzhi* have pointed out some particular deity for Transformation
Yoga together with the instructions on their practices, I shall not
introduce them here; for it would take excessive space to explain them.

*The Practice of the Transformation Yoga*.

First, the yogi visualizes the self-body become the body of the patron
Buddha; then visualizes a red *Ah* word at the reproductive center or at
the navel center, a dark blue *Hūṃ* word at the Heart Center, a white
*Kha* word at the Gate of Purity[102](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:102)<span
id="an_r_nar:102"></span>. Then he should pull up the lower prana (from
the reproductive center) to the navel center; thus the *Ah* word is
pushed up to the place of the *Hūṃ* word (in the Heart Center); again
the *Hūṃ* word is pushed to the *Kha* word. Some say the *Hūṃ* word and
*Ah* word should come down and return to their own places once, then
rise up again; but I think the first way is simpler and more convenient.
One should repeatedly practice this until the signs or symptoms appear.
The signs are the feeling of itching, throbbing, etc., at the top of the
head.

Thereupon, the yogi may proceed to practice the formal or real
Transformation Yoga as follows: Sitting in a crouching posture, grasp
the two knees with hands clasped, recite the prayer of Taking Refuge and
the prayer of Raising the Bodhi Heart. Then visualize your body become
the body of one's patron Buddha; also think that the patron Buddha whose
essence is identical with that of your

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

guru, sits in the sky in front of and above your head at a distance of
one to six feet. With great earnestness and faith the yogi should pray
to him. Then, with a clear visualization of the *Ah* word at the Navel
Center, the *Hūṃ* word at the Heart Center, and the *Kha* word at the
Pure-Gate Center, the yogi pulls the lower prana to drive up the *Ah*
word into the *Hūṃ* word through the Central Channel, and thus the two
words are fused in one. Meantime, he should pull up all his strength and
say loudly "Ah-hi-ga" many times, until he feels that the *Ah* word has
been actually driven into the *Hūṃ* word. Then he says again "Ah-hi-ga"
loudly twenty times, and the *Hūṃ* word thus rises to the Throat Center.
At this time the yogi should visualize clearly the *Kha* word standing
at the Gate of Purity; the gate is open and through it can be seen
clearly the firmament as one sees the bright sky through an open window.
Then the yogi pulls all his strength together and shouts "Ah-hi-ga" five
times; through this force the *Hūṃ* word is ejected (with great speed)
from the Gate of Purity and hits right into the Heart Center of the
patron Buddha \[above your head\]. Thereupon, the yogi concentrates his
mind in the realm of Non-Thought.

Based on the *Tantra of Gdan-bzhi* as well as the verbal instructions
given by gurus is this brief instruction on the Transformation Yoga.

Furthermore, according to the teaching of Tantras and their
commentaries, the yogi will gain great profit if he understands the way
of meditating on the crown of two sounded letters, of visualizing the
two words with the heads of the letters seeing upward and downward; the
way of "calling-with-prana" during the up-going and down-coming
performance; and other special superb instructions.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

Generally speaking, the teaching of transforming one's consciousness to
a felicitous plane, (such as the thirty-three Heavens and the Heavens of
Forms in Saṃsara) is of great importance and value; especially, the
Tantric Transformation Yoga designed for the qualified Tantric Yogis.
With the power of the unique Samadhi, the Tantric yogi is able to close
all eight gates and make the consciousness exit through the Golden Gate.
If he can keep the (horse-like) prana, upon which the consciousness
rides, from running through the eight gates, he can automatically stop
the consciousness from escaping through the eight gates. The yogi should
know how to use the words to close the gates and control the
consciousness, and he should be able to control the prana at the
different gates through the Vase Breathing \[practice\].

It is difficult to find a clear instruction in the books concerning what
kind of words should be used to close the gates. However, according to
the *Tantra of Sambhoda* and *Man-snye*, only the red *Ah* word like
that of the *Ah* at the Navel Center should be used. Some say the best
teaching is to use a red *Hūṃ* word instead of *Ah* to close each gate.
This saying proves ignorance of the meaning of the Tantra and of the
clear instructions about using the word to close all the nine gates, in
the *Tantra of Gdan-bzhi* and others.

The instruction of Grong-hjug (House Entering) is also called the
instruction in the Yoga of Entering Another's Body. Grong (literally,
*city* or *house*), here implies the physical organs of eye, ear, etc.,
(for they are like houses wherein the consciousnesses dwell). Says the
*Sutra of the Paramita Vehicle:* "One's consciousness entering into the
not-yet-decomposed corpse of another is called Grong-hjug—

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Entering into
Another's House." This teaching is the unique teaching of the
Unparalleled Tantra. It frequently appears in the Mother Tantra, and
sometimes in the Father Tantra. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

What is the purpose of practicing this yoga, or what is this teaching
for? Who is qualified to practice it? How is the teaching of this Yoga
exercised?

The person who practices this teaching, as well as those who practice
the Transformation Yoga, must have well obtained the initiation and
observed the Tantric precepts in a perfect manner, etc., as required in
the practice of the Arising Yoga.

According to Tantra there are three different teachings of the
Transformation practices: the special Transformation Yoga; the Teaching
of the self-mind (or soul) entering into another's corpse; and the
teaching of expelling another's soul from his body so that one's
consciousness may enter this body. All these three Transformation
practices require, first, the capability of closing the nine gates by
words; second, the mastery of Vase Breathing, by means of which all the
pranas of different organs are gathered and entered into the Central
Channel; third, the mastery of Tumo, whereby the small *Ah*-word of the
red-element in the navel center is able to attract and hold the wisdom
*Hūṃ* word (which is the rider of the subtle prana) at the Heart Center.
This is said in the *Tantras of Vajra Dakini* and of *Gdan-bzhi* and in
their common commentary *Bhaba Bhad-ras;* and in the *Tantra of
G’a-sbyor* and its commentary, the Fruit-Bearing Pith-Instruction.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

I believe that in both cases, whether the self-consciousness enters into
the corpse or into another's living body, a special prana performance is
required in addition to the requirements and qualifications mentioned
before[103](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:103)<span id="an_r_nar:103"></span>. The
details may be found in some other sources.

It would be difficult to benefit sentient beings on a great scale with a
low-born human body; therefore, it is desirable to have a human body of
high class to accomplish the undertaking. Because the possession of a
sick, aged, crippled body would handicap self-improvement as well as
altruistic deeds, one resorts to the Yoga of Entering Another's Body to
procure a fair and healthy body.

According to gurus there are three requirements for practicing this
Yoga: first, the person who intends to practice this yoga must have an
*infinite compassion* for all sentient beings; he must be absolutely
sure that great benefits and boons for sentient beings will be achieved
if he performs this yoga; he also must have mastered both prana and
mind. A yogi who meets these requirements and conditions may then
proceed to a very secluded, sheltered place. He should dispense with all
distracted thoughts, keep away from all wordly activities, prepare the
offerings, and establish the altar for the patron Buddha. With all these
arrangements made, he should then engage himself in meditation under
strict Confinement of Contemplation[104](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:104)<span
id="an_r_nar:104"></span>.

Then he should prepare a Mandala painted black as the
supporting-platform and put a human skull on it. In the center of the
human skull a *Hūṃ* word should be clearly written with a white stone
(chalk). Visualizing himself become the Patron-Buddha, he then recites
and meditates on the prayer of Seven Wishes of Bodhisattva
Samantabhadra. Then the yogi visualizes a *Hūṃ* word

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

in the center of the heart, and, when the exhalation goes through the
right nostril, he should think the *Hūṃ* word comes out along with the
exalted air and enters into and is identified with the *Hūṃ* word in the
skull. Meantime the yogi should hold the air outside as long as
possible. When he cannot hold it any longer, he slowly takes the air in.
Then he exhales and visualizes as before. Continuing this practice for a
while, the yogi will see the skull shake, jump and move—these are the
signs that will appear.

The yogi may now proceed to the actual transformation of soul. First, he
should procure a fresh corpse with no signs of decomposing, not being
dead from any injuries or disease; or he may procure a clean and fresh
corpse of cattle or any livestock. Then he washes the corpse with clean
water, decorates it with pleasing ornaments, and places it well on the
Mandala in a sitting position. Then, the yogi visualizes the *Hūṃ* word
which symbolizes the mind, both in his own heart and that of the corpse.
He then arouses his prana to drive the *Hūṃ* word out through his right
nostril and through the corpse's left nostril into the *Hūṃ* word at the
Heart Center. If the yogi practices this again and again, the corpse
will start to breathe and to regain its senses. When these signs take
place, the yogi should know his performance is effective and should
(temporarily) stop the practice.

When the yogi is ready to carry out the real performance, he should
release himself from the Confinement and go out to find a qualified and
fresh corpse, bring it back, and place it on the Mandala facing him.
Having decorated the corpse, the yogi then visualizes the
self-Yidam-body and lays aside the attachment to the vulgar human body.
He then reminds himself that all Dharmas in the cosmos are

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

magic-like and illusory. Now it is time for him to cut off all vulgar,
fallacious thought, as well as delusory habitual thinking, and render
his body as an offering to the gurus and guards.

With great earnestness, he should pray them to protect him from all evil
hindrances and influences. Then the yogi should clearly visualize both
himself and the corpse transformed into Patron Buddha and vividly
visualize the *Hūṃ* word in the Heart Center of both. Then the yogi
contacts the air-gate of the corpse and actuates his prana to drive the
*Hūṃ* word in his Heart Center out through his right nostril and into
the *Hūṃ* word of the corpse through its left nostril. At this time the
yogi should pull up all his strength to aim at the *Hūṃ* word of the
corpse with his prana-mind. By means of this exercise, the corpse will
begin to breathe and jerk, etc. Whereupon, the yogi's friendly
companions should take care of him, foster him with proper food for half
a month in a solitary place. Until the yogi can stably live with the new
body, he should not appear before people. In order to express his
gratitude to the deceased one, the yogi should perform the Offering
Rituals, such as the Ritual of Tsa Tsa and the Ritual of Burning
Performances. With this new human body, the yogi should devote himself
to the welfare of sentient beings on a great and broad scale.

These instructions were given by gurus. Thus, the instruction on the
Yoga of Entering Other's body which are based on the genuine contents of
(several) Tantras and their commentaries has now been given here without
wavering ambiguity.

(Now the important question concerning the rightfulness of performing
this yoga will naturally arise in people's

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

minds);[105](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:105)<span id="an_r_nar:105"></span> if
it is sinful to transform one's consciousness to some other
consciousness to some other place before the coming of death as
admonished in the Instruction on Transformation Yoga, is it not also
sinful to perform this Yoga? Though no clear statement answering this
question can be found in Tantras, I consider the problem in the light of
the following: first, since the performance of this yoga excludes itself
from the category of normal death, it cannot be considered a crime of
committing suicide, for it does not meet the qualifications of normal
death and rebirth; it belongs to none of the regular Four Births of
Saṃsara. Though there is a (tiny) intermediate stage between the time
the consciousness leaves the body and the time it enters into the
other's body, this cannot be considered a qualified Bardo-stage.
Besides, in the case of a right performance of this yoga, the yogi has a
pure and altruistic wish, and, since his mind aims at Dharma, he cannot
be regarded as committing the crime of suicide. If one wants to know
more about this topic, one may study the pith-instructions on the
Illusory Body in the *Tantra of Gsun-*a*dus*.

Though both the instruction of the Self-Transforming Yoga and the Yoga
of Transforming into Others were available in the past, the latter was
not given to gurus; therefore, it is not explained here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[252:\*](ettt18.htm#fr_18) To use Transformation
yoga to try to circumvent karma is forbidden; it would be absurd to try
to do so, for the "escaped" karma would only return in aggravated form
later. *Ed*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[257:\*](ettt18.htm#fr_19) Comparable to the
Kali and Siva [Āgamas](errata.htm#62) respectively of Hindu Tantra. See
note [60](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:60) and also the discussion of śakta-śakti
vs. upāya-[prajñā](errata.htm#63) in the editorial introduction.—*Ed*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten: How to Improve the Practice in the Path](ettt19)

</div>
