<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt09)  [Next](ettt11.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### CHAPTER ONE

### INTRODUCTION

It is the intention of the author to relate the secret, yet famous
teachings of the profound Six Yogas of Naropa in two steps. First, the
preparatory practice. Second, the main practice of the teaching itself.

The first step includes two groups of teachings, the ordinary
preparatory works of Mahayana Buddhism, and the extraordinary
preparations for the Supreme Vehicle[3](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:3.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:3"></span>. About the first group two questions must be
answered: (1) Why is it necessary to make an effort in the ordinary
practice of Mahayana Buddhism? (2) How should one actually practice
them? Let us discuss the first point. It is absolutely necessary to work
step by step on the preparations both for the Paramita
Vehicle[4](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:4.md)<span id="an_r_nar:4"></span> and the
True Word Vehicle[5](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:5.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:5"></span>. As admonished by Lama
Rngog-pa[6](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:6.md)<span id="an_r_nar:6"></span>, the one
who held the traditional way of preaching of Marpa (he quoted from the
Tantra of Two Forms[7](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:7.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:7"></span>):

The disciple must first give and offer … till…

…………………………………

After that, he is to be given

The teaching of the Middle Way[8](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:8.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:8"></span>.

Both schools (exoteric and esoteric) of Mahayana Buddhism exhort the
disciples to observe the basic practices and teachings of Buddha, there
is no exception, even in Tantra. The Jetsun Milarepa also said that if
one wants to know how to liberate oneself in Bardo, one should first
practice the prayer of Taking the Three Refuges, then bring forth the
Bodhi Heart of Vow and the Bodhi Heart

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of Performance (see note [15](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:15).md). Even then it
should be known the misfortune-bringer always turns out to be one's
close friend. The fallers in the abyss are the men who follow the
cattle.

Thus, if anyone does not observe the precepts strictly after having
taken the oath of Tantra, both he and his guru will fall into danger. It
is also said that by merely hearing the advantages of the esoteric
teachings one may apply (the initiations) in an easy-going manner which
is very dangerous and often leads to disasters. The Jetsun Mila was
blessed by the Goddess[9](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:9.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:9"></span> for having preached the Bardo preparation in
such a manner. Thus we know that the fundamental teachings of Buddha are
essential and necessary to all schools. His holiness Gampopa also urged
in his Commentary on the Four Dharmas that all Buddhists should follow
the Three Gradual Paths of Lam-rim[10](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:10.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:10"></span> in the beginning stage of his way to
Buddhahood.

Some disciples may raise the question: Why did not Jet-sun Pag-mo-grubpa
and other great masters mention any of these preparations in their books
on the Six Yogas? This is simply because the preparatory teachings had
already been given, and the teachings of the Six Yogas were to be given
to those who had already completed the preparatory practice. In their
admonishments to the monastic orders, the masters clearly emphasized the
importance of the preparatory practices. If one follows these
instructions one will be freed from partiality. This is the vital point
of both esoteric and exoteric Buddhism; the reader should especially
note it.

Now the second question. How should one actually practice the
preparatory teaching? According to the Great Jetsun
(Adisha)[11](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:11.md)<span id="an_r_nar:11"></span>, the
disciple should first find a qualified

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

guru of Mahayana Buddhism, think of his teachings and practice them
under his instructions wholeheartedly.

After this, he should then follow the guru's instruction to contemplate
the difficulties of attaining this present precious and meaningful human
birth. Thus he fervently determines to make right use of this human
body; he also learns that to make the most of it is to enter the path of
Mahayana in which the first step is to awaken the Heart-for-Bodhi. If
the Heart-for-Bodhi is actually awakened in one's heart, he is then able
to practice Mahayana Buddhism truly and naturally, otherwise his
Malayana will merely be a word. Therefore, the wise Buddhist must strive
step by step to put an end to the wrong thoughts adverse to the
Heart-for-Bodhi[12](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:12.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:12"></span>.

If he does not completely give up thoughts concerned with the wordly
affairs of this life, he will encounter many difficulties in the
practice of both Hinayana and Mahayana. Always he should remind himself
that this life is short. Always he should think of his inevitable death
and warn himself of the possibility of falling into a lower birth after
his departure from this world. Furthermore, he should realize that to
strive for a happier birth in his next life is still of no avail, for
everything in Saṃsara is transient and untenable. Rather he should exert
himself to attain Liberation, he should [continuously](errata.htm#17.md)
make an effort to widen his compassion and kindness as these qualities
are the roots of the Heart-for-Bodhi. He should try to reach a state in
which the compassionate Bodhi-Heart arises spontaneously without effort.

With a desire for learning the way of the Bodhisattva's actions, he
should gladly undertake the Bodhisattvas’ responsibilities and
compassionate deeds. With this in

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

mind, he is to observe the precepts of the Bodhisattva and study and
practice the Six Paramitas in general. He should particularly pay
attention to the preparatory works for
Dhayana[13](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:13.md)<span id="an_r_nar:13"></span>,
namely, the fitness and readiness of his mind for meditation. He should
also study and practice the teachings of the Prajana Paramita,
contemplating on the magic-like and
space-like[14](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:14.md)<span id="an_r_nar:14"></span>
nature of all beings. Thereafter, if he is capable of taking the Tantric
precepts on himself, he should study the *Guru's Fifty Stanza* and
follow its instructions to serve his guru. In this manner, he should set
about the practices of Tantra.

If he has not undergone these preparatory works step by step, he can
never conquer the craving of this life. Thus he has no chance to become
a steady and unwavering devotee. By no means then shall he possess
unfeigned faith, or an absolute devotion in his heart. He is uncertain
about the law of Karma, and he will become an unscrupulous Buddhist who
observes no precepts whatsoever. He will have no abomination for
Saṃsara. There will be no tranquility in his mind; therefore, his
striving for liberation is merely a talking with no meaning at all.
Since kindness and compassion cannot grow within him, he has no chance
of developing the spontaneous
Wish-for-Heart-of-Bodhi[15](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:15.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:15"></span>. At most he is a nominal Mahayana Buddhist. He
lacks a strong desire to learn the actions of a Bodhisattva so that the
peacefulness of abiding-in-goodness will never come to him. A steadfast
understanding of Meditation and Wisdom will never come to him; he will
always be confused at the delicate discriminations on Samadhis. Nor is
there a chance for him to attain, an unwavering understanding of the
non-Ego truth. If one wants to avoid the aforementioned dangers, he
should work hard on the preparatory

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

practices for Mahayana. This is clearly advocated and elucidated by His
Holiness Adisha, who received the teaching from the Maitreya-Asanga
lineage and also the teachings from the Manjuśri Nagra-juna-Ziwala
lineage, and put them together as if to combine the three rivers into
one to show that preparatory works are necessary both to the Paramita
Path and to the Diamond Path.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Two: Special Preparations](ettt11.md)

</div>
