<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt12)  [Next](ettt14.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### CHAPTER FOUR

### THE STEPS OF PRACTICE IN THE PATH

First, the preparatory exercises of *A*krul-*a*kor and Stong-ra are
given; second, the process of the actual practice.

Some in the Marpa School say that with the protection-practice of the
*Hūṃ* word during the inhaling, exhaling, and holding periods of
breathing, or with the moderate wrathful deities as protection, or with
the practice of the Guru Yoga to accumulate the merits, the Yogi may do
without the practice of *A*krul-*a*kor and Stong-ra. This kind of saying
is given by the later followers; but His Holiness Milarepa and Gampopa
never so declared in the old days.

The practice of *A*krul-*a*kor has two aspects: First, the practice of
Taking the Refuges and Arousing the Bodhi Heart; and second, meditation
on the Guru who sits upon one's own head and sincerely praying to him.
These practices are definitely in accordance with the teachings of
Tantra. The Yogi should first vividly visualize himself as the
Father-Mother Patron Buddha.

Master Pag-mo-grub-b’a exposed, in his Stanzas on the Skillful Path, the
methods and physical exercises as follows:

1\. Making the body full like a vase.

2\. Turning like a wheel.

3\. Bending like a hook.

4\. With the Vajra Mudra shooting the sky and tightening the lower part.

5\. Like a dog vomiting, shaking the body.

6\. Shaking the head and body, and stretching the limbs.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

These are the famous Six Exercises of Naropa.

1\. *Making the body full like a vase:* The Yogi should sit on a
comfortable seat in a lotus posture, his body and spine erect; put his
two palms on his two knees; inhale the air with the right nostril, and
then look to the left and exhale all the air very slowly and gently.
Take in the air with the right nostril and look toward the right, and
slowly, gently, let all the breath out. Then take in the air with the
left nostril and look toward the left; gently let the breath out as
before. Next take in the air with both nostrils and let the breath out
while the body remains sitting in a normal position. Repeat this manner
of breathing three times. Altogether nine repetitions are required to
expel all the defiled air within the body. During the inhaling and
exhaling, the mouth should not be opened. The yogi should keep his body
straight and turn his two fists inward. Then he should inhale very
gently and slowly and send the air down below the navel. Meantime he
should gulp down the air without any sound, using the diaphragm to press
the Upper Prana down and to gently pull up the Lower Prana. Thus, the
Upper and Lower Prana meet and unite. The mind should concentrate on the
center of the navel Chakra, and one should hold the breath as long as he
can as if holding the air in a vase to its fullness. During this
breath-holding period, all the body movements should be carried out.
Although not a real *A*krul-*a*kor exercise, this exercise is called a
form of *A*krul-*a*kor. At the moment when the yogi cannot hold the
breath longer, he should very gently let the air out through the
nostrils, but never through the mouth. While doing this, the mind should
not think of anything.

2\. *Turning like a Wheel:* Sitting in the Lotus posture,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

use the fingers of the right hand to hold the large toe of the right
foot and those of the left hand to hold the large toe of the left foot.
Hold the body erect, and turn the waist and stomach clockwise three
times; turn them counterclockwise three times. Next bend the body from
left to right and from right to left three times; then bend the body
forward and reverse it to the looking-up position. Repeat the
body-bending three times.

3\. *Bending like a Hook:* Put the two fists, in the vajra-fist manner,
upon the Heart Center and stretch them forward with great force, then
stretch both arms forward. Use the right fist to make a circle around
the head from left to right. As the arm and fist come down, use the
elbow to strike the side of the chest. Do the same movement with the
left arm from the opposite direction. Then holding the Vajra-fists and
putting them on the Heart Center, again stretch them forward with force.
Next, stretch both arms to the right, as before, and strike the side of
the chest.

4\. *With the Vajra Mudra shooting the sky and tightening the lower
part:* Cross the two knees and hold the body erect. Join the fingers of
both hands and massage the body from the lower part up to the head; then
use the fingers to support the whole body and lift it up. Then suddenly
loosen the fingers, and let the body drop down vehemently.

5\. *Like a dog vomiting, shaking the body:* Cross the knees and keep
the body straight. Put the two hands on the ground, and then
successively lift up the body and the head. As the hands release the
support and the body drops down, the whole body should be waved and
shaken as though trembling. At the same time exhale the air and utter a
prolonged *Ha* sound, turning round at the waist. Repeat three times.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

6\. *Shaking the head and body and stretching the limbs:* Put the right
hand on the left knee and the left hand on the right knee. Use the
fingers of both hands to pull up the knees, then shake the head and
body.

The yogi who practices these exercises must be acquainted with the art
of holding the breath. He must be at ease and gentle. The best time to
practice these exercises is before eating, or some time after the meal
when the stomach is not too full. These exercises should be practised
until the body becomes very flexible and energetic.

 

*The Practice of the Visualization of the Stong-ra  
*(*the Empty Body*)

The Yogi should visualize the image of the patron Buddha as before, but
now he should especially visualize the interior of the body as clear and
transparent, like crystal, from the top of the head to the soles of the
feet. In this manner, the yogi should try to stabilize the
visualization. The practice of mental visualization and the physical
exercises should be carried out alternatively.

The Stong-ra practice is to visualize the body without the slightest
shadow or obstruction as if one were seeing a clear rainbow.
[Although](errata.htm#30.md) one's body cannot at this stage actually
become (a body of rainbow), the stabilization of this visualization will
enable the yogi to overcome the hazards—the nerve pains and prana
pains—which he may encounter during his practice. Because of this
Stong-ra practice, the greater pains or hazards will not arise; even if
these pains do arise they can be subdued by the practice of Stong-ra
visualization. This is the special advantage of practicing Stong-ra as
well as the physical exercises.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Although there are a number of different statements and arrangements of
the Stong-ra practice, the teaching of Pag-mo-grub-b’a says no more than
the instruction given above; therefore, one should know that to follow
this instruction is quite sufficient.

Though one may not find many accounts of the Stong-ra and physical
exercises in the main Tantras, these are the pith-instructions taught by
the masters. Furthermore, in the practice on
Rtsa[56](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:56.md)<span id="an_r_nar:56"></span> and prana
it is sometimes difficult to attain Samadhi through the gentle or soft
practice; therefore, the radical or strong practice is needed. In that
case it is believed that these preparatory practices will minimize
hazards and obstacles.

 

*The Actual Successive Practice of the Path*

This is expounded in two sections: The classifications of the Path; and
the instruction of entering into the Path.

There are different ways to classify this teaching—some divide it into
two groups; some, into three, four, six, or ten. However, from the
viewpoint of befitting the different dispositions or capacities of human
beings, the teachings can be classified in three groups. First, the
teaching that enables one to become the perfect Buddha in this very
life; second, the teaching that enables one to become Buddha in the
Bardo state; third, the teaching that enables one to become Buddha in
future lives[57](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:57.md)<span id="an_r_nar:57"></span>.
From the viewpoint of the nature of the practice, the teaching can be
divided into the ordinary Perfecting Yoga, and the outstanding
betterment practice of the Perfecting Yoga The latter is not usually
found in the teachings of the masters of this school (Kar-gyupa), who
mainly depend on the pith-instructions alone.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

However, those masters in the Marpa school who held the tradition of
preaching the Tantra do accept this type of teaching.

Marpa said:

"From the great master Naropa, the
guard[58](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:58.md)<span id="an_r_nar:58"></span>,  
 I have heard the profound *Tantra of Hevajra*  
 I also received the pith-instruction of joining, transformation and
unification[59](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:59.md)<span id="an_r_nar:59"></span>  
 (*Bsre, rpo, nrtsams-sbyor*).  
 Especially have I learned the teaching of Heat Yoga and Karmayoga.  
 Thus, for me, was the essence of the teachings of the Whisper
Succession illustrated."

Thus, Marpa said, was illustrated for him the joining and transformation
practice of the Whisper Succession. In particular, he relied on the
practice of the Heat Yoga of the Vajra, which produces the four blisses.
Later on, through the practices of Karmayoga, the four blisses were also
raised within him. From this we know that, in the teaching of Hevajra,
he relied mainly on the Heat Yoga and Karma-yoga.

Again Marpa said:

"In the city of Lagkedar, in the west,  
 I bowed down at the feet of the holy  
 Ye-shes-snying-po.  
 From him I heard the teaching of  
 Gsun-wa-*a*dus-b’a of the Father
Tantra[60](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:60.md)<span id="an_r_nar:60"></span>.  
 And also received the pith-instructions  
 Of the Illusory Body and Great Light.  
 Thus have I learned the teaching of the  
 Path of the Five Steps."

According to Naropa there are four outstanding Tantras

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

from which the superb pith-instructions are derived; one of them is the
teaching of the Path of the Five Steps of Gsun-wa-*a*dus-b’a. Thus Marpa
learned the teaching of the Illusory Body and Great Light of
Gsun-wa-*a*dus-b’a from both Ye-shes-snying-po and Naropa. As for the
teaching of Transformation Yoga and Yoga of Entrance, he mainly derived
them from the masterly [*Gdan-bzhi*](errata.htm#31.md) *Tantra*.

According to the classification of the Six Yogas of Naropa, the yogas
are: Heat Yoga, Yoga of Illusory Body, Light Yoga, Transformation Yoga,
Yoga of Entrance and Bardo Yoga. Both the Dream Yoga and Bardo Yoga are
ramifications of the Yoga of Illusory Body. It is better to appropriate
the Light-of-Sleep[61](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:61.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:61"></span> to the Yoga of Illusory Body; also it is more
convenient to classify the Transformation Yoga and the Yoga of Entrance
as one. The pith-instruction of Milarepa stated:

"…This teaching contains the Arising Yoga, Head Yoga, Karmayoga, the
Knowledge of Reality, the Symbolic Light in the Path, and the Symbolic
Illusory Body and Dream in the Path. These six teachings are the
heart-like pith-instruction of Marpa, the final teachings of the Whisper
Succession. No other teachings of any Path-with-Form can be found
superior in essence to these. There is no other temporary or final
instruction that does not belong to this teaching. The teaching of the
Six Yogas is itself the Perfecting Yoga."

Those who follow and hold the traditional instructions of the Marpa
School all hold this opinion. Those who declare that there are other
teachings more profound than [the](errata.htm#32.md) Six Yogas of Naropa,
speak nonsense.

Here it is proper to point out that, in general, the highest Perfecting
Yoga must first provide the method of inducing

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the \[prana\] of the Roma and R-kyang[62](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:62.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:62"></span>, to enter the Central Channel. This teaching is
indispensable, though there are a great many different methods given by
accomplished yogis who relied on different Tantras. In this teaching (of
Six Yogas), the method of meditating on the
\[gTummo\][62a](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:62a.md)<span id="an_r_nar:62a"></span>
or the short. [*Ah*](errata.htm#33.md) at the Transformation Center of the
navel is used to gather the Live-Dynamic Prana into the Central Channel.
Through the entrance of the air into the Central Channel, the four
blisses are produced, and finally, the Mahamudra Innate Wisdom.
[In](errata.htm#34.md) this profound Teaching of
Skillfulness[63](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:63.md)<span id="an_r_nar:63"></span>
is not relied on, but, instead, the practice of the Samadhi of
Absolute-No-Thought, the Yogi will reach the state of Mind-Consolidation
in which bliss, illumination, and non-thought are experienced. This
state of Mind-Consolidation, however, is a common stage: Hinayana,
Mahayana, Paramitayana, and Vajrayana all have the k now ledge and
experiences of it. It is by no means special; therefore, it is of great
importance that one should not confuse the teaching of this
Mind-Consolidation state with the special Tantric Skillful Path. This
view can be verified by the instance of Gampopa's \[Sgam-po-pa\] meeting
with Milarepa. [When](errata.htm#35.md) Gampopa first met Milarepa, he told
Milarepa that he was able to remain in Samadhi with perfect
concentration for many days in a single period. But Milarepa told him
that no butter can be produced by squeezing the sand; moreover, the
Samadhi he had engaged in was by no means enough. Milarepa then told him
that he should practice the Small *Ah* of Life-Energy of the Heat Yoga.
One should well understand this important
point[64](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:64.md)<span id="an_r_nar:64"></span>.

We have always heard it said that the teaching of Heat Yoga of the
Kargyutpa is the very best; however, this

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

should only be understood to the effect that the primordial and
fundamental principle of the Perfecting Yoga is to make the life-prana
enter into the Central Channel to produce the Innate Great Bliss.
Consequently, as the prime goal is reached, there is no need to pursue
any other teachings of the Perfecting Yoga. By the practice of the
meditation on the Dumo fire, the air enters into the Central Channel and
goes through the progressive process of entering, remaining, and
dissolving. By means of this power the Bodhi-Heart is brought under
control. No more leakage of the Bodhi-Heart will occur; therefore the
Yogi is able to practice the Karmayoga which provides favorable
conditions for producing the Four Innate Blisses. The teaching of Heat
Yoga and Karmayoga is mainly needed for the purpose of producing the
Innate Bliss. Relying on this Innate Blissful-Emptiness while awake, the
Yoga of Illusory Body should he practiced in the daytime. At time of
sleep in the night, exercise on the Illusory Body of the dream state
should be stressed. To practice this, one should first exercise the
Light Yoga; then one is able to enter into (and master) the dream. In
order to be capable of holding the prana during the time of (the
unfoldment of) the Light-of-Sleeping State, one must first have the
ability to gather the pranas during the waking state. For both of these
practices, the best preparation is Heat Yoga.

The Yogi must first completely master the Dream State. After that he is
able to recognize the Bardo State; for this the Heat Yoga is also the
best preparation. Also because of the Heat Yoga these three practices
converge into the Yoga of Illusory Body.

In the art of mastering the special Transformation Yoga and the Entrance
Yoga, one must first be able to gather

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

all the pranas into the Central Channel. Practicing Heat Yoga is the
best method to accomplish this.

If he knows the different ways of allocating these teachings, he will
have no difficulty in understanding the various ways of classifying
them. If he possesses sound understanding of them, he may arrange them
in any manner.

 

*The Successive Steps of the Teachings in the Path*

This will be expounded in two categories: first, the basic teachings in
the path; second, the teaching of improvement. In the first category lie
(1) the principle of the Path and (2) the ramification teachings of the
path-Transformation Yoga and the Entrance Yoga. In the former there also
lie two divisions: (1) The exposition of the gathering of prana in the
Central Channel and the manner of the arising of the four blisses. (2)
Relying on the foregoing experience, instruction on practicing the
Illusory Yoga and Light Yoga. Of the first there are also two divisions:
(1) The inner practice of Heat Yoga. (2) The outer practice of
Karmayoga. The first again has two divisions; (1) Through the practice
of Dumo the prana is led to the Central Channel. (2) By means of the
entrance of the prana the manner of the arising of the four blisses. The
first, again has two divisions: (1) How to practice Dumo. (2) The manner
of the entrance, remaining, and dissolving of the prana in the Central
Channel resulting from the Dumo practice. The first is divided into
three groups: (1) Meditation on the Three Pillars. (2) Meditation on the
Clear Words. (3) The practice of Vase-Breathing.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

Meditation on the Three Pillars: Visualize clearly that sitting in the
front sky are the Chief Gurus and the Succession Gurus, together with
the Goddess and the Brave ones[65](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:65.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:65"></span>. To them render the comprehensive offerings
without the slightest regard for one's own possessions. Then pray to
them in general terms many times; especially on this occasion one should
pray fervently for the arising of the two-in-one bliss-voidness
experience and realization. Also one should think that it is for the
purpose of enabling all the mother-like sentient beings to become the
perfect Buddha Rdo-rje-chang that he now practices the Heat Yoga. One
should put all one's heart into thinking of the Bodhi-Heart. Then
visualize, clearly and vividly, the image of the
self-Buddha[66](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:66.md)<span id="an_r_nar:66"></span>.
Thus the foundation of Samadhi is laid.

The Yogi should put on the
meditation-belt[67](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:67.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:67"></span>, cross his legs (in the sitting posture), hold
his spine erect, slightly bend his chin, and rest naturally the eyes.
The tongue slightly touches the upper palate, the teeth and lips rest
naturally as they are. Alert the body and mind; thrust the chest
forward; put one hand on top of the other and poise them below the
navel. Clearly visualize the three channels. Then think of the Dumo
situated about four fingers’ distance from the navel, close to the
spine. More explicitly, the Dumo is situated in the Central Channel at
the joining point of the three channels—namely the Central, Right, and
Left Channels. They are situated in a parallel position, and the Central
Channel extends from the place below the navel up to the top of the
head, as the supporting pillar of the four Chakras.

The reason for [meditating](errata.htm#36.md) in such a manner is to lead
the pranas to enter into the Central Channel. Three different

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

ways of practice were suggested. Some say that the three Channels all
end at the place four fingers’ distance below the navel. Some say that
the Right and Left Channels do not end there, but extend down to the end
of the precious organ. In the upper part, some claim, the Central
Channel extends up to Smin-mds’ams, the center of the two eyebrows, and
the Right and Left Channels extend down to the nostrils. Through correct
practice, the Right and Left Channels which encircle the Central
Channels in the center of the four chakras will eventually be
straightened. As for the diameter of the Channels, there are no definite
rules. Meditate on various diameters. When the Dumo is meditated upon,
the color of the Central Channel should be visualized as the color of
the oil lamps’ flame. This whisper-given pith-instruction is found in
the *Tantras of Mkaspyol;* however, before reaching this stage, the
color of the Right Channel should be visualized as red, and the Left
Channel as white, and the Central as blue.

Then the four Chakras should be meditated upon. First the Transformation
Chakra of the Navel Center: its outer shape is triangular and has
forty-two red nerve-leaves (Rts’adabs) extending upwards. This is a
general way of meditating on these nerve-leaves. Though it is not
specific, it is quite sufficient to serve the purpose. Second, the
Dharma Chakra in the Heart Center; its outer shape is round, like the
shape of the *Boṃ* word. It has eight white nerve-leaves extending
downward. Third in the Throat Center lies the Chakra of Reward. Its
outer shape is rounded like the *Boṃ* word. It has sixteen red
nerve-leaves extending downward. The Yogi should understand that the
last two Chakras symbolize Wisdom and Skill, and duly meditate upon
them.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

At the beginning of visualizing the three Channels, one should know that
the process of visualization consists of two practices:

1\. Seeing the Channels vividly, or forming a clear picture in the mind.

2\. Holding on to this picture.

The mind should concentrate in the Central Channel at the point where
the three channels join. This is very important. Then, one should
proceed to visualize all the nerve-leaves, complete in number, of the
different Chakras. Keep on with this practice; the nerve-leaves will
become clearer and clearer in the mental picture.

If one has made every effort to visualize the nerve-leaves, but cannot
get a clear picture of them in mind, one should concentrate on
visualizing the three Channels, putting emphasis on picturing the
portion above the Heart Center. If the mind concentrates without a
slight rest for a long period, it will incur great hazards and
hindrances. In that case, one should only meditate on the point where
the three Channels join. According to this teaching, it is said, the
yogi will experience two different stages: the emergence of a very clear
and durable picture of the nerves, and the emergence of an obscure
picture of the nerves. Whichever the case, it is advisable to follow the
above instructions. This is verified by the teachings on visualization
of nerves given by the accomplished yogi, the great Lawabi.

During this visualizing practice, if the yogi wants also to practice the
breath-holding exercise, he may do so as instructed before. The way of
alternately practicing the visualization, body movement, and Stong-ra
will be expounded later.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

*The Practice of Visualizing Words*

In Heat-Yoga, a teaching of meditating on different words in the three
Channels and four Chakras is provided. This teaching is found in both
the fundamental *Tantra of Hevajra* and the *Expounding Tantra of
Sambhuda*. Many great accomplished yogis, such as the Black Practitioner
(Nagbo-Spyod-pa), taught this teaching.

The practice of visualizing words includes two ways—the comprehensive
way and the simple. The comprehensive way is to meditate on the words
both at the center of the Chakra and at each different nerve-leaf. But
in this teaching (of the Six Yogas), we find no clear instructions on
this. The simple way is to meditate only on the words in the center of
the four Chakras. This is clearly stated in the *Expounding Tantra* and
the teachings of the great accomplished beings. Reflecting on this
principle, one finds that merely meditating on the small *Ah* word in
the Navel Center and the *Hūṃ* word in the Head Center is not sufficient
nor desirable. To meditate on the words in the Heart Center and Throat
Center is also necessary. It is of great importance.

To meditate on the words, one should follow the aforementioned
instructions on keeping posture. Visualize the small *Ah* word at the
center of the Transformation Chakra of the navel, or in the center in
the Central Channel, which is close to the core of the spine. The Yogi
should concentrate only at this point.

The visualization procedure is as follows:

Visualize a small red, Sanskrit *Ah* word. Its shape is similar to the
Tibetan word *Shad* of the printed alphabet, standing upon a moon-wheel.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

To locate the visualization in the Heart Center, the yogi should see the
word at the center of the eight nerve-leaves of the Dharma Chakra of the
Heart Center near the central point between the two breasts.. He should
meditate only on the point in the Central Channel that is near the
spine. Visualize a blue *Hūṃ* word standing on a moon-wheel, head face
down, the Bodhi-Heart like snow about to melt.

To locate the visualized word at the Throat Center, the yogi should
visualize only the center-point of the sixteen nerve-leaves of the
Throat Center in the Central Channel near the spinal column. Visualize
at this point a red *Oṃ* word, its head facing up, standing on the
moon-wheel.

To locate the word at the Head Center, the yogi should visualize the
word at the center of the nerve-leaves of the Head Center in the Central
Channel near the spinal column. Visualize at the point a white *Haṃ*
word, facing down, standing on the moon-wheel.

It is of great importance that the yogi should visualize the points in
the center of the Central Channel, entwined by the knot of the Right and
Left channels, at the cross sections of the four Chakras.

Says the *Expounding Tantra Sambhoda:*

"The lotus that reaches the inner part of the heart  
 Is the principal one, which has eight nerve-leaves.  
 The nerve that reaches the inside of it is like a lamp.  
 In shape, it resembles the plantain flower,  
 Leaves opened and facing downward.  
 The god who dwells within it  
 Is as small as the mustard seed.  
 The indestructible seed—the *Hūṃ*,  
 Trembles like the snow about to melt…" \[cf. the Upanisadic and the
*gotra* teaching.\]

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

The nerve that reaches the inner part of the heart is the principal
nerve, which implies the Central Channel; the *Hūṃ* world should be
visualized in it. The other words in the other three Chakras should be
visualized as well.

Although there are many different teachings on the word-visualization in
the four Chakras, the essential point is to visualize these words in the
center of the Central Channel. Nevertheless, this point is not clearly
stated in some teachings. If it is not clearly understood, one will not
be able to gather the pranas at the Central Channel; consequently one
will miss the essence of the pith-instruction.

The size of the words on which the yogi meditates should be as small as
the mustard seed—as the Tantra describes the *Hūṃ* word. This size
applies to the other four words as well.

The smaller and clearer the word as visualized and held by the mind, the
easier it is to control the pranas. This is a very important factor in
mastering the pranas.

Although the Sambhodra Tantra does not mention it, the small word Ah
should be visualized with a head. According to the pith-instruction
given in the *Tantra of Bde-mchog*, all the four words should be
visualized with the half-moon head, the Thig-le and Na-da melting like
the female Bodhisattva about to weep. This teaching is important because
it produces and will enhance the Great Bliss.

If the Yogi visualizes the word as very bright and glowing, he will be
able easily to overcome drowsiness and promote his illuminative
experience of Samadhi.

When any visualized object is meditated upon, the yogi should put all
his mind into the subtle object as if his mind (or rather his whole
being) enters into the object. He

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

should never visualize the object as if he merely sees it before
him[68](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:68.md)<span id="an_r_nar:68"></span>. For the
correct practice, mind and object become as one; thus the experience of
the unification of mind and Thig-le will come to pass, and, the
gathering of the prana will become easy. In the practice of this
meditation one should neither overstrain nor be too lax in his effort.
Overstrain or laziness will bring drowsiness and distractions;
therefore, the yogi should avoid both extremes.

The beginner should not meditate on the three words above the heart
center for too long; he should meditate on them for only a short while,
and devote most of this time to concentrating on the small *Ah*. If he
finds it difficult to concentrate on the minute object, he should
visualize it a little larger. When a larger picture can be stabilized in
the mind, the yogi will then be able to visualize smaller or more subtle
objects.

The purpose of practicing the Heat Yoga is to produce the Four Blisses.
When the Bodhi-Heart in the nerves begins melting and the two
pranas[69](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:69.md)<span id="an_r_nar:69"></span> start
gathering at the head Chakra, the (first) Bliss \[ananda\] begins to
arise. Thereafter, the Bodhi-Heart begins to disperse into the nerves.
When the Bodhi-Heart gathers at the Throat Center the (second)
Extreme-Bliss \[paramananda\] arises; then the Bodhi-Heart disperses
again through the different nerves, and when it is gathered at the Heart
Center, the (third) Superb Bliss \[viramananda\] arises. Again, the
Bodhi-Hearth disperses through the nerves, and when it is gathered at
the Navel Center, the (fourth) Innate Bliss \[sahajananda\] arises <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md). Following this

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

if one meditates upon the words in the center of the Central Channel in
the four Chakras, the mind-prana will be easily gathered at the four
centers; thus, the Four Blisses will arise from the four centers. It is
necessary for the Yogi to recognize these Four Blisses in experience.

When the Bodhi-Hearth begins to melt and drop down from the upper center
to the lower centers, if the Bodhi-Heart cannot remain at each center
for a longer period, it will be extremely difficult for the yogi to
recognize the differences between the Four Blisses. Especially will it
be difficult to recognize the Innate Bliss. Thus one should know that if
the mind can concentrate a long period on the four Chakras, the melted
Bodhi-Heart will also remain at the different centers for a longer
period. This is a very important point. If the *Haṃ* word at the Head
Center that is the center of the white Bodhi-Heart can be stabilized,
the white element will be greatly enhanced and multiplied. If the word
at the Throat Center, the place through which

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the Right Channel multiplies the blood-element, can be stabilized, the
secretion of the Dumo which comes from the Navel Center will produce
great power. <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10.md) Consequently, it will
promote and improve the practice of Dream Yoga. The Heart Center is the
center of light. If the *Hūṃ* word at the heart center is stabilized the
great light will unfold. Meditation on the Heart Center will help the
emergence of the light in both the waking and the sleeping states.

The small *Ah* word should also be stabilized at the Navel Center, since
through it the Left Channel multiplies the fluid. From the Navel Center
the White-Bodhi-Heart revitalizes the whole body. Furthermore, this
center is the special place where the Dumo resides. It is well known
that the Navel Center is the place where the fire, that melts the
Bodhi-Heart, is kindled. <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*\*](#fn_11.md)

It is of great importance that the yogi should acquaint himself with the
teaching of the meditation on the Chakras and their words. Until all the
words in the different Chakras appear vividly in the mind, the yogi
should continue his effort.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

*The Practice of Vase-Breathing*

Following the preceding instructions, the yogi should first clearly
visualize the nerve \[nadi = Tib. rtsa. *Ed*.\] system in general, then
concentrate on the center of the Central Channel at the cross section of
the three channels. Next, the yogi should meditate on the four words in
the different nerves; especially should he concentrate on the small Ah
word in the Central Channel at the Navel Center. If this mind-holding
object can be stabilized, the mind and prana will converge to it. Thus
the mind reaches the state of concentration and the pranas are
collected. This is stated in the *Tantra of Bde-Mchog* and the
*Expounding Tantra Sambhodra of Hevajra*.

During the practice of Vase-Breathing, the yogi should also meditate on
the four words in the four Chakras. This is taught by the great
accomplished yogis the Black-Practitioner, Lawaba, and Ocean-Born, as
well as in many [holy](errata.htm#37.md) scriptures, especially in those
important pith-instructions of the Perfecting Yoga given in the Tantras.
But that the four words should all be visualized, is not given, even in
the instruction of Vase-Breathing Practice in the Whisper Teaching.

The Yogi should well acquaint himself with the meditation procedure as
given in the preceding instructions. Through this practice the pranas
will enter into the Central Channel and by the power of the fire of Dumo
the Bodhi-Heart will be melted—thus the Four Blisses will definitely
arise. But there are many Tibetan teachers who give the teaching of Dumo
in a manner which combines all the practices of nerve (Rtsa), word, and
Vase-Breathing at one time and declares that it is for the sake of
promptly

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

producing the Dumo experience that the combined practice is given.

"The taking-in, the filling-up, the dissolving,  
 And the shooting like the arrow are the four steps."

This stanza shows the four special steps of the Vase-Breathing practice
that was found in the pith-instructions of the gurus in the past and
favored by them. There is a certain commentary which says that "the
four" means the four bases; this is a mistake, however, that was made
through overlooking the text of the Tantras.

The physical preparations for the breathing exercise are the same as
given before. The best time to practice this breathing exercise,
according to the instructions of the accomplished Yogi Pag-mo-grub-pa is
the time when the breathing runs equally (in both nostrils).

Pag-mo-grub-pa adds: "Although many gurus say that the best time to
practice this breathing exercise is the time when the air runs equally
(through both nostrils), (in the light of serious meditation) the
breathing practice should be carried on day and night." In order to make
the proper time explicit, this instruction is given first.

In general, the prana[70](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:70.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:70"></span> is the essence of the expression of the
Buddhas. In this practice the exercise should be carried out when most
of the Lotus-Shelter-Air ascends. This is stated in the Lotus Commentary
of the *Dorn Tyun Tantra*.

Now, the explanation of the taking-in-air: The yogi should not inhale
through the mouth but through the nostrils. He should not breath in
roughly, but inhale gently and slowly.

Filling-up the air: After taking in the air, press it down and hold it.
As the yogi inhales, he should think that the air comes in through the
two nostrils and enters into the

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Right and Left
Channels, filling them up (like breath inflating balloons made of
entrails.)

Dissolving-the-air: When both channels, Right and Left, are full, all
the air enters into the Central Channel with a "Whoosh."

At this time the yogi should swallow the spittle in the mouth and press
the upper air down and pull the lower air up from both the lower
gates[71](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:71.md)<span id="an_r_nar:71"></span> to the
small *Ah* word. Then the yogi should concentrate on his visualizations
and hold his breath as long as he can. The holy Pag-mo-grub-pa said in
his instructions-stanza: "From the Right and Left Channels the air
enters into the Central Channel and fills it. When the breath can be
held no longer, the yogi should release it for a very short time—the
duration of snapping one's finger. The air left in the body should be
used for the dissolving practice."

Though this instruction is somewhat contradictory on two points with the
instruction given before, except the fourth step (the dissolving step),
the other three (taking-in, holding, and exhaling the air) are
expounded. The filling-up practice means inhaling the air that fills the
Right and Left Channels, and the dissolving practice means the departure
of the air from the two channels and its entrance into the Central
Channel; thereby the Central Channel is filled with air, but the air in
the Right and Left Channel is dissolved or emptied.

As to the manner of practicing the Vase-Breathing at the Navel Center,
some claim that the lower air should not be pulled up, merely pressing
the upper air down will do; others say that the yogi should press the
air down at first, then, after a while, pull up the lower air three
times. These sayings are wrongfully given through ignorance of the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

[essence](errata.htm#38.md) of Vase-Breathing practice. The right practice
is to combine the Live-Prana above the navel with the Tur Sel
Prana[71a](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:71a.md)<span id="an_r_nar:71a"></span> below
the navel. As the *Dom Gyun Tantra* says:

"The up-going air and the down-going air  
 Should be joined together by the mind."

This stanza explains the way of practicing the Vase-Breathing by
combining or uniting the up-going and down-going prana. Thus we know
that the up-going and down-going air should be combined and that they
should not be pulled up simultaneously, but one after another. If there
is no special reason for a particular meditation, the up-going air
should be drawn and pressed first; afterwards, pull up the down-going
air. It is not necessary to pull the down-going air three times.

"Shooting the air like the arrow." This illustrates the manner of
expelling the air from the body. When the yogi exhales the air, he
should visualize it arising through the Central Channel freely, like gas
through a pipe. One should not visualize the air going out of the body
through the crown of the head.

About the practice of drawing the up-going and the down-going air
together at the Navel Center, one important point should be mentioned:
some say the yogi should visualize the whole body full of Prana; some
say the Prana should be visualized only full above the Heart Center or
above the Throat Center. These instructions are unsound—because the true
and sound teaching is to visualize the small *Ah* word whereupon the two
pranas unite <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md). There

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

are two reasons for this. First, through leading the Prana into the
Central Channel, the Life-Prana and the down-going prana are unified.
Second, through visualizing words, the essential mental concentration
process is automatically completed. Furthermore, whenever the mouth of
Ro-ma and Rkyang-ma are open, the mouth of the Central Channel is closed
and vice versa.

Through the practice of Vase-Breathing, the out-going breathing from the
Ro-ma and Rkyang-ma is stopped; and through visualizing the air entering
into the Central Channel, the yogi eventually will be able actually to
lead the incoming air into the Central Channel.

The manner and the duration of holding the breath are explained by
Pag-mo-grub-pa as follows: In the beginning stage, practice on taming
the nerves is emphasized. The yogi should not hold his breath to the
point of strain. The yogi should hold the breath easily and not for too
long. Gradually, he should increase the duration of the holding period.
Until the breath becomes very smooth and submissive, he should not
engage in the stronger breathing practices, such as shaking the upper
part of the body and forcibly pulling up the prana. He should release
his breath before he feels uncomfortable, and not try to hold it too
long. Even if he tries to do so, it will not help the gathering of
pranas in the Central Channel, for the prana will remain in the
Transformation Wheel only a moment and then go outside. Although to hold
the prana outside the Wheel Center for a long period will produce a
little warmness and bliss, it does not help the prana to enter into the
Central Channel.

In the practice of visualization, the yogi tries to visualize the
subject clearly, but a clear image appears in his

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

mind for only a short moment. To visualize a steady picture is
difficult. In the after-meditation period, however, he will sometimes
experience the appearance of a steady picture in his mind clearly,
without any effort. In the same way he will learn that natural and easy
breath-holding cannot come without practice and effort. Therefore, until
the natural breath-holding or breath-remaining comes to pass, he should
try to prolong the breath-holding exercise gently. Even if he exerts
himself in holding the breath for a long period the prana will not
remain at the place desired. Furthermore, too much exertion will cause
many troubles and do little good, so, until the prana can be easily and
naturally placed in the Navel Center, the yogi should gently prolong the
breath-holding exercise. If one knows how to practice this exercise
proficiently, one will be able to know whether the prana naturally
remains and whether the prana can be led to the desired place.

The best time to practice Vase Breathing is neither just before nor just
after eating, but when the stomach is neither too full nor too empty.
The practice should be carried out without interruption, yet not for too
long a period. At times the yogi should rest for a while.

During the Vase Breathing, word-visualization should also be practiced.
The yogi should clearly visualize the four words—*Ah*, *Hūṃ*, *Oṃ*,
*Haṃ*—at the four respective centers of navel, heart, throat and head
that are knotted (by the nerves) as mentioned before.

Thereupon, the yogi should visualize an *Ah* word, the essence of fire
and Dumo, blazing with brightness. This word-of-fire is then fanned and
stimulated by the wind from the Privy Wheel, and its heat rises up and
ascends to the *Hūṃ*, *Oṃ* and *Haṃ* words. The three words begin to

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

melt, and the melted drops all fall to the *Ah* word and unite with it,
becoming one. This one drop is the self-nature of the Innate Bliss,
whereupon the yogi should concentrate. In this process of holding mind
to the subject, the yogi should visualize the Dumo-Ti-Le burning with
the tiny fire-tongue.

The yogi should visualize the melting Bodhi-Heart begin to drop from the
respective Wheels and fill up the *Ah* word, and then concentrate on
visualizing the *Ah* word until the signs of a stable visualization
appear.

If the visualization becomes stable, the light of Dumo will shine. The
body, both inside and out, and the things in the house can all be seen
clearly as one sees the olive fruit in one's own palm. Thus it is
important to visualize the *Ah* word shining with its burning tongue,
clearly and vividly. Through this practice the brightness-aspect of
Samadhi will increase, and a perfect Samadhi will be obtained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[176:\*](ettt13.htm#fr_9.md) We have inserted the
four technical Sanskrit terms.

The *Hevajra Tantra* states also the alternative tradition of this
highest bliss as third in order, thus implying its correspondence with
the Heart Center of the Sacred Light of Vairočana <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> and his co-power, the Lord of the Center of the five Dhyani
Buddhas. This tacit identification with the heart, and not the usually
given hair-splitting reasons, is the true esoteric basis for the
alternative order, which is thus seen not to be "artificial" as D. L.
Snellgrove (*Hevajra Tantra*, Oxford, Vol. I, p. 137) surmises, saying
hence not correctly that "it is associated with no improved
interpretation of them (the Four Blisses) as a coherent set." This
conclusion is understandable, however, for anyone not familiar with the
relation of the Four Misses to the Chakras, for that relation provides
the only solid and practical basis for the non-arbitrariness Snellgrove
rightly sought. The moment the Chakras are taken into account, the only
proper position for the Highest or Innate Bliss is seen at once to he
third, placing it in direct correspondence with the Heart Center, where
it uniquely belongs.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[178:\*](ettt13.htm#fr_10.md) We would rather say,
as better agreeing with practice: Which comes from the Heart Center, and
in mediated through the Navel Center. *Ed*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[178:\*\*](ettt13.htm#fr_11.md) Both from
conversations with other practitioners of yoga and from personal
experience, the editor can unequivocally state that the greatest heat
(gTum-mo) can be generated and more easily controlled through the use of
the Heart Center rather than through the navel plexus, allowing the
latter to function unconsciously under orders of the Heart Center, as it
were, and as a distribution point—but not bestowing any direct attention
on the navel per se. Even on a cold night the bodily heat thus generated
with comparative simplicity is pervasive and intense.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[182:\*](ettt13.htm#fr_12.md) There is a third and
synthesizing view and doctrine here not mentioned in the text; namely,
to maintain the conscious concentration of the prana at the heart
center, letting that center be the means for the (unconscious) command
to the Navel Center for its (the prana's) distribution.—*Ed*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Five: The Art Of Gtum-Mo or Heat Yoga](ettt14.md)

</div>
