<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt16)  [Next](ettt18.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### CHAPTER EIGHT

### THE YOGA OF THE LIGHT

The instruction on Light Yoga is given in two parts: The practice of
Light Yoga in the waking state, and the practice of Light Yoga in the
sleeping state.

This Light Yoga practiced in the daytime refers to the general or common
Light (in contrast to the unique Tantric Light practice), which is the
fundamental Dharma-essence apart from the realistic and nihilistic
extremes[95](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:95.md)<span id="an_r_nar:95"></span>. This
is the (so-called) Light-of-Object; the understanding or realization of
which is (called) the Light-of-Object (literally, the
Light-of-Comprehending-the-Object). This teaching is found in both
Hinayana and Mahayana, in the Paramita Vehicle as well as in Tantra, and
in the three Lower Tantras as well as the Highest Division of Tantra. It
is a teaching common to all Buddhist schools. Sometimes it is called the
Absolute Light. The unique Light (as taught in Tantra) is no different
in essence from the common Light-of-Object. The difference lies in the
Light-of-Subject, which (in the Tantric teachings) is the realization of
the Innate Great Bliss.

The unique teaching of the Anuttara Tantra for the realization of the
Innate Born Great Bliss, requires mainly the entering, remaining, and
dissolving of the prana in the Central Channel, or the
Bliss-of-the-Perfecting-Yoga. This Innate Great Bliss is not, however,
produced through the melting of *Thig-le*, nor through the concentration
practice of ordinary meditation—the no-thought experience apart from
drowsiness and distraction. Neither is

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

it produced through the *taming of prana*. For the Bliss produced
through the taming of prana is quite different from the Innate Great
Bliss. Through the taming of prana, the experience of brightness,
no-thought, and bliss may be produced, but this bliss is different from
the Innate Great Bliss. It may also be a Bliss-of-Melting, but it is not
the same Bliss of the Arising Yoga—the Melting-Bliss is not produced
through the prana entering into the Central Channel, etc. One should
carefully distinguish the different Blisses, and understand them well.

As explained before, in the Heat Yoga, the Innate Great Bliss of the
Perfecting Yoga should be merged with the well-studied View of the
Soleness—thus arises the Void-Bliss Wisdom, called the Light, or the
Light of the Path. In the practice of Perfecting Yoga, to unfold this
light is required before the Illusory Bodies come to pass. In addition
to this, many other practices are required for the raising of the
Illusory Bodies. Here, the special Light practice is emphasized. The
entering of Light requires a dependence on either the actual Illusory
Body or on any similar illusory body.

The subsiding process of the Light \[is now discussed\].

The explanations on this subject are not very clear in most of the
pith-instructions. However, there is a very good one that describes the
process as follows:

The yogi should visualize himself as the Father and Mother Yidam. At the
Dharma Wheel of the Heart Center in the Central Channel stands a blue
*Hūṃ* word on the Sun Disc.

From this *Hūṃ* word emanate beams of light shining upon all the cosmos
and purifying them; then the beams enter and are absorbed into the
bodies of all sentient beings.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thereupon, all the
sentient beings melt (and are absorbed) into the Mother Yidam. Then, in
the downward absorbing process, the head of the Yidam vanishes, then the
neck, the chest, etc., one by one, and are finally absorbed in the *Hūṃ*
word. At the same time, in the upward-absorbing process the toes first
vanish into the leg, then the leg into the thigh, thigh into hips, hips
into belly, and finally all are absorbed into the *Hūṃ* word. Thereon,
the lower part of the *Hūṃ* word, the vowel *ū*, vanishes into the *Ha*,
and the *Ha* vanishes into the half-moon; the half-moon then vanishes
into the *Thig-le* \[here to be understood as *bindu* Ed.\] and the
*Thig-le* vanishes upward into the *Nada*. Since this Visualization of
the absorbing process is concentrated upon the Heart Center in the
Central Channel, if one can stabilize the Visualization, the pranas of
the Ro-ma and Rkyang-ma will all enter, remain, and dissolve in the
Heart Center in the Central Channel; the Four Voidnesses will
successively arise; the Light of Path will augment. At this time, with
blissful mind, one should unwaveringly meditate upon the Visualization.

As mentioned before, this commentary on the Illusory Body and Light Yoga
is prepared on the pith-instructions of the Pao School. The instruction
of the Light Yoga given above is based on the unique teaching of the
Five Steps of Gsun-*a*dus and it was introduced here as a little
adornment for the pith-instructions.

In the Heat Yoga practice, if one can raise (unfold) the Innate
\[Wisdom-Bliss\] through the entering of prana into the Central Channel,
he will easily be able to raise the Innate Light at the time of Light
Yoga practice. At least, he will be able to unfold it through the
practice of the absorbing process (without difficulty).

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

If the practice of the Light of the Sleeping State can be done through
holding the Light of Sleeping State by prana, which is the prerequisite
practice of Dream Yoga, it accords with the instructions of many gurus.
For holding the dream through prana is itself a very good method of
practising the Light. At first, one should eat well and abundantly, and
dress in very warm clothes (or cover oneself with a warm quilt).
Depending on the needs and time the yogi should abandon sleep for two or
three days, or sleep as usual (literally, do not abandon sleep). If he
abandons sleep for two to three days, he will become too sleepy, and it
will be difficult for him to recognize the Light of Sleep. Therefore,
for the beginners, it is preferable to practice the Light Yoga in a
comparatively light sleeping state. For the advanced yogi, whose
meditation has already become steady, it is not necessary to abandon
sleep; however, in order to test one's ability to recognize the Light in
very deep sleeping state, he may abandon sleep for some days.

In the practice of the Light Yoga, the yogi should render offerings and
pray to the Precious Ones, present the Gtor-mas to the Guards, and pray
them to assist him in recognizing the Light of Sleep and in subduing all
hindrances. He should visualize the Yidam's body, practise the Guru
Yoga, and pray earnestly many times that his guru assist him to
recognize the Light. The yogi should also repeatedly remind himself not
to fall into dreams but to recognize the Voidness-of-Sleep when sleep
comes.

The sleeping-posture should be as follows: Lie down on the right side,
with the head to the north, the feet pointing south; the back, east; and
the mouth, toward the west. Place the left foot on the right foot. This
position is called

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

the Lion-Sleep-Posture. Then, the yogi should visualize the self-Yidam
body and also visualize a blue *Hūṃ* word standing in the center of a
lotus, with four green leaves extending in each direction, situated at
the Heart Center in the Central Channel. On the four leaves there are
four words—*Ah*, *Nu*, *Da*, *Ra*. (In some other instructions no word
is visualized on the four leaves). The *Ah* word sits on the leaf in the
east; the *Nu* word; in the south; the *Da*, in the west; the *Ra*,
north. When one feels sleepy, he concentrates on the *Ah* word; when he
feels very sleepy or insensible, he should concentrate on the *Nu* word;
thus the First Voidness will appear. When the yogi concentrates on the
*Da* word, the Second Voidness or the Extreme Voidness will emerge; when
he concentrates on the *Ra* word, the Third Voidness or the Voidness of
Attainment will emerge. Thereupon, when the yogi concentrates on the
*Hūṃ* word in the center, the Fourth Voidness or the Universal Voidness
will emerge.

It is said that successively visualizing these four words will cause the
Four Voidnesses to emerge successively. However, this saying makes
little sense, because some do not understand that in meditating on these
words at the Heart Center in the Central Channel, the life prana will
automatically gather; consequently, the Four Voidnesses will arise.
Based on this reasoning, one should not misinterpret the text
"visualizing the word of the center at the Heart." The essential thing
is to visualize at the central point of the Heart Center in the Central
Channel. Because the words of the instructions are not clear, it is
wrongly said that concentrating on the three words on the three leaves
will produce the Three Voidnesses. This opinion completely misses the
essential point of the teaching. Therefore,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

we may dispense with this *Ah*, *Nu*, *Da*, *Ra* word-practice, which is
difficult and results in little benefit.

The important thing is to concentrate on the *Hūṃ* word in the center.

There are two different kinds of meditator of the Sleeping Light: the
yogi who has attained a stable Samadhi of the visualized object before
(engaging in this practice), and the yogi who has not attained a stable
Samadhi. In the latter case, the yogi will attain a Sleeping Samadhi
immediately after he falls into sleep through holding his mind on the
instructions given before, but this Sleeping Samadhi will last only a
very short while. Therefore, relying merely on the mindfulness of
recognizing the sleeping state, through desire will not give one a
stable Samadhi even though great efforts are made. For if one cannot
"hold" the Light through the prana power, the inhalation and exhalation
will still take place. Though the breathing may be very subtle and calm,
the breath cannot be completely stopped. Thus a counterpart of the
Fourth Emptiness will emerge but not the real Fourth Emptiness.
Consequently, the Sleeping Light cannot be (fully) recognized.

In the case of the yogi who has already attained a stable Samadhi and
has mastered the Heat Yoga capable of gathering the Life Prana in the
Central Channel and raising the Fourth Emptiness, he will have no
difficulty in unfolding the Light-of-the Sleeping-State. If he follows
the instructions as given before and visualizes the *Hūṃ* word in the
Central Channel at bedtime, he will be able to unfold the Fourth
Emptiness of the Sleeping State through the dissolving process of prana
within two or three days.

If the yogi cannot unfold the Emptiness through the prana power in the
daytime, but if he attains a stable Samadhi

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

with the experience of bliss, brightness and non-thought, he may either
follow the foregoing instructions or absorb himself in his Samadhi to
reach the state of Sleeping Samadhi. Some people say that if one has
attained a stable Samadhi of any general type it is not necessary for
one to lead the prana entering into the Central Channel. This is not
correct, for doing so will not bring about the actual Sleeping-Light of
Anuttara Tantra. Nevertheless, if the yogi concentrates at the
Heart-Center, through the power of the habitual thought produced by the
practice he may well bring about the fruit. Though through the power of
any general Dhyana one may induce a certain sleeping samadhi with the
capability of contemplating on the Soleness and the Light of the general
Paths (Hinayana and Mahayana Path), that is by no means the Light as
taught by the teaching of Anuttara Tantra <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md).

Recognizing the Light through the prana power by concentrating on the
Heart Center will cause the Four Voidnesses to successively arise; the
manner of their emergence is explained as follows:

Meditating upon a *Thig-le* in the Heart Center at the deep-sleeping
state in the preparatory stage will cause a perfect Light-of-No-Thought
to emerge. Even if it does not emerge and the yogi falls asleep, his
prana will naturally gather in the Central Channel. As instructed
before, if one

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

is able to gather the pranas in the Central Channel in the daytime
practice and practises the concentration of the *Hūṃ* word at the Heart
Center in the Central Channel before bedtime, the pranas will be
gathered easily in the Central Channel. The experiences of the emergence
of the Voidness are as follows: First, the yogi sees the
water-reflection-like mirage, then it vanishes and becomes smoke. The
yogi sees many sparkling lights like those of the glowworm, then they
vanish again and become the stable light of a lamp. This light vanishes,
and the yogi sees the manifestation as the lucid *Thig-le* like
moonlight shining in the clear sky. The serene moonlight spreads over
all the universe; this experience is called the "Voidness" or the
"Emergence." Then the vision vanishes again, and the yogi experiences
all his mental manifestations appearing to be a clear sky and sees the
all-spreading glaring sunlight, its color not like the blazing fire-ball
but sparkling and gleaming. This experience is called the "Extreme
Emptiness" or the "Augmentation of Manifestation." Then the yogi
experiences, as the sky extending over all the universe, his mental
manifestations appearing to be the dark firmament at night, dark but not
black. At this time, if the yogi concentrates on the upper part of the
body, the vision will not disappear; if he concentrates on the lower
part of the body, the mind will become dim and dull; however, this
experience is not harmful. Keeping one's mind on the instruction, the
yogi cultivates this experience of darkness and eventually a very stable
"Light" will emerge. The emergence of this light is called the "Great
Emptiness" or the "Manifestation of Attainment."

When the yogi arises from the darkness, a vision like the clear sky of
dawn will emerge, which is neither exactly

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

like the color or shape of the sky, nor like the sunlight, moonlight, or
darkness. This stage is called the "Universal Voidness." He should try
to absorb himself in this great voidness as long as possible.

In the teaching of Gsun-*a*dus of the Marpa School, one may find
instructions for avoiding either the sudden awakening from sleep or the
falling into dream state.

The Four Voidnesses are also called the Four Blisses. The Fourth
Voidness is identified with the supreme Innate Bliss. The rapturous and
non-thought aspects of this Innate Bliss are expediently called "bliss";
actually they are two characteristics among others of the Voidness which
are seen as clearly (by the enlightened beings) as one sees his own
palm.

The teaching of the identity of Bliss and Void of the
Unparalled-Vehicle[96](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:96.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:96"></span> is to meditate on the View of the Soleness
together with the produced Bliss, as mentioned before. Although this
term, the Identity-of-Bliss-Void, is claimed by many, there are numerous
incorrect and misleading explanations of the teaching. They are similar,
\[to the true teaching *Ed*.\] but erroneous; one should examine them
very carefully.

Although the pith-instructions of this school are many, in this
connection there is no mentioning of the "Three Voidnesses." Some people
avow the "Four Voidnesses principle," but it seems not befitting here.
One may not be able to find this point in the pith-instructions of the
Rngog-pa School; nevertheless, it is clearly stated in the book of
*Spyod-bsdus* (*Collective Instructions on Performances*—commentary of
Gsun-*a*dus), which says:

"The [skandhas](errata.htm#57.md) then enter into the subtle elements, the
subtle elements into the consciousness, the consciousness

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

into the subtle-consciousness (Sattva), the subtle-consciousness into
the Blindness. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md) Following this
proceeding and coordinating with it, the sleeping procedure is reversed.
At the time the 'Entering-process' of consciousness, of subtle
consciousness, and of the great Blindness takes place, in a split second
the yogi forgets his meditation (or completely fails to keep his
attention on the meditation-object). Later, when the forgetfulness is
overcome, the Light—essence of the wisdom—will shine forth. If one can
liberate himself from the forgetfulness, he will attain the 'essence'
through the Prana (force). If any dream takes place during this time,
the yogi should try to reverse the sleeping-procedure and concentrate as
long as possible on the illuminating Light."

Having fully understood the secret meaning of the books of the
accomplished one, I have given the explanations on the Four Voidnesses
and the (practical) instructions on holding the Light. These
instructions cannot be found anywhere
else[97](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:97.md)<span id="an_r_nar:97"></span>; one
should try to understand them properly and follow them.

In the above quotation, "the [skandhas](errata.htm#58.md)" means the crude
visions; "the subtle elements" implies the time when the elements enter
into the prana—that is, the time when the earth, water, and fire
elements successively subside from one to another until the fire
elements enter into prana. "Entering into the consciousness" means that
the prana subsides into the consciousness; here, the consciousness means
the First Voidness. The "Sattva" implies the stage of the Augmentation;
"entering" implies the consciousness enters or (subsides) into this
stage. "The Blindness"

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

means the stage of Attainment. "Following this proceeding and
coordinating with it" means the yogi should coordinate and combine
himself with the Three Voidnesses at the time of sleep.

In short, this quotation from the "Collective Instruction on
Performance" is the essence summarized from Ye-shes-rdo-rje. "This time"
means the time of sleep. The "entering-process of the three
consciousnesses[98](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:98.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:98"></span>" means that former consciousnesses successively
enter into the later consciousnesses, and at the time of the third stage
of the third consciousness the mind becomes dim. "Later" implies the
time after the attainment, or the "After-stage" of the Attainment. "When
the forgetfulness is overcome" denotes the time when one awakes from the
non-thought consciousness in the deeply slumbering state—the experience
is like beholding the clear sky at dawn. During this time no other
visions (or thoughts) come to pass. "If \[there is\] liberation \[from
forgetfulness *Ed*.\], the prana *arouses* the
essence[99](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:99.md)<span id="an_r_nar:99"></span>."
Before the various dreams come in sight, one should try to concentrate
on the Light as long as possible. Here, the "liberation" implies the
Light Samadhi; if the Samadhi becomes dim or weakened and the yogi is
forced to arise from it, through the force of the (moving) prana the
flowing-thoughts will also be set in motion; whereupon the dreams also
take place. In case no dream whatsoever arises (at this time) the yogi
should meditate on the Light without distraction as long as possible.

If the yogi is able to bring forth the Samadhi of Sleep, but not to
produce the "Light" through the prana-holding-practice, he may
experience the transparency and clearness in the Samadhi of Sleep, but
(since it follows not the way of Light Yoga) the Three Voidnesses
preceding the sleeping-stage

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

would never appear. Therefore, it by no means can be considered as
having the qualifications and significance of the "Light of Sleep."
Besides, in the Samadhi of Sleep, the qualified and plentiful
experiences of the mirage, smoke, etc., preceding the First Voidness
will never come into being, but only those resembling them.

One should acquaint oneself with the two different Lights of the Light
of Sleep, i.e., the Light in Experience and the Light in
Realization—also the thick and thin Light, or the bright and dim Light.
Though many people declare that the thoughtless, lucid, and transparent
Samadhi of Sleep is identical with the Light of Sleep, no sufficient
reason is found for this claim.

This exposition, based upon the teaching of the "Holy Father and Son"
\[see last paragraph, Chapter Two *Ed*.\], of the Light Yoga with both
the instructions on the Light of Daytime and the Light of Sleep, is
given here after careful studies and contemplations. Thus one should
hold it dear as most valuable instruction.

If one has tried his best to remain in the Light, but, because of the
drifting prana is unable to hold on, one may then resort to the special
teaching on dream-arisings given in the pith-instruction of
[*Gsun-*a*dus*](errata.htm#59.md) of the Marpa School.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[244:\*](ettt17.htm#fr_16.md) It is clear that
throughout the text Tsong Khapa is referring to a practical yoga-type
discipline, very different from the very philosophical and verbal
context of the Anuttara Tantra as presented in most of the occidentally
accessible texts, e.g. in the Vow of Mahamudra, for example. That
practical teaching and the realization it brings is the true heart of
the Anuttara Tantra.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[247:\*](ettt17.htm#fr_17.md) Here is the "entering
process of the three consciousnesses" mentioned below. See note
[98](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:98.md). *Ed*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Nine: The Transformation Yoga](ettt18.md)

</div>
