<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt22)  [Next](ettt24) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

### APPENDIX

### THE VOW OF MAHĀMUDRĀ

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Translator's Introduction</span>

Buddhism seldom positively asserts what is the Truth. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) Rather, it teaches the truth-seekers to
understand and to explore their own minds, for in the quest of Reality
nothing is more important or befitting for the seeker than to know *what
the mind actually is* rather than to know only *what mind knows of*—the
so-called knowledge and objects known by the mind. Reality is the object
known, but the first step is to understand the knower of this
Reality. <span id="fr_24"></span>[\*\*](#fn_24) Whatever one's beliefs,
opinions, and thoughts, all these depend on the mind and come through
the mind, for there is no possibility for one to escape from the sphere
of mind in thinking or knowing.

After waking from sleep, each day of our lives begins with an awareness
of 'I'. [Descartes](errata.htm#79) observed, "I think, therefore I
am"—which seems logical to common sense since it feels the necessity for
a knower in order for anything to be known. But whether or not this 'I'
really exists and is substantial is debatable, says
[Buddhism](errata.htm#80). Although Buddhism denies the reality of the
ego, it does not absolutely deny the reality of the "awareness," or
thinking-process (at least in Mahayana Buddhism). Therefore, it is of
the utmost importance to know what this "awareness" or "mind" is.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

Buddhist schools employ two different approaches in the study of mind.
The Vaibhasika and Yogacara may be said to use the "horizontal"
approach, i.e. studying the mind analytically by mapping its divisions,
characteristics, functions, etc., including the 8 Consciousnesses and
mental functions of the different stages of Samadhis. The Tantric
\[Buddhist\] schools and Zen, <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25)
however, employ what may be called a "vertical" approach—urging the
student to disregard the analysis of functions and peripheral knowledge
of mind and instead to penetrate directly and deeply to the very
foundation of mind-essence.

To clarify for the readers the Buddhist view of these two approaches in
studying the mind, the translator will explain them through applying
what may be called the "three-dimension system" to the mind: The first
dimension—function; the second dimension—the form; the third
dimension—the essence-of-mind.

The first dimension (Chinese *"Yung";* Tibetan "*Rtsl*") means
"activity" or "function"; the second dimension, (Chinese *Shang;*
Tibetan *Rnam Pa*) refers to the "form" or "characteristics." The third
dimension (Chinese *Ti;* Tibetan *Ngo wo*) points to the essence or real
nature of mind. The manifestations in the first dimension of mind—the
peripheral or outer realm of mind—are comparatively easy to comprehend.
The second dimension, the form and characteristics, is not easily
understood without a certain kind of study or investigation. The third
dimension denotes the transcendental aspect of mind or the Dimension of
Beyond.

The function of mind refers to the capability of the

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

mind to know or to be "aware" of the Five Objects (of sight, sound,
touch, taste, feeling, smell), of Dharma (all objects, existences, and
ideas, etc.), and if we include the two obscure consciousnesses (No. 7
and No. 8) their functions are to become aware of the illusory ego (in
the case of No. 7) and the "form of all Dharmas" (in the case of No. 8).
Also, the function of mind refers to the emotional manifestations of
mind in being able to express love, <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26)
hate, anger, joy, etc. This realm, of the functioning-aspect-of-mind or
the first dimension of mind, is very obvious and immediately known by
all. Now, the second dimension—the form or characteristics of the
mind—refers to the awareness <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*\*](#fn_27) of
the mind, or more clearly, the "awaring-aspect-of-the-mind". This
"awaring-aspect-of-mind" is found in all the Eight Consciousnesses,
though some consciousnesses (such as No. 8, the Alaya) are not as
sharply aware as the mind-consciousness or the eye-consciousness.

Although this "awareness" continually takes place in the mind of every
individual, seldom is the individual conscious of the "awareness" itself
but is rather primarily conscious of the objects of the awareness. To
become "aware" of the "awareness" requires some study and effort.
Holding onto the "awareness" for long periods during meditation will in

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

time produce a change in the function and pattern of the 8
Consciousnesses and a *relative* transcendental accomplishment will be
achieved. According to Buddhism, the final transcendental
accomplishment—the perfect Buddhahood—will only be reached through the
realization of the Void-nature of the "awareness." The frequently used
terms in Mahamudra—"brightness" and "light"—refer to the
"evolved-awareness" of the mind, while the "Void," "non-existent," and
"non-creating" refer to the "root-nature" of awareness. This realm of
the "Void-bright" is the essence of mind, here—the third dimension of
the mind. In short, the essence of mind, as taught in Mahamudra, is the
"void-bright" or "awareness without subject-object".

Thus the teaching of Mahamudra disregards the first dimension of mind
and even does not concern itself much with "awareness" but strives to
cut through the Samsaric "awareness" which stems from the subject-object
pattern of thought.

To completely realize the essence-of-mind is by no means an easy task.
It requires years and *lives* of study and effort. One may ask, Why is
it so difficult if the Buddha-nature is inherent in one's mind? What
prevents this realization is the *force* of our "habitual thinking." On
a small scale this bondage may be likened to that of some childhood
habit or obsession which, although we know it is illusory and
irrational, nevertheless grips us and influences our thinking and
behavior because of early, deep-set conditioning. It is much the same in
the case of our "endeavor for enlightenment"; though the Void-nature of
mind is somewhat glimpsed or even realized, this does not permanently
eliminate habitual thoughts which have been operating through
immeasurable lifetimes in the past.

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

Therefore, Mahamudra and Zen can never be considered merely philosophy
or art, for they are actually the most serious teachings of the Buddhist
religion. They are teachings of liberation <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28) and should not be abused, as Zen
[has](errata.htm#81) recently been in the Occident, by being made a
subject of vain talk or subtle speculations as though they were only a
game of the mind.

The reader will discover that the opening stanzas of *The Vow* express
the religious and spiritual tradition of Mahamudra. The first five
stanzas present the fundamental principles and the necessary "wishes" of
the Buddhists. The author of *The Vow* is Garmapa III (1284-1339) a very
great authority and accomplished yogi whose numerous writings include
*The Profound Inner Meaning Of Tantrism*, considered by Tibetan scholars
the greatest work on the subject. *The Vow* is recited by the White
School as a daily prayer.

Although this Vow is comparatively short, [it](errata.htm#82) contains
the majority of the essential teachings of Mahamudra. In Tibet, there
exists quite a body of books and commentaries explaining this Vow. At
present these works are not available; therefore translator has supplied
a short commentary to accompany the stanzas[also](errata.htm#83) . Also,
since the original text was not available, the present translation was
made from the Chinese text that the translator had previously made from
the Tibetan.

The translator is confident that this *Vow of Mahamudra* is one of the
highest teachings of Tibetan Buddhism and

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

firmly believes it will contribute much to the search by psychologists
and religionists for a deeper understanding of man's essential nature.

##### EDITOR'S NOTE

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px">

Mahāmudrā (Tib. p’yag-rgya-chen-po) means literally "the great attitude
or symbolic gesture". The term derives from the Hindu Tantra (as *śri*
or *mahāyantra*) and the subsequent Buddhist Tantra of North India. One
writer of that school, Advayavajra, in his *Čaturmudrā*, refers to
Mahāmudrā in very much the same way that Śakti—as ultimate Divinity as
*Goddess*—is referred to in higher treatises of the Hindu Tantra: "She
is not an object subject to time… she combines saṃsāra and nirvāṇa; her
substance is universal Love; she is the unique essence of the Innate
Transcendent Bliss."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[285:\*](ettt23.htm#fr_23) The translator must
here be restricting himself to the skeptical method of Nagārjuna and
some schools of Zen, for there exist very explicit Buddhist cosmological
and psychological texts, both in Hinayana and Mahayana.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[285:\*\*](ettt23.htm#fr_24) The translator
overlooks here the ancient Upaniśadic dictum, which became part of the
essence of the much later Zen: O Maitreya, the knower cannot be known!
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[286:\*](ettt23.htm#fr_25) Growing out of more
of a Mādhyamika emphasis. *Ed*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[287:\*](ettt23.htm#fr_26) Not the correct word
here, merely "affection" being meant; (see our note to stanza 15) the
word "mind" in the same line could also be bettered by "consciousness",
"mind" having too intellectualistic a connotation. *Ed*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[287:\*\*](ettt23.htm#fr_27) The editor here
assumes responsibility for this term throughout, having suggested it to
the translator, in several discussions preceding the writing of this
essay, as a better one in this context than "consciousness," quoting to
him the editor's definition of *mind* as "that which orders awareness."
The awareness is thus more primal than the ordering.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[289:\*](ettt23.htm#fr_28) They become such only
when linked to a definite practice of tantric yoga type. See also our
remarks in the footnotes on pages [244](ettt17.htm#page_244) and
[296](ettt24.htm#page_296).—*Ed*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](ettt24)

</div>
