<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt19)  [Next](ettt21.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

### CHAPTER ELEVEN

### TSONG KHOPA'S SUMMARY OF SOURCES

Some say that this teaching (Six Yogas) appears in the first part of the
general-contents section of the Book; some that it is in the last part
of the Book[106](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:106.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:106"></span>. The former claim apparently has two mistakes.
According to those who avow the latter, there is a commentary as well as
a book called *Collective Instructions* written by Marpa; but this seems
neither reliable nor convincing. It is also said that there is a book by
Marpa containing the instructions of the Six Yogas in both stanza style
and prose style. And there is a book called the *Six Yogas of the
Diamond Song*. But this is merely an introductory book; it only serves
the purpose of sowing the seeds of Pith-Instructions; it cannot bestow
great power (to the followers).

The worst sources are those so-called "Six Yogas" texts discovered in
the *Dharma of Treasury;* though they are numerous, I can have no
confidence whatsoever in them[107](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:107.md)<span
id="an_r_nar:107"></span>.

Marpa (the founder of the Kagyupa school) imparted this teaching to
Rngog-ston, Mds’ur-ston, and Milarepa; that made three lineages in the
school. Then Milarepa imparted the teaching to the Holy Gambopa and
Rechung. From Gambopa this School branched out into many sects, their
teachings and practices quite different from one another. This book is
written after a thorough study of the different pith-instructions from
these sects. The instruction of Heat Yoga is based on the fundamental
teachings and the (special) instructions bestowed upon Tilopa

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[the teacher of
Marpa's guru Nāropā *Ed*.\] by the Master Tsarayawa, the Black
Practitioner.

The Light Yoga is mainly based on the pith-instructions and the
available commentary *Wisdom Essence*. In addition to these sources,
[writings](errata.htm#64.md) of the "Holy Father and Son" \[two revered and
learned lamas who were father and son, with family name of
[*A*pags-pa](errata.htm#65.md) *Ed*.\] have been relied upon. The
Transformation Yoga and the Yoga of Entering into Another's Body are
based not only on the *Tantra of Gdan-bzhi* as mentioned before, but
also on the *Tantra Sambhoda* and the *Tantra Vajra Dakini*. Therefore,
these instructions are trustworthy, and one may have full confidence in
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epilogue](ettt21.md)

</div>
