[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg13)  [Next](cdg15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1501 A.D. JEROME CARDAN, 1576 A.D.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_D">D</span></span>The son of Facius
Cardan, a learned jurist and mathematician of Milan, Italy. During his
lifetime he was celebrated as an occultist, mathematician and physician.
To-day he is remembered chiefly for his treatise on Algebra, published
at Nuremberg in 1545, which is the first example of the application of
algebraical reasoning to geometrical problems.

### SYLPHS OF CARDAN.

Here I will add a story which is more wonderful than all the rest, and
which I have heard my father, Facius Cardan (who confessed that he had
had a familiar spirit for nearly thirty years) recount not once but many
times. Finally I searched for his record of this event, and I found that
which I had so often heard, committed to writing and to memory as
follows. August 13, 1491. When I had completed the customary rites, at
about the twentieth hour of the day, seven men duly appeared to me
clothed in silken garments, resembling Greek togas, and wearing, as it
were, shining shoes. The undergarments beneath their glistening and
ruddy breastplates seemed to be wrought of crimson and were of
extraordinary glory and beauty. Nevertheless all were not dressed in
this fashion, but only two who seemed to be of nobler rank than the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

others. The taller of them who was of ruddy complexion, was attended by
two companions, and the second, who was fairer and of shorter stature,
by three. Thus in all there were seven. He left no record as to whether
their heads were covered. They were about forty years of age, but they
did not appear to be above thirty. When asked who they were, they said
that they were men composed, as it were, of air, and subject to birth
and death. It was true that their lives were much longer than ours, and
might even reach to three hundred years duration. Questioned on the
immortality of our soul, they affirmed that nothing survives which is
peculiar to the individual. They said that they themselves were more
closely related to the gods than mankind, but were yet separated from
them by an almost immeasurable distance. They are either more blessed or
more wretched than we are, just as we ourselves are more so than the
brutes. They said that no hidden things were unknown to them, neither
books nor treasures, and that the basest of them were the guardian
spirits of the noblest of men, just as men of low degree are the
trainers of good dogs and horses. They have such exceedingly subtile
bodies that they can do us neither good nor harm, save through
apparitions and terrors or by conveying knowledge. The shorter of the
two leaders had three hundred disciples in a public academy, and the
other, two hundred. Indeed both were in the habit of lecturing publicly.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When my father
asked them why they did not reveal treasures to men if they knew where
they were, they answered that it was forbidden by a peculiar law under
the heaviest penalties for anyone to communicate this knowledge to men.
They remained with my father for over three hours. But when he
questioned them as to the cause of the universe they were not agreed.
The tallest of them denied that God had made the world from eternity. On
the contrary, the other added

Air that God created it from moment to moment, so that should He desist
for an instant the world would perish. To prove this he brought forward
certain statements from the Disquisitions of Averroes, although that
particular book had not then been found. He referred, and by name, to
certain books, some of which had been found and others which up to that
time had remained undiscovered. They were all works of Averroes. Indeed
he openly declared himself to be an Averroeist. Be this fad or fable, so
its stands. TRANSLATED FROM JEROME CARDAN, "DE SUBTILITATE," BOOK XIX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: E. Averroes](cdg15)
