[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg16)  [Next](cdg18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### 429 B.C. PLATO, 347 B.C.

### HIS PLACE AS A PHILOSOPHER.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_G">G</span></span>"Yes, there is a
mother-dotrine, a synthesis of religions and philosophies. It develops
and deepens as the ages roll along, but its foundation and centre remain
the same. We have still to show the providential reasons for its
different forms, according to race and time. We must re-establish the
chain of the great initiates, who were the real initiators of humanity.
Then, the might of each of them will be multiplied by that of all the
rest, and the unity of truth will appear in the very diversity of its
expression. Like everything in nature, Greece has had her dawn, the full
blaze of her sun, and her decline. Such is the law of days, of men, and
nations, of earths and heavens. Orpheus is the initiate of the dawn,
Pythagoras the initiate of the full daylight, and Plato that of the
setting sun of Greece, a setting of glowing purple which becomes the
rose of a new dawn, the dawn of humanity. Plato follows Pythagoras, just
as the torch-bearer followed the great hierophant in the mysteries of
Eleusis." EXTRACTS, PAGES 61, 62.

### PLATO MEETS HIS MASTER.

"At the age of twenty-seven he had written several tragedies and was
about to offer one for competition. It was about this time that Plato
met Socrates, who was discussing with some youths in the gardens of the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Academy. He was
speaking about the Just and the Unjust, the Beautiful, the Good, and the
True. The poet drew near to the philosopher, listened to him, and
returned on the morrow and for several days afterwards. At the end of a
few weeks, his mind had undergone a complete revolution. . . . Another
Plato had been born in him, as he listened to the words of the one who
called himself 'the one who brings souls to birth.' The important thing,
he (Socrates) said, was to believe in the Just and the True, and to
apply them to life. Plato had received from Socrates the great impulse,
the active male principle of his life, his faith in justice and truth.
He was indebted for the science and substance of his ideas to his
initiation into the Mysteries, and his genius consists in the new form,
at once poetic and dialectic, he was enabled to give to them." EXTRACTS
PAGES 69, 72, 83, EDOUARD SCHURE, "HERMES AND PLATO." TRANSLATED BY F.
ROTHWELL, B.A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: H. Benvenuto Cellini Sees a Salamander](cdg18)
