[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hpi08)  [Next](hpi10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766136078/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

History of Philosophy in Islam, by T.J. de Boer \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### 2. ETHICAL TEACHING.

1\. The believing Muslim, in so far as custom did not maintain its
dominion over him, had at first the Word of God and the example of His
Prophet as his rule of conduct and opinion. After the Prophet's death,
the Sunna of Mohammed was followed, in cases where the Koran gave no
information,--that is to say, men acted and decided, as Mohammed had
decided or acted, according to the Tradition of his Companions. But from
the time of the conquest of countries in possession of an old
civilization, demands which were altogether new were made of ' Islam.
Instead of the simple conditions of Arab life, usages and institutions
were met with there, in regard to which the Sacred Law gave no precise
direction, and to meet which no tradition or interpretation of tradition
presented itself. Every day added thus to the number of individual cases
which had not been provided for, and yet about which one had to come to
a decision, whether according to custom, or his own sense of right. In
the old-Roman provinces, Syria and Mesopotamia, Roman law must have long
continued to exercise an important influence.

Those jurists who attributed to their own opinion (*Ra’y*, *opinio*)
alongside of the Koran and Sunna, a subsidiary authority to determine
the law, were called 'Adherents of the Ra’y'. One of them, Abu Hanifa of
Kufa († 767), the founder of the Hanifite School, became specially
famous. But even in Medina, before the appearance of the school of Malik
(715-795), as well as in that school, a harmless though restricted
deference was at first paid to the Ra’y. By slow degrees, however, and
in the course of opposing

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

a Ra’y which was becoming a pretext for much arbitrariness, the view
gained ground, that in everything the Tradition (*hadith*) respecting
the Sunna of the Prophet was to be followed. Thereupon traditions were
collected from all quarters, and explained--and in large numbers even
forged--; and a system of criteria to determine their genuineness was
formed, which, however, laid more stress upon the external evidence and
the appropriateness of the traditionary material than upon consistency
and historic truth. As a consequence of this development, the 'people of
the Ra’y', who were chiefly located in Iraq (Babylonia), were now
confronted by the 'Adherents of the Tradition', or the Medina school.
Even Shafii (767-820), the founder of the third school of Law, who in
general held to the Sunna, was numbered with the partisans of Tradition,
in contradistinction no doubt to Abu Hanifa.

2\. Logic introduced a new element into this controversy,--viz *Qiyas*
or Analogy. There had been, of course, stray applications of Qiyas, even
in earlier times; but, to lay down Qiyas as a principle, a foundation or
a source of law,--presupposed the influence of scientific reflection.
Although the terms *Ra’y* and *Qiyas* may be used as synonyms, yet there
is in the latter term, less suggestion of the presence and operation of
individual predilection than there is in *Ra’y*. The more one grew
accustomed to employ Qiyas in grammatical and logical researches, the
more readily could he include this principle in the institutes of
jurisprudence, whether by way of reasoning from one instance to another,
or from the majority of instances to the remainder (*i.e.*
analogically), or by way of seeking rather for some common ground
governing various cases,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

from which the conduct proper in a particular case might be deduced
(*i.e.* syllogistically) <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8).

The application of Qiyas appears to have come into use, first and most
extensively, in the Hanifite school, but afterwards also in the school
of Shafii,--though with a more limited range. In connection therewith,
the question--whether language was capable of expressing the Universal,
or could merely denote the Particular--became important for ethical
doctrine.

The logical principle of Qiyas never attained to great repute. Much more
emphasis was laid,--next to the Koran and the Sunna, the historic
foundations of the Law--, upon the *Idjma*, that is, the Consensus of
the Congregation of the faithful. The Consensus of the Congregation or,
practically, of the most influential learned men in it,--who may be
compared to the fathers and teachers of the Catholic Church,--is the
Dogmatical principle, which, contested only by a few, has proved the
most important instrument in establishing the Muslim Ethical System.
Theory, however, continues to assign a certain subordinate place to
Qiyas, as a fourth source of moral guidance, after Koran, Sunna and
Idjma.

3\. The Muslim Ethical System (*al-fiqh*) = 'the knowledge') takes into
account the entire life of the believer, for whom the Faith itself is
the first of all duties. Like every innovation the system at first
encountered violent opposition:--commandment was now turned into
doctrinal theory, and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

believing obedience into abstruse pursuit of knowledge: that called for
protestation alike from plain pious people and from wise statesmen. But
gradually the 'knowing' men or men learned in the Law (*ulamā*, or in
the West, *faqihs*) were recognized as the true heirs of the prophets.
The Ethical system was developed before the Doctrinal, and it has been
able to hold the leading position up to the present day. Nearly every
Muslim knows something of it, seeing it is part of a good religious
upbringing. According to the great Church-father Gazali, 'the Fiqh' is
the daily bread of believing souls, while the Doctrine is only valuable
as a Medicine for the sick.

We are not called upon here to enter into the minutiae of the fine-spun
casuistic of the Fiqh. The main subject handled in it is an ideal
righteousness, which can never be illustrated in all its purity in our
imperfect world. We are acquainted now with its principles, and with the
position which it holds in Islam. Let us merely add a brief notice of
the division of moral acts which was formulated by ethical teachers.
According to this classification there are:

1\. Acts, the practice of which is an absolute duty and is therefore
rewarded, and the omission of which is punished:

2\. Acts which are recommended by the Law, and are the subject of
reward, but the neglect of which does not call for punishment:

3\. Acts which are permitted, but which in the eyes of the Law are a
matter of indifference:

4\. Acts which the Law disapproves of, but does not hold as punishable:

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

5\. Acts which are forbidden by the Law and which demand unconditional
punishment <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9).

4\. Greek philosophic enquiries have had a two-fold influence upon the
Ethics of Islam. With many of the sectaries and mystics, both orthodox
and heretic, an ascetic system of Ethics is found, coloured by
Pythagorean-Platonic views. The same thing appears with philosophers,
whom we shall afterwards meet again. But in orthodox circles the
Aristotelian deliverance,--that virtue consists in the just mean--,
found much acceptance, because something similar stood in the Koran, and
because, generally, the tendency of Islam was a catholic one,--one
conciliatory of opposites.

More attention indeed was given to Politics than to Ethics, in the
Muslim empire, and the struggles of political parties were the first
thing to occasion difference of opinion. Disputes about the *Imâmat*,
*i.e.* the headship in the Muslim Church, pervade the entire history of
Islam; but the questions discussed have commonly more of a personal and
practical than a theoretical importance, and therefore a history of
philosophy does not need to consider them very fully. Hardly anything of
philosophic value emerges in them. Even in the course of the first
centuries there was developed a firm body of constitutional law
canonically expressed; but this, like the ideal system of duty, was not
particularly heeded by strong rulers,--who viewed it as mere theological
brooding,--while, on the other hand, by weak princes it could not be
applied at all.

Just as little is it worth our while to examine minutely the numerous
'mirrors of Princes', which were such favourites,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

in Persia especially, and in whose wise moral saws, and maxims of
political sagacity, the courtly circles found edification.

The weight of philosophic endeavour in Islam lies on the theoretical and
intellectual side. With the actual proceedings of social and political
life they are able to make but a scanty compromise. Even the Art of the
Muslims, although it exhibits more originality than their Science, does
not know how to animate the crude material, but merely sports with
ornamental forms. Their Poetry creates no Drama, and their Philosophy is
unpractical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[38:1](hpi09.htm#fr_8) Examples of both methods
occur, but usually *Qiyas* is equivalent to *Analogy*. However, in the
philosophical terminology which owes its origin to the Translators,
*Qiyas* always stands for συλλογισμός, while ἀναλογία is rendered by the
Arabic *mithl*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[40:1](hpi09.htm#fr_9) Cf. Snouck Hurgronje in
ZDMG, LIII p. 155.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Doctrinal Systems](hpi10)
