[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf05016) 
[Next](daf05018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIECA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 5*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs. Part IV.

Another expedition of the conquerors of Damascus will equally display
their avidity and their contempt for the riches of the present world.
They were informed that the produce and manufactures of the country were
annually collected in the fair of Abyla,  <span
id="fr_433"></span>[64](#fn_433) about thirty miles from the city; that
the cell of a devout hermit was visited at the same time by a multitude
of pilgrims; and that the festival of trade and superstition would be
ennobled by the nuptials of the daughter of the governor of Tripoli.
Abdallah, the son of Jaafar, a glorious and holy martyr, undertook, with
a banner of five hundred horse, the pious and profitable commission of
despoiling the infidels. As he approached the fair of Abyla, he was
astonished by the report of this mighty concourse of Jews and
Christians, Greeks, and Armenians, of natives of Syria and of strangers
of Egypt, to the number of ten thousand, besides a guard of five
thousand horse that attended the person of the bride. The Saracens
paused: "For my own part," said Abdallah, "I dare not go back: our foes
are many, our danger is great, but our reward is splendid and secure,
either in this life or in the life to come. Let every man, according to
his inclination, advance or retire." Not a Mussulman deserted his
standard. "Lead the way," said Abdallah to his Christian guide, "and you
shall see what the companions of the prophet can perform." They charged
in five squadrons; but after the first advantage of the surprise, they
were encompassed and almost overwhelmed by the multitude of their
enemies; and their valiant band is fancifully compared to a white spot
in the skin of a black camel.  <span id="fr_434"></span>[65](#fn_434)
About the hour of sunset, when their weapons dropped from their hands,
when they panted on the verge of eternity, they discovered an
approaching cloud of dust; they heard the welcome sound of the tecbir,
 <span id="fr_435"></span>[66](#fn_435) and they soon perceived the
standard of Caled, who flew to their relief with the utmost speed of his
cavalry. The Christians were broken by his attack, and slaughtered in
their flight, as far as the river of Tripoli. They left behind them the
various riches of the fair; the merchandises that were exposed for sale,
the money that was brought for purchase, the gay decorations of the
nuptials, and the governor's daughter, with forty of her female
attendants. The fruits, provisions, and furniture, the money, plate, and
jewels, were diligently laden on the backs of horses, asses, and mules;
and the holy robbers returned in triumph to Damascus. The hermit, after
a short and angry controversy with Caled, declined the crown of
martyrdom, and was left alive in the solitary scene of blood and
devastation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_433"></span>[64](daf05017.htm#fr_433) Dair Abil Kodos.
After retrenching the last word, the epithet, holy, I discover the Abila
of Lysanias between Damascus and Heliopolis: the name (Abil signifies a
vineyard) concurs with the situation to justify my conjecture, (Reland,
Palestin. tom. i. p 317, tom. ii. p. 526, 527.)

<span id="fn_434"></span>[65](daf05017.htm#fr_434) I am bolder than Mr.
Ockley, (vol. i. p. 164,) who dares not insert this figurative
expression in the text, though he observes in a marginal note, that the
Arabians often borrow their similes from that useful and familiar
animal. The reindeer may be equally famous in the songs of the
Laplanders.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[66](daf05017.htm#fr_435) We hear the tecbir;
so the Arabs call Their shout of onset, when with loud appeal They
challenge heaven, as if demanding conquest. This word, so formidable in
their holy wars, is a verb active, (says Ockley in his index,) of the
second conjugation, from Kabbara, which signifies saying Alla Acbar, God
is most mighty!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs. Part V.](daf05018)
