[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf05033) 
[Next](daf05035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIECA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 5*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LV: The Bulgarians, The Hungarians And The Russians. Part I.

The Bulgarians. - Origin, Migrations, And Settlement Of The Hungarians.
- Their Inroads In The East And West. - The Monarchy Of Russia. -
Geography And Trade. - Wars Of The Russians Against The Greek Empire. -
Conversion Of The Barbarians.

Under the reign of Constantine the grandson of Heraclius, the ancient
barrier of the Danube, so often violated and so often restored, was
irretrievably swept away by a new deluge of Barbarians. Their progress
was favored by the caliphs, their unknown and accidental auxiliaries:
the Roman legions were occupied in Asia; and after the loss of Syria,
Egypt, and Africa, the Caesars were twice reduced to the danger and
disgrace of defending their capital against the Saracens. If, in the
account of this interesting people, I have deviated from the strict and
original line of my undertaking, the merit of the subject will hide my
transgression, or solicit my excuse. In the East, in the West, in war,
in religion, in science, in their prosperity, and in their decay, the
Arabians press themselves on our curiosity: the first overthrow of the
church and empire of the Greeks may be imputed to their arms; and the
disciples of Mahomet still hold the civil and religious sceptre of the
Oriental world. But the same labor would be unworthily bestowed on the
swarms of savages, who, between the seventh and the twelfth century,
descended from the plains of Scythia, in transient inroad or perpetual
emigration.  <span id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_876) Their names are
uncouth, their origins doubtful, their actions obscure, their
superstition was blind, their valor brutal, and the uniformity of their
public and private lives was neither softened by innocence nor refined
by policy. The majesty of the Byzantine throne repelled and survived
their disorderly attacks; the greater part of these Barbarians has
disappeared without leaving any memorial of their existence, and the
despicable remnant continues, and may long continue, to groan under the
dominion of a foreign tyrant. From the antiquities of, I. Bulgarians,
II. Hungarians, and, III. Russians, I shall content myself with
selecting such facts as yet deserve to be remembered. The conquests of
the, IV. Normans, and the monarchy of the, V. Turks, will naturally
terminate in the memorable Crusades to the Holy Land, and the double
fall of the city and empire of Constantine.

I. In his march to Italy, Theodoric  <span
id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_877) the Ostrogoth had trampled on the arms
of the Bulgarians. After this defeat, the name and the nation are lost
during a century and a half; and it may be suspected that the same or a
similar appellation was revived by strange colonies from the
Borysthenes, the Tanais, or the Volga. A king of the ancient
Bulgaria, <span id="fr_878"></span>[3](#fn_878) bequeathed to his five
sons a last lesson of moderation and concord. It was received as youth
has ever received the counsels of age and experience: the five princes
buried their father; divided his subjects and cattle; forgot his advice;
separated from each other; and wandered in quest of fortune till we find
the most adventurous in the heart of Italy, under the protection of the
exarch of Ravenna.  <span id="fr_879"></span>[4](#fn_879) But the stream
of emigration was directed or impelled towards the capital. The modern
Bulgaria, along the southern banks of the Danube, was stamped with the
name and image which it has retained to the present hour: the new
conquerors successively acquired, by war or treaty, the Roman provinces
of Dardania, Thessaly, and the two Epirus;  <span
id="fr_880"></span>[5](#fn_880) the ecclesiastical supremacy was
translated from the native city of Justinian; and, in their prosperous
age, the obscure town of Lychnidus, or Achrida, was honored with the
throne of a king and a patriarch.  <span id="fr_881"></span>[6](#fn_881)
The unquestionable evidence of language attests the descent of the
Bulgarians from the original stock of the Sclavonian, or more properly
Slavonian, race;  <span id="fr_882"></span>[7](#fn_882) and the kindred
bands of Servians, Bosnians, Rascians, Croatians, Walachians,  <span
id="fr_883"></span>[8](#fn_883) &c., followed either the standard or the
example of the leading tribe. From the Euxine to the Adriatic, in the
state of captives, or subjects, or allies, or enemies, of the Greek
empire, they overspread the land; and the national appellation of the
slaves  <span id="fr_884"></span>[9](#fn_884) has been degraded by
chance or malice from the signification of glory to that of servitude.
 <span id="fr_885"></span>[10](#fn_885) Among these colonies, the
Chrobatians,  <span id="fr_886"></span>[11](#fn_886) or Croats, who now
attend the motions of an Austrian army, are the descendants of a mighty
people, the conquerors and sovereigns of Dalmatia. The maritime cities,
and of these the infant republic of Ragusa, implored the aid and
instructions of the Byzantine court: they were advised by the
magnanimous Basil to reserve a small acknowledgment of their fidelity to
the Roman empire, and to appease, by an annual tribute, the wrath of
these irresistible Barbarians. The kingdom of Crotia was shared by
eleven Zoupans, or feudatory lords; and their united forces were
numbered at sixty thousand horse and one hundred thousand foot. A long
sea-coast, indented with capacious harbors, covered with a string of
islands, and almost in sight of the Italian shores, disposed both the
natives and strangers to the practice of navigation. The boats or
brigantines of the Croats were constructed after the fashion of the old
Liburnians: one hundred and eighty vessels may excite the idea of a
respectable navy; but our seamen will smile at the allowance of ten, or
twenty, or forty, men for each of these ships of war. They were
gradually converted to the more honorable service of commerce; yet the
Sclavonian pirates were still frequent and dangerous; and it was not
before the close of the tenth century that the freedom and sovereignty
of the Gulf were effectually vindicated by the Venetian republic.  <span
id="fr_887"></span>[12](#fn_887) The ancestors of these Dalmatian kings
were equally removed from the use and abuse of navigation: they dwelt in
the White Croatia, in the inland regions of Silesia and Little Poland,
thirty days' journey, according to the Greek computation, from the sea
of darkness.

The glory of the Bulgarians  <span id="fr_888"></span>[13](#fn_888) was
confined to a narrow scope both of time and place. In the ninth and
tenth centuries, they reigned to the south of the Danube; but the more
powerful nations that had followed their emigration repelled all return
to the north and all progress to the west. Yet in the obscure catalogue
of their exploits, they might boast an honor which had hitherto been
appropriated to the Goths: that of slaying in battle one of the
successors of Augustus and Constantine. The emperor Nicephorus had lost
his fame in the Arabian, he lost his life in the Sclavonian, war. In his
first operations he advanced with boldness and success into the centre
of Bulgaria, and burnt the royal court, which was probably no more than
an edifice and village of timber. But while he searched the spoil and
refused all offers of treaty, his enemies collected their spirits and
their forces: the passes of retreat were insuperably barred; and the
trembling Nicephorus was heard to exclaim, "Alas, alas! unless we could
assume the wings of birds, we cannot hope to escape." Two days he waited
his fate in the inactivity of despair; but, on the morning of the third,
the Bulgarians surprised the camp, and the Roman prince, with the great
officers of the empire, were slaughtered in their tents. The body of
Valens had been saved from insult; but the head of Nicephorus was
exposed on a spear, and his skull, enchased with gold, was often
replenished in the feasts of victory. The Greeks bewailed the dishonor
of the throne; but they acknowledged the just punishment of avarice and
cruelty. This savage cup was deeply tinctured with the manners of the
Scythian wilderness; but they were softened before the end of the same
century by a peaceful intercourse with the Greeks, the possession of a
cultivated region, and the introduction of the Christian worship. The
nobles of Bulgaria were educated in the schools and palace of
Constantinople; and Simeon,  <span id="fr_889"></span>[14](#fn_889) a
youth of the royal line, was instructed in the rhetoric of Demosthenes
and the logic of Aristotle. He relinquished the profession of a monk for
that of a king and warrior; and in his reign of more than forty years,
Bulgaria assumed a rank among the civilized powers of the earth. The
Greeks, whom he repeatedly attacked, derived a faint consolation from
indulging themselves in the reproaches of perfidy and sacrilege. They
purchased the aid of the Pagan Turks; but Simeon, in a second battle,
redeemed the loss of the first, at a time when it was esteemed a victory
to elude the arms of that formidable nation. The Servians were
overthrown, made captive and dispersed; and those who visited the
country before their restoration could discover no more than fifty
vagrants, without women or children, who extorted a precarious
subsistence from the chase. On classic ground, on the banks of Achelous,
the greeks were defeated; their horn was broken by the strength of the
Barbaric Hercules.  <span id="fr_890"></span>[15](#fn_890) He formed the
siege of Constantinople; and, in a personal conference with the emperor,
Simeon imposed the conditions of peace. They met with the most jealous
precautions: the royal gallery was drawn close to an artificial and
well-fortified platform; and the majesty of the purple was emulated by
the pomp of the Bulgarian. "Are you a Christian?" said the humble
Romanus: "it is your duty to abstain from the blood of your fellow-
Christians. Has the thirst of riches seduced you from the blessings of
peace? Sheathe your sword, open your hand, and I will satiate the utmost
measure of your desires." The reconciliation was sealed by a domestic
alliance; the freedom of trade was granted or restored; the first honors
of the court were secured to the friends of Bulgaria, above the
ambassadors of enemies or strangers;  <span
id="fr_891"></span>[16](#fn_891) and her princes were dignified with the
high and invidious title of Basileus, or emperor. But this friendship
was soon disturbed: after the death of Simeon, the nations were again in
arms; his feeble successors were divided and extinguished; and, in the
beginning of the eleventh century, the second Basil, who was born in the
purple, deserved the appellation of conqueror of the Bulgarians. His
avarice was in some measure gratified by a treasure of four hundred
thousand pounds sterling, (ten thousand pounds' weight of gold,) which
he found in the palace of Lychnidus. His cruelty inflicted a cool and
exquisite vengeance on fifteen thousand captives who had been guilty of
the defence of their country. They were deprived of sight; but to one of
each hundred a single eye was left, that he might conduct his blind
century to the presence of their king. Their king is said to have
expired of grief and horror; the nation was awed by this terrible
example; the Bulgarians were swept away from their settlements, and
circumscribed within a narrow province; the surviving chiefs bequeathed
to their children the advice of patience and the duty of revenge.

II\. When the black swarm of Hungarians first hung over Europe, above
nine hundred years after the Christian aera, they were mistaken by fear
and superstition for the Gog and Magog of the Scriptures, the signs and
forerunners of the end of the world.  <span
id="fr_892"></span>[17](#fn_892) Since the introduction of letters, they
have explored their own antiquities with a strong and laudable impulse
of patriotic curiosity.  <span id="fr_893"></span>[18](#fn_893) Their
rational criticism can no longer be amused with a vain pedigree of
Attila and the Huns; but they complain that their primitive records have
perished in the Tartar war; that the truth or fiction of their rustic
songs is long since forgotten; and that the fragments of a rude
chronicle  <span id="fr_894"></span>[19](#fn_894) must be painfully
reconciled with the contemporary though foreign intelligence of the
imperial geographer.  <span id="fr_895"></span>[20](#fn_895) Magiar is
the national and oriental denomination of the Hungarians; but, among the
tribes of Scythia, they are distinguished by the Greeks under the proper
and peculiar name of Turks, as the descendants of that mighty people who
had conquered and reigned from China to the Volga. The Pannonian colony
preserved a correspondence of trade and amity with the eastern Turks on
the confines of Persia and after a separation of three hundred and fifty
years, the missionaries of the king of Hungary discovered and visited
their ancient country near the banks of the Volga. They were hospitably
entertained by a people of Pagans and Savages who still bore the name of
Hungarians; conversed in their native tongue, recollected a tradition of
their long-lost brethren, and listened with amazement to the marvellous
tale of their new kingdom and religion. The zeal of conversion was
animated by the interest of consanguinity; and one of the greatest of
their princes had formed the generous, though fruitless, design of
replenishing the solitude of Pannonia by this domestic colony from the
heart of Tartary.  <span id="fr_896"></span>[21](#fn_896) From this
primitive country they were driven to the West by the tide of war and
emigration, by the weight of the more distant tribes, who at the same
time were fugitives and conquerors.  <span
id="fr_897"></span>[\*\_0044](#fn_897) Reason or fortune directed their
course towards the frontiers of the Roman empire: they halted in the
usual stations along the banks of the great rivers; and in the
territories of Moscow, Kiow, and Moldavia, some vestiges have been
discovered of their temporary residence. In this long and various
peregrination, they could not always escape the dominion of the
stronger; and the purity of their blood was improved or sullied by the
mixture of a foreign race: from a motive of compulsion, or choice,
several tribes of the Chazars were associated to the standard of their
ancient vassals; introduced the use of a second language; and obtained
by their superior renown the most honorable place in the front of
battle. The military force of the Turks and their allies marched in
seven equal and artificial divisions; each division was formed of thirty
thousand eight hundred and fifty-seven warriors, and the proportion of
women, children, and servants, supposes and requires at least a million
of emigrants. Their public counsels were directed by seven vayvods, or
hereditary chiefs; but the experience of discord and weakness
recommended the more simple and vigorous administration of a single
person. The sceptre, which had been declined by the modest Lebedias, was
granted to the birth or merit of Almus and his son Arpad, and the
authority of the supreme khan of the Chazars confirmed the engagement of
the prince and people; of the people to obey his commands, of the prince
to consult their happiness and glory.

With this narrative we might be reasonably content, if the penetration
of modern learning had not opened a new and larger prospect of the
antiquities of nations. The Hungarian language stands alone, and as it
were insulated, among the Sclavonian dialects; but it bears a close and
clear affinity to the idioms of the Fennic race,  <span
id="fr_898"></span>[22](#fn_898) of an obsolete and savage race, which
formerly occupied the northern regions of Asia and Europe.  <span
id="fr_899"></span>[\*\_0045](#fn_899) The genuine appellation of Ugri
or Igours is found on the western confines of China;  <span
id="fr_900"></span>[23](#fn_900) their migration to the banks of the
Irtish is attested by Tartar evidence;  <span
id="fr_901"></span>[24](#fn_901) a similar name and language are
detected in the southern parts of Siberia;  <span
id="fr_902"></span>[25](#fn_902) and the remains of the Fennic tribes
are widely, though thinly scattered from the sources of the Oby to the
shores of Lapland.  <span id="fr_903"></span>[26](#fn_903) The
consanguinity of the Hungarians and Laplanders would display the
powerful energy of climate on the children of a common parent; the
lively contrast between the bold adventurers who are intoxicated with
the wines of the Danube, and the wretched fugitives who are immersed
beneath the snows of the polar circle. Arms and freedom have ever been
the ruling, though too often the unsuccessful, passion of the
Hungarians, who are endowed by nature with a vigorous constitution of
soul and body.  <span id="fr_904"></span>[27](#fn_904) Extreme cold has
diminished the stature and congealed the faculties of the Laplanders;
and the arctic tribes, alone among the sons of men, are ignorant of war,
and unconscious of human blood; a happy ignorance, if reason and virtue
were the guardians of their peace!  <span
id="fr_905"></span>[28](#fn_905)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_876"></span>[1](daf05034.htm#fr_876) All the passages of
the Byzantine history which relate to the Barbarians are compiled,
methodized, and transcribed, in a Latin version, by the laborious John
Gotthelf Stritter, in his "Memoriae Populorum, ad Danubium, Pontum
Euxinum, Paludem Maeotidem, Caucasum, Mare Caspium, et inde Magis ad
Septemtriones incolentium." Petropoli, 1771 - 1779; in four tomes, or
six volumes, in 4to. But the fashion has not enhanced the price of these
raw materials.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[2](daf05034.htm#fr_877) Hist. vol. iv. p. 11.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[3](daf05034.htm#fr_878) Theophanes, p. 296 -
299. Anastasius, p. 113. Nicephorus, C. P. p. 22, 23. Theophanes places
the old Bulgaria on the banks of the Atell or Volga; but he deprives
himself of all geographical credit by discharging that river into the
Euxine Sea.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[4](daf05034.htm#fr_879) Paul. Diacon. de
Gestis Langobard. l. v. c. 29, p. 881, 882. The apparent difference
between the Lombard historian and the above- mentioned Greeks, is easily
reconciled by Camillo Pellegrino (de Ducatu Beneventano, dissert. vii.
in the Scriptores Rerum Ital. tom. v. p. 186, 187) and Beretti,
(Chorograph. Italiae Medii Aevi, p. 273, &c. This Bulgarian colony was
planted in a vacant district of Samnium, and learned the Latin, without
forgetting their native language.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[5](daf05034.htm#fr_880) These provinces of the
Greek idiom and empire are assigned to the Bulgarian kingdom in the
dispute of ecclesiastical jurisdiction between the patriarchs of Rome
and Constantinople, (Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A.D. 869, No. 75.)

<span id="fn_881"></span>[6](daf05034.htm#fr_881) The situation and
royalty of Lychnidus, or Achrida, are clearly expressed in Cedrenus, (p.
713.) The removal of an archbishop or patriarch from Justinianea prima
to Lychnidus, and at length to Ternovo, has produced some perplexity in
the ideas or language of the Greeks, (Nicephorus Gregoras, l. ii. c. 2,
p. 14, 15. Thomassin, Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. i. l. i. c. 19, 23;)
and a Frenchman (D'Anville) is more accurately skilled in the geography
of their own country, (Hist. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxxi.)

<span id="fn_882"></span>[7](daf05034.htm#fr_882) Chalcocondyles, a
competent judge, affirms the identity of the language of the Dalmatians,
Bosnians, Servians, Bulgarians, Poles, (de Rebus Turcicis, l. x. p.
283,) and elsewhere of the Bohemians, (l. ii. p. 38.) The same author
has marked the separate idiom of the Hungarians. Note: The Slavonian
languages are no doubt Indo-European, though an original branch of that
great family, comprehending the various dialects named by Gibbon and
others. Shafarik, t. 33. - M. 1845.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[8](daf05034.htm#fr_883) See the work of John
Christopher de Jordan, de Originibus Sclavicis, Vindobonae, 1745, in
four parts, or two volumes in folio. His collections and researches are
useful to elucidate the antiquities of Bohemia and the adjacent
countries; but his plan is narrow, his style barbarous, his criticism
shallow, and the Aulic counsellor is not free from the prejudices of a
Bohemian.

Note: We have at length a profound and satisfactory work on the
Slavonian races. Shafarik, Slawische Alterthumer. B. 2, Leipzig, 1843. -
M. 1845.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[9](daf05034.htm#fr_884) Jordan subscribes to
the well-known and probable derivation from Slava, laus, gloria, a word
of familiar use in the different dialects and parts of speech, and which
forms the termination of the most illustrious names, (de Originibus
Sclavicis, pars. i. p. 40, pars. iv. p. 101, 102)

<span id="fn_885"></span>[10](daf05034.htm#fr_885) This conversion of a
national into an appellative name appears to have arisen in the viiith
century, in the Oriental France, where the princes and bishops were rich
in Sclavonian captives, not of the Bohemian, (exclaims Jordan,) but of
Sorabian race. From thence the word was extended to the general use, to
the modern languages, and even to the style of the last Byzantines, (see
the Greek and Latin Glossaries and Ducange.) The confusion of the
Servians with the Latin Servi, was still more fortunate and familiar,
(Constant. Porphyr. de Administrando, Imperio, c. 32, p. 99.)

<span id="fn_886"></span>[11](daf05034.htm#fr_886) The emperor
Constantine Porphyrogenitus, most accurate for his own times, most
fabulous for preceding ages, describes the Sclavonians of Dalmatia, (c.
29 - 36.)

<span id="fn_887"></span>[12](daf05034.htm#fr_887) See the anonymous
Chronicle of the xith century, ascribed to John Sagorninus, (p. 94 -
102,) and that composed in the xivth by the Doge Andrew Dandolo,
(Script. Rerum. Ital. tom. xii. p. 227 - 230,) the two oldest monuments
of the history of Venice.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[13](daf05034.htm#fr_888) The first kingdom of
the Bulgarians may be found, under the proper dates, in the Annals of
Cedrenus and Zonaras. The Byzantine materials are collected by Stritter,
(Memoriae Populorum, tom. ii. pars ii. p. 441 - 647;) and the series of
their kings is disposed and settled by Ducange, (Fam. Byzant. p. 305 -
318.)

<span id="fn_889"></span>[14](daf05034.htm#fr_889) Simeonem semi-Graecum
esse aiebant, eo quod a pueritia Byzantii Demosthenis rhetoricam et
Aristotelis syllogismos didicerat, (Liutprand, l. iii. c. 8.) He says in
another place, Simeon, fortis bella tor, Bulgariae praeerat;
Christianus, sed vicinis Graecis valde inimicus, (l. i. c. 2.)

<span id="fn_890"></span>[15](daf05034.htm#fr_890) - Rigidum fera
dextera cornu Dum tenet, infregit, truncaque a fronte revellit. Ovid
(Metamorph. ix. 1 - 100) has boldly painted the combat of the river god
and the hero; the native and the stranger.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[16](daf05034.htm#fr_891) The ambassador of
Otho was provoked by the Greek excuses, cum Christophori filiam Petrus
Bulgarorum Vasileus conjugem duceret, Symphona, id est consonantia
scripto juramento firmata sunt, ut omnium gentium Apostolis, id est
nunciis, penes nos Bulgarorum Apostoli praeponantur, honorentur,
diligantur, (Liutprand in Legatione, p. 482.) See the Ceremoniale of
Constantine Porphyrogenitus, tom. i. p. 82, tom. ii. p. 429, 430, 434,
435, 443, 444, 446, 447, with the annotations of Reiske.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[17](daf05034.htm#fr_892) A bishop of
Wurtzburgh submitted his opinion to a reverend abbot; but he more
gravely decided, that Gog and Magog were the spiritual persecutors of
the church; since Gog signifies the root, the pride of the Heresiarchs,
and Magog what comes from the root, the propagation of their sects. Yet
these men once commanded the respect of mankind, (Fleury, Hist. Eccles.
tom. xi. p. 594, &c.)

<span id="fn_893"></span>[18](daf05034.htm#fr_893) The two national
authors, from whom I have derived the mos assistance, are George Pray
(Dissertationes and Annales veterum Hun garorum, &c., Vindobonae, 1775,
in folio) and Stephen Katona, (Hist. Critica Ducum et Regum Hungariae
Stirpis Arpadianae, Paestini, 1778 - 1781, 5 vols. in octavo.) The first
embraces a large and often conjectural space; the latter, by his
learning, judgment, and perspicuity, deserves the name of a critical
historian.

Note: Compare Engel Geschichte des Ungrischen Reichs und seiner Neben
lander, Halle, 1797, and Mailath, Geschichte der Magyaren, Wien, 1828.
In an appendix to the latter work will be found a brief abstract of the
speculations (for it is difficult to consider them more) which have been
advanced by the learned, on the origin of the Magyar and Hungarian
names. Compare vol. vi. p. 35, note. - M.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[19](daf05034.htm#fr_894) The author of this
Chronicle is styled the notary of King Bela. Katona has assigned him to
the xiith century, and defends his character against the hypercriticism
of Pray. This rude annalist must have transcribed some historical
records, since he could affirm with dignity, rejectis falsis fabulis
rusticorum, et garrulo cantu joculatorum. In the xvth century, these
fables were collected by Thurotzius, and embellished by the Italian
Bonfinius. See the Preliminary Discourse in the Hist. Critica Ducum, p.
7 - 33.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[20](daf05034.htm#fr_895) See Constantine de
Administrando Imperio, c. 3, 4, 13, 38 - 42, Katona has nicely fixed the
composition of this work to the years 949, 950, 951, (p. 4 - 7.) The
critical historian (p. 34 - 107) endeavors to prove the existence, and
to relate the actions, of a first duke Almus the father of Arpad, who is
tacitly rejected by Constantine.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[21](daf05034.htm#fr_896) Pray (Dissert. p. 37
- 39, &c.) produces and illustrates the original passages of the
Hungarian missionaries, Bonfinius and Aeneas Sylvius.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[\*\_0044](daf05034.htm#fr_897) In the deserts
to the south-east of Astrakhan have been found the ruins of a city named
Madchar, which proves the residence of the Hungarians or Magiar in those
regions. Precis de la Geog. Univ. par Malte Brun, vol. i. p. 353. - G.

This is contested by Klaproth in his Travels, c. xxi. Madschar, (he
states) in old Tartar, means "stone building." This was a Tartar city
mentioned by the Mahometan writers. - M.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[22](daf05034.htm#fr_898) Fischer in the
Quaestiones Petropolitanae, de Origine Ungrorum, and Pray, Dissertat. i.
ii. iii. &c., have drawn up several comparative tables of the Hungarian
with the Fennic dialects. The affinity is indeed striking, but the lists
are short; the words are purposely chosen; and I read in the learned
Bayer, (Comment. Academ. Petropol. tom. x. p. 374,) that although the
Hungarian has adopted many Fennic words, (innumeras voces,) it
essentially differs toto genio et natura.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[\*\_0045](daf05034.htm#fr_899) The connection
between the Magyar language and that of the Finns is now almost
generally admitted. Klaproth, Asia Polyglotta, p. 188, &c. Malte Bran,
tom. vi. p. 723, &c. - M.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[23](daf05034.htm#fr_900) In the religion of
Turfan, which is clearly and minutely described by the Chinese
Geographers, (Gaubil, Hist. du Grand Gengiscan, 13; De Guignes, Hist.
des Huns, tom. ii. p. 31, &c.)

<span id="fn_901"></span>[24](daf05034.htm#fr_901) Hist. Genealogique
des Tartars, par Abulghazi Bahadur Khan partie ii. p. 90 - 98.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[25](daf05034.htm#fr_902) In their journey to
Pekin, both Isbrand Ives (Harris's Collection of Voyages and Travels,
vol. ii. p. 920, 921) and Bell (Travels, vol. i p. 174) found the
Vogulitz in the neighborhood of Tobolsky. By the tortures of the
etymological art, Ugur and Vogul are reduced to the same name; the
circumjacent mountains really bear the appellation of Ugrian; and of all
the Fennic dialects, the Vogulian is the nearest to the Hungarian,
(Fischer, Dissert. i. p. 20 - 30. Pray. Dissert. ii. p. 31 - 34.)

<span id="fn_903"></span>[26](daf05034.htm#fr_903) The eight tribes of
the Fennic race are described in the curious work of M. Leveque, (Hist.
des Peuples soumis a la Domination de la Russie, tom. ii. p. 361 - 561.)

<span id="fn_904"></span>[27](daf05034.htm#fr_904) This picture of the
Hungarians and Bulgarians is chiefly drawn from the Tactics of Leo, p.
796 - 801, and the Latin Annals, which are alleged by Baronius, Pagi,
and Muratori, A.D. 889, &c.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[28](daf05034.htm#fr_905) Buffon, Hist.
Naturelle, tom. v. p. 6, in 12mo. Gustavus Adolphus attempted, without
success, to form a regiment of Laplanders. Grotius says of these arctic
tribes, arma arcus et pharetra, sed adversus feras, (Annal. l. iv. p.
236;) and attempts, after the manner of Tacitus, to varnish with
philosophy their brutal ignorance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV: The Bulgarians, The Hungarians And The Russians. Part
II.](daf05035)
