[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf05029) 
[Next](daf05031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIECA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 5*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire. Part III.

The most lofty titles, and the most humble postures, which devotion has
applied to the Supreme Being, have been prostituted by flattery and fear
to creatures of the same nature with ourselves. The mode of adoration,
 <span id="fr_765"></span>[49](#fn_765) of falling prostrate on the
ground, and kissing the feet of the emperor, was borrowed by Diocletian
from Persian servitude; but it was continued and aggravated till the
last age of the Greek monarchy. Excepting only on Sundays, when it was
waived, from a motive of religious pride, this humiliating reverence was
exacted from all who entered the royal presence, from the princes
invested with the diadem and purple, and from the ambassadors who
represented their independent sovereigns, the caliphs of Asia, Egypt, or
Spain, the kings of France and Italy, and the Latin emperors of ancient
Rome. In his transactions of business, Liutprand, bishop of Cremona,
 <span id="fr_766"></span>[50](#fn_766) asserted the free spirit of a
Frank and the dignity of his master Otho. Yet his sincerity cannot
disguise the abasement of his first audience. When he approached the
throne, the birds of the golden tree began to warble their notes, which
were accompanied by the roarings of the two lions of gold. With his two
companions Liutprand was compelled to bow and to fall prostrate; and
thrice to touch the ground with his forehead. He arose, but in the short
interval, the throne had been hoisted from the floor to the ceiling, the
Imperial figure appeared in new and more gorgeous apparel, and the
interview was concluded in haughty and majestic silence. In this honest
and curious narrative, the Bishop of Cremona represents the ceremonies
of the Byzantine court, which are still practised in the Sublime Porte,
and which were preserved in the last age by the dukes of Muscovy or
Russia. After a long journey by sea and land, from Venice to
Constantinople, the ambassador halted at the golden gate, till he was
conducted by the formal officers to the hospitable palace prepared for
his reception; but this palace was a prison, and his jealous keepers
prohibited all social intercourse either with strangers or natives. At
his first audience, he offered the gifts of his master, slaves, and
golden vases, and costly armor. The ostentatious payment of the officers
and troops displayed before his eyes the riches of the empire: he was
entertained at a royal banquet,  <span id="fr_767"></span>[51](#fn_767)
in which the ambassadors of the nations were marshalled by the esteem or
contempt of the Greeks: from his own table, the emperor, as the most
signal favor, sent the plates which he had tasted; and his favorites
were dismissed with a robe of honor.  <span
id="fr_768"></span>[52](#fn_768) In the morning and evening of each day,
his civil and military servants attended their duty in the palace; their
labors were repaid by the sight, perhaps by the smile, of their lord;
his commands were signified by a nod or a sign: but all earthly
greatness stood silent and submissive in his presence. In his regular or
extraordinary processions through the capital, he unveiled his person to
the public view: the rites of policy were connected with those of
religion, and his visits to the principal churches were regulated by the
festivals of the Greek calendar. On the eve of these processions, the
gracious or devout intention of the monarch was proclaimed by the
heralds. The streets were cleared and purified; the pavement was strewed
with flowers; the most precious furniture, the gold and silver plate,
and silken hangings, were displayed from the windows and balconies, and
a severe discipline restrained and silenced the tumult of the populace.
The march was opened by the military officers at the head of their
troops: they were followed in long order by the magistrates and
ministers of the civil government: the person of the emperor was guarded
by his eunuchs and domestics, and at the church door he was solemnly
received by the patriarch and his clergy. The task of applause was not
abandoned to the rude and spontaneous voices of the crowd. The most
convenient stations were occupied by the bands of the blue and green
factions of the circus; and their furious conflicts, which had shaken
the capital, were insensibly sunk to an emulation of servitude. From
either side they echoed in responsive melody the praises of the emperor;
their poets and musicians directed the choir, and long life  <span
id="fr_769"></span>[53](#fn_769) and victory were the burden of every
song. The same acclamations were performed at the audience, the banquet,
and the church; and as an evidence of boundless sway, they were repeated
in the Latin,  <span id="fr_770"></span>[54](#fn_770) Gothic, Persian,
French, and even English language,  <span
id="fr_771"></span>[55](#fn_771) by the mercenaries who sustained the
real or fictitious character of those nations. By the pen of Constantine
Porphyrogenitus, this science of form and flattery has been reduced into
a pompous and trifling volume,  <span id="fr_772"></span>[56](#fn_772)
which the vanity of succeeding times might enrich with an ample
supplement. Yet the calmer reflection of a prince would surely suggest
that the same acclamations were applied to every character and every
reign: and if he had risen from a private rank, he might remember, that
his own voice had been the loudest and most eager in applause, at the
very moment when he envied the fortune, or conspired against the life,
of his predecessor.  <span id="fr_773"></span>[57](#fn_773)

The princes of the North, of the nations, says Constantine, without
faith or fame, were ambitious of mingling their blood with the blood of
the Caesars, by their marriage with a royal virgin, or by the nuptials
of their daughters with a Roman prince.  <span
id="fr_774"></span>[58](#fn_774) The aged monarch, in his instructions
to his son, reveals the secret maxims of policy and pride; and suggests
the most decent reasons for refusing these insolent and unreasonable
demands. Every animal, says the discreet emperor, is prompted by the
distinction of language, religion, and manners. A just regard to the
purity of descent preserves the harmony of public and private life; but
the mixture of foreign blood is the fruitful source of disorder and
discord. Such had ever been the opinion and practice of the sage Romans:
their jurisprudence proscribed the marriage of a citizen and a stranger:
in the days of freedom and virtue, a senator would have scorned to match
his daughter with a king: the glory of Mark Antony was sullied by an
Egyptian wife:  <span id="fr_775"></span>[59](#fn_775) and the emperor
Titus was compelled, by popular censure, to dismiss with reluctance the
reluctant Berenice.  <span id="fr_776"></span>[60](#fn_776) This
perpetual interdict was ratified by the fabulous sanction of the great
Constantine. The ambassadors of the nations, more especially of the
unbelieving nations, were solemnly admonished, that such strange
alliances had been condemned by the founder of the church and city. The
irrevocable law was inscribed on the altar of St. Sophia; and the
impious prince who should stain the majesty of the purple was excluded
from the civil and ecclesiastical communion of the Romans. If the
ambassadors were instructed by any false brethren in the Byzantine
history, they might produce three memorable examples of the violation of
this imaginary law: the marriage of Leo, or rather of his father
Constantine the Fourth, with the daughter of the king of the Chozars,
the nuptials of the granddaughter of Romanus with a Bulgarian prince,
and the union of Bertha of France or Italy with young Romanus, the son
of Constantine Porphyrogenitus himself. To these objections three
answers were prepared, which solved the difficulty and established the
law. I. The deed and the guilt of Constantine Copronymus were
acknowledged. The Isaurian heretic, who sullied the baptismal font, and
declared war against the holy images, had indeed embraced a Barbarian
wife. By this impious alliance he accomplished the measure of his
crimes, and was devoted to the just censure of the church and of
posterity. II. Romanus could not be alleged as a legitimate emperor; he
was a plebeian usurper, ignorant of the laws, and regardless of the
honor, of the monarchy. His son Christopher, the father of the bride,
was the third in rank in the college of princes, at once the subject and
the accomplice of a rebellious parent. The Bulgarians were sincere and
devout Christians; and the safety of the empire, with the redemption of
many thousand captives, depended on this preposterous alliance. Yet no
consideration could dispense from the law of Constantine: the clergy,
the senate, and the people, disapproved the conduct of Romanus; and he
was reproached, both in his life and death, as the author of the public
disgrace. III. For the marriage of his own son with the daughter of
Hugo, king of Italy, a more honorable defence is contrived by the wise
Porphyrogenitus. Constantine, the great and holy, esteemed the fidelity
and valor of the Franks;  <span id="fr_777"></span>[61](#fn_777) and his
prophetic spirit beheld the vision of their future greatness. They alone
were excepted from the general prohibition: Hugo, king of France, was
the lineal descendant of Charlemagne;  <span
id="fr_778"></span>[62](#fn_778) and his daughter Bertha inherited the
prerogatives of her family and nation. The voice of truth and malice
insensibly betrayed the fraud or error of the Imperial court. The
patrimonial estate of Hugo was reduced from the monarchy of France to
the simple county of Arles; though it was not denied, that, in the
confusion of the times, he had usurped the sovereignty of Provence, and
invaded the kingdom of Italy. His father was a private noble; and if
Bertha derived her female descent from the Carlovingian line, every step
was polluted with illegitimacy or vice. The grandmother of Hugo was the
famous Valdrada, the concubine, rather than the wife, of the second
Lothair; whose adultery, divorce, and second nuptials, had provoked
against him the thunders of the Vatican. His mother, as she was styled,
the great Bertha, was successively the wife of the count of Arles and of
the marquis of Tuscany: France and Italy were scandalized by her
gallantries; and, till the age of threescore, her lovers, of every
degree, were the zealous servants of her ambition. The example of
maternal incontinence was copied by the king of Italy; and the three
favorite concubines of Hugo were decorated with the classic names of
Venus, Juno, and Semele.  <span id="fr_779"></span>[63](#fn_779) The
daughter of Venus was granted to the solicitations of the Byzantine
court: her name of Bertha was changed to that of Eudoxia; and she was
wedded, or rather betrothed, to young Romanus, the future heir of the
empire of the East. The consummation of this foreign alliance was
suspended by the tender age of the two parties; and, at the end of five
years, the union was dissolved by the death of the virgin spouse. The
second wife of the emperor Romanus was a maiden of plebeian, but of
Roman, birth; and their two daughters, Theophano and Anne, were given in
marriage to the princes of the earth. The eldest was bestowed, as the
pledge of peace, on the eldest son of the great Otho, who had solicited
this alliance with arms and embassies. It might legally be questioned
how far a Saxon was entitled to the privilege of the French nation; but
every scruple was silenced by the fame and piety of a hero who had
restored the empire of the West. After the death of her father-in-law
and husband, Theophano governed Rome, Italy, and Germany, during the
minority of her son, the third Otho; and the Latins have praised the
virtues of an empress, who sacrificed to a superior duty the remembrance
of her country.  <span id="fr_780"></span>[64](#fn_780) In the nuptials
of her sister Anne, every prejudice was lost, and every consideration of
dignity was superseded, by the stronger argument of necessity and fear.
A Pagan of the North, Wolodomir, great prince of Russia, aspired to a
daughter of the Roman purple; and his claim was enforced by the threats
of war, the promise of conversion, and the offer of a powerful succor
against a domestic rebel. A victim of her religion and country, the
Grecian princess was torn from the palace of her fathers, and condemned
to a savage reign, and a hopeless exile on the banks of the Borysthenes,
or in the neighborhood of the Polar circle.  <span
id="fr_781"></span>[65](#fn_781) Yet the marriage of Anne was fortunate
and fruitful: the daughter of her grandson Joroslaus was recommended by
her Imperial descent; and the king of France, Henry I., sought a wife on
the last borders of Europe and Christendom.  <span
id="fr_782"></span>[66](#fn_782)

In the Byzantine palace, the emperor was the first slave of the
ceremonies which he imposed, of the rigid forms which regulated each
word and gesture, besieged him in the palace, and violated the leisure
of his rural solitude. But the lives and fortunes of millions hung on
his arbitrary will; and the firmest minds, superior to the allurements
of pomp and luxury, may be seduced by the more active pleasure of
commanding their equals. The legislative and executive powers were
centred in the person of the monarch, and the last remains of the
authority of the senate were finally eradicated by Leo the philosopher.
 <span id="fr_783"></span>[67](#fn_783) A lethargy of servitude had
benumbed the minds of the Greeks: in the wildest tumults of rebellion
they never aspired to the idea of a free constitution; and the private
character of the prince was the only source and measure of their public
happiness. Superstition rivetted their chains; in the church of St.
Sophia he was solemnly crowned by the patriarch; at the foot of the
altar, they pledged their passive and unconditional obedience to his
government and family. On his side he engaged to abstain as much as
possible from the capital punishments of death and mutilation; his
orthodox creed was subscribed with his own hand, and he promised to obey
the decrees of the seven synods, and the canons of the holy church.
 <span id="fr_784"></span>[68](#fn_784) But the assurance of mercy was
loose and indefinite: he swore, not to his people, but to an invisible
judge; and except in the inexpiable guilt of heresy, the ministers of
heaven were always prepared to preach the indefeasible right, and to
absolve the venial transgressions, of their sovereign. The Greek
ecclesiastics were themselves the subjects of the civil magistrate: at
the nod of a tyrant, the bishops were created, or transferred, or
deposed, or punished with an ignominious death: whatever might be their
wealth or influence, they could never succeed like the Latin clergy in
the establishment of an independent republic; and the patriarch of
Constantinople condemned, what he secretly envied, the temporal
greatness of his Roman brother. Yet the exercise of boundless despotism
is happily checked by the laws of nature and necessity. In proportion to
his wisdom and virtue, the master of an empire is confined to the path
of his sacred and laborious duty. In proportion to his vice and folly,
he drops the sceptre too weighty for his hands; and the motions of the
royal image are ruled by the imperceptible thread of some minister or
favorite, who undertakes for his private interest to exercise the task
of the public oppression. In some fatal moment, the most absolute
monarch may dread the reason or the caprice of a nation of slaves; and
experience has proved, that whatever is gained in the extent, is lost in
the safety and solidity, of regal power.

Whatever titles a despot may assume, whatever claims he may assert, it
is on the sword that he must ultimately depend to guard him against his
foreign and domestic enemies. From the age of Charlemagne to that of the
Crusades, the world (for I overlook the remote monarchy of China) was
occupied and disputed by the three great empires or nations of the
Greeks, the Saracens, and the Franks. Their military strength may be
ascertained by a comparison of their courage, their arts and riches, and
their obedience to a supreme head, who might call into action all the
energies of the state. The Greeks, far inferior to their rivals in the
first, were superior to the Franks, and at least equal to the Saracens,
in the second and third of these warlike qualifications.

The wealth of the Greeks enabled them to purchase the service of the
poorer nations, and to maintain a naval power for the protection of
their coasts and the annoyance of their enemies.  <span
id="fr_785"></span>[69](#fn_785) A commerce of mutual benefit exchanged
the gold of Constantinople for the blood of Sclavonians and Turks, the
Bulgarians and Russians: their valor contributed to the victories of
Nicephorus and Zimisces; and if a hostile people pressed too closely on
the frontier, they were recalled to the defence of their country, and
the desire of peace, by the well-managed attack of a more distant tribe.
 <span id="fr_786"></span>[70](#fn_786) The command of the
Mediterranean, from the mouth of the Tanais to the columns of Hercules,
was always claimed, and often possessed, by the successors of
Constantine. Their capital was filled with naval stores and dexterous
artificers: the situation of Greece and Asia, the long coasts, deep
gulfs, and numerous islands, accustomed their subjects to the exercise
of navigation; and the trade of Venice and Amalfi supplied a nursery of
seamen to the Imperial fleet.  <span id="fr_787"></span>[71](#fn_787)
Since the time of the Peloponnesian and Punic wars, the sphere of action
had not been enlarged; and the science of naval architecture appears to
have declined. The art of constructing those stupendous machines which
displayed three, or six, or ten, ranges of oars, rising above, or
falling behind, each other, was unknown to the ship-builders of
Constantinople, as well as to the mechanicians of modern days.  <span
id="fr_788"></span>[72](#fn_788) The Dromones,  <span
id="fr_789"></span>[73](#fn_789) or light galleys of the Byzantine
empire, were content with two tier of oars; each tier was composed of
five-and-twenty benches; and two rowers were seated on each bench, who
plied their oars on either side of the vessel. To these we must add the
captain or centurion, who, in time of action, stood erect with his
armor-bearer on the poop, two steersmen at the helm, and two officers at
the prow, the one to manage the anchor, the other to point and play
against the enemy the tube of liquid fire. The whole crew, as in the
infancy of the art, performed the double service of mariners and
soldiers; they were provided with defensive and offensive arms, with
bows and arrows, which they used from the upper deck, with long pikes,
which they pushed through the portholes of the lower tier. Sometimes,
indeed, the ships of war were of a larger and more solid construction;
and the labors of combat and navigation were more regularly divided
between seventy soldiers and two hundred and thirty mariners. But for
the most part they were of the light and manageable size; and as the
Cape of Malea in Peloponnesus was still clothed with its ancient
terrors, an Imperial fleet was transported five miles over land across
the Isthmus of Corinth.  <span id="fr_790"></span>[74](#fn_790) The
principles of maritime tactics had not undergone any change since the
time of Thucydides: a squadron of galleys still advanced in a crescent,
charged to the front, and strove to impel their sharp beaks against the
feeble sides of their antagonists. A machine for casting stones and
darts was built of strong timbers, in the midst of the deck; and the
operation of boarding was effected by a crane that hoisted baskets of
armed men. The language of signals, so clear and copious in the naval
grammar of the moderns, was imperfectly expressed by the various
positions and colors of a commanding flag. In the darkness of the night,
the same orders to chase, to attack, to halt, to retreat, to break, to
form, were conveyed by the lights of the leading galley. By land, the
fire-signals were repeated from one mountain to another; a chain of
eight stations commanded a space of five hundred miles; and
Constantinople in a few hours was apprised of the hostile motions of the
Saracens of Tarsus.  <span id="fr_791"></span>[75](#fn_791) Some
estimate may be formed of the power of the Greek emperors, by the
curious and minute detail of the armament which was prepared for the
reduction of Crete. A fleet of one hundred and twelve galleys, and
seventy-five vessels of the Pamphylian style, was equipped in the
capital, the islands of the Aegean Sea, and the seaports of Asia,
Macedonia, and Greece. It carried thirty-four thousand mariners, seven
thousand three hundred and forty soldiers, seven hundred Russians, and
five thousand and eighty-seven Mardaites, whose fathers had been
transplanted from the mountains of Libanus. Their pay, most probably of
a month, was computed at thirty-four centenaries of gold, about one
hundred and thirty-six thousand pounds sterling. Our fancy is bewildered
by the endless recapitulation of arms and engines, of clothes and linen,
of bread for the men and forage for the horses, and of stores and
utensils of every description, inadequate to the conquest of a petty
island, but amply sufficient for the establishment of a flourishing
colony.  <span id="fr_792"></span>[76](#fn_792)

The invention of the Greek fire did not, like that of gun powder,
produce a total revolution in the art of war. To these liquid
combustibles the city and empire of Constantine owed their deliverance;
and they were employed in sieges and sea-fights with terrible effect.
But they were either less improved, or less susceptible of improvement:
the engines of antiquity, the catapultae, balistae, and battering-rams,
were still of most frequent and powerful use in the attack and defence
of fortifications; nor was the decision of battles reduced to the quick
and heavy fire of a line of infantry, whom it were fruitless to protect
with armor against a similar fire of their enemies. Steel and iron were
still the common instruments of destruction and safety; and the helmets,
cuirasses, and shields, of the tenth century did not, either in form or
substance, essentially differ from those which had covered the
companions of Alexander or Achilles.  <span
id="fr_793"></span>[77](#fn_793) But instead of accustoming the modern
Greeks, like the legionaries of old, to the constant and easy use of
this salutary weight, their armor was laid aside in light chariots,
which followed the march, till, on the approach of an enemy, they
resumed with haste and reluctance the unusual encumbrance. Their
offensive weapons consisted of swords, battle-axes, and spears; but the
Macedonian pike was shortened a fourth of its length, and reduced to the
more convenient measure of twelve cubits or feet. The sharpness of the
Scythian and Arabian arrows had been severely felt; and the emperors
lament the decay of archery as a cause of the public misfortunes, and
recommend, as an advice and a command, that the military youth, till the
age of forty, should assiduously practise the exercise of the bow.
 <span id="fr_794"></span>[78](#fn_794) The bands, or regiments, were
usually three hundred strong; and, as a medium between the extremes of
four and sixteen, the foot soldiers of Leo and Constantine were formed
eight deep; but the cavalry charged in four ranks, from the reasonable
consideration, that the weight of the front could not be increased by
any pressure of the hindmost horses. If the ranks of the infantry or
cavalry were sometimes doubled, this cautious array betrayed a secret
distrust of the courage of the troops, whose numbers might swell the
appearance of the line, but of whom only a chosen band would dare to
encounter the spears and swords of the Barbarians. The order of battle
must have varied according to the ground, the object, and the adversary;
but their ordinary disposition, in two lines and a reserve, presented a
succession of hopes and resources most agreeable to the temper as well
as the judgment of the Greeks.  <span id="fr_795"></span>[79](#fn_795)
In case of a repulse, the first line fell back into the intervals of the
second; and the reserve, breaking into two divisions, wheeled round the
flanks to improve the victory or cover the retreat. Whatever authority
could enact was accomplished, at least in theory, by the camps and
marches, the exercises and evolutions, the edicts and books, of the
Byzantine monarch.  <span id="fr_796"></span>[80](#fn_796) Whatever art
could produce from the forge, the loom, or the laboratory, was
abundantly supplied by the riches of the prince, and the industry of his
numerous workmen. But neither authority nor art could frame the most
important machine, the soldier himself; and if the ceremonies of
Constantine always suppose the safe and triumphal return of the emperor,
 <span id="fr_797"></span>[81](#fn_797) his tactics seldom soar above
the means of escaping a defeat, and procrastinating the war.  <span
id="fr_798"></span>[82](#fn_798) Notwithstanding some transient success,
the Greeks were sunk in their own esteem and that of their neighbors. A
cold hand and a loquacious tongue was the vulgar description of the
nation: the author of the tactics was besieged in his capital; and the
last of the Barbarians, who trembled at the name of the Saracens, or
Franks, could proudly exhibit the medals of gold and silver which they
had extorted from the feeble sovereign of Constantinople. What spirit
their government and character denied, might have been inspired in some
degree by the influence of religion; but the religion of the Greeks
could only teach them to suffer and to yield. The emperor Nicephorus,
who restored for a moment the discipline and glory of the Roman name,
was desirous of bestowing the honors of martyrdom on the Christians who
lost their lives in a holy war against the infidels. But this political
law was defeated by the opposition of the patriarch, the bishops, and
the principal senators; and they strenuously urged the canons of St.
Basil, that all who were polluted by the bloody trade of a soldier
should be separated, during three years, from the communion of the
faithful.  <span id="fr_799"></span>[83](#fn_799)

These scruples of the Greeks have been compared with the tears of the
primitive Moslems when they were held back from battle; and this
contrast of base superstition and high-spirited enthusiasm, unfolds to a
philosophic eye the history of the rival nations. The subjects of the
last caliphs  <span id="fr_800"></span>[84](#fn_800) had undoubtedly
degenerated from the zeal and faith of the companions of the prophet.
Yet their martial creed still represented the Deity as the author of
war:  <span id="fr_801"></span>[85](#fn_801) the vital though latent
spark of fanaticism still glowed in the heart of their religion, and
among the Saracens, who dwelt on the Christian borders, it was
frequently rekindled to a lively and active flame. Their regular force
was formed of the valiant slaves who had been educated to guard the
person and accompany the standard of their lord: but the Mussulman
people of Syria and Cilicia, of Africa and Spain, was awakened by the
trumpet which proclaimed a holy war against the infidels. The rich were
ambitious of death or victory in the cause of God; the poor were allured
by the hopes of plunder; and the old, the infirm, and the women, assumed
their share of meritorious service by sending their substitutes, with
arms and horses, into the field. These offensive and defensive arms were
similar in strength and temper to those of the Romans, whom they far
excelled in the management of the horse and the bow: the massy silver of
their belts, their bridles, and their swords, displayed the magnificence
of a prosperous nation; and except some black archers of the South, the
Arabs disdained the naked bravery of their ancestors. Instead of wagons,
they were attended by a long train of camels, mules, and asses: the
multitude of these animals, whom they bedecked with flags and streamers,
appeared to swell the pomp and magnitude of their host; and the horses
of the enemy were often disordered by the uncouth figure and odious
smell of the camels of the East. Invincible by their patience of thirst
and heat, their spirits were frozen by a winter's cold, and the
consciousness of their propensity to sleep exacted the most rigorous
precautions against the surprises of the night. Their order of battle
was a long square of two deep and solid lines; the first of archers, the
second of cavalry. In their engagements by sea and land, they sustained
with patient firmness the fury of the attack, and seldom advanced to the
charge till they could discern and oppress the lassitude of their foes.
But if they were repulsed and broken, they knew not how to rally or
renew the combat; and their dismay was heightened by the superstitious
prejudice, that God had declared himself on the side of their enemies.
The decline and fall of the caliphs countenanced this fearful opinion;
nor were there wanting, among the Mahometans and Christians, some
obscure prophecies  <span id="fr_802"></span>[86](#fn_802) which
prognosticated their alternate defeats. The unity of the Arabian empire
was dissolved, but the independent fragments were equal to populous and
powerful kingdoms; and in their naval and military armaments, an emir of
Aleppo or Tunis might command no despicable fund of skill, and industry,
and treasure. In their transactions of peace and war with the Saracens,
the princes of Constantinople too often felt that these Barbarians had
nothing barbarous in their discipline; and that if they were destitute
of original genius, they had been endowed with a quick spirit of
curiosity and imitation. The model was indeed more perfect than the
copy; their ships, and engines, and fortifications, were of a less
skilful construction; and they confess, without shame, that the same God
who has given a tongue to the Arabians, had more nicely fashioned the
hands of the Chinese, and the heads of the Greeks.  <span
id="fr_803"></span>[87](#fn_803)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_765"></span>[49](daf05030.htm#fr_765) The respectful
salutation of carrying the hand to the mouth, ad os, is the root of the
Latin word adoro, adorare. See our learned Selden, (vol. iii. p. 143 -
145, 942,) in his Titles of Honor. It seems, from the 1st book of
Herodotus, to be of Persian origin.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[50](daf05030.htm#fr_766) The two embassies of
Liutprand to Constantinople, all that he saw or suffered in the Greek
capital, are pleasantly described by himself (Hist. l. vi. c. 1 - 4, p.
469 - 471. Legatio ad Nicephorum Phocam, p. 479 - 489.)

<span id="fn_767"></span>[51](daf05030.htm#fr_767) Among the amusements
of the feast, a boy balanced, on his forehead, a pike, or pole,
twenty-four feet long, with a cross bar of two cubits a little below the
top. Two boys, naked, though cinctured, (campestrati,) together, and
singly, climbed, stood, played, descended, &c., ita me stupidum
reddidit: utrum mirabilius nescio, (p. 470.) At another repast a homily
of Chrysostom on the Acts of the Apostles was read elata voce non
Latine, (p. 483.)

<span id="fn_768"></span>[52](daf05030.htm#fr_768) Gala is not
improbably derived from Cala, or Caloat, in Arabic a robe of honor,
(Reiske, Not. in Ceremon. p. 84.)

<span id="fn_769"></span>[53](daf05030.htm#fr_769) It is explained,
(Codin, c. 7. Ducange, Gloss. Graec. tom. i. p. 1199.)

<span id="fn_770"></span>[54](daf05030.htm#fr_770) (Ceremon. c. 75, p.
215.) The want of the Latin 'V' obliged the Greeks to employ their
'beta'; nor do they regard quantity. Till he recollected the true
language, these strange sentences might puzzle a professor.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[55](daf05030.htm#fr_771) (Codin.p. 90.) I wish
he had preserved the words, however corrupt, of their English
acclamation.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[56](daf05030.htm#fr_772) For all these
ceremonies, see the professed work of Constantine Porphyrogenitus with
the notes, or rather dissertations, of his German editors, Leich and
Reiske. For the rank of standing courtiers, p. 80, not. 23, 62; for the
adoration, except on Sundays, p. 95, 240, not. 131; the processions, p.
2, &c., not. p. 3, &c.; the acclamations passim not. 25 &c.; the
factions and Hippodrome, p. 177 - 214, not. 9, 93, &c.; the Gothic
games, p. 221, not. 111; vintage, p. 217, not 109: much more information
is scattered over the work.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[57](daf05030.htm#fr_773) Et privato Othoni et
nuper eadem dicenti nota adulatio, (Tacit. Hist. 1,85.)

<span id="fn_774"></span>[58](daf05030.htm#fr_774) The xiiith chapter,
de Administratione Imperii, may be explained and rectified by the
Familiae Byzantinae of Ducange.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[59](daf05030.htm#fr_775) Sequiturque nefas
Aegyptia conjux, (Virgil, Aeneid, viii. 688.) Yet this Egyptian wife was
the daughter of a long line of kings. Quid te mutavit (says Antony in a
private letter to Augustus) an quod reginam ineo? Uxor mea est, (Sueton.
in August. c. 69.) Yet I much question (for I cannot stay to inquire)
whether the triumvir ever dared to celebrate his marriage either with
Roman or Egyptian rites.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[60](daf05030.htm#fr_776) Berenicem invitus
invitam dimisit, (Suetonius in Tito, c. 7.) Have I observed elsewhere,
that this Jewish beauty was at this time above fifty years of age? The
judicious Racine has most discreetly suppressed both her age and her
country.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[61](daf05030.htm#fr_777) Constantine was made
to praise the the Franks, with whom he claimed a private and public
alliance. The French writers (Isaac Casaubon in Dedicat. Polybii) are
highly delighted with these compliments.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[62](daf05030.htm#fr_778) Constantine
Porphyrogenitus (de Administrat. Imp. c. 36) exhibits a pedigree and
life of the illustrious King Hugo. A more correct idea may be formed
from the Criticism of Pagi, the Annals of Muratori, and the Abridgment
of St. Marc, A.D. 925 - 946.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[63](daf05030.htm#fr_779) After the mention of
the three goddesses, Luitprand very naturally adds, et quoniam non rex
solus iis abutebatur, earum nati ex incertis patribus originera ducunt,
(Hist. l. iv. c. 6: ) for the marriage of the younger Bertha, see Hist.
l. v. c. 5; for the incontinence of the elder, dulcis exercipio
Hymenaei, l. ii. c. 15; for the virtues and vices of Hugo, l. iii. c. 5.
Yet it must not be forgot, that the bishop of Cremona was a lover of
scandal.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[64](daf05030.htm#fr_780) Licet illa Imperatrix
Graeca sibi et aliis fuisset satis utilis, et optima, &c., is the
preamble of an inimical writer, apud Pagi, tom. iv. A.D. 989, No. 3. Her
marriage and principal actions may be found in Muratori, Pagi, and St.
Marc, under the proper years.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[65](daf05030.htm#fr_781) Cedrenus, tom. ii. p.
699. Zonaras, tom. i. p. 221. Elmacin, Hist. Saracenica, l. iii. c. 6.
Nestor apud Levesque, tom. ii. p. 112 Pagi, Critica, A.D. 987, No. 6: a
singular concourse! Wolodomir and Anne are ranked among the saints of
the Russian church. Yet we know his vices, and are ignorant of her
virtues.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[66](daf05030.htm#fr_782) Henricus primus duxit
uxorem Scythicam, Russam, filiam regis Jeroslai. An embassy of bishops
was sent into Russia, and the father gratanter filiam cum multis donis
misit. This event happened in the year 1051. See the passages of the
original chronicles in Bouquet's Historians of France, (tom. xi. p. 29,
159, 161, 319, 384, 481.) Voltaire might wonder at this alliance; but he
should not have owned his ignorance of the country, religion, &c., of
Jeroslaus - a name so conspicuous in the Russian annals.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[67](daf05030.htm#fr_783) A constitution of Leo
the Philosopher (lxxviii.) ne senatus consulta amplius fiant, speaks the
language of naked despotism.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[68](daf05030.htm#fr_784) Codinus (de Officiis,
c. xvii. p. 120, 121) gives an idea of this oath so strong to the
church, so weak to the people.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[69](daf05030.htm#fr_785) If we listen to the
threats of Nicephorus to the ambassador of Otho, Nec est in mari domino
tuo classium numerus. Navigantium fortitudo mihi soli inest, qui eum
classibus aggrediar, bello maritimas ejus civitates demoliar; et quae
fluminibus sunt vicina redigam in favillam. (Liutprand in Legat. ad
Nicephorum Phocam, in Muratori Scriptores Rerum Italicarum, tom. ii.
pars i. p. 481.) He observes in another place, qui caeteris praestant
Venetici sunt et Amalphitani.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[70](daf05030.htm#fr_786) Nec ipsa capiet eum
(the emperor Otho) in qua ortus est pauper et pellicea Saxonia: pecunia
qua pollemus omnes nationes super eum invitabimus: et quasi Keramicum
confringemus, (Liutprand in Legat. p. 487.) The two books, de
Administrando Imperio, perpetually inculcate the same policy.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[71](daf05030.htm#fr_787) The xixth chapter of
the Tactics of Leo, (Meurs. Opera, tom. vi. p. 825 - 848,) which is
given more correct from a manuscript of Gudius, by the laborious
Fabricius, (Bibliot. Graec. tom. vi. p. 372 - 379,) relates to the
Naumachia, or naval war.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[72](daf05030.htm#fr_788) Even of fifteen and
sixteen rows of oars, in the navy of Demetrius Poliorcetes. These were
for real use: the forty rows of Ptolemy Philadelphus were applied to a
floating palace, whose tonnage, according to Dr. Arbuthnot, (Tables of
Ancient Coins, &c., p. 231 - 236,) is compared as 4 1/2 to 1 with an
English 100 gun ship.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[73](daf05030.htm#fr_789) The Dromones of Leo,
&c., are so clearly described with two tier of oars, that I must censure
the version of Meursius and Fabricius, who pervert the sense by a blind
attachment to the classic appellation of Triremes. The Byzantine
historians are sometimes guilty of the same inaccuracy.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[74](daf05030.htm#fr_790) Constantin.
Porphyrogen. in Vit. Basil. c. lxi. p. 185. He calmly praises the
stratagem; but the sailing round Peloponnesus is described by his
terrified fancy as a circumnavigation of a thousand miles.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[75](daf05030.htm#fr_791) The continuator of
Theophanes (l. iv. p. 122, 123) names the successive stations, the
castle of Lulum near Tarsus, Mount Argaeus Isamus, Aegilus, the hill of
Mamas, Cyrisus, Mocilus, the hill of Auxentius, the sun-dial of the
Pharus of the great palace. He affirms that the news were transmitted in
an indivisible moment of time. Miserable amplification, which, by saying
too much, says nothing. How much more forcible and instructive would
have been the definition of three, or six, or twelve hours!

<span id="fn_792"></span>[76](daf05030.htm#fr_792) See the Ceremoniale
of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, l. ii. c. 44, p. 176 - 192. A critical
reader will discern some inconsistencies in different parts of this
account; but they are not more obscure or more stubborn than the
establishment and effectives, the present and fit for duty, the rank and
file and the private, of a modern return, which retain in proper hands
the knowledge of these profitable mysteries.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[77](daf05030.htm#fr_793) See the fifth, sixth,
and seventh chapters, and, in the Tactics of Leo, with the corresponding
passages in those of Constantine.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[78](daf05030.htm#fr_794) (Leo, Tactic. p. 581
Constantin. p 1216.) Yet such were not the maxims of the Greeks and
Romans, who despised the loose and distant practice of archery.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[79](daf05030.htm#fr_795) Compare the passages
of the Tactics, p. 669 and 721, and the xiith with the xviiith chapter.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[80](daf05030.htm#fr_796) In the preface to his
Tactics, Leo very freely deplores the loss of discipline and the
calamities of the times, and repeats, without scruple, (Proem. p. 537,)
the reproaches, nor does it appear that the same censures were less
deserved in the next generation by the disciples of Constantine.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[81](daf05030.htm#fr_797) See in the Ceremonial
(l. ii. c. 19, p. 353) the form of the emperor's trampling on the necks
of the captive Saracens, while the singers chanted, "Thou hast made my
enemies my footstool!" and the people shouted forty times the kyrie
eleison.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[82](daf05030.htm#fr_798) Leo observes (Tactic.
p. 668) that a fair open battle against any nation whatsoever: the words
are strong, and the remark is true: yet if such had been the opinion of
the old Romans, Leo had never reigned on the shores of the Thracian
Bosphorus.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[83](daf05030.htm#fr_799) Zonaras (tom. ii. l.
xvi. p. 202, 203) and Cedrenus, (Compend p. 668,) who relate the design
of Nicephorus, most unfortunately apply the epithet to the opposition of
the patriarch.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[84](daf05030.htm#fr_800) The xviith chapter of
the tactics of the different nations is the most historical and useful
of the whole collection of Leo. The manners and arms of the Saracens
(Tactic. p. 809 - 817, and a fragment from the Medicean Ms. in the
preface of the vith volume of Meursius) the Roman emperor was too
frequently called upon to study.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[85](daf05030.htm#fr_801) Leon. Tactic. p. 809.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[86](daf05030.htm#fr_802) Liutprand (p. 484,
485) relates and interprets the oracles of the Greeks and Saracens, in
which, after the fashion of prophecy, the past is clear and historical,
the future is dark, enigmatical, and erroneous. From this boundary of
light and shade an impartial critic may commonly determine the date of
the composition.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[87](daf05030.htm#fr_803) The sense of this
distinction is expressed by Abulpharagius (Dynast. p. 2, 62, 101;) but I
cannot recollect the passage in which it is conveyed by this lively
apothegm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire. Part IV.](daf05031)
