[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc103) 
[Next](motc105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 104. The Eastern Tribes

Besides the Iroquois and Shawano, the Cherokee remember also the
Delawares, Tuscarora, Catawba, and Cheraw as tribes to the east or north
with which they formerly had relations.

The Cherokee call the Delawares Anakwan'\`kï, in the singular
Akwan'\`kï, a derivative formed according to usual Cherokee phonetic
modification from Wapanaq'kï, "Easterners," the generic name by which
the Delawares and their nearest kindred call themselves.

In the most ancient tradition of the Delawares the Cherokee are called
Talega, Tallige, Tallige-wi, etc.\[1\] In later Delaware tradition they
are called Kïtu'hwa, and again we find the two tribes at war, for which
their neighbors are held responsible. According to the Delaware account,
the Iroquois, in one of their forays to the south, killed a Cherokee in
the woods and purposely left a Delaware war club near the body to make
it appear that the work had been done by men of that tribe. The Cherokee
found the body and the club, and naturally supposing that the murder had
been committed by the Delawares, they suddenly attacked the latter, the
result being a long and bloody war between the two tribes.\[2\] At this
time, i.e., about the end of the seventeenth century, it appears that a
part at least of the Cherokee lived on the waters of the Upper Ohio,
where the Delawares made continual inroads upon them, finally driving
them from the region and seizing it for themselves about the year
1708.\[3\] A century ago the Delawares used to tell bow their warriors
would sometimes mingle in disguise with the Cherokee at their night
dances until the opportunity Came to strike a sudden blow and be off
before their enemies recovered from the surprise.

Later there seems to have been peace until war was again brought on

\[1. Brinton, Lenape and Their Legends, p. 130 et passim, 1885;
Schoolcraft, Notes on Iroquois, pp. 147, 305 et passim, 1847;
Heckewelder, Indian Nations, pp. 47-50, ed. 1876.

2\. Heckewelder, op. cit., p. 54.

3\. Loskiel, History of the \[Moravian\] Mission, pp. 124-127; London,
1794.\]

*p. 379*

by the action of the Shawano, who had taken refuge with the Delawares,
after having been driven from their old home on Cumberland river by the
Cherokee. Feeling secure in their new alliance, the Shawano renewed
their raids upon the Cherokee, who retaliated by pursuing them into the
Delaware country, where they killed several Delawares by mistake. This
inflamed the latter people, already excited by the sight of Cherokee
scalps and prisoners brought back through their country by the Iroquois,
and another war was the result, which lasted until the Cherokee, tired
of fighting so many enemies, voluntarily made overtures for peace, in
1768, saluting the Delawares as Grandfather, an honorary title accorded
them by all the Algonquian tribes. The Delawares then reprimanded the
Shawano, as the cause of the trouble, and advised them to keep quiet,
which, as they were now left to fight their battles alone, they were
glad enough to do. At the same time the Cherokee made peace with the
Iroquois, and the long war with the northern tribes came to an end. The
friendly feeling thus established was emphasized in 1779, when the
Cherokee sent a message of condolence upon the death of the Delaware
chief White-eyes.\[1\]

The Tuscarora, formerly the ruling tribe of eastern North Carolina, are
still remembered under the name Ani'-Skälâ'lï, and are thus, mentioned
in the Feather dance of the Cherokee, in which some of the actors are
supposed to be visiting strangers from other tribes.

As the majority of the Tuscarora fled from Carolina to the Iroquois
country about 1713, in consequence of their disastrous war with the
whites, their memory has nearly faded from the recollection of the
southern Indians. From the scanty light which history throws upon their
mutual relations, the two tribes seem to have been almost constantly at
war with each other. When at one time the Cherokee, having already made
peace with some other of their neighbors, were urged by the whites to
make peace also with the Tuscarora, they refused, on the ground that, as
they could not live without war, it was better to let matters stand as
they were than to make peace with the Tuscarora and be obliged
immediately to look about for new enemies with whom to fight. For some
years before the outbreak of the Tuscarora war in 1711 the Cherokee had
ceased their inroads upon this tribe, and it was therefore supposed that
they were more busily engaged with some other people west of the
mountains, these being probably the Shawano, whom they drove out of
Tennessee about this time.\[2\] In the war of 1711-1713 the Cherokee
assisted the whites against the Tuscarora. In 1731 the Cherokee again
threatened to make war upon the remnant of that tribe still residing in
North Carolina and the colonial government was compelled to
interfere.\[3\]

\[1. Heckewelder, Indian Nations, pp. 88-89, 1876.

2\. See Haywood, Nat. and Aborig. Hist. of Tennessee, pp. 220, 224, 237,
1823.

3\. North Carolina Colonial Records, iii, pp. 153, 202, 345, 369, 393,
1886.\]

*p. 380*

The Cheraw or Sara, ranging at different periods from upper South
Carolina to the southern frontier of Virginia, are also remembered
tinder the name of Ani'-Suwa'lï, or Ani'-Suwa'la, which agrees with the
Spanish form Xuala of De Soto's chronicle, and Suala, or Sualy, of
Lederer. The Cherokee remember them as having lived east of the Blue
ridge, the trail to their country leading across the gap at the head of
Swannanoa river, east from Asheville. The name of the stream and gap is
a corruption of the Cherokee Suwa'lï-Nûñnâ'hï, "Suwa'li trail." Being a
very warlike tribe, they were finally so reduced by conflicts with the
colonial governments and the Iroquois that they were obliged to
incorporate with the Catawba, among whom they still maintained their
distinct language as late as 1743.\[1\]

The Catawba are known to the Cherokee as Ani'ta'gwa, singular Ata'gwa,
or Ta'gwa, the Cherokee attempt at the name by which they are most
commonly known. They were the immediate neighbors of the Cherokee on the
east and southeast, having their principal settlements on the river of
their name, just within the limits of South Carolina, and holding the
leading place among all the tribes east of the Cherokee country with the
exception of the Tuscarora. On the first settlement of South Carolina
there were estimated to be about 7,000 persons in the tribe, but their
decline was rapid, and by war and disease their number had been reduced
in 1775 to barely 500, including the incorporated remnants of the Cheraw
and several smaller tribes. There are now, perhaps, 100 still remaining
on a small reservation near the site of their ancient towns. Some local
names in the old Cherokee territory seem to indicate the former presence
of Catawba, although there is no tradition of any Catawba settlement
within those limits. Among such names may be mentioned Toccoa creek, in
northeastern Georgia, and Toccoa river, in north-central Georgia, both
names being derived from the Cherokee Tagwâ'hï, "Catawba place." An old
Cherokee personal name is Ta'gwädihï', "Catawba-killer."

The two tribes were hereditary enemies, and the feeling between them is
nearly as bitter to-day as it was a hundred years ago. Perhaps the only
case on record of their acting together was in the war of 1711-13, when
they cooperated with the colonists against the Tuscarora. The Cherokee,
according to the late Colonel Thomas, claim to have formerly occupied
all the country about the head of the Catawba river, to below the
present Morganton, until the game became scarce, when they retired to
the west of the Blue ridge, and afterward "loaned" the eastern territory
to the Catawba. This agrees pretty well with a Catawba tradition
recorded in Schoolcraft, according to which the Catawba--who are
incorrectly represented as comparatively recent immigrants from the
north--on arriving at Catawba river found

\[1. Mooney, Siouan Tribes of the East (bulletin of the Bureau of
Ethnology), pp. 56, 61, 1894.\]

*p. 381*

their progress disputed by the Cherokee, who claimed original ownership
of the country. A battle was fought, with incredible loss on both sides,
but with no decisive result, although the advantage was with the
Catawba, on account of their having guns, while their opponents had only
Indian weapons. Preparations were under way to renew the fight when the
Cherokee offered to recognize the river as the boundary, allowing the
Catawba to settle anywhere to the east. The overture was accepted and an
agreement was finally made by which the Catawba were to occupy the
country east of that river and the Cherokee the country west of Broad
river, with the region between the two streams to remain as neutral
territory. Stone piles were heaped up on the battlefield to commemorate
the treaty, and the Broad river was henceforth called Eswau Huppeday
(Line river), by the Catawba, the country eastward to Catawba river
being left unoccupied.\[1\] The fact that one party had guns would bring
this event within the early historic period.

The Catawba assisted the whites against the Cherokee in the war of 1760
and in the later Revolutionary struggle. About 100 warriors, nearly the
whole fighting strength of the tribe, took part in the first-mentioned
war, several being killed, and a smaller number accompanied Williamson's
force in 1776.\[2\] At the battle fought under Williamson near the
present site of Franklin, North Carolina, the Cherokee, according to the
tradition related by Wafford, mistook the Catawba allies of the troops
for some of their own warriors, and were, fighting for some time under
this impression before they noticed that the Catawba wore deer tails in
their hair so that the whites might not make the same mistake. In this
engagement, which was one of the bloodiest Indian encounters of the
Revolution, the Cherokee claim that they had actually defeated the
troops and their Catawba allies, when their own ammunition gave out and
they were consequently forced to retire. The Cherokee leader was a noted
war chief named Tsanï (John).

About 1840 nearly the whole Catawba tribe moved up from South Carolina
and joined the eastern band of Cherokee, but in consequence of tribal
jealousies they remained but a short time, and afterward returned to
their former home, as is related elsewhere.

Other tribal names (of doubtful authority) are Ani'-Sa'ni and
Ani'-Sawahâ'nï, belonging to people said to have lived toward the north;
both names are perhaps intended for the Shawano or Shawnee, properly
Ani'-Sawänu'gï. The Ani'-Gilï' are said to have been neighbors of the
Anin'tsï or Natchez; the name may possibly be a Cherokee form for
Congaree.

\[1. Catawba MS from South Carolina official archives. Schoolcraft,
Indian Tribes, III, pp. 293-4, 1853.

2\. Ibid., p. 294,1853.\]

*p. 682*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 105. The Southern And Western Tribes](motc105)
