[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc120) 
[Next](motc122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 121. Herbert's Spring

"From the head of the southern branch of Savannah river it does not
exceed half a mile to a head spring of the Missisippi water that runs
through the middle and upper parts of the Cheerake nation about a
northwest course, and, joining other rivers, they empty themselves into
the great Missisippi. The above fountain is called 'Herbert's spring,'
so named from an early commissioner of Indian affairs, and it was
natural for strangers to drink thereof, to quench thirst, gratify their
curiosity, and have it to say they had drank of the French waters.

*p. 404*

Some of our people, who went only with the view of staying a short time,
but by some allurement or other exceeded the time appointed, at their
return reported, either through merriment or superstition, that the
spring had such a natural bewitching quality that whosoever drank of it
could not possibly quit the nation during the tedious space of seven
years. All the debauchees readily fell in with this superstitious notion
as an excuse for their bad method of living, when they had no proper
call to stay in that country; and in process of time it became as
received a truth as any ever believed to have been spoken by the Delphic
oracle. One cursed, because its enchantment had marred his good fortune;
another condemned his weakness for drinking down witchcraft, against his
own secret suspicions; one swore he would never taste another such
dangerous poison, even though he should be forced to go down to the
Missisippi for water; and another comforted himself that so many years
out of the seven were already passed, and wished that if ever he tasted
it again, though under the greatest necessity, he might be confined to
the Stygian waters. Those who had their minds more enlarged diverted
themselves much at their cost, for it was a noted favorite place, on
account of the name it went by; and, being a well situated and good
spring, there all travelers commonly drank a bottle of choice. But now
most of the pack-horse men, though they be dry, and also matchless sons
of Bacchus, on the most pressing invitations to drink there, would swear
to forfeit sacred liquor the better part of their lives rather than
basely renew or confirm the loss of their liberty, which that execrable
fountain occasions."--Adair, American Indians, p. 231, 1775.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 122. Local Legends Of North Carolina](motc122)
