[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc014) 
[Next](motc016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 15. The Fourfooted Tribes

In Cherokee mythology, as in that of Indian tribes generally, there is
no essential difference between men and animals. In the primal genesis
period they seem to be completely undifferentiated, and we find all
creatures alike living and working together in harmony and mutual
helpfulness until man, by his aggressiveness and disregard for the
rights of the others, provokes their hostility, when insects, birds,
fishes, reptiles, and fourfooted beasts join forces against him (see
story, "Origin of Disease and Medicine"). Henceforth their lives are
apart, but the difference is always one of degree only. The animals,
like the people, are organized into tribes and have like them their
chiefs and townhouses, their councils and ballplays, and the same
hereafter in the Darkening land of Us'ûñhi'yï. Man is still the
paramount power, and hunts and slaughters the others as his own
necessities compel, but is obliged to satisfy the animal tribes in every
instance, very much as a murder is compounded for, according to the
Indian system, by "covering the bones of the dead" with presents for the
bereaved relatives.

This pardon to the hunter is made the easier through a peculiar

*p. 262*

doctrine of reincarnation, according to which, as explained by the
shamans, there is assigned to every animal a definite life term which
can not be curtailed by violent means. If it is killed before the
expiration of the allotted time the death is only temporary and the body
is immediately resurrected in its proper shape from the blood drops, and
the animal continues its existence until the end of the predestined
period, when the body is finally dissolved and the liberated spirit goes
to join its kindred shades in the Darkening land. This idea appears in
the story of the bear man and in the belief concerning the Little Deer.
Death is thus but a temporary accident and the killing a mere minor
crime. By some priests it is held that there are seven successive
reanimations before the final end.

Certain supernatural personages, Kana'tï and Tsul\`kälû' (see the
myths), have dominion over the animals, and are therefore regarded as
the distinctive gods of the hunter. Kana'tï at one time kept the game
animals, as well as the pestiferous insects, shut up in a cave under
ground, from which they were released by his undutiful sons. The
primeval animals-the actors in the animal myths and the predecessors of
the existing species-are believed to have been much larger, stronger,
and cleverer than their successors of the present day. In these myths we
find the Indian explanation of certain peculiarities of form, color, or
habit, and the various animals are always consistently represented as
acting in accordance with their well-known characteristics.

First and most prominent in the animal myths is the Rabbit (*Tsistu*),
who figures always as a trickster and deceiver, generally malicious, but
often beaten at his own game by those whom he had intended to victimize.
The connection of the rabbit with the dawn god and the relation of the
Indian myths to the stories current among the southern negroes are
discussed in another place. Ball players while in training are forbidden
to eat the flesh of the rabbit, because this animal so easily becomes
confused in running. On the other hand, their spies seek opportunity to
strew along the path which must be taken by their rivals a soup made of
rabbit hamstrings, with the purpose of rendering them timorous in
action. I

In a ball game between the birds and the fourfooted animals (see story)
the Bat, which took sides with the birds, is said to have won the
victory for his party by his superior dodging abilities. For this reason
the wings or sometimes the stuffed skin of the bat are tied to the
implements used in the game to insure success for the players. According
to the same myth the Flying Squirrel (*Tewa*) also aided in securing the
victory, and hence both these animals are still invoked by the ball
player. The meat of the common gray squirrel (*sälâ'lï*) is forbidden to
rheumatic patients, on account of the squirrel's habit of assuming a
cramped position when eating. The stripes upon the back of the

*p. 263*

ground squirrel (*kiyu\`ga*) are the mark of scratches made by the angry
animals at a memorable council in which he took it upon himself to say a
good word for the archenemy, Man (see "Origin of Disease and Medicine").
The peculiarities of the mink (sûñgï) are accounted for by another
story.

The buffalo, the largest game animal of America, was hunted in the
southern Allegheny region until almost the close of the last century,
the particular species being probably that known in the West as the wood
or mountain buffalo. The name in use among the principal gulf tribes was
practically the same, and can not be analyzed, viz, Cherokee, *yûñsû'*;
Hichitee, *ya'nasi*; Creek, *yëna'sa*; Choctaw, *yanash*. Although the
flesh of the buffalo was eaten, its skin dressed for blankets and bed
coverings, its long hair woven into belts, and its horns carved into
spoons, it is yet strangely absent from Cherokee folklore. So far as is
known it is mentioned in but a single one of the sacred formulas, in
which a person under treatment for rheumatism is forbidden to eat the
meat, touch the skin, or use a spoon made from the horn of the buffalo,
upon the ground of an occult connection between the habitual cramped
attitude of a rheumatic and the natural "hump" of that animal.

The elk is known, probably by report, under the name of *a\`wï e'gwa*,
"great deer", but there is no myth or folklore in connection with it.

The deer, *a\`wï'*, which is still common in the mountains, was the
principal dependence of the Cherokee hunter, and is consequently
prominent in myth, folklore, and ceremonial. One of the seven gentes of
the tribe is named from it (Ani'-Kawï', "Deer People"). According to a
myth given elsewhere, the deer won his horns in a successful race with
the rabbit. Rheumatism is usually ascribed to the work of revengeful
deer ghosts, which the hunter has neglected to placate, while on the
other hand the aid of the deer is invoked against frostbite, as its feet
are believed to be immune from injury by frost. The wolf, the fox, and
the opossum are also invoked for this purpose, and for the same reason.
When the redroot (*Ceanothus americanus*) puts forth its leaves the
people say the young fawns are then in the mountains. On killing a deer
the hunter always cuts out the hamstring from the hind quarter and
throws it away, for fear that if he ate it he would thereafter tire
easily in traveling.

The powerful chief of the deer tribe is the A\`wï' Usdi', or "Little
Deer," who is invisible to all except the greatest masters of the
hunting secrets, and can be wounded only by the hunter who has
supplemented years of occult study with frequent fasts and lonely
vigils. The Little Deer keeps constant protecting watch over his
subjects, and sees well to it that not one is ever killed in wantonness.
When a deer is shot by the hunter the Little Deer knows it at once and
is instantly

*p. 264*

at the spot. Bending low his head he asks of the blood stains upon the
ground if they have heard--i.e., if the hunter has asked pardon for the
life that he has taken. If the formulistic prayer has been made, all is
well, because the necessary sacrifice has been atoned for; but if
otherwise, the Little Deer tracks the hunter to his house by the blood
drops along the trail, and, unseen and unsuspected, puts into his body
the spirit of rheumatism that shall rack him with aches and pains from
that time henceforth. As seen at rare intervals--perhaps once in a long
lifetime-the Little Deer is pure white and about the size of a small
dog, has branching antlers, and is always in company with a large herd
of deer. Even though shot by the master hunter, he comes to life again,
being immortal, but the fortunate huntsman who can thus make prize of
his antlers has in them an unfailing talisman that brings him success in
the chase forever after. The smallest portion of one of those horns of
the Little Deer, when properly consecrated, attracts the deer to the
hunter, and when exposed from the wrapping dazes them so that they
forget to run and thus become an easy prey. Like the Ulûñsû'tî stone
(see number 50), it is a dangerous prize when not treated with proper
respect, and is--or was--kept always in a secret place away from the
house to guard against sacrilegious handling.

Somewhat similar talismanic power attached to the down from the young
antler of the deer when properly consecrated. So firm was the belief
that it had influence over "anything about a deer" that eighty and a
hundred years ago even white traders used to bargain with the Indians
for such charms in order to increase their store of deerskins by drawing
the trade to themselves. The faith in the existence of the miraculous
Little Deer is almost as strong and universal to-day among the older
Cherokee as is the belief in a future life.

The bears (*yânû*) are transformed Cherokee of the old clan of the
Ani'-Tsâ'gûhï (see story, "Origin of the Bear"). Their chief is the
White Bear, who lives at Kuwâ'hï, "Mulberry place," one of the high
peaks of the Great Smoky mountains, near to the enchanted lake of
Atagâ'hï (see number 69), to which the wounded bears go to be cured of
their hurts. Under Kuwâ'hï and each of three other peaks in the same
mountain region the bears have townhouses, where they congregate and
hold dances every fall before retiring to their dens for the winter.
Being really human, they can talk if they only would, and once a mother
bear was heard singing to her cub in words which the hunter understood.
There is one variety known as *kalâs'-gûnâhi'ta*, "long hams," described
as a large black bear with long legs and small feet, which is always
lean, and which the hunter does not care to shoot, possibly on account
of its leanness. It is believed that new-born cubs are hairless, like
mice.

The wolf (*wa'\`ya*) is revered as the hunter and watchdog of Kana'tï,
and the largest gens in the tribe bears the name of Ani'-wa'\`ya, "Wolf

*p. 265*

people." The ordinary Cherokee will never kill one if he can possibly
avoid it, but will let the animal go by unharmed, believing that the
kindred of a slain wolf will surely revenge his death, and that the
weapon with which the deed is done will be rendered worthless for
further shooting until cleaned and exercised by a medicine man. Certain
persons, however, having knowledge of the proper atonement rites, may
kill wolves with impunity, and are hired for this purpose by others who
have suffered from raids upon their fish traps or their stock. Like the
eagle killer (see "The Bird Tribes"), the professional wolf killer,
after killing one of these animals, addresses to it a prayer in which he
seeks to turn aside the vengeance of the tribe by laying the burden of
blame upon the people of some other settlement. He then unscrews the
barrel of his gun and inserts into it seven small sourwood rods heated
over the fire, and allows it to remain thus overnight in the running
stream; in the morning the rods are taken out and the barrel is
thoroughly dried and cleaned.

The dog (*gi\`lï'*), although as much a part of Indian life among the
Cherokee as in other tribes, hardly appears in folklore. One myth makes
him responsible for the milky way; another represents him as driving the
wolf from the comfortable house fire and taking the place for himself.
He figures also in connection with the deluge. There is no tradition of
the introduction of the horse (*sâ'gwälï*, from *asâ'gwälihû'*, from "a
pack or burden") or of the cow (*wa'\`ka*, from the Spanish, *vaca*).
The hog is called, *sïkwä*, this being originally the name of the
opossum, which somewhat resembles it in expression, and which is now
distinguished as *sïkwä utse'tstï*, "grinning sïkwä". In the same way
the sheep, another introduced animal, is called *a\`wï' unäde'na*,
"woolly deer"; the goat, *a\`wï' ahänu'lähï*, "bearded deer," and the
mule, "*sâ'gwä'lï digû'lanähi'ta*", "long-eared horse." The cat, also
obtained from the whites, is called *wesä*, an attempt at the English
"pussy." When it purrs by the fireside, the children say it is counting
in Cherokee, "*ta'ladu', nûñ'gï, ta'ladu', nûñ'gï*," "sixteen, four,
sixteen, four." The elephant, which a few of the Cherokee have seen in
shows, is called by them *käma'mä u'tänû*, "great butterfly," from the
supposed resemblance of its long trunk and flapping ears to the
proboscis and wings of that insect. The anatomical peculiarities of the
opossum, of both sexes, are the subject of much curious speculation
among the Indians, many of whom believe that its young are produced
without any help from the male. It occurs in one or two of the minor
myths.

The fox (*tsu'\`lä*) is mentioned in one of the formulas, but does no
appear in the tribal folklore. The black fox is known by a different
name (*inâ'lï*). The odor of the skunk (*dïlä'*) is believed to keep off
contagious diseases, and the scent bag is therefore taken out and hung
over the doorway, a small hole being pierced in it in order that the
contents may ooze out upon the timbers. At times, as in the

*p. 266*

smallpox epidemic of 1866, the entire body of the animal was thus hung
up, and in some cases, as an additional safeguard, the meat was cooked
and eaten and the oil rubbed over the skin of the person. The underlying
idea is that the fetid smell repels the disease spirit, and upon the
same principle the buzzard, which is so evidently superior to carrion
smells, is held to be powerful against the same diseases.

The beaver (*dâ'yï*), by reason of its well-known gnawing ability,
against which even the hardest wood is not proof, is invoked on behalf
of young children just getting their permanent teeth. According to the
little formula which is familiar to nearly every mother in the tribe,
when the loosened milk tooth is pulled out or drops out of itself, the
child runs with it around the house, repeating four times, "*Dâ'yï,
skïntä'* (Beaver, put a new tooth into my jaw)" after which he throws
the tooth upon the roof of the house.

In a characteristic song formula to prevent frostbite the traveler,
before starting out on a cold winter morning, rubs his feet in the ashes
of the fire and sings a song of four verses, by means of which,
according to the Indian idea, he acquires in turn the cold-defying
powers of the wolf, deer, fox, and opossum, four animals whose feet, it
is held, are never frostbitten. After each verse he imitates the cry and
the action of the animal. The words used are archaic in form and may be
rendered "I become a real wolf," etc. The song runs:

Tsûñ'wa'\`ya-ya' (repeated four times), *wa* + *a!* (prolonged howl).
(Imitates a wolf pawing the ground with his feet.)

Tsûñ'-ka'wi-ye' (repeated four times), *sauh! sauh! sauh! sauh!*
(Imitates call and jumping of a deer.)

Tsûñ'-tsu'\`la-ya' (repeated four times), *gaih! gaih! gaih! gaih!*
(Imitates barking and scratching of a fox.)

Tsûñ'-sï'kwa-ya' (repeated four times), *kï* +. (Imitates the cry of an
opossum when cornered, and throws his head back as that animal does when
feigning death.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. The Rabbit Goes Duck Hunting](motc016)
