[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc080) 
[Next](motc082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 81. Tsul'kälû, The Slant-eyed Giant

A long time ago a widow lived with her one daughter at the old town of
Känuga on Pigeon river. The girl was of age to marry, and her mother
used to talk with her a good deal, and tell her she must

*p. 338*

be sure to take no one but a good hunter for a husband, so that they
would have some one to take care of them and would always have plenty of
meat in the house. The girl said such a man was hard to find, but her
mother advised her not to be in a hurry, and to wait until the right one
came.

Now the mother slept in the house while the girl slept outside in the
âsï. One dark night a stranger came to the âsï wanting to court the
girl, but she told him her mother would let her marry no one but a good
hunter. "Well," said the stranger, "I am a great hunter," so she let him
come in, and he stayed all night. Just before day he said he must go
back now to his own place, but that he had brought some meat for her
mother, and she would find it outside. Then he went away and the girl
had not seen him. When day came she went out and found there a deer,
which she brought into the house to her mother, and told her it was a
present from her new sweetheart. Her mother was pleased, and they had
deersteaks for breakfast.

He came again the next night, but again went away before daylight, and
this time he left two deer outside. The mother was more pleased this
time, but said to her daughter, "I wish your sweetheart would bring us
some wood." Now wherever he might be, the stranger knew their thoughts,
so when he came the next time he said to the girl, "Tell your mother I
have brought the wood"; and when she looked out in the morning there
were several great trees lying in front of the door, roots and branches
and all. The old woman was angry, and said, "He might have brought us
some wood that we could use instead of whole trees that we can't split,
to litter up the road with brush." The hunter knew what she said, and
the next time he came he brought nothing, and when they looked out in
the morning the trees were gone and there was no wood at all, so the old
woman had to go after some herself.

Almost every night he came to see the girl, and each time he brought a
deer or some other game, but still he always left before daylight. At
last her mother said to her, "Your husband always leaves before
daylight. Why don't he wait? I want to see what kind of a son-in-law I
have." When the girl told this to her husband he said he could not let
the old woman see him, because the sight would frighten her. "She wants
to see you, anyhow," said the girl, and began to cry, until at last he
had to consent, but warned her that her mother must not say that he
looked frightful (*usga'së\`ti'yu*).

The next morning he did not leave so early, but stayed in the âsï, and
when it was daylight the girl went out and told her mother. The old
woman came and looked in, and there she saw a great giant, with long
slanting eyes (*tsul\`kälû'*), lying doubled up on the floor, with his
head against the rafters in the left-hand corner at the back, and his
toes scraping the roof in the right-hand corner by the door. She

*p. 339*

gave only one look and ran back to the house, crying,

Usga'së\`ti'yu! Usga'së\`ti'yu!

Tsul\`kälû' was terribly angry. He untwisted himself and came out of the
âsï, and said good-bye to the girl, telling her that he would never let
her mother see him again, but would go back to his own country. Then he
went off in the direction of Tsunegûñ'yï.

Soon after he left the girl had her monthly period. There was a very
great flow of blood, and the mother threw it all into the river. One
night after the girl had gone to bed in the âsï her husband came again
to the door and said to her, "It seems you are alone," and asked where
was the child. She said there had been none. Then he asked where was the
blood, and she said that her mother had thrown it into the river. She
told just where the place was, and he went there and found a small worm
in the water. He took it up and carried it back to the âsï, and as he
walked it took form and began to grow, until, when he reached the âsï,
it was a baby girl that he was carrying. He gave it to his wife and
said, "Your mother does not like me and abuses our child, so come and
let us go to my home." The girl wanted to be with her husband, so, after
telling her mother good-bye, she took up the child and they went off
together to Tsunegûñ'yï.

Now, the girl had an older brother, who lived with his own wife in
another settlement, and when he heard that his sister was married he
came to pay a visit to her and her new husband, but when he arrived at
Känuga his mother told him his sister had taken her child and gone away
with her husband, nobody knew where. He was sorry to see his mother so
lonely, so he said he would go after his sister and try to find her and
bring her back. It was easy to follow the footprints of the giant, and
the young man went along the trail until he came to a place where they
had rested, and there were tracks on the ground where a child had been
lying and other marks as if a baby had been born there. He went on along
the trail and came to another place where they had rested, and there
were tracks of a baby crawling about and another lying on the ground. He
went on and came to where they had rested again, and there were tracks
of a child walking and another crawling about. He went on until he came
where they had rested again, and there were tracks of one child running
and another walking. Still he followed the trail along the stream into
the mountains, and came to the place where they had rested again, and
this time there were footprints of two children running all about, and
the footprints can still be seen in the rock at that place.

Twice again he found where they had rested. and then the trail led up
the slope of Tsunegûñ'yï, and he heard the sound of a drum and voices,
as if people were dancing inside the mountain. Soon he came to n eave
like a doorway in the side of the mountain, but the rock was so steep
and smooth that he could not climb tip to it, but could only

*p. 340*

just look over the edge and see the heads and shoulders of a great many
people dancing inside. He saw his sister dancing among them and called
to her to come out. She turned when she heard his voice, and as soon as
the drumming stopped for a while she came out to him, finding no trouble
to climb down the rock, and leading her two little children by the hand.
She was very glad to meet her brother and talked with him a long time,
but did not ask him to come inside, and at last he went away without
having seen her husband.

Several other times her brother came to the mountain, but always his
sister met him outside, and he could never see her husband. After four
years had passed she came one day to her mother's house and said her
husband had been hunting in the woods near by, and they were getting
ready to start home to-morrow, and if her mother and brother would come
early in the morning they could see her husband. If they came too late
for that, she said, they would find plenty of meat to take home. She
went back into the woods, and the mother ran to tell her son. They came
to the place early the next morning, but Tsul\`kälû' and his family were
already gone. On the drying poles they found the bodies of freshly
killed deer hanging, as the girl had promised, and there were so many
that they went back and told all their friends to come for them, and
there were enough for the whole settlement.

Still the brother wanted to see his sister and her husband, so he went
again to the mountain, and she came out to meet him. He asked to see her
husband, and this time she told him to come inside with her. They went
in as through a doorway, and inside he found it like a great townhouse.
They seemed to be alone, but his sister called aloud, "He wants to see
you," and from the air came a voice, "You can not see me until you put
on a new dress, and then you can see me." "I am willing," said the young
man, speaking to the unseen spirit, and from the air came the voice
again, "Go back, then, and tell your people that to see me they must go
into the townhouse and fast seven days, and in all that time they must
not come out from the townhouse or raise the war whoop, and on the
seventh day I shall come with new dresses for you to put on so that you
can all see me."

The young man went back to Känuga and told the people. They all wanted
to see Tsul\`kälû', who owned all the game in the mountains, so they
went into the townhouse and began the fast. They fasted the first day
and the second and every day until the seventh-all but one man from
another settlement, who slipped out every night when it was dark to get
something to eat and slipped in again when no one was watching. On the
morning of the seventh day the sun was just coming up in the east when
they beard a great noise like the thunder of rocks rolling down the side
of Tsunegûñ'yï. They were frightened and drew near together in the
townhouse, and no one whispered.

*p. 341*

Nearer and louder came the sound until it grew into an awful roar, and
every one trembled and held his breath-all but one man, the stranger
from the other settlement, who lost his senses from fear and ran out of
the townhouse and shouted the war cry.

At once the roar stopped and for some time there was silence. Then they
heard it again, but as if it where going farther away, and then farther
and farther, until at last it died away in the direction of Tsunegûñ'yï,
and then all was still again. The people came out from the townhouse,
but there was silence, and they could see nothing but what had been
seven days before.

Still the brother was not disheartened, but came again to see his
sister, and she brought him into the mountain. He asked why Tsul\`kälû'
had not. brought the new dresses, as he had promised, and the voice from
the air said, "I came with them, but you did not obey my word, but broke
the fast and raised the war cry." The young man answered, "It was not
done by our people, but by a stranger. If you will come again, we will
surely do as you say." But the voice answered, "Now you can never see
me." Then the young man could not say any more, and he went back to
Känuga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 82. Käna'sta, The Lost Settlement](motc082)
