[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc006) 
[Next](motc008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 7. The Journey To The Sunrise

A long time ago several young men made up their minds to find the place
where the Sun lives and see what the Sun is like. They got

*p. 256*

ready their bows and arrows, their parched corn and extra moccasins, and
started out toward the east. At first they met tribes they knew, then
they came to tribes they had only heard about, and at last to others of
which they had never heard.

There was a tribe of root eaters and another of acorn eaters, with great
piles of acorn shells near their houses. In one tribe they found a sick
man dying, and were told it was the custom there when a man died to bury
his wife in the same grave with him. They waited until he was dead, when
they saw his friends lower the body into a great pit, so deep and dark
that from the top they could not see the bottom. Then a rope was tied
around the woman's body, together with a bundle of pine knots, a lighted
pine knot was put into her hand, and she was lowered into the pit to die
there in the darkness after the last pine knot was burned.

The young men traveled on until they came at last to the sunrise place
where the sky reaches down to the ground. They found that the sky was an
arch or vault of solid rock hung above the earth and was always swinging
up and down, so that when it went up there was an open place like a door
between the sky and ground, and when it swung back the door was shut.
The Sun came out of this door from the east and climbed along on the
inside of the arch. It had a human figure, but was too bright for them
to see clearly and too hot to come very near. They waited until the Sun
had come out and then tried to get through while the door was still
open, but just as the first one was in the doorway the rock came down
and crushed him. The other six were afraid to try it, and as they were
now at the end of the world they turned around and started back again,
but they had traveled so far that they were old men when they reached
home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. The Moon And The Thunders.](motc008)
