[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc030) 
[Next](motc032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 31. The Terrapin's Escape From The Wolves

The Possum and the Terrapin went out together to hunt persimmons, and
found a tree full of ripe fruit. The Possum climbed it and was throwing
down the persimmons to the Terrapin when a wolf came up and began to
snap at the persimmons as they fell, before the Terrapin could reach
them. The Possum waited his chance, and at last managed to throw down a
large one (some say a bone which he carried with him), so that it lodged
in the wolf's throat as he jumped up at it and choked him to death.
"I'll take his ears for hominy spoons," said the Terrapin, and cut off
the wolf's ears and started home with them, leaving the Possum still
eating persimmons up in the tree. After a while he came to a house and
was invited to have some *kanahe'na* gruel from the jar that is set
always outside the door. He sat down beside the jar and dipped up the
gruel with one of the wolf's ears for a spoon. The people noticed and
wondered. When he was satisfied he went on, but soon came to another
house and was asked to have some more kanahe'na. He dipped it up again
with the wolf's ear and went on when he had enough. Soon the news went
around, that the Terrapin had killed the Wolf and was using his ears for
spoons. All the Wolves got together and followed the Terrapin's trail
until they came up with him and made him prisoner. Then they held a
council to decide what to do with him, and agreed to boil him in a clay
pot. They brought in a pot, but the Terrapin only laughed at it and said
that if they put him into that thing he would kick it all to pieces.
They said they would burn him in the fire, but the Terrapin laughed
again and said he would put it out. Then they decided to throw him into
the deepest hole in the river and drown him. The Terrapin

*p. 279*

begged and prayed them not to do that, but they paid no attention, and
dragged him over to the river and threw him in. That was just what the
Terrapin had been waiting for all the time, and he dived under the water
and came up on the other side and got away.

Some say that when he was thrown into the river he struck against a
rock, which broke, his back in a dozen places. He sang a medicine song:

Gû'daye'wû, Gû'daye'wû,  
I have sewed myself together, I have sewed myself together,

and the pieces came together, but the scars remain on his shell to this
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32. Origin Of The Groundhog Dance: The Groundhog's Head](motc032)
