[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc078) 
[Next](motc080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 79. The Removed Townhouses

Long ago, long before the Cherokee were driven from their homes in 1838,
the people on Valley river and Hiwassee heard voices of invisible
spirits in the air calling and warning them of wars and misfortunes
which the future held in store, and inviting them to come and live with
the Nûñnë'hï, the Immortals, in their homes under the mountains and
under the waters. For days the voices hung in the air, and the people
listened until they heard the spirits, say "If you would live with us,
gather everyone in your townhouses and fast there for seven days and no
one must raise a shout or a warwhoop in all that time. Do this and we
shall come and you will see us and we shall take you to live with us."

The people were afraid of the evils that were to come, and they knew
that the Immortals of the mountains and the waters were happy forever,
so they counciled in their townhouses and decided to go with them. Those
of Anisgayâ'yï town came all together into their townhouse and prayed
and fasted for six days. On the seventh day there was a sound from the
distant mountains, and it came nearer and grew louder until a roar of
thunder was all about the townhouse and they felt the ground shake under
them. Now they were frightened, and despite the warning some of them
screamed out. The Nûñnë'hï, who had already lifted up the townhouse with
its mound to carry it away, were startled by the cry and let a part of
it fall to the earth, where now we see the mound of Së\`tsï. They
steadied themselves again and bore the rest of the townhouse, with all
the people in it, to the top of Tsuda'ye\`lûñ'yï (Lone peak), near the
head of Cheowa, where we can still see it, changed long ago to solid
rock, but the people are invisible and immortal.

*p. 336*

The people of another town, on Hiwassee, at the place which we call now
Du'stiya\`lûñ'yï, where Shooting creek comes in, also prayed and fasted,
and at the end of seven days the Nûñnë'hï came and took them away down
under the water. They are there now, and on a warm summer day, when the
wind ripples the surface, those who listen well can hear them talking
below. When the Cherokee drag the river for fish the fish-drag always
stops and catches there, although the water is deep, and the people know
it is being held by their lost kinsmen, who do not want to be forgotten.

When the Cherokee were forcibly removed to the West one of the greatest
regrets of those along Hiwassee and Valley rivers was that they were
compelled to leave behind forever their relatives who had gone to the
Nûñnë'hï.

In Tennessee river, near Kingston, 18 miles below Loudon, Tennessee, is
a place which the Cherokee call Gustï', where there once was a
settlement long ago, but one night while the people were gathered in the
townhouse for a dance the bank caved in and carried them all down into
the river. Boatmen passing the spot in their canoes see the round dome
of the townhouse--now turned to stone--in the water below them and
sometimes hear the sound of the drum and dance coming up, and they never
fail to throw food into the water in return for being allowed to cross
in safety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 80. The Spirit Defenders Of Nïkwäsï'](motc080)
