[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc023) 
[Next](motc025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 24. The Rabbit Escapes From The Wolves

Some Wolves once caught the Rabbit and were going to eat him when he
asked leave to show them a new dance he was practicing. They knew that
the Rabbit was a great song leader, and they wanted to learn the latest
dance, so they agreed and made a ring about him while he got ready. He
patted his feet and began to dance around in

a circle, singing:

Tlâge'sitûñ' gäli'sgi'sidâ'hä--  
Ha'nia lïl lïl! Ha'nia lïl lïl!

On the edge of the field I dance about--  
Ha'nia lïl lïl! Ha'nia lïl lïl!

"Now, said the Rabbit, "when I sing 'on the edge of the field,' I dance
that way"--and he danced over in that direction--"and when I sing lïl
lïl! you must all stamp your feet hard." The Wolves thought it fine. He
began another round singing the same song, and danced a little nearer to
the field, while the Wolves all stamped their feet. He sang louder and
louder and danced nearer and nearer to the field until at the fourth
song, when the Wolves were stamping as hard as they could and thinking
only of the song, he made one jump and was off through the long grass.
They were after him at once, but he ran for a hollow stump and climbed
up on the inside. When the Wolves got there one of them put his head
inside to look up, but the Rabbit spit into his eye, so that he had to
pull his head out again. The others were afraid to try, and they went
away, with the Rabbit still in the stump.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. Flint Visits The Rabbit](motc025)
