[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc031) 
[Next](motc033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 32. Origin Of The Groundhog Dance: The Groundhog's Head

Seven wolves once caught a Groundhog and said, "Now we'll kill you and
have something good to eat." But the Groundhog said, "When we find good
food we must rejoice over it, as people do in the Green-corn dance. I
know you mean to kill me and I can't help myself, but if you want to
dance I'll sing for you. This is a new dance entirely. I'll lean up
against seven trees in turn and you will dance out and then turn and
come back, as I give the signal, and at the last turn you may kill me."

The wolves were very hungry, but they wanted to learn the new dance, so
they told him to go ahead. The Groundhog leaned up against a tree and
began the song, *Ha'wiy'ëhï'*, and all the wolves danced out in front,
until he gave the signal, *Yu!* and began with *Ha'wiy'ëhï'*, when they
turned and danced back in line. "That's fine," said the Groundhog, and
went over to the next tree and started the second song. The wolves
danced, out and then turned at the signal and danced back again. "That's
very fine," said the Groundhog, and went over to another tree and
started the third song. The wolves danced their best and the Groundhog
encouraged them, but at each song he took another tree, and each tree
was a little nearer to his hole under a stump. At the seventh song he
said, "Now, this is the last dance, and when I say *Yu!* you will all
turn and come after me, and the one who gets me may have me." So he
began the seventh song and kept it up until the wolves were away out in
front. Then he gave the signal, *Yu!* and made a jump for his hole. The
wolves turned and were after him, but he reached the hole first and
dived in. Just as he got inside, the foremost wolf caught him by the
tail and gave it such a pull that it broke off, and the Groundhog's tail
has been short ever since.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

The unpleasant smell of the Groundhog's head was given it by the other
animals to punish an insulting remark made by him in council. The story
is a vulgar one, without wit enough to make it worth recording.

*p. 280*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. The Migration Of The Animals](motc033)
