[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc071) 
[Next](motc073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 72. The Hunter And Selu

A hunter had been tramping over the mountains all day long without
finding any game and when the sun went down, he built a fire in a hollow
stump, swallowed a few mouthfuls of corn gruel and lay down to sleep,
tired out and completely discouraged. About the middle of the night he
dreamed and seemed to hear the sound of beautiful singing, which
continued until near daybreak and then appeared to die away into the
upper air.

All next day he hunted with the same poor success, and at night made his
lonely camp again, in the woods. He slept and the strange dream came to
him again, but so vividly that it seemed to him like an actual
happening. Rousing himself before daylight, he still heard the song, and
feeling sure now that it was real, he went in the direction of the sound
and found that it came from a single green stalk of corn (*selu*). The
plant spoke to him, and told him to cut off some of its roots and take
them to his home in the settlement, and the next morning to chew them
and "go to water" before anyone else was awake, and then to go out again
into the woods, and he would kill many deer and from that time on would
always be successful in the hunt. The corn plant continued to talk,
teaching him hunting secrets and telling him always to be generous with
the game he took, until it was noon and the sun was high, when it
suddenly took the form of a woman and rose gracefully into the air and
was gone from sight, leaving the hunter alone in the woods.

He returned home and told his story, and all the people knew that

*p. 324*

he had seen Selu, the wife of Kana'tï. He did as the spirit had
directed, and from that time was noted as the most successful of all the
hunters in the settlement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 73. The Underground Panthers](motc073)
