[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc087) 
[Next](motc089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 88. First Contact With Whites

There are a few stories concerning the first contact of the Cherokee
with whites and negroes. They are very modern and have little value as
myths, but throw some light upon the Indian estimate of the different
races.

One story relates how the first whites came from the east and tried to
enter into friendly relations, but the Indians would have nothing to do
with them for a long time. At last the whites left a jug of whisky and a
dipper near a spring frequented by the Indians. The Indians came along,
tasted the liquor, which they had never known before, and liked it so
well that they ended by all getting comfortably drunk. While they were
in this happy frame of mind some white men came up, and this time the
Indians shook hands with them and they have been friends after a fashion
ever since. This may possibly be a Cherokee adaptation of the story of
Hudson's first landing on the island of Manhattan.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

At the creation an ulûñsû'tï was given to the white man, and a piece of
silver to the Indian. But the white man despised the stone and threw it
away, while the Indian did the same with the silver. In going about the
white man afterward found the silver piece and put it

*p. 351*

into his pocket and has prized it ever since. The Indian, in like
manner, found the ulûñsû'tï where the white man had thrown it. He picked
it up and has kept it since as his talisman, as money is the talismanic
power of the white man. This story is quite general and is probably
older than others of its class.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

When Sequoya, the inventor of the Cherokee alphabet, was trying to
introduce it among his people, about 1822, some of them opposed it upon
the ground that Indians had no business with reading. They said that
when the Indian and the white man were created, the Indian, being the
elder, was given a book, while the white man received a bow and arrows.
Each was instructed to take good care of his gift and make the best use
of it, but the Indian was so neglectful of his book that the white man
soon stole it from him, leaving the bow in its place, so that books and
reading now belong of right to the white man, while the Indian ought to
be satisfied to hunt for a living.--*Cherokee Advocate*, October 26,
1844.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

The negro made the first locomotive for a toy and put it on a wooden
track and was having great fun with it when a white man came along,
watched until he saw how to run it, and then killed the negro and took
the locomotive for himself. This, also, although plainly of very recent
origin, was heard from several informants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 89. The Iroquois Wars](motc089)
