[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc107) 
[Next](motc109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 108. The Massacre Of The Ani'-kuta'nï

Among other perishing traditions is that relating to the Ani'-Kuta'nï or
Ani'-Kwäta'nï, concerning whom the modern Cherokee know so little that
their very identity is now a matter of dispute, a few holding that they
were in ancient people who preceded the Cherokee and built the mounds,
while others, with more authority, claim that they were a clan or
society in the tribe and were destroyed long ago by pestilence or other
calamity. Fortunately, we are not left to depend entirety upon surmise
in the matter, as the tradition was noted by Haywood some seventy years
ago, and by another writer some forty years later, while the connected
story could still be obtained from competent authorities. From the
various statements it would seem that the Ani'-Kuta'nï were a priestly
clan, having hereditary supervision of all religious ceremonies among
the Cherokee, until, in consequence of having abused their sacred
privileges, they were attacked and completely exterminated by the rest
of the tribe, leaving the priestly functions to be assumed thereafter by
individual doctors and conjurers.

Haywood says., without giving name or details, "The Cherokees are
addicted to conjuration to ascertain whether a sick person will recover.
This custom arose after the destruction of their priests. Tradition
states that such person lived among their ancestors and were deemed
superior to others, and were extirpated long ago, in consequence of the
misconduct of one of the priests, who attempted to take the wife of a
man who was the brother of the leading chief of the nation."\[1\]

A more detailed statement, on the authority of Chief John Ross and Dr J.
B. Evans, is given in 1866 by a writer who speaks of the massacre as
having occurred about a century before, although from the

\[1. Nat. and Aborig. Hist. Tenn., p. 266.\]

*p. 393*

dimness of the tradition it is evident that it must have been much
earlier:

"The facts, though few, are interesting. The order was hereditary; in
this respect peculiar, for among Indians seldom, and among the Cherokees
never, does power pertain to any family as a matter of right. Yet the
family of the Nicotani--for it seems to have been a family or
clan--enjoyed this privilege. The power that they exercised was not,
however, political, nor does it appear that chiefs were elected from
among them.

"The Nicotani were a mystical, religious body, of whom the people stood
in great awe, and seem to have been somewhat like the Brahmins of India.
By what means they attained their ascendancy, or how long it was
maintained, can never be ascertained. Their extinction by massacre is
nearly all that can be discovered concerning them. They became haughty,
insolent, overbearing, and licentious to an intolerable degree. Relying
on their hereditary privileges and the strange awe which they inspired,
they did not hesitate by fraud or violence to rend asunder the tender
relations of husband and wife when a beautiful woman excited their
passions. The people long brooded in silence over the oppressions and
outrages of this high caste, whom they deeply hated but greatly feared.
At length a daring young man, a member of an influential family,
organized a conspiracy among the people for the massacre of the
priesthood. The immediate provocation was the abduction of the wife of
the young leader of the conspiracy. His wife was remarkable for her
beauty, and was forcibly abducted and violated by one of the Nicotani
while he was absent on the chase. On his return he found no difficulty
in exciting in others the resentment which he himself experienced. So
many had suffered in the same way, so many feared that they might be
made to suffer, that nothing was wanted but a leader. A leader appearing
in the person of the young brave whom we have named, the people rose
under his direction and killed every Nicotani, young and old. Thus
perished a hereditary secret society, since which time no hereditary
privileges have been tolerated among the Cherokees."\[1\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 109. The War Medicine](motc109)
