[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc070) 
[Next](motc072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 71. The Ice Man

Once when the people were burning the woods in the fall the blaze set
fire to a poplar tree, which continued to burn until the fire went down
into the roots and burned a great hole in the ground. It burned and
burned, and the hole grew constantly larger, until the people became
frightened and were afraid it would burn the whole world. They tried to
put out the fire, but it had gone too deep, and they did not know what
to do.

At last some one said there was a man living in a house of ice far in
the north who could put out the fire, so messengers were sent, and after
traveling a long distance they came to the ice house and found the Ice
Man at home. He was a little fellow with long hair hanging down to the
ground in two plaits. The messengers told him their errand and he at
once said, "O yes, I can help you," and began to unplait his hair. When
it was all unbraided he took it up in one band and struck it once across
his other hand, and the messengers felt a wind blow against

*p. 323*

their cheeks. A second time he struck his hair across his hand, and a
light rain began to fall. The third time he struck his hair across his
open hand there was sleet mixed with the raindrops, and when he struck
the fourth time great hailstones fell upon the ground, as if they had
come out from the ends of his hair. "Go back now," said the lee Man,
"and I shall be there to-morrow." So the messengers returned to their
people, whom they found still gathered helplessly about the great
burning pit.

The next-day while they were all watching about the fire there came a
wind from the north, and they were afraid, for they knew that it came
from the lee Man. But the wind only made the fire blaze up higher. Then
a light rain began to fall, but the drops seemed only to make the fire
hotter. Then the shower turned to a heavy rain, with sleet and hail that
killed the blaze and made clouds of smoke and steam rise from the red
coals. The people fled to their homes for shelter, and the storm rose to
a whirlwind that drove the rain into every burning crevice and piled
great hailstones over the embers, until the fire was dead and even the
smoke ceased. When at last it was all over and the people returned they
found a lake where the burning pit had been, and from below the water
came a sound as of embers still crackling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 72. The Hunter And Selu](motc072)
