[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga08)  [Next](ga10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SIXTH CHAPTER

How Apuleius came unto a city named Hipate, and was lodged in one Milos
house, and brought him letters from one Demeas of Corinth.

After that those two Companions were departed I entred into the City:
where I espied an old woman, of whom I enquired whether that city was
called Hipata, or no: Who answered, Yes. Then I demaunded, Whether she
knew one Milo an Alderman of the city: Whereat she laughed and said:
Verily it is not without cause that Milo is called an Elderman, and
accounted as chiefe of those which dwel without the walls of the City.
To whom I sayd againe, I pray thee good mother do not mocke, but tell me
what manner of man he is, and where he dwelleth. Mary (quoth shee) do
you see these Bay windowes, which on one side abut to the gates of the
city, and on the other side to the next lane? There Milo dwelleth, very
rich both in mony and substance, but by reason of his great avarice and
insatiable covetousnes, he is evill spoken of, and he is a man that
liveth all by usurie, and lending his money upon pledges. Moreover he
dwelleth in a small house, and is ever counting his money, and hath a
wife that is a companion of his extreame misery, neither keepeth he more
in his house than onely one maid, who goeth apparelled like unto a
beggar. Which when I heard, I laughed in my self and thought, In faith
my friend Demeas hath served me well, which hath sent me being a
stranger, unto such a man, in whose house I shall not bee afeared either
of smoke or of the sent of meat; and therewithall I rode to the doore,
which was fast barred, and knocked aloud. Then there came forth a maid
which said, Ho sirrah that knocks so fast, in what kinde of sort will
you borrow money? Know you not that we use to take no gage, unless it be
either plate or Jewels? To whom I answered, I pray you maid speak more
gently, and tel me whether thy master be within or no? Yes (quoth shee)
that he is, why doe you aske? Mary (said I) I am come from Corinth, and
have brought him letters from Demeas his friend. Then sayd the Maid, I
pray you tarry here till I tell him so, and therewithall she closed fast
the doore, and went in, and after a while she returned againe and sayd,
My master desireth you to alight and come in. And so I did, whereas I
found him sitting upon a little bed, going to supper, and his wife sate
at his feet, but there was no meat upon the table, and so by appointment
of the maid I came to him and saluted him, and delivered the letters
which I had brought from Demeas. Which when hee had read hee sayd,
Verily, I thanke my friend Demeas much, in that hee hath sent mee so
worthy a guest as you are. And therewithall hee commanded his wife to
sit away and bid mee sit in her place; which when I refused by reason of
courtesie, hee pulled me by my garment and willed me to sit downe; for
wee have (quoth he) no other stool here, nor no other great store of
household stuffe, for fear of robbing. Then I according to his
commandement, sate down, and he fell in further communication with me
and sayd, Verily I doe conjecture by the comly feature of your body, and
by the maidenly shamefastnesse of your face that you are a Gentleman
borne, as my friend Demeas hath no lesse declared the same in his
letters. Wherfore I pray you take in good part our poore lodging, and
behold yonder chamber is at your commaundement, use it as your owne, and
if you be contented therewithall, you shall resemble and follow the
vertuous qualities of your good father Theseus, who disdained not the
slender and poore Cottage of Hecades.

And then he called his maid which was named Fotis, and said, Carry this
Gentlemans packet into the chamber, and lay it up safely, and bring
water quickly to wash him, and a towel to rub him, and other things
necessary, and then bring him to the next Baines, for I know that he is
very weary of travell.

These things when I heard, I partly perceived the manners of Milo, and
endeavouring to bring my selfe further into his favour, I sayd, Sir
there is no need of any of these things, for they have been everywhere
ministred unto mee by the way, howbeit I will go into the Baines, but my
chiefest care is that my horse be well looked to, for hee brought mee
hither roundly, and therefore I pray thee Fotis take this money and buy
some hay and oats for him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventh Chapter](ga10)
