[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga36)  [Next](ga38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE THIRTY-FIFTH CHAPTER

How a woman killed her selfe and her child, because her husband haunted
harlots.

After that we had passed a great part of our journey, we came to a
village where we lay all night, but harken, and I will tell you what
mischiefe happened there: you shall understand there was a servant to
whom his Master had committed the whole government of his house, and was
Master of the lodging where we lay: this servant had married a Maiden of
the same house, howbeit he was greatly in love with a harlot of the
towne, and accustomed to resort unto her, wherewith his wife was so
highly displeased and became so jealous, that she gathered together all
her husbands substance, with his tales and books of account, and threw
them into a light fire: she was not contented with this, but she tooke a
cord and bound her child which she had by her husband, about her middle
and cast her selfe headlong into a deepe pit. The Master taking in evill
part the death of these twaine, tooke his servant which was the cause of
this murther by his luxurie, and first after that he had put off all his
apparell, he annointed his body with honey, and then bound him sure to a
fig-tree, where in a rotten stocke a great number of Pismares had
builded their neasts, the Pismares after they had felt the sweetnesse of
the honey came upon his body, and by little and little (in continuance
of time) devoured all his flesh, in such sort, that there remained on
the tree but his bare bones: this was declared unto us by the
inhabitants of the village there, who greatly sorrowed for the death of
this servant: then we avoiding likewise from this dreadfull lodging
incontinently departed away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thirty-sixth Chapter](ga38)
