[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc19)  [Next](fotc21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Torran Dubh</span>.

Adam Gordon, first of that surname, Earl of Sutherland, having married
Elizabeth Sutherland, heiress of that country, took journey to
Edinburgh, the year of God 1517, to dispatch some affairs there, which
did concern the settling of his estate, leaving the commandment of the
country, in his absence, to Alexander Sutherland (base brother to his
wife Elizabeth) and to John Murray of Abirscors; which John Mackay of
Strathnaver, understanding (having now appeased his civil discords at
home, by the death of leis uncle Neil) this occasion, in the very change
of surnames in Sutherland, to try if he could gain anything by spoiling
that country; and thereupon assembling together all the forces of
Strathnaver, Assynt, and Eddrachillis, with all such as he could
purchase out of the west and north-west isles of Scotland, invades the
country of Sutherland with all hostility, burning

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

and spoiling all before him. The inhabitants of Sutherland do speedily
convene together with all the parts of the country; and so, under the
conduct of Alexander Sutherland, John Murray, and William Mackames, they
rencounter with John Mackay and his company at a place called Torran
Dubh, beside Rogart, in Strathfleet, where there ensued a fierce and
cruel conflict. The Sutherland men chased John Mackay's vanguard, and
made them retire to himself where he stood in battle array; then did he
select and choose a number of the ablest men in all his host, and, with
these, he himself returned again to the conflict, leaving his brother
Donald to conduct the rest, and to support him as necessity should
require; whereupon they do begin a more cruel fight than before, well
fought on either side. In end, after long resistance, the Sutherland men
obtained the victory; few of these that came to renew the fight escaped,
but only John Mackay himself, and that very hardly. Neil MacIan-MacAngus
of Assynt was there slain, with divers of his men. There were 216 of the
Strathnaver men left dead in the field, besides those that died in the
chase. There were slain of Sutherland men 38. Not long

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

thereafter John Mackay sent William and Donald, two brethren, with a
company of men, to invade John Murray, with whom they met at a place
called Loch-Sallachie, in Sutherland. After a sharp skirmish, both the
chieftains of the Strathnaver men were slain, with divers of their men,
and the rest put to flight; neither was the victory pleasing to John
Murray, for he lost there his brother, called John Roy-Murray. Thus
continued the inhabitants of these countries infesting one another with
continued spoils, until the year of God 1522, that Alexander Gordon
(Earl Adam's eldest son) overthrew John Mackay at Lairg, and forced him
to submit himself to Earl Adam; unto whom John Mackay gave his band of
manrent and service, dated the year of God 1522.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Alltan-Beath](fotc21)
