[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotc25)  [Next](fotc27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Troubles Between Sutherland and Caithness in 1587–90</span>.

The year of God 1587, there happened some dissension betwixt the Earls
of Sutherland and Caithness. Upon this occasion George Gordon of Marie
in Sutherland (base son to Gilbert Gordon of Gartie), had done divers
attempts and indignities to the Earl of Caithness and his servants,
occasioned through the nearness of George Gordon's dwelling-house, which
bordered upon Caithness. These insolencies of George Gordon's the Earl
of Caithness could not or would not endure; and so assembling a company
of men, horse and foot, he comes under silence of the night and invades
George Gordon in his own house at Marie. George makes all the resistance
he could; and, as they were eagerly pursuing the house, he slays a
special gentleman of Caithness, called John Sutherland; therewith he
issues out of the house and casts himself into the river of Helmsdale,
which was hard by, thinking to save himself by swimming; but he was shot

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

with arrows, and slain in the water. This happened in the month of
February, 1587.

Alexander, Earl of Sutherland, took the slaughter of George Gordon in
evil part, which he determined to revenge, and thereupon dealt with such
of his friends as had credit at Court for the time; by whose means he
obtained a commission against the slayers of George Gordon; which being
gotten, he sent 200 men into Caithness in February, 1588, conducted by
John Gordon of Golspitour, and John Gordon of Backies, who invaded the
parishes of Dunbeath and Latheron in Caithness with all hostility,
spoiling and burning the same; they killed John, James's son, a
gentleman of Caithness, with some others; and this was called
Creach-lairn.

No sooner were they returned out of Dunbeath but Earl Alexander, being
accompanied by Uistean Mackay (who had been then lately reconciled to
his superior, the Earl of Sutherland), entered into Caithness with all
his forces, spoiling all before hint till he came to Girnigo (now called
Castle Sinclair), where the Earl of Caithness then lay. Earl Alexander

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

escaped himself, hard by the town of Wick, which is within a mile of
Girnigo. They took the town of Wick with little difficulty, and burnt
the same. They besieged the Castle of Girnigo for the space of twelve
days, which was well defended by the Earl of Caithness and those that
were within. Earl Alexander, perceiving that the Castle could not be
obtained without a long siege, sent his men abroad through the county of
Caithness to pursue such as had been at the slaughter of George Gordon,
if they could be apprehended; so, having slain divers of them, and
spoiled the country, Earl Alexander returns again with his host into
Sutherland in the month of February, 1588. And this was called
Là-na-Creich-Moire.

The Earl of Caithness, to revenge these injuries, and to requite his
losses, assembled all his forces in the year of God 1589, and sent them
into Sutherland, under the conduct of his brother, the Laird of Murkle,
who entered Sutherland with all hostility, and, coming to Strathullie,
he slays three tenants of the Earl of Sutherland's in Liriboll, burning
the house above them; from Liriboll they

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

march further into the country. The inhabitants of Sutherland, being
conducted by Uistean Mackay and John Gordon of Backies, met with the
Caithness men at a place called Crissaligh, where they skirmished a
little while, with little or no slaughter on either side; and so Murkle
retired home into Caithness. In exchange hereof, Alexander, Earl of
Sutherland, sent 300 men into Caithness, conducted by John Gordon of
Backies, the same year of God 1589, who, entering that county with all
hostility, spoiled and wasted the same till he came within six miles of
Girnigo, killed above 30 men, and returned home with a great booty. This
was called Creach-na-Caingis.

The Earl of Caithness, to repair his former losses, convened his whole
forces the year of God 1590. He entered into Sutherland with all
hostility, and encamped beside the Backies; having stayed one night
there, they returned homeward the next day, driving a prey of goods
before the host. By this time some of the inhabitants of Sutherland were
assembled to the number of 500 or 400 only, and, perceiving the
Caithness men upon the sands

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of Clentrednal, they presently invade them at a place called Clyne.
There ensued a sharp conflict, fought with great obstinacy on either
side, until the night parted then. Of the Sutherland men, there were
slain John Murray, and sixteen common soldiers. Of the Caithness men,
there were killed Nicholas Sutherland (the Laird of Forse's brother),
and Angus MacTormoid, with thirteen others. Divers were hurt on either
side.

The next morning timely the Earl of Caithness returned with all
diligence into Caithness, to defend his own country; for while he was in
Sutherland, Uistean Mackay had entered with his forces into Caithness,
and had spoiled that country even to the town of Thurso; but, before the
Earl of Caithness could overtake him, he returned again into Strathnaver
with a great booty.

Thus they infested one another with continual spoils and slaughters,
until they were reconciled by the mediation of the Earl of Huntly, who
caused them meet at Strathbogie; and a final peace was concluded there,
betwixt these parties, in the month of March, 1591. Here ends this book
of Sutherland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Troubles Between the Earls of Huntly and Moray.](fotc27.md)
