[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc35)  [Next](fotc37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Some Troubles Betwixt Sutherland and Caithness In 1612</span>.

The year of God 1612, there happened some discord and dissensions
betwixt Sutherland and Caithness, which troubled a little the peace of
that part of the kingdom. The occasion was this:—One Arthur Smith (a
false coiner), being, together with his servant, apprehended for making
and striking of false money, were both sent to Edinburgh, the year of
God 1599, where his servant was executed, but Arthur himself escaped,
and retired into Caithness, and dwelt there with the Earl of that
country. The report hereof coming to

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

the King's ears, the year of God 1612, His Majesty gave a secret
commission to his servant, Sir Robert Gordon (the Earl of Sutherland's
brother), for apprehending this Arthur Smith; but, as Sir Robert was
going about to perform the same, he received a commandment from His
Majesty to accompany Sir Alexander Hay (then Secretary of Scotland) in
apprehending John Lesley of New Lesley, and some other rebels in
Gereagh; which Sir Robert obeyed, and committed the execution of the
commission against Arthur Smith unto his nephew, Donald Mackay of Farr,
John Gordon of Gospeter, younger (nephew to George Gordon slain at
Marie, the year 1587), and to John Gordon, son to John Gordon of
Backies. These three, parting from Sutherland with 36 men, came to the
town of Thurso in Caithness, where Arthur Smith then dwelt, and there
apprehended him; which, when John Sinclair of Skirkag (the Earl of
Caithness's nephew) understood, he assembled the inhabitants of the
town, and opposed himself to the King's commission. There ensued a sharp
skirmish upon the streets of Thurso, where John Sinclair of Skirkag was

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

slain, and James Sinclair of Dun left there, deadly hurt, lying upon the
ground; Arthur Smith was there likewise slain; divers of the Sutherland
men were hurt; but, perceiving Smith dead, they left Thurso, and retired
themselves all home into their own country.

Thereupon, both the parties compeared before the Secret Council at
Edinburgh. The Earl of Caithness did pursue Sir Robert Gordon, Donald
Mackay, and John Gordon, for the slaughter of his nephew. These, again,
did pursue the inhabitants of Caithness for resisting the King's
commissioners. The Secret Council (having special commandment from His
Majesty to that effect) dealt earnestly with both the parties; and, in
end, persuaded them to submit these questions and debates to the
arbitrament of friends. A certain number of the Lords of Council were
chosen as friends for either party. The Archbishop of St. Andrews and
the Earl of Dunfermline, Chancellor of Scotland, were appointed oversmen
by consent of both the parties. These friendly judges, having heard the
business reasoned in their presence, and, finding that the examination
thereof would prove tedious

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

and intricate, they direct a power to the Marquis of Huntly to deal in
the matter; desiring him to try, if, by his means and mediation, these
contentions might be settled, happening betwixt parties so strictly tied
to him by blood and alliance, the Earl of Sutherland being his
cousin-german, and the Earl of Caithness having married his sister. The
Marquis of Huntly did his best, but could not prevail, either party
being so far from condescending to the other's demands, and so he
remitted the business back again to the Secret Council; which Sir Robert
Gordon perceiving, he moved the King's Majesty for a pardon to Donald
Mackay, John Gordon, and their associates, for the slaughter of John
Sinclair of Skirkag; which His Majesty earnestly granted, seeing it was
committed in the execution of His Majesty's service; yet, nevertheless,
there still remained a grudge in the minds of the parties, searching by
all means and occasions to infest one another, until the year of God
1619, that the Earl of Caithness and Sir Robert Gordon (then, by his
brother's death, Tutor of Sutherland) were reconciled by the mediation
of George Lord

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gordon, Earl of
Enzie, by whose travel and diligence all particulars betwixt the Houses
of Sutherland and Caithness were finally settled; and then went both of
them familiarly to either's houses; whose perfect reconciliation will,
doubtless, tend to the peace and quiet of these parts of the kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spanish Blanks, and What Follows Thereupon](fotc37)
