[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc31)  [Next](fotc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Troubles in the West Isles Betwixt the Clan Donald and the Siol Tormoit in 1601</span>.

Donald Gorm Macdonald of the Sleat had married Sir Rory Macleod of the
Harris's sister, and for some displeasure or jealousy conceived against
her, he did repudiate her; whereupon Sir Rory Macleod sent a message to
Donald Gorm, desiring him to take home his sister. Donald Gorm not only
refused

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

to obey his request, but also intended divorcement against leer; which
when he had obtained, he married Kenneth Mackenzie, Lord of Kintail's
sister.

Sir Rory Macleod took this disgrace (as he thought it) so highly, that,
assembling his countrymen and followers without delay, he invaded, with
fire and sword, a part of Donald Gorm's lands in the Isle of Skye, which
lands Sir Rory claimed to appertain to himself. Donald Gorm, impatient
of this injury, convened his forces, and went into the Harris, which he
wasted and spoiled, carried away their store and bestial, and killed
some of the inhabitants. This again did so stir up Sir Rory Macleod and
his kin, the Siol Tormoit, that they took a journey into the Isle of
Uist (which appertaineth to Donald Gorm), and landing there, Sir Rory
sent his cousin, Donald Glas Macleod, with some 40 men, to spoil the
island, and to take a prey of goods out of the precinct of Kiltrynaid,
where the people had put all their goods to be preserved as in a
sanctuary, being a church. John Macian-MacJames (a kinsman of Donald
Gorm's) being desired by him

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

to stay in the island, accompanied with 20 others, rencountered with
Donald Glas Macleod. This small company of the Clan Donald behaved
themselves so valiantly, that, after a sharp skirmish, they killed
Donald Glas Macleod, with the most part of his company, and so rescued
the goods. Sir Rory, seeing the bad success of his kinsmen, retired home
for that time.

Thus both parties were bent headlong against others with a spirit full
of revenge and fury, and so continued mutually infesting one another
with spoils and cruel slaughters, to the utter ruin and desolation of
both countries, until the inhabitants were forced to eat horses, dogs,
cats, and other filthy beasts. In end, Donald Gorm assembled his whole
forces the year of God 1601, to try the event of battle, and came to
invade Sir Rory's lands, thinking thereby to draw his enemies to fight.
Sir Rory Macleod was then in Argyle, craving aid and advice from the
Earl of Argyle against the Clan Donald. Alexander Macleod (Sir Rory's
brother) resolves to fight with Donald Gorm, though his brother was
absent; so, assembling all the inhabitants of

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

his brother's lands, with the whole race of the Siol Tormoit, and some
of the Siol Torquil, out of the Lewis, he encamped beside a hill called
Ben-a-Chuilinn, in the Isle of Skye, with a resolution to fight against
Donald Gorm and the Clan Donald the next morning, which were no sooner
come but there ensued a cruel and terrible skirmish, which lasted the
most part of the day, both contending for the victory with great
obstinacy. The Clan Donald, in the end, overthrew their. enemies, hurt
Alexander Macleod, and took him prisoner, with Neil MacAlister Roy, and
30 others of the chiefest men among the Siol Tormoit, killed two near
kinsmen of Sir Rory Macleod's, John MacTormoit and Tormot MacTormoit,
with many others. After this skirmish there followed a reconciliation
betwixt them, by the mediation of old Angus Macdonald of Kintyre, the
Laird of Coll, and others. Then Donald Gorm delivered unto Sir Rory
Macleod all the prisoners taken at Ben-a-Chuilinn, together with his
brother, Alexander Macleod; since which time they have continued in
peace and quietness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Troubles Between Lord Kintail and Glengarry](fotc33)
