[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc08)  [Next](fotc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Clan Chattan and Clan Kay.</span>

Robert III. in the year 1396 sent Lindsay, Earl of Crawford, and Dunbar,
Earl of Murray, to suppress a violent contest between the Clans Chattan
and Kay, who being numerous, bold, and barbarous, mutually plundered and
murdered each other. They, fearing lest they should not effect the
matter without much bloodshed, had recourse to policy, viz.:—That thirty
on each side should enter themselves as champions for their respective
clans, and decide their differences by the sword, without being allowed
any other weapon. This proposal was agreed to on both sides. The King
and his nobility were to be spectators of the combat. The conquered clan
were to be pardoned for all their former offences, and the conquerors
honoured with the royal favour. The North Inch of Perth, a level spot,
so called from being partly surrounded by water, was to be the scene of
action; but upon the mustering the combatants, it was found that one of
them, belonging to the Clan Chattan, had absented himself through fear,
and could not be found. It was proposed to balance

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the difference by withdrawing one of the Clan Kay; but none of them
could be prevailed upon to resign the honour and danger of the combat.
After various other expedients failing, one Henry Wynd, a smith, though
no way connected with either clan, offered to supply the place of the
absentee, upon his receiving a French crown of gold (about the value of
seven shillings and sixpence) which was accordingly paid him. The
encounter was maintained on both sides with inconceivable fury; but, at
length, by the superior valour, strength, and skill of Henry Wynd,
victory declared herself for the Clan Chattan. Of them no more than ten,
besides Wynd, were left alive, and all dangerously wounded. The
combatants of the Clan Kay were all cut off, excepting one, who remained
unhurt, threw himself into the Tay, and escaped to the opposite bank.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Tuiteam-Tarbhach](fotc10)
