[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotc09)  [Next](fotc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Tuiteam-Tarbhach.</span>

The year of God 1406, this conflict was fought at Tuiteam-Tarbhach, in
the south-west part of Sutherland, as it marches with Ross. Upon this
occasion, Angus Mackay of Strathnaver

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

married Macleod of the Lews’ sister, by whom he had two sons, Angus Dow
and Rory Gald. Angus Mackay dying, he leaves the government of his
estate and children to his brother Uistean Dow Mackay. Macleod of the
Lews, understanding that his sister, the widow of Angus Mackay, was
hardly dealt withal in Strathnaver by Uistean Dow, the takes journey
thither to visit her, with the choicest men of his country. At his
coming there, he finds that she is not well dealt withal, so he returned
home malcontent, and in his way he spoiled Strathnaver and a great part
of Brae-Chat in the height of Sutherland. Robert, Earl of Sutherland,
being advertised thereof, he sent Alexander Murray of Cubin, with a
company of men, to assist Uistean Dow in pursuing Macleod, and to
recover the prey. They overtake Macleod at Tuiteam-tarbhach, as he and
his company were going to the west sea, where Alexander Murray and
Uistean Dow invaded them with great courage. The fight was long and
furious, rather desperate than resolute. In the end they recovered the
booty, and killed Macleod with all his company. This conflict gave name

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

to the place where it was fought, being then. called Tuiteam-tarbhach,
which signifieth a plentiful fall or slaughter, and is so called unto
this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Lon-Harpasdal](fotc11.md)
