[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotc34)  [Next](fotc36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Troubles of the Lewis</span>.

Rory Macleod of the Lewis had three wives; he married, first, Barbara
Stewart, daughter to the Lord Methven, by whom he had Torquil Oighre,
who died before his father, without issue. After Barbara Stewart's
death, Rory married Mackenzie's daughter, who bore Torquil Connaldagh,
whom Rory would not acknowledge as his son, but held him always a
bastard; and, repudiating his mother, he married Maclean's sister, by
whom he had Torquil Dow and Tormot. Besides these, Rory had three base
sons—Neil Macleod, Rory Oig, and Murdo Macleod. After the death of old
Rory Macleod, his son, Torquil Dow Macleod (excluding his brother
Torquil Connaldagh as a bastard), Both take possession of the Lewis, and
is acknowledged by the inhabitants as the lawful inheritor of that
Island. Torquil Connaldagh (by some called Torquil of the Cogaidh)
perceiving himself thus put bye the inheritance of the Lewis, hath
recourse to his mother's kindred, the Clan Mackenzie, and desires their
support to recover the same.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Lord Kintail,
Torquil Connaldagh, his brother—Murdo Macleod, and the Brieve of the
Lewis, met altogether in Ross, to advise by what means Torquil
Connaldagh might obtain the possession of the Lewis, which they were out
of all hope to effect so long as Torquil Dow was alive; whereupon the
Brieve of the Lewis undertook to slay his master, Torquil Dow, which he
brings thus to pass:—The Brieve, being accompanied with the most part of
his tribe (the Clan-vic-Gill-Mhoire), went in his galley to the Isle of
Rona; and, by the way, he apprehended a Dutch ship, which he brought by
force along with him to the Lewis; he invites his master, Torquil Dow,
to a banquet in the ship; Torquil Dow (suspecting no deceit) went
thither, accompanied with seven of the best of his friends, and sat down
in the ship, expecting some drink; instead of wine, they bring cords;
thus were they all apprehended and bound by the Brieve and his kindred,
who brought them to the Lord of Kintail's bounds, and there beheaded
them every man, in July, 1597. Neither did this advance Torquil
Connaldagh to the possession of the Lewis; for his brother,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Neil Macleod,
opposed himself, and pursued the Brieve and his kin in a part of the
Island called Ness, which they had fortified, where he killed divers of
them, and made them leave the strength. Thus did Neil Macleod possess
the Island, to the behoof of his brother, Tormot, and the children of
Torquil Dow, whom he acknowledged to be righteous heirs of the Island.
Torquil Connaldagh had now lost both his sons, John and Neil, and had
married his daughter to Rory Mackenzie (the Lord Kintail's brother),
giving her in marriage the lands of Coigeach. Hereupon, Kintail began to
think and advise by what means he might purchase to himself the
inheritance of that Island, having now Torquil Connaldagh and his
brother, Murdo Macleod, altogether at his devotion, and having Tormot
Macleod in his custody, whom he took from the schools; so that he had no
one to oppose his designs but Neil Macleod, whom he might easily
overthrow. Kintail deals earnestly with Torquil Connaldagh, and, in end,
persuades him to resign the right of the Island into his favour, and to
deliver him all the old rights and evidents of the Lewis.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

In this meantime, the barons and gentlemen of Fife, hearing these
troubles, were enticed, by the persuasion of some that had been there,
and by the report of the fertility of the Island, to undertake a
difficult and hard enterprise. They conclude to send a colony thither,
and to civilise (if it were possible) the inhabitants of the Island. To
this effect, they obtain, from the King, a gift of the Lewis, the year
1599, or thereabouts, which was alleged to be then at his disposal.
Thereupon, the adventurers, being joined together in Fife, assembled a
company of soldiers, with artificers of all sorts, and did transport
them into the Lewis, where they erected houses and buildings, till, in
end, they made a pretty little town, in a proper and convenient place
fit for the purpose, and there they encamped themselves. Neil Macleod
and Murdo (the sons of old Rory) withstood the undertakers. Murdo
Macleod invaded the Laird of Barcolmy, whom he apprehended, together
with his ship, and killed all his men; so, having detained him six
months in captivity in the Lewis, he released him from his promise to
pay him a ransom.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Now, Neil Macleod was grieved in heart to see his brother, Murdo,
entertain the Brieve and his tribe, being the chief instruments of their
brother, Torquil Dow's, slaughter; and, thereupon, Neil apprehended his
brother, Murdo, which, when the undertakers heard, they sent a message
to Neil, showing that, if he would deliver unto them his brother Murdo,
they would agree with himself, give him a portion of the Island, and
assist him to revenge the slaughter of his brother, Torquil Dow.
Whereunto Neil hearkened, delivered his brother, Murdo, to the
undertakers; then went Neil with them to Edinburgh, and had his pardon
from the King for all his byepast offences. Murdo Macleod was executed
at St. Andrews.

Thus was the Earl of Kintail in despair to purchase or obtain the Lewis;
and therefore he lends all his wits to cross the undertakers; he setteth
Tormot Macleod at liberty, thinking that, at his arrival in the Island,
all the inhabitants would stir in his favour against the undertakers;
which they did indeed, as the natural inclination is of all these
Islanders and Highlanders, who, of all

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

other people, are most bent and willing to hazard and adventure
themselves, their lives, and all they have, for their lords and masters.
The King was informed, by the undertakers, that the Lord of Kintail was
a crosser and a hinderer of their enterprise; whereupon he was brought
into question, and committed to ward in the Castle of Edinburgh, from
whence he was released, without the trial of an assize, by the Lord
Chancellor's means. Neil Macleod, returning into the Lewis with the
undertakers, fell at variance with them; whereupon, he went about to
invade their camp, and they began, in like manner, to lay a snare for
him. The Laird of Wormistoun, choosing a very dark night, sent a company
to apprehend Neil; who, perceiving them coming, invaded them, and chased
them, with slaughter, to their camp. By this time, came Tormot Macleod
into the Island, at whose arrival the inhabitants speedily assembled,
and came to him as to their lord and master.

Thereupon, Tormot, accompanied with his brother, Neil, invaded the camp
of the undertakers, forced it, burnt the fort, killed most part of their
men, took their commanders

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

prisoners, and released them after eight months’ captivity. Thus, for a
while, Tormot Macleod commanded in that Island, until the undertakers
returned again to the Lewis, being assisted by the forces of all the
neighbouring countries, by virtue of the King's commission, directed
against Tormot Macleod and his kin, the Siol-Torquil. How soon their
forces were landed on the Island, Tormot Macleod rendered himself to the
undertakers, upon their promise to carry him safe to London, and to
obtain him a remission for his byepast crimes; but Neil Macleod stood
out and would not submit himself. Tormot being come to London, the King
gives him a pardon; but, withal, he sent him home into Scotland, to be
kept in ward at Edinburgh, where he remained until the month of March,
1615, that the King gave him liberty to pass into Holland, where he
ended his days. Tormot thus warded in Edinburgh, the adventurers did
settle themselves again for a little while, in the Lewis, where, at
last, the undertakers began to weary; many of the adventurers and
partners drew back from the enterprise; some, for lack of means, were
not able;

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

others died; others had greater occasion and business elsewhere to
abstract them; many of them began to decline and decay in their estates;
and so, being continually vexed by Neil Macleod, they left the Island,
and returned into Fife.

The Lord of Kintail, perceiving all things thus fall out to his mind,
did now show himself openly in the matter. He passed a gift of the
Island in his own name, under His Majesty's great seal, by the Lord
Chancellor's means, by virtue of the old right which Torquil Connaldagh
had before resigned in his favour. Some of the adventurers complained
hereof to the King's Majesty, who was highly displeased with Kintail,
and made him resign his right into His Majesty's hands; which right,
being now at His Majesty's disposition, he gave the same to three of the
undertakers, to wit, the Lord Balmerino, Sir James Spence of Wormistoun,
and Sir George Hay; who, now having all the right in their persons,
assembled their forces together, with the aid of most part of all the
neighbouring counties; and so, under the conduct of Sir George Hay and
Sir James Spence, they invaded the Lewis

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

again, not only to settle a colony there, but also to search for Neil
Macleod.

The Lord Kintail (yet hunting after the Lewis) did, underhand, assist
Neil, and publicly did aid the undertakers by virtue of the King's
commission; Kintail sent a supply of victuals, in a ship from Ross, to
the adventurers. In the meantime, he sent quietly to Neil Macleod,
desiring him to take the ship by the way, that the undertakers, trusting
to these victuals, and being disappointed thereof, might be forced to
return, and abandon the Island; which fell out accordingly; for Sir
James Spence and Sir George Hay, failing to apprehend Neil, and being
scarce of victuals to furnish their army, began to weary, and so
dismissed all the neighbouring forces. Sir George Hay and Wormistoun
then retired into Fife, leaving some men in the Island to defend and
keep the fort until they sent them a fresh supply of men and victuals;
whereupon, Neil, being assisted by his nephew, Malcolm Macleod (the son
of Rory Og), invaded the undertakers’ camp, burnt the same, apprehended
all those which were left behind in the island, and sent them home
safely; since which time they

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

never returned again into the Lewis. Then did the Lord Balmerino, Sir
George Hay, and Sir James Spence, begin to weary of the Lewis, and sold
their title of that Island to the Lord of Kintail for a sum of money;
whereby, in end, after great trouble and much blood, he obtained that
Island. And thus did this enterprise of the Fife undertakers come to no
effect, after they had spent much time, and most part of their means,
about it.

Kintail was glad that he had now, at last, caught his long-expected
prey; and thereupon he went into the Island, where he was no sooner
landed but all the inhabitants yielded unto him, except Neil Macleod,
and some few others. The inhabitants yielded the more willingly to
Kintail because he was their neighbour, and might still vex them with
continual excursions if they did stand out against him; which they were
not able to do. Neil Macleod was now forced to retire to a rock, within
the sea, called Berrissay, which he kept for the space of three years.
During the time of his stay in the fort of Berrissay, there arrived an
English pirate in the Lewis, who had a ship furnished with great wealth;

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

this pirate (called Peter Lowe) entered into friendship and familiarity
with Neil, being both rebels; at last, Neil took him prisoner with all
his men, whom he sent, together with the ship, to the Council of
Scotland, thinking thereby to get his own pardon, and his brother Tormot
released out of prison; but neither of them did he obtain; and all the
Englishmen, with their captain, Peter Lowe, were hanged at Leith, the
year 1612. Neil Macleod, being wearied to remain in the fort of
Berrissay, abandoned the same, and, dispersing all his company several
ways, he retired into Harris, where he remained a certain while in
secret; then he rendered himself unto his cousin, Sir Rory Macleod, whom
he entreated to carry him into England to His Majesty; which Sir Rory
undertook to do; and, coming to Glasgow, with a resolution to embark
then for England, he was charged there, under the pain of treason, to
deliver Neil, whom he presented before the Council at Edinburgh, where
he was executed in April, 1613. After the death of Neil, his nephew,
Malcolm Macleod (the son of Rory Og), escaping from the Tutor of
Kintail,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

associated himself to the Clan Donald, in Isla and Kintyre, during their
troubles against the Campbells, in the years 1614, 1615, and 1616; at
which time Malcolm made a journey from Kintyre to the Lewis, and there
killed two gentlemen of the Clan Mackenzie; then he went into Spain, and
there remained in Sir James Macdonald's company, with whom he is now
again returned into England, in the year 1620.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Troubles Betwixt Sutherland and Caithness In 1612](fotc36.md)
