[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotc11)  [Next](fotc13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Druimnacoub</span>.

The year of God 1427, Thomas Mackay (otherwise Macneil), possessor of
the lands of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Creich,
Spanzedell, and Polrossie, in Sutherland, had conceived some displeasure
against the laird of Freswick, called Mowat, whom Thomas Macneil did
eagerly pursue, and killed him near the town of Tain, in Ross, within
the Chapel of St. Duffus, and burnt also that chapel unto which this
Mowat had retired himself as to a sanctuary. The King hearing of this
cruel fact, he causes to proclaim and denounce Thomas Macneil rebel, and
promised his land to any that would apprehend hint. Angus Murray (the
son of Alexander Murray of Cubin, above-mentioned), understanding the
King's proclamation, had secret conference with Morgan and Neil Mackay,
brethren to this Thomas. Angus offered unto them, if they would assist
him to apprehend their brother, that he would give them his own two
daughters in marriage, and also assist them to get the peaceable
possession of Strathnaver, which they did claim as due to them, and (as
he thought) they might then easily obtain the same, with little or no
resistance at all, seeing that Neil Wasse Mackay (the son of Angus Dow)
lay prisoner in the Bass, and Angus Dow himself was unable (by reason of
the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

weakness of his body at that time) to withstand them. Morgan Mackay and
Neil Mackay do condescend and yield to the bargain; and presently,
thereupon, they did apprehend their brother, Thomas, at Spanzedell, in
Sutherland, and delivered him to Angus Murray, who presented him to the
King, at whose command Thomas Macneil was executed at Inverness; and the
lands of Polrossie and Spanzedell, which he did possess, were given to
Angus Murray for this service; which lands his successors do possess
unto this day. Angus Murray, for performance of his promise made to Neil
and Morgan Mackay, gave them his two daughters in marriage. Then Angus
deals with Robert, Earl of Sutherland, that he might have his
attollerance to convene some men in Sutherland, therewith to accompany
his two sons-in-law to obtain the possession of Strathnaver. Earl Robert
grants him his demand; so Angus having gathered a company of resolute
men, he went with these two brethren to invade Strathnaver. Angus Dow
Mackay, hearing of their approach, convened his countrymen, and, because
he was unable himself in person to resist them, he

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

made his bastard son (John Aberigh) leader of his men. They encountered
at Druimnacoub, two miles from Tongue—Mackay's chief dwelling-place.
There ensued a cruel and sharp conflict, valiantly fought a long time,
with great slaughter, so that, in the end, there remained but few alive
of either side. Neil Mackay, Morgan Mackay, and their father-in-law
(Angus Murray), were there slain. John Aberigh, having lost all his men,
was left for dead on the field, and was afterwards recovered; yet he was
mutilated all the rest of his days. Angus Dow Mackay, being brought
thither to view the place of the conflict, and searching for the dead
corpses of his cousins, Morgan and Neil, was there killed with a shot of
an arrow, by a Sutherland man, that was lurking in a bush hard by, after
his fellows had been slain. This John Aberigh was afterwards so hardly
pursued by the Earl of Sutherland, that he was constrained, for safety
of his life, to flee into the Isles.

The Scottish historians, in describing this conflict, do mistake the
place, the persons, and the fact and do quite change the whole state of
the history. For the person—Angus

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dow Mackay of
Strathnaver is by some of them called Angus Duff, and by others, Angus
Duff of Strathern. For the place—they make Angus Duff of Strathern to
come from Strathern (some say from Strathnaver), to Moray and Caithness,
as if these shires did join together. For the fact—they would have Angus
Duff to come for a prey of goods out of Caithness and Moray, which two
shires do not march together, having a great arm of the sea interjected
betwixt them, called the Moray Firth, and having Ross and Sutherland
betwixt them by land. But the truth of this conflict and the occasion
thereof I have here set down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Ruaig-Shansaid](fotc13.md)
