[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc30)  [Next](fotc32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Death of Sir Lauchlan Maclean in 1598</span>.

Sir Lauchlan Maclean's ambition, together with his desire of revenge,
thrust him on to claim the inheritance of the whole Isle of Isla, being
always the possession and ancient inheritance of the Clan Donald, all
which Maclean thought easily now to compass, Sir James Macdonald (the
just inheritor thereof) being young, and his father, Angus Macdonald,
aged. Sir Lauchlan assembled his whole forces, and, in warlike manner,
invaded Isla, to take possession thereof by virtue of a new right which
he had then lately obtained, which Sir James Macdonald (Maclean's
sister's son) understanding, he convened his friends, and went likewise
into the same island (being his own and his forebears’ possession) to
interrupt, if it were possible, the proceedings of his unkind uncle,
Maclean.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

Being both arrived in the island, such as did love them and desired
peace, did mediate a long time betwixt them, and took great pains in
essaying to agree them. Sir James (being the more reasonable of the two)
was content to let his uncle have the half of the island during his
lifetime, although he had no just title thereto, providing he would take
it in the same fashion as his predecessors, the Clan Lean, had it even
before his time, to wit, holden of the Clan Donald; and, moreover, he
offered to submit the controversy to the King's Majesty's arbitrament,
thereby to eschrew all debate with his uncle. But Maclean, running
headlong to his own mischief, much against the opinion of his friends,
who advised him to the contrary, did refuse all offers of peace, unless
his nephew would then presently resign unto him the title and possession
of the whole island. Whereupon they do both resolve and prepare to
fight, Sir James being far inferior in number of men, but some of these
he had with him were lately before trained in the wars of Ireland. Thus
there ensued a cruel and sharp battle, at the head of Loch-Gruinart,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

in Isla, courageously fought a long time on either side. Sir James, in
the beginning, caused his vanguard to make a compass in fashion of a
retreat, thereby to get the sun at his back, and the advantage of a hill
which was hard by. In the end, Sir James, having repulsed the enemy's
vanguard, and forcing their main battle, Maclean was slain; courageously
fighting, together with 80 of the most principal men of his kin, and 200
common soldiers lying dead about him. His son, Lauchlan Barrach Maclean
(being sore wounded) was chased with the rest of his men even to their
boats and vessels. Sir James Macdonald was dangerously wounded, whereof
he hardly recovered afterward, for he was shot with an arrow through the
body, and was left the most part of the ensuing night for dead amongst
the slain bodies. There were slain of the Clan Donald about 30 in all,
and above 60 wounded, which happened the year of God 1598.

And thus the war began by Maclean, without reason, the year of God 1585,
ended now, this year, by his death. Maclean had three responses from a
witch before he

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

undertook this journey into Isla; first, desiring him not to land there
upon Thursday; the next was, forbidding him to drink of a well beside
Gruinart; and thirdly, she told him that one called Maclean should be
slain at Gruinart. The first he transgressed unwillingly, being driven
into that island by a tempest on a Thursday. The second he transgressed
negligently, and drank of that water before he knew the name of the
place, and so he died at Gruinart, as was foretold him, but doubtfully,
and as commonly all such responses be. These broils and uproars did so
move the King against the Macdonalds, that His Majesty afterwards
finding the inheritance both of Kintyre and Isla to beat his own
disposition, he gave all these lands to the Earl of Argyle and the
Campbells; whereupon proceeded the troubles that arose since betwixt the
Campbells and the Clan Donald in Kintyre and Isla, after His Majesty's
coming to the Crown of England, which I omit to relate; only thus far,
that Sir James Macdonald was, by Argyle's means, warded in the Castle of
Edinburgh, and was kept there a long time; from whence he

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

escaped by the means and diligence of his cousin, MacRanald, who fled
with Sir James into Spain and Flanders, where they were entertained by
the Spaniards; from whence they are now (upon the Earl of Argyle's
flight thither to the King of Spain) both recalled home by His Majesty,
the year of God 1620, and are now in England at this time, with the
King, who hath given Sir James a yearly pension of 1000 merks sterling,
and a yearly pension of 200 merks sterling to MacRanald, together with a
pardon for all their bye-gone offences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Troubles in the West Isles Betwixt the Clan Donald and the Siol
Tormoit in 1601](fotc32)
