[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130093)  [Next](1130095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>[1 Tim.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span>*“Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the
commandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our
hope; unto Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace,
from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord.” \[The R.V. omits* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>κυρίου</span>*and
translates: Christ Jesus our hope,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p3.2"></span>τῆς ἐλπίδος ἡμῶν</span>*.\]*

<span id="v.iii.ii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>Great</span> and admirable is the dignity of
an Apostle, and we find Paul constantly setting forth the causes of it,
not as if he took the honor to himself, but as intrusted with it, and
being under the necessity of so doing. For when he speaks of himself as
“called,” and that “by the will of God,” and again elsewhere, “a
necessity is laid upon me” ([1 Cor. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)<span id="v.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>.),
and when he says, “for this I was separated,” by these expressions all
idea of arrogance and ambition is removed. For as he deserves the
severest blame, who intrudes into an office which is not given him of
God, so he who refuses, and shrinks from it when offered to him, incurs
blame of another kind, that of rebellion and disobedience. Therefore
Paul, in the beginning of this Epistle, thus expresses himself, “Paul,
an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God.” He does not say
here, “Paul called,” but “by commandment.” He begins in this manner,
that Timothy may not feel any human infirmity from supposing that Paul
addresses him on the same terms as his disciples. But where is this
commandment given? We read in the Acts of the Apostles: “The Spirit
said, Separate me Paul and Barnabas.” ([Acts xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.ii-p4.3"></span>.)
And everywhere in his writings Paul adds the name of Apostle, to
instruct his hearers not to consider the doctrines he delivered as
proceeding from man. For an Apostle <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086) can say nothing of his own, and by
calling himself an Apostle, he at once refers his hearers to Him that
sent him. In all his Epistles therefore he begins by assuming this
title, thus giving authority to his words, as here he says, “Paul, an
Apostle of Jesus Christ according to the commandment of God our
Saviour.” Now it does not appear that the Father anywhere commanded him.
It is everywhere Christ who addresses him. Thus, “He said unto me,
Depart, for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles” ([Acts xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021)<span id="v.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>.);
and again, “Thou must be brought before Cæsar.” ([Acts xxvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024)<span id="v.iii.ii-p5.3"></span>.)
But whatever the Son commands, this he considers to be the commandment
of the Father, as those of the Spirit are the commandments of the Son.
For he was sent by the Spirit, he was separated by the Spirit, and this
he says was the commandment of God. What then? does it derogate from the
power of the Son, that His Apostle was sent forth by the commandment of
the Father? By no means. For observe, how he represents the power as
common to both. For having said, “according to the commandment of God
our Saviour”; he adds, “and Lord Jesus Christ, our hope.” And observe,
with what propriety he applies the titles. <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087) And indeed, the Psalmist applies
this to the Father, saying, “The hope of all the ends of the earth.”
([Ps. lxiv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.) And again, the blessed Paul in another
place writes, “For therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach, because
we have hope in the living God.” The teacher must suffer dangers even
more than the disciple. “For I will smite the shepherd, (he says,) “and
the sheep shall be scattered abroad.” ([Zech. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>.)
Therefore the devil rages with greater violence against teachers,
because by their destruction the flock also is scattered. For by slaying
the sheep, he has lessened the flock, but when he has made away with the
shepherd, he has ruined the whole flock, so that he the <span
id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span id="v.iii.ii-Page_409"></span>rather
assaults him, as working greater mischief by a less effort; and in one
soul effecting the ruin of all. For this reason Paul, at the beginning,
elevates and encourages the soul of Timothy, by saying, We have God for
our Saviour and Christ for our hope. We suffer much, but our hopes are
great; we are exposed to snares and perils, but to save us we have not
man but God. Our Saviour is not weak, for He is God, and whatever be our
dangers they will not overcome us; nor is our hope made ashamed, for it
is Christ. <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088) For in two ways we
are enabled to bear up against dangers, when we are either speedily
delivered from them, or supposed by good hopes under them.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p8"></span>But Paul never calls himself the Apostle
of the Father, but always of Christ. Because he makes everything common
to both. The Gospel itself he calls “the Gospel of God.” <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089) And whatever we suffer here, he
implies, things present are as nothing.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p10"></span>“Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p11"></span>This too is encouraging. For if he
evinced such faith as to be called peculiarly Paul’s “own” son, he might
be confident also with respect to the future. For it is the part of
faith not to be cast down or disturbed, though circumstances occur that
seem contrary to the promises. But observe he says, “my son,” and even
“mine own son,” and yet he is not of the same substance. But what? was
he of irrational kind? “Well,” says one, “he was not of Paul, so this
does not imply ’being of’ another.” What then? was he of another
substance? neither was it so, for after saying “mine own son,” he adds,
“in the faith,” to show that he was really “his own son,” and truly from
him. There was no difference. The likeness he bore to him was in respect
to his faith, as in human births there is a likeness in respect of
substance. The son is like the father in human beings, but with respect
to God the proximity is greater. <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) For here a father and a son, though
of the same substance, differ in many particulars, as in color, figure,
understanding, age, bent of mind, endowments of soul and body, and in
many other things they may be like or unlike, but there is no such
dissimilarity in the divine Essence. “By commandment.” This is a
stronger expression than “called”, as we learn from other passages. As
he here calls Timothy “mine own son,” in like manner he says to the
Corinthians, “in Christ Jesus I have begotten you,” i.e. in faith; but
he adds the word “own,” <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) to
show his particular likeness to himself, as well as his own love and
great affection for him. Notice again the “in” applied to the faith. “My
own son,” he says, “in the faith.” See what an honorable distinction, in
that he calls him not only his “son,” but his “own” son.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p14"></span>[1 Tim.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>.
“Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p15"></span>Why is mercy mentioned here, and not in
the other Epistles? This is a further mark of his affection. Upon his
son he invokes greater blessings, with the anxious apprehension of a
parent. For such was his anxiety, that he gives directions to Timothy,
which he has done in no other case, to attend to his bodily health;
where he says, “Use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake, and thine
often infirmities” ([1 Tim. v. 23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>.) Teachers indeed stand more in need of
mercy.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p16"></span>“From God our Father,” he says, “and
Jesus Christ our Lord.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p17"></span>Here too is consolation. For if God is
our Father, He cares for us as sons, as Christ says, “What man is there
of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?” ([Matt.
vii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p18"></span>[1 Tim.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>.
“As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p19"></span>Observe the gentleness of the expression,
more like that of a servant than of a master. For he does not say “I
commanded,” or “bade” or even “exhorted,” but “I besought thee.” But
this tone is not for all: only meek and virtuous disciples are to be
treated thus. The corrupt and insincere are to be dealt with in a
different manner, as Paul himself elsewhere directs, “Rebuke them with
all authority” ([Tit. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>.); and here he says “charge,” not “beseech,”
but “charge some that they teach no other doctrine.” What means this?
That Paul’s Epistle which he sent them was not sufficient? Nay, it was
sufficient; but men are apt sometimes to slight Epistles, or perhaps
this may have been before the Epistles were written. He had himself
passed some time in that city. There was the temple of Diana, and there
he had been exposed to those great sufferings. For after the assembly in
the Theater had been dissolved, and he had called to him and exhorted
the disciples, he found it necessary to sail away, though afterwards he
returned to them. It were worth enquiry, whether he stationed Timothy
there at that time. <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) For he
says, that “thou <span id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="v.iii.ii-Page_410"></span>mightest charge some that they teach no
other doctrine”: he does not mention the persons by name, that he might
not, by the openness of his rebuke, render them more shameless. There
were in that city certain false Apostles of the Jews, who wished to
oblige the faithful to observe the Jewish law, a fault he is everywhere
noticing in his Epistles; and this they did not from motives of
conscience, so much as from vainglory, and a wish to have disciples,
from jealousy of the blessed Paul, and a spirit of opposition to him.
This is meant by “teaching another doctrine.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p21"></span>[1 Tim.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>.
“Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p22"></span>By “fables” he does not mean the law; far
from it; but inventions and forgeries and counterfeit doctrines. For, it
seems, the Jews wasted their whole discourse on these unprofitable
points. They numbered up their fathers and grandfathers, that they might
have the reputation of historical knowledge and research. “That thou
mightest charge some,” he says, “that they teach no other doctrine,
neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies.” Why does he call
them “endless”? It is because they had no end, or none of any use, or
none easy for us to apprehend. Mark how he disapproves of questioning.
For where faith exists, there is no need of question. Where there is no
room for curiosity, questions are superfluous. Questioning is the
subversion of faith. <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) For he
that seeks has not yet found. He who questions cannot believe. Therefore
it is his advice that we should not be occupied with questions, since if
we question, it is not faith; for faith sets reasoning at rest. But why
then does Christ say, “Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you” ([Matt. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>.); and, “Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have eternal life”? ([John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span id="v.iii.ii-p23.2"></span>.)
The seeking there is meant of prayer and vehement desire, and He bids
“search the Scriptures,” not to introduce the labors of questioning, but
to end them, that we may ascertain and settle their true meaning, not
that we may be ever questioning, but that we may have done with it. And
he justly said, “Charge some that they teach no other doctrine, neither
give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister questions
rather than the dispensation of God in faith.” <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) Justly has he said, “the
dispensation of God.” For great are the blessings which God is willing
to dispense; but the greatness of them is not conceived by reasoning.
This must then be the work of faith, which is the best medicine of our
souls. This questioning therefore is opposed to the dispensation of God.
For what is dispensed by faith? To receive His mercies and become better
men; to doubt and dispute of nothing; but to repose in confidence. For
what “ministers questions” displaces faith and that which faith hath
wrought and builded. Christ has said that we must be saved by faith;
this these teachers questioned and even denied. For since the
announcement was present, but the issue of it future, faith was
required. But they bring preoccupied by legal observances threw
impediments in the way of faith. He seems also here to glance at the
Greeks, where he speaks of “fables and genealogies,” for they enumerated
their Gods.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p25"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let us not then give heed to
questions. For we were called Faithful, that we might unhesitatingly
believe what is delivered to us, and entertain no doubt. For if the
things asserted were human, we ought to examine them; but since they are
of God, they are only to be revered and believed. If we believe not, how
shall we be persuaded of the existence of a God? For how knowest thou
that there is a God, when thou callest Him to account? The knowledge of
God is best shown by believing in Him without proofs and demonstrations.
Even the Greeks know this; for they believed their Gods telling them,
saith one, even without proof; and what?—That <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) they were the offspring of the
Gods. But why do I speak of the Gods? In the case of the man, a deceiver
and sorcerer, <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) (I speak of
Pythagoras,) they acted in like manner, for of him it was said, <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) He said it. <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) And over their temples was an image
of Silence, and her finger on her mouth, compressing her lips, and
significantly exhorting all that passed by to be silent. And were their
doctrines so sacred, and are ours less so? and even to be ridiculed?
What extreme madness is this! The tenets of the Greeks indeed are
rightly questioned. For they were of that nature, being but disputes,
conflicts of reasonings, and doubts, and conclusions. But ours are far
from all these. For human wisdom invented theirs, but ours were taught
by the grace of the Spirit. Their doctrines are madness and folly, ours
are true wisdom. In their case there is neither teacher nor scholar; but
all alike are disputants. Here whether teacher or scholar, each is to
learn <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099) of him from whom he
ought to learn, and not to doubt, but obey; not to dispute, but be<span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span id="v.iii.ii-Page_411"></span>lieve.
For all the ancients obtained a good report through faith, and without
this everything is subverted. And why do I speak of it in heavenly
things? We shall find upon examination that earthly things depend upon
it no less. For without this there would be no trade nor contracts, nor
anything of the sort. And if it be so necessary here in things that are
false, how much more in those. <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p32"></span>This then let us pursue, to this let us
adhere, so shall we banish from our souls all destructive doctrines,
such, for instance, as relate to nativity <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101) and fate. <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) If you believe that there is a
resurrection and a judgment, you will be able to expel from your mind
all those false opinions. Believe that there is a just God, and you will
not believe that there can be an unjust nativity. Believe that there is
a God, and a Providence, <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) and
you will not believe that there can be a nativity, that holds all things
together. <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) Believe that there
is a place of punishment, and a Kingdom, and you will not believe in a
nativity that takes away our free agency, and subjects us to necessity
and force. Neither sow, nor plant, nor go to war, nor engage in any work
whatever! For whether you will or not, things will proceed according to
the course of nativity! What need have we more of Prayer? And why should
you deserve to be a Christian, if there be this nativity? for you will
not then be responsible. And whence proceed the arts of life? are these
too from nativity? Yes, you say, and it is fated to one to become wise
with labor. But can you show me one who has learnt an art without labor?
You cannot. It is not then from nativity but from labor that he derives
his skill.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p37"></span>But why does a man who is corrupt and
wicked become rich, without inheriting it from his father, while
another, amidst infinite labors, remains poor? For such are the
questions they raise, always arguing upon wealth and poverty, and never
taking the case of vice and virtue. Now in this question talk not of
that, but show me a man who has become bad, whilst he was striving to be
good; or one that, without striving, has become good. For if Fate has
any power, its power should be shown in the most important things; in
vice and virtue, not in poverty and riches. Again you ask, why is one
man sickly and another healthy? why is one honored, another disgraced?
Why does every thing succeed well with this man, whilst another meets
with nothing but failure and impediments? Lay aside the notion of
nativity, and you will know. Believe firmly that there is a God and a
Providence, and all these things will be cleared up. “But I cannot,” you
say, “conceive that there is a Providence, when there is such disorder.
Can I believe that the good God gives wealth to the fornicator, the
corrupt and dishonest man, and not to the virtuous? How can I believe
this? for there must be facts to ground belief.” Well then, do these
cases proceed from a nativity that was just, or unjust? “Unjust,” you
say. Who then made it? “Not God,” you say, “it was unbegotten.” But how
can the unbegotten produce these things? for they are contradictions.
“These things are not then in any wise the works of God.” Shall we then
enquire who made the earth, the sea, the heavens, the seasons?
“Nativity,” you answer. Did nativity then produce in things inanimate
such order and harmony, but in us, for whom these things were made, so
much disorder? As if one, in building a house, should be careful to make
it magnificent, but bestow not a thought upon his household. But who
preserves the succession of the seasons? Who established the regular
laws of nature? Who appointed the courses of day and night? These things
are superior to any such nativity. “But these,” you say, “came to be of
themselves.” And yet how can such a well-ordered system spring up of
itself?

<span id="v.iii.ii-p38"></span>“But whence,” you say, “come the rich,
the healthy, the renowned, and how are some made rich by covetousness,
some by inheritance, some by violence? and why does God suffer the
wicked to be prosperous?” We answer, Because the retribution, according
to the desert of each, does not take place here, but is reserved for
hereafter. Show me any such thing taking place Then! “Well,” say you,
“give me here, and I do not look for hereafter.” <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) But it is because you seek here,
that you receive not. For if when earthly enjoyment is not within your
reach, you seek present things so eagerly as to prefer them to future,
what would you do if you were in possession of unmixed pleasure? God
therefore shows you that these things are nothing, and indifferent; for
if they were not indifferent, He would not bestow them on such men. You
will own that it is a matter of indifference whether one be tall or
short, black or white; so is it whether one be rich or poor. For, tell
me, are not things necessary bestowed on all equally, as the capacity
for virtue, the distribution of spiritual gifts? If you understood
aright the mercies of God, you would not complain of wanting worldly
things, whilst you enjoyed these best gifts equally with others; and
knowing that equal distribution you would not desire superi<span
id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="v.iii.ii-Page_412"></span>ority in
the rest. As if a servant enjoying from his master’s bounty food,
clothing, and lodging, and all other necessaries equally with his
fellow-servants, should pride himself upon having longer nails, or more
hair upon his head; so it is for a Christian to be elated on account of
those things, which he enjoys only for a time. For this reason it is,
that God withdraws those things from us, to extinguish this madness, and
transfer our affections from them to heaven. But nevertheless we do not
learn wisdom. As if a child possessing a toy, should prefer it to things
necessary, and his father, to lead him against his will to what was
better for him, should deprive him of his toy; so God takes these things
from us, that He may lead us to heaven. If you ask then why He permits
the wicked to be rich, it is because they are not high in His esteem.
And if the righteous too are rich, it is rather that He allows it to be,
than that He makes them so. Now these things we say superficially, as to
men not knowing the Scriptures. But our discourses would be unnecessary
if you would believe and take heed to the divine word, for that would
teach you all things. And that you may understand that neither riches,
nor health, nor glory, are anything, I can show you many, who, when they
might gain wealth, do not seek wealth; when they might enjoy health,
mortify their bodies; when they might rise to glory, make it their aim
to be despised. But there is no good man, who ever studied to be bad.
Let us therefore desist from seeking things below, and let us seek
heavenly things; for so we shall be able to attain them, and we shall
enjoy eternal delights, <span id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106) by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. To Whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now, and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[408:1087](1130094.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p5"></span> He refers to the sense of the term in
Greek, which is, “One who is sent.” See [Heb.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001), [John
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028), [John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="v.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[408:1088](1130094.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p6"></span> ἐπώνυμα, viz. “Saviour” and “Hope.”

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[409:1089](1130094.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p7"></span> Montfaucon adopts Savile’s conjecture.
<span class="c16"><span id="v.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>mss</span>. Christ’s.
The mistake would be easily made by a transcriber who did not follow the
sense entirely.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[409:1090](1130094.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p9"></span> [1 Tim.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#011), [1 Thess.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[409:1091](1130094.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p12"></span> He supposes an Arian objector to argue
that St. Paul here calls one a “son,” and his “own son,” who was not of
his substance, and so our Lord may be called the Son of God, and yet not
be of His substance. St. Chrysostom replies (1) that even so St. Paul
does not leave room to suppose a different kind of substance, as though
he had called a brute his son. The objector rejoins, that still he calls
one a son who was not of “his own” substance. He answers (2) that even
this does not follow, since he adds, “in the faith,” and the faith of
Timothy was both exactly similar to his own, and derived from it. Thus
the passage affords no countenance even to the doctrine of “like,” as
opposed to “one substance.” See Epistle of St. Athanasius in def. of
Nicene Def. c. v. § 8, Oxf. Tr. p. 39, and Disc. 1, c. v. p. 203.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[409:1092](1130094.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p13"></span> γνήσιον.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[409:1093](1130094.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p20"></span> He must mean to suggest that this is a
reference to former times, for he knew the history too well to suppose
that this Epistle was written then.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[410:1094](1130094.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p23"></span> Or “incompatible with” ἀναιρετική.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[410:1095](1130094.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p24"></span> The English version is “godly edifying,”
from the reading οἰκοδομίαν. Οἰκονομίαν, as here, is the reading of
<span class="c16"><span id="v.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. nearly
all Greek. \[Adopted in the R.V.\]

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[410:1096](1130094.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p26"></span> Or “and wherefore,” “because,” &c. See
[Acts xvii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[410:1097](1130094.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p27"></span> γόητος καὶ μάγου.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[410:1098](1130094.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p28"></span> αὐτὸς ἔφα.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[410:1099](1130094.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p29"></span> So Sav. mar. and <span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>ms</span>. Colb. and afterwards, “And his was
the five years’ silence, he closed his mouth with his finger, and
compressing his lips,” &c.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[410:1100](1130094.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p30"></span> This seems the only way in which the
Greek can be *construed*. The word *vult*, in the Latin, may come from
another reading, but the sense is plain.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[411:1101](1130094.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p31"></span> ἐκείναις. Sav. conj. ἐκείνοις, which
seems necessary, unless the fault be elsewhere; he must mean “heavenly
things.” Comp. [Luke xvi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[411:1102](1130094.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p33"></span> Γένεσις. The same word is kept
throughout the passage, though it sounds ill in places, for the sake of
fidelity.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[411:1103](1130094.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p34"></span> Εἰμαρμένη.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[411:1104](1130094.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p35"></span> Θεὸς προνοῶν, “a God providing.”

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[411:1105](1130094.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p36"></span> συνέχουσα.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[411:1106](1130094.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p39"></span> Compare [Jas. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[412:1107](1130094.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p40"></span> Ed. τροφῆς, “food.” St. Chrys.
undoubtedly wrote τρυφῆς.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 1:5-7](1130095)
