[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130083)  [Next](1130085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span
id="iv.vi.i-Page_377"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p4.1"></span>second epistle of St. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p5.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p6"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p6.1"></span>thessalonians.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.vi.i-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p8.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p9"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p9.1"></span>Argument.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p10"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p10.1"></span>Having</span> said in his former Epistle that
“we pray night and day to see you, and that we could not forbear, but
were left in Athens alone,” and that “I sent Timothy” (from [1 Thess.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#010)<span id="iv.vi.i-p10.2"></span>.),
by all these expressions he shows the desire which he had to come
amongst them. When therefore he had perhaps not had time to go, and to
perfect what was lacking in their faith, on this account he adds a
second Epistle, filling up by his writings what was wanting of his
presence. For that he did not depart, we may conjecture from hence: for
he says in this Epistle, “We beseech you by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” ([2 Thess. ii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p10.3"></span>.) For in his first Epistle he said,
“Concerning the times and the seasons ye have no need that aught be
written unto you.” ([1 Thess. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi.i-p10.4"></span>.) So
that if he had gone, there would have been no need of his writing. But
since the question was deferred, on this account he adds this Epistle,
as in his Epistle to Timothy he says, “They subvert the faith of some,
saying that the Resurrection is already past” (from [2 Tim. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.i-p10.5"></span>.);
that the faithful henceforth hoping for nothing great or splendid, might
faint under their sufferings.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p11"></span>For since that hope supported them, and
did not allow them to yield to the present evils, the devil wishing to
cut it off, as being a kind of anchor, when he was not able to persuade
them that the things to come were false, went to work another way, and
having suborned certain pestilential men, endeavored to deceive those
who believed into a persuasion that those great and splendid things had
received their fulfillment. Accordingly these men then said that the
Resurrection was already past. But now they said that the Judgment and
the coming of Christ were at hand, that they might involve even Christ
in a falsehood, and having pointed out to them that there is hereafter
no retribution, nor judgment-seat, nor punishment and vengeance for
those who had done them evil, they might both render these more bold,
and those more dispirited. And, what was worse than all, some attempted
merely to report words as if they were said by Paul, but others even to
forge Epistles as written by him. On this account, cutting off all
access for them, he says, “Be not quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet
be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by epistle as from us.”
([2 Thess. ii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p11.1"></span>.) “Neither by spirit,” he says, glancing at
the false prophets. Whence then shall we know them, he says? For this
very reason, he added, “The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand,
which is the token in every Epistle: so I write. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all.” ([2 Thess.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.i-p11.2"></span>.)
He does not here mean, that this is the token,—for it is probable that
others also <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="iv.vi.i-Page_378"></span>imitated this,—but that I write the
salutation with mine own hand, as is the custom also now among us. For
by the subscription the writings of those who send letters are made
known. But he comforts them, as being excessively pinched <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063) by their troubles; both praising
them from their present state, and encouraging them from a prospect of
the futurity, and from the punishment, and from the recompense of good
things prepared for them; and he more clearly enlarges upon the topic,
not indeed revealing the time itself, but showing the sign of the time,
namely, Antichrist. For a weak soul is then most fully assured, not when
it merely hears, but when it learns something more particular.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p13"></span>And Christ too bestowed great care upon
this point, and being seated on the Mount, He with great particularity
discoursed to His disciples upon the Consummation. And wherefore? that
there might be no room for those who introduce Antichrists and false
Christs. And He Himself also gives many signs, one indeed, and that the
most important, saying, when “the Gospel shall be preached to all
nations” (from [Matt. xxiv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p13.1"></span>.), and another also, that they should not be
deceived with respect to His coming. “As the lightning” ([Matt.
24.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p13.2"></span>.), He says, shall He come; not concealed in
any corner, but shining everywhere. It requires no one to point it out,
so splendid will it be, even as the lightning needs no one to point it
out. And He has spoken in a certain place also concerning Antichrist,
when He said, “I am come in My Father’s name, and ye receive Me not: if
another shall come in His own name, Him ye will receive.” ([John v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043)<span id="iv.vi.i-p13.3"></span>.)
And He said that those unspeakable calamities one after another were a
sign of it, and that Elias must come.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p14"></span>The Thessalonians indeed were then
perplexed, but their perplexity has been profitable to us. For not to
them only, but to us also are these things useful, that we may be
delivered from childish fables and from old women’s fooleries. And have
you not often heard, when you were children, persons talking much even
about the name of Antichrist, and about his bending the knee? For the
devil scatters these things in our minds, whilst yet tender, that the
doctrine may grow up with us, and that he may be able to deceive us.
Paul therefore, in speaking of Antichrist, would not have passed over
these things if they had been profitable. Let us not therefore enquire
into these things. For he will not come so bending his knees, but
“exalting himself against all that is called God, or that is worshiped;
so that he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God.”
([2 Thess. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p14.1"></span>.) For as the devil fell by pride, so he who
is wrought upon by him is anointed unto pride.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p15"></span>Wherefore, I beseech you, let us all be
earnest to be far removed from this affection, that we may not fall into
his condemnation, that we may not subject ourselves to the same
punishment, that we may not partake of the vengeance. “Not a novice,” he
says, “lest being puffed up he fall into the condemnation of the devil.”
([1 Tim. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>.) He who is puffed up therefore, suffers the
same punishment with the devil. “For the beginning of pride is not to
know the Lord.” ([Sir. 10:12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.2"></span>.)
Pride is the beginning of sin, the first impulse and movement toward
evil. Perhaps indeed it is both the root and the foundation. For “the
beginning” means either the first impulse towards evil, or the
grounding. As if one should say, the beginning of chastity is to abstain
from the sight of an improper object, that is the first impulse. But if
we should say, the beginning of chastity is fasting, that is the
foundation and establishment. So also pride is the beginning of sin. For
every sin begins from it, and is maintained by it. For that, whatever
good things we do, this vice suffers them not to remain and not fall
away, but is as a certain root not letting them abide unshaken, is
manifest from hence: see what things the Pharisee did, but they profited
him nothing. For he did not extirpate the root, but it corrupted all his
performances, because the root remained. From pride springs contempt of
the poor, desire of riches, the love of power, the longing for much
glory. Such an one is prompt to revenge an insult. For he who is proud
cannot bear to be insulted even by his superiors, much less by his
inferiors. But he who cannot bear to be insulted cannot bear either to
suffer any ill. See how pride is the beginning of sin.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p16"></span>But how is it the beginning of pride, not
to know the Lord? Justly. For he who knows God as he ought to know Him,
he who knows that the Son of God humbled Himself so much, is not lifted
up. But he who knows not these things, is lifted up. For pride anoints
him unto arrogance. For tell me, whence is it that they who make war
upon the Church say that they know God? Is it not from arrogance? See
into what a precipice it plunges them, not to know the Lord! For if God
loveth a contrite spirit ([Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="iv.vi.i-p16.1"></span>,
etc.), He on the other hand “resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to
the humble.” ([1 Pet. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p16.2"></span>.) There is therefore no evil like pride. It
renders a man a demon, insolent, blasphemous, perjured, and makes him
desirous of deaths and murders. The proud man always lives in troubles,
is always angry, always unhappy. There is nothing which can satiate his
passion. If he should see the king <span id="page_379">p. 379</span>
<span id="iv.vi.i-Page_379"></span>stooping down to him, and prostrating
himself, he is not satisfied, but is the more inflamed. For as the
lovers of money, the more they receive, want so much the more, so also
the proud, the more honor they enjoy, the more they desire. For their
passion is increased; for a passion it is, and a passion knows not
limit, but then stops when it has slain its possessor. Do you not see
that drunkards are always thirsty? for it is a passion, not the desire
of nature, but some perverted disease. Do you not see how those who are
affected with bulimy, as it is called, are always hungry? For it is a
passion, as the children of the physicians say, already exceeding the
bounds of nature. The busy-bodies, and the over-curious, whatever they
have learnt, do not stop. For it is a passion, and has no limit.
([Ecclesiasticus 23.17](../../../bib/apo/sir023.htm#017)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p16.3"></span>.) Again, they who delight in fornication,
they too cannot desist. “To a fornicator,” it is said, “all bread is
sweet.” He will not cease, till he is devoured. For it is a passion.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p17"></span>But they are indeed passions, not however
incurable, but admitting of cure, and much more than bodily affections.
For if we will, we can extinguish them. How then can a man extinguish
pride? By knowing God. For if it arises from not knowing God, if we know
Him, all pride is banished. Think of Hell. Think of those who are much
better than yourself. Think of your sins. Think for how many things you
deserve punishment from God. If you think of these, you will soon bring
down your proud mind, you will soon bend it. But can you not do these
things? are you too weak? Consider things present, human nature itself,
the nothingness of man! When thou seest a dead body carried through the
market-place, orphan children following it, a widow beating her breast,
servants bewailing, friends looking dejected, reflect upon the
nothingness of things present, and that they differ not from a shadow,
or a dream.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p18"></span>Does this not suit you? Think of those who
are very rich, who perish anyhow in war; look round on the houses, that
belonged to the great and illustrious, and are now leveled to the
ground. Consider how mighty they were, and now not even a memorial of
them is left. For, if you will, every day you may find examples of these
things—the successions of rulers,—the confiscations of rich men’s goods.
“Many tyrants have sat upon the ground—and he who was never thought on,
has worn a diadem.” ([Ecclesiasticus
11.15](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p18.1"></span>.) Do not these things happen every day? Do
not our affairs resemble a kind of wheel? Read, if you will, both our
own (books), and those without: <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064) for they also abound in such
examples. If you despise ours, and this from pride; if you admire the
works of philosophers, go even to them. They will instruct thee,
relating ancient calamities, as will poets, and orators, and sophists,
and all historians. From every side, if you will, you may find examples.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p20"></span>But if you will none of these things,
reflect upon our very nature, of what it consists, and wherein it ends.
Consider, when you sleep, of what worth are you? Will not even a little
beast be able to destroy thee? For often a little animal falling from
the roof has deprived many persons of sight, or has been the cause of
some other danger. But what? art thou not less than all beasts? But what
sayest thou? that thou excellest in reason? But behold, thou hast not
reason: for pride is a sign of the want of reason. And for what, tell
me, art thou high-minded after all? Is it upon the good constitution of
thy body? But the prize of victory here is with the irrational
creatures; this is possessed also by robbers and murderers, and
violators of the tombs. But art thou proud of thine understanding? It is
no proof of understanding to be proud. By this then first thou deprivest
thyself of becoming intelligent. Let us bring down our high thoughts.
Let us be moderate, and lowly, and gentle. For such even Christ has
pronounced blessed above all, saying, “Blessed are the poor in spirit.”
([Matt. v. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p20.1"></span>.) And again, He cried, saying, “Learn of Me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart.” ([Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="iv.vi.i-p20.2"></span>.)
For this reason He washed the feet of His disciples, affording us an
example of humility. From all these things let us gain profit, that we
may be able to obtain the blessings promised to those who love Him, by
the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[378:1064](1130084.htm#fr_1063) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p12"></span> τεταριχενμένους, see on Stat. Hom. vi.
Tr. p. 388, note 6.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[379:1065](1130084.htm#fr_1064) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p19"></span> The sequel clearly shows that he means
Christian and Heathen books, and so the words themselves mean, rather
than domestic and foreign history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians 1:1,2](1130085)
