[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130113)  [Next](1130115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>[2 Timothy i.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>“Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner: but be thou partaker of
the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God; Who hath
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>There</span> is nothing worse than that man
should measure and judge of divine things by human reasonings. For thus
he will fall from that rock <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) a
vast distance, and be deprived of the light. For if he who wishes with
human eyes to apprehend the rays of the sun will not only not apprehend
them, but, besides this failure, will sustain great injury; so, but in a
higher degree, is he in a way to suffer this, and abusing the gift of
God, who would by human reasonings gaze intently on that Light. Observe
accordingly how Marcion, and Manes, and Valentinus, and others who
introduced their heresies and pernicious doctrines <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324) into the Church of God, measuring
divine things by human reasonings, became ashamed of the Divine economy.
Yet it was not a subject for shame, but rather for glorying; I speak of
the Cross of Christ. For there is not so great a sign of the love of God
for mankind, not heaven, nor sea, nor earth, nor the creation of all
things out of nothing, nor all else beside, as the Cross. Hence it is
the boast of Paul, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ.” ([Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>.)
But natural men, and those who attribute to God no more than to human
beings, stumble, and become ashamed. Wherefore Paul from the first
exhorts his disciple, and through him all others, in these words: “Be
not thou ashamed of the testimony of our Lord,” that is, <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) “Be not ashamed, that thou
preachest One that was cru<span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="v.iv.ii-Page_480"></span>cified, but rather glory in it.” For in
themselves death and imprisonment and chains are matters of shame and
reproach. But when the cause is added before us, and the mystery viewed
aright, they will appear full of dignity, and matter for boasting. For
it was that death which saved the world, when it was perishing. That
death connected earth with heaven, that death destroyed the power of the
devil, and made men angels, and sons of God: that death raised our
nature to the kingly throne. Those chains were the conversion of many.
“Be not” therefore “ashamed,” he says, “of the testimony of our Lord,
nor of me His prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the
Gospel”; that is, though thou shouldest suffer the same things, be not
thou ashamed. For that this is implied appears from what he said above;
“God hath given us a spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind”;
and by what follows, “Be thou partaker of the sufferings of the Gospel”:
not merely be not ashamed of them, but be not ashamed even to experience
them.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p8"></span>And he does not say, “Do not fear,” but,
the more to encourage him, “be not ashamed,” as if there were no further
danger, if he could overcome the shame. For shame is only then
oppressive, when one is overcome by it. Be not therefore ashamed, if I,
who raised the dead, who wrought miracles, who traversed the world, am
now a prisoner. For I am imprisoned, not as a malefactor, but for the
sake of Him who was crucified. If my Lord was not ashamed of the Cross,
neither am I of chains. And with great propriety, when he exhorts him
not to be ashamed, he reminds him of the Cross. If thou art not ashamed
of the Cross, he means, neither be thou of chains; if our Lord and
Master endured the Cross, much more should we chains. For he who is
ashamed of what He endured, is ashamed of Him that was crucified. Now it
is not on my own account that I bear these chains; therefore do not give
way to human feelings, but bear thy part in these sufferings. “Be
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel.” He says not this, as if the
Gospel could suffer injury, but to excite his disciple to suffer for it.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p9"></span>“According to the power of God; Who hath
saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p10"></span>More especially because it was a hard
thing to say, “Be partakers of afflictions,” he again consoles
him. <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326) Reckon that thou
sustainest these things, not by thine own power, but by the power of
God. For it is thy part to choose and to be zealous, but God’s to
alleviate sufferings and bid them cease. <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) He then shows him the proofs of His
power. Consider how thou wast saved, how thou wast called. As he
elsewhere says, “According to His power that worketh in us.” ([Eph. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>.)
So much was it a greater exercise of power to persuade the world to
believe, than to make the Heavens. But how was he “called with a holy
calling”? <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328) This means, He made
them saints, who were sinners and enemies. “And this not of ourselves,
it was the gift of God.” If then He is mighty in calling us, and good,
in that He hath done it of grace and not of debt, we ought not to fear.
For He Who, when we should have perished, <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) saved us, though enemies, by grace,
will He not much more cooperate with us, when He sees us working? “Not
according to our own works,” he says, “but according to his own purpose
and grace,” that is, no one compelling, no one counseling Him, but of
His own purpose, from the impulse of His own goodness, He saved us; for
this is the meaning of “according to His own purpose.” “Which was given
us before the world began.” That is, it was determined without beginning
that these things should be done in Christ Jesus. This is no light
consideration, that from the first He willed it. It was not an
after-thought. How then is not the Son eternal? for He also willed it
from the beginning.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p15"></span>[2 Tim.
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>.
“But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ,
Who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light
by the Gospel.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p16"></span>Thou seest the power, thou seest the gift
bestowed not by works, but through the Gospel. These are objects of
hope: for both were wrought in His Body. And how will they be wrought in
ours? “By the Gospel.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p17"></span>[2 Tim.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>.
“Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an Apostle, and a teacher of
the Gentiles.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p18"></span>Why does he so constantly repeat this, and
call himself a teacher of the Gentiles? Because he wishes to persuade
them that they also ought to draw close to the Gentiles. Be not
therefore dismayed at my sufferings. The sinews of death are unstrung.
It is not as a malefactor that I suffer, but because I am “a teacher of
the Gentiles.” At the same time he makes his discourse worthy of credit.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p19"></span>[2 Tim.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>.
“For the which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not
ashamed. For I know Whom I have believed, and am persuaded that He is
able to keep that which I have committed unto Him against that day.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p20"></span>“I am not ashamed,” he says. For are
chains, are sufferings, a matter for shame? Be <span id="page_481">p.
481</span> <span id="v.iv.ii-Page_481"></span>not then ashamed! Thou
seest how he illustrates his teaching by his works. “These things,” he
says, “I suffer”: I am cast into prison, I am banished; “For I know Whom
I have believed, and am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I
have committed to Him <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) against
That Day.” What is <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) “that
which is committed”? <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) The
faith, the preaching of the Gospel. He, who committed this to him, he
says, will preserve it unimpaired. I suffer everything, that I may not
be despoiled of this treasure, and I am not ashamed at these things, so
long as it is preserved uninjured. Or he calls the Faithful the charge
which God committed to him, or which he committed to God. For he says,
“Now I commit you to the Lord.” ([Acts xx.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032)<span id="v.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>.)
That is, these things will not be unprofitable to me. And in Timothy is
seen the fruit of the charge thus “committed.” You see that he is
insensible to sufferings, from the hope that he entertains of his
disciples.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p24"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>Moral.</span> Such ought a Teacher to be, so
to regard his disciples, to think them everything. “Now we live,” he
says, “if ye stand fast in the Lord.” And again, “What is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ?” ([1 Thess. 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008), [1
Thess. 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p24.2"></span>.) You see his anxiety in this matter, his
regard for the good of his disciples, not less than for his own. <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) For teachers ought to surpass
natural parents, to be more zealous than they. And it becomes their
children to be kindly affectioned towards them. For he says, “Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for
your souls as they that must give account.” ([Heb. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>.)
For say, is he subject to so dangerous a responsibility, and art thou
not willing to obey him, and that too, for thy own benefit? For though
his own state should be good, yet as long as thou art in a bad condition
his anxiety continues, he has a double account to render. And consider
what it is to be responsible and anxious for each of those who are under
his rule. What honor wouldest thou have reckoned equal, what service, in
requital of such dangers? Thou canst not offer an equivalent. For thou
hast not yet devoted thy soul for him, but he lays down his life for
thee, and if he lays it not down here, when the occasion requires it, he
loses it There. But thou art not willing to submit even in words. This
is the prime cause of all these evils, that the authority of rulers is
neglected, that there is no reverence, no fear. He says, “Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit yourselves.” But now all is turned
upside down and confounded. And this I say not for the sake of the
rulers; (for what benefit will they have of the honor they receive from
us, <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) except so far as we are
rendered obedient;) but I say it for your advantage. For with respect to
the future, they will not be benefited by the honor done them, but
receive the greater condemnation, neither will they be injured as to the
future by ill treatment, but will have the more excuse. But all this I
desire to be done for your own sakes. For when rulers are honored by
their people, this too is reckoned against them; as in the case of Eli
it is said, “Did I not choose him out of his father’s house?” ([1 Sam.
ii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>.) But when they are insulted, as in the
instance of Samuel, God said, “They have not rejected thee, but they
have rejected Me.” ([1 Sam. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.ii-p26.2"></span>.)
Therefore insult is their gain, honor their burden. What I say,
therefore, is for your sakes, not for theirs. He that honors the Priest,
will honor God also; and he who has learnt to despise the Priest, will
in process of time insult God. “He that receiveth you,” He saith,
“receiveth Me.” ([Matt. x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p26.3"></span>.) “Hold my priests in honor” ([Ecclesiasticus
7.31](../../../bib/apo/sir007.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p26.4"></span>?), He says. The Jews learned to despise God,
because they despised Moses, and would have stoned him. For when a man
is piously disposed towards the Priest, he is much more so towards God.
And even if the Priest be wicked, God seeing that thou respectest him,
though unworthy of honor, through reverence to Him, will Himself reward
thee. For if “he that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
receive a prophet’s reward” ([Matt. x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041)<span id="v.iv.ii-p26.5"></span>.);
then he who honoreth and submitteth and giveth way to the Priest shall
certainly be rewarded. For if in the case of hospitality, when thou
knowest not the guest, thou receivest so high a recompense, much more
wilt thou be requited, if thou obeyest him whom He requires thee to
obey. “The Scribes and Pharisees,” He says, “sit in Moses’ seat; all
therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do
not ye after their works.” ([Matt.
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.ii-p26.6"></span>.)
Knowest thou not what the Priest is? He is an Angel <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) of the Lord. Are they his own words
that he speaks? If thou despisest him, thou despisest not him, but God
that ordained him. But how does it appear, thou askest, that he is
ordained of God? Nay, if thou suppose it otherwise, thy hope is rendered
vain. For if God worketh nothing through his means, thou neither hast
any Laver, nor art partaker of the Mysteries, nor of the benefit of
Blessings; thou art therefore not a Christian. What then, you say, does
God ordain all, even the unworthy? God indeed doth not ordain all, but
He worketh through all, though they be them<span id="page_482">p.
482</span> <span id="v.iv.ii-Page_482"></span>selves unworthy, that the
people may be saved. For if He spoke, for the sake of the people, by an
ass, and by Balaam, a most wicked man, much more will He speak by the
mouth of the Priest. What indeed will not God do or say for our
salvation? By whom doth He not act? For if He wrought through Judas and
those other that “prophesied,” to whom He will say, “I never knew you;
depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity” ([Matt.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>.);
and if others “cast out devils” ([Ps. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.ii-p27.2"></span>.);
will He not much more work through the Priests? Since if we were to make
inquisition into the lives of our rulers, we should then become the
ordainers <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) of our own
teachers, and all would be confusion; the feet would be uppermost, the
head below. Hear Paul saying, “But with me it is a very small thing that
I should be judged of you, or of man’s judgment.” ([1 Cor. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.ii-p28.1"></span>.)
And again, “Why dost thou judge thy brother?” ([Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.ii-p28.2"></span>.)
For if we may not judge our brother, much less our teacher. If God
commands this indeed, thou doest well, and sinnest if thou do it not;
but if the contrary, dare not do it, nor attempt to go beyond the lines
that are marked out. After Aaron had made the golden calf, Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram raised an insurrection against him. And did they not
perish? Let each attend to his own department. For if he teach perverted
doctrine, though he be an Angel, obey him not; but if he teach the
truth, take heed not to his life, but to his words. Thou hast Paul to
instruct thee in what is right both by words and works. But thou sayest,
“He gives not to the poor, he does not govern well.” Whence knowest thou
this? Blame not, before thou art informed. Be afraid of the great
account. Many judgments are formed upon mere opinion. Imitate thy Lord,
who said, “I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, and if not, I will know.” ([Gen. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.ii-p28.3"></span>.)
But if thou hast enquired, and informed thyself, and seen; yet await the
Judge, and usurp not the office of Christ. To Him it belongs, and not to
thee, to make this inquisition. Thou art an inferior servant, not a
master. Thou art a sheep, be not curious concerning the shepherd, lest
thou have to give account of thy accusations against him. But you say,
How does he teach me that which he does not practice himself? It is not
he that speaks to thee. If it be he whom thou obeyest, thou hast no
reward. It is Christ that thus admonishes thee. And what do I say? Thou
oughtest not to obey even Paul, if he speaks of himself, or anything
human, but the Apostle, that has Christ speaking in him. Let not us
judge one another’s conduct, but each his own. Examine thine own life.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p29"></span>But thou sayest, “He ought to be better
than I.” Wherefore? “Because he is a Priest.” And is he not superior to
thee in his labors, his dangers, his anxious conflicts and troubles? But
if he is not better, oughtest thou therefore to destroy thyself? These
are the words of arrogance. <span id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337)
For how is he not better than thyself? He steals, thou sayest, and
commits sacrilege! How knowest thou this? Why dost thou cast thyself
down a precipice? If thou shouldest hear it said that such an one hath a
purple robe, <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338) though thou
knewest it to be true, and couldest convict him, thou declinest to do
it, and pretendest ignorance, not being willing to run into unnecessary
danger. But in this case thou art so far from being backward, that even
without cause thou exposest thyself to the danger. Nor think thou art
not responsible for these words. Hear what Christ says, “Every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment.” ([Matt. xii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>.) And dost thou think thyself better than
another, and dost thou not groan, and beat thy breast, and bow down thy
head, and imitate the Publican?

<span id="v.iv.ii-p32"></span>And then thou destroyest thyself, though
thou be better. Be silent, that thou cease not to be better. If thou
speak of it, thou hast done away the merit; if thou thinkest it, I do
not say so; if thou dost not think it, thou hast added much. For if a
notorious sinner, when he confessed, “went home justified,” he who is a
sinner in a less degree, and is conscious of it, how will he not be
rewarded? Examine thy own life. Thou dost not steal; but thou art
rapacious, and overbearing, and guilty of many other such things. I say
not this to defend theft; God forbid! deeply lament if there is any one
really guilty of it, but I do not believe it. How great an evil is
sacrilege, it is impossible to say. But I spare you. For I would not
that our virtue should be rendered vain by accusing others. What was
worse than the Publican? For it is true that he was a publican, and
guilty of many offenses, yet because the Pharisee only said, “I am not
as this publican,” he destroyed all his merit. I am not, thou sayest,
like this sacrilegious Priest. And dost not thou make all in vain?

<span id="v.iv.ii-p33"></span>This I am compelled to say, and to enlarge
upon in my discourse, not so much because I am concerned for them, but
because I fear for you, lest you should render your virtue vain by this
boasting of yourselves, and condemnation of others. For hear the
exhortation of Paul, “Let every one prove his own work, and then shall
he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.” ([Gal. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.ii-p34"></span><span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="v.iv.ii-Page_483"></span>If you had a wound, tell me, and should go
to a physician, would you stay him from salving and dressing your own
wound, and be curious to enquire whether the physician had a wound, or
not? and if he had, would you mind it? Or because he had it, would you
forbear dressing your own, and say, A physician ought to be in sound
health, and since he is not so, I shall let my wound go uncured? For
will it be any palliation <span id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339) for
him that is under rule, that his Priest is wicked? By no means. He will
suffer the destined punishment, and you too will meet with that which is
your due. For the Teacher now only fills a place. For “it is written,
They shall all be taught of God.” ([John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045), [Isa.
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>.) “Neither shall they say, Know the Lord. For
all shall know Me from the least to the greatest.” ([Jer. xxxi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="v.iv.ii-p35.2"></span>.)
Why then, you will say, does he preside? Why is he set over us? I
beseech you, let us not speak ill of our teachers, nor call them to so
strict an account, lest we bring evil upon ourselves. Let us examine
ourselves, and we shall not speak ill of others. Let us reverence that
day, on which he enlightened <span id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340)
us. He who has a father, whatever faults he has, conceals them all. For
it is said, “Glory not in the dishonor of thy father; for thy father’s
dishonor is no glory unto thee. And if his understanding fail, have
patience with him.” ([Ecclesiasticus
3.10-12](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>.) And if this be said of our natural fathers,
much more of our spiritual fathers. Reverence him, in that he every day
ministers to thee, causes the Scriptures to be read, sets the house in
order for thee, watches for thee, prays for thee, stands imploring God
on thy behalf, offers supplications for thee, for thee is all his
worship. Reverence all this, think of this, and approach him with pious
respect. Say not, he is wicked. What of that? He that is not
wicked, <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341) doth he of himself
bestow upon thee these great benefits? By no means. Everything worketh
according to thy faith. Not even the righteous man can benefit thee, if
thou art unfaithful, nor the unrighteous harm thee, if thou art
faithful. God, when He would save His people, wrought for the ark by
Oxen. <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342) Is it the good life or
the virtue of the Priest that confers so much on thee? The gifts which
God bestows are not such as to be effects of the virtue of the Priest.
All is of grace. His part is but to open his mouth, while God worketh
all: the Priest only performs a symbol. <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343) Consider how wide was the distance
between John and Jesus. Hear John saying, “I have need to be baptized of
Thee” ([Matt. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p39.2"></span>.), and, “Whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy
to unloose.” ([John i. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p39.3"></span>.) Yet notwithstanding this difference, the
Spirit descended. Which John had not. For “of His fullness,” it is said,
“we all have received.” ([John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.ii-p39.4"></span>.)
Yet nevertheless, It descended not till He was baptized. But neither was
it John who caused It to descend. Why then is this done? That thou
mayest learn that the Priest performs a symbol. <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344) No man differs so widely from
another man, as John from Jesus, and yet with him <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) the Spirit descended, that we may
learn, that it is God who worketh all, that all is God’s doing. I am
about to say what may appear strange, but be not astonished nor startled
at it. The Offering is the same, whether a common man, or Paul or Peter
offer it. It is the same which Christ gave to His disciples, and which
the Priests now minister. This is nowise inferior to that, because it is
not men that sanctify even this, but the Same who sanctified the one
sanctifies the other also. For as the words which God spake are the same
which the Priest now utters, so is the Offering the same, and the
Baptism, that which He gave. Thus the whole is of faith. The Spirit
immediately fell upon Cornelius, because he had previously fulfilled his
part, and contributed his faith. And this is His Body, as well as that.
And he who thinks the one inferior to the other, knows not that Christ
even now is present, even now operates. Knowing therefore these things,
which we have not said without reason, but that we may conform your
minds in what is right, and render you more secure for the future, keep
carefully in mind what has been spoken. For if we are always hearers,
and never doers, we shall reap no advantage from what is said. Let us
therefore attend diligently to the things spoken. Let us imprint them
upon our minds. Let us have them ever engraved upon our consciences, and
let us continually ascribe glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[479:1324](1130114.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p5"></span> πέτρας, the rock of faith, but one
suspects πείρας, “that endeavor,” to be the true reading.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[479:1325](1130114.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p6"></span> B. “those who gave birth to the other
heresies, and introduced pernicious doctrines.”

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[479:1326](1130114.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p7"></span> B. “He means the death of Christ.” The
word “Testimony” might be rendered “Martyrdom,” and such is the original
idea of Martyrdom: see Euseb. Eccl. Hist. v. 2.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[480:1327](1130114.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p11"></span> Thus Old Lat. and B. The printed copies
add, “by saying, ‘Not according to our works,’ that is,” which is not to
the purpose.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[480:1328](1130114.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p12"></span> B. omits “but,” &c.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[480:1329](1130114.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p13"></span> Sav. How was he called? “With a holy
calling.”

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[480:1330](1130114.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p14"></span> So B. Edd. “when we needed to be saved.”

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[481:1331](1130114.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p21"></span> Lit. “my deposit.”

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[481:1332](1130114.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p22"></span> Sav. has τί σὴ π., Ben. τί ἔστι, B. τίς
ἡ, which last is best.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[481:1333](1130114.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p23"></span> παρακαταθήκη.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[481:1334](1130114.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p25"></span> al. “no less than for his own kindred.”

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[481:1335](1130114.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p26"></span> This expression shows that he was not yet
Bishop.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[481:1336](1130114.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p26.7"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p27"></span> Or, “a messenger.”

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[482:1337](1130114.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p28"></span> χειροτονηταὶ.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[482:1338](1130114.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p30"></span> Or, “desperation,” if it be taken with
the preceding sentence.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[482:1339](1130114.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p31"></span> This was treason in a subject. See
Gibbon, c. xl.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[483:1340](1130114.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p35"></span> παραμυθία.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[483:1341](1130114.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p36"></span> i.e. baptized.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[483:1342](1130114.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p37"></span> Sav. mar. “he that is wicked,” which
supposes the objection to be somewhat differently put.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[483:1343](1130114.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p38"></span> [1 Sam. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[483:1344](1130114.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p39"></span> σὑμβολον. This is said evidently of the
act of the Priest considered *in itself*, and as distinct from the
accompanying grace. For St. Chrysostom’s view of the Priest’s
responsibility, see his Treatise on the Priesthood, and his comments on
[1 Tim. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>, &c., &c.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[483:1345](1130114.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p40"></span> Suicer collects passages on this word. It
may mean “a pledge,” but certainly has also the sense of “symbol.” It
seems to be used of the material elements before and after consecration.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[483:1346](1130114.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p41"></span> ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy 1:13-18](1130115)
