[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130060)  [Next](1130062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>[Colossians i.
15-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>“Who is the Image of the invisible God,
the Firstborn of all creation: for in Him were all things created, in
the heavens, and upon the earth, things visible and things invisible,
whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers: all things
have been created through Him, and unto Him; and He is before all
things, and in Him all things consist. And He is the head of the body,
the Church.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>To-day</span> it is necessary for me to pay
the debt, which yesterday <span id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) I
deferred, in order that I might address it to your minds when in full
force. Paul, discoursing as we showed of the dignity of the Son, says
these words: “Who is the Image of the invisible God.” Whose image then
wilt thou have Him be? God’s? Then he is exactly like the one to whom
you assign Him. For if as a man’s image, say so, and I will have done
with you as a madman. But if as God and God’s Son, God’s image, he shows
the exact likeness. Wherefore hath no Angel anywhere been called either
“image” or “son,” but man both? Wherefore? Because in the former case
indeed the exaltedness of their nature might presently have thrust the
many into this impiety <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) ; but in
the other case the mean and low nature is a pledge of security against
this, and will not allow any, even should they desire it, to suspect
anything of the kind, nor to bring down the Word so low. For this cause,
where the meanness is great, the Scripture boldly asserts the honor, but
where the nature is higher, it forbears. “The Image of the Invisible” is
itself also invisible, and invisible in like manner, for otherwise it
would not be an image. For an image, so far as it is an image, even
amongst us, ought to be exactly similar, as, for example, in respect of
the features and the likeness. <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733)
But here indeed amongst us, this is by no means possible; for human art
fails in many respects, or rather fails in all, if you examine with
accuracy. But where God is, there is no error, no failure.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>But if a creature: how is He the Image of
the Creator? For neither is a horse the image of a man. If “the Image”
mean not exact likeness to the Invisible, what hinders the Angels also
from being His Image? for they too are invisible; but not to one
another: but the soul is invisible: but because it is invisible, it is
simply on that account an image, and not in such sort as he and angels
are images. <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span>“The Firstborn of all creation.” “What
then,” saith one, “Lo, He is a creature.” Whence? tell me. “Because he
said ‘Firstborn<span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>.’</span>” However, he said not “first
created,” but “firstborn.” Then it is reasonable that he should be
called many things. For he must also be called a brother “in all
things.” ([Heb. ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p10.2"></span>.) And we must take from Him His being
Creator; and insist that neither in dignity nor in any other thing is He
superior to us? And who that hath understanding would say this? For the
word “firstborn” is not expressive of dignity and honor, nor of anything
else, but of time only. What does “the firstborn” signify? That he is
created, is the answer. Well. If then this be so, it has also kindred
expressions. But otherwise the firstborn is of the same essence with
those of whom he is firstborn. Therefore he will be the firstborn son of
all things—for it said “of every creature”; therefore of stones also,
and of me, is God the Word firstborn. But again, of what, tell me, are
the words “firstborn from the dead” ([Col.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018), [Rom.
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p10.3"></span>.) declaratory? Not that He first rose; for
he said not simply, “of the dead,” but “firstborn from the dead,” nor
yet, “that He died first,” but that He rose the firstborn from the dead.
So that they declare nothing else <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_271"></span>than this, that He is the
Firstfruits of the Resurrection. Surely then neither in the place before
us. <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) Next he proceeds to the
doctrine itself. For that they may not think Him to be of more recent
existence, because that in former times the approach was through Angels,
but now through Him; he shows first, that they had no power (for else it
had not been “out of darkness” (<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>ver.
13.) that he brought), next, that He is also before them. And he uses as
a proof of His being before them, this; that they were created by him.
“For in Him,” he saith, “were all things created.” What say here the
followers of Paul of Samosata? <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736)
“The things in the heavens.” What was in question, he has placed
first; <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737) “and the things upon the
earth.” Then he says, “the visible and the invisible things”; invisible,
such as soul, and all that has come to exist in heaven; visible, such as
men, sun, sky. “Whether thrones.” And what is granted, he lets alone,
but what is doubted he asserts. “Whether thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers.” The words “whether,” “or,” comprehend the
whole of things; but by means of the greater things show it of the less
also. But the Spirit is not amongst the “powers.” “All things,” he
saith, “have been created through Him, and unto Him.” Lo, “in Him,”
is <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) “through Him,” for having
said “in Him,” he added, “through Him.” But what “unto Him”? It is this;
the subsistence of all things depends on Him. Not only did He Himself
bring them out of nothing into being, but Himself sustains them now, so
that were they dissevered from His Providence, they were at once undone
and destroyed. But He said not, “He continues them,” which had been a
grosser way of speaking, but what is more subtle, that “on” Him they
depend. To have only a bearing on Him is enough to continue anything and
bind it fast. So also the word “firstborn,” in the sense of a
foundation. But this doth not show the creatures to be consubstantial
with Him; but that all things are through Him, and in Him are upheld.
Since Paul also when he says elsewhere, “I have laid a foundation” ([1
Cor. iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p14.1"></span>.), is speaking not concerning substance,
but operation. For, that thou mayest not think Him to be a minister, he
says that He continues them, which is not less than making them.
Certainly, with us it is greater even: for to the former, art conducts
us; but to the latter, not so, it does not even stay a thing in decay.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p15"></span>“And He is before all things,” he saith.
This is befitting God. Where is Paul of Samosata? “And in Him all things
consist,” that is, they are created into <span
id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) Him. He repeats these expressions in
close sequence; with their close succession, as it were with rapid
strokes, tearing up the deadly doctrine by the roots. For, if even when
such great things had been declared, still after so long a time Paul of
Samosata sprung up, how much more \[would such have been the case\], had
not these things been said before? “And in Him,” he saith, “all things
consist.” How “consist” in one who was not? So that the things also done
through Angels are of Him.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p17"></span>“And He is the head of the body, the
Church.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18"></span>Then having spoken of His dignity, he
afterwards speaks of His love to man also. “He is,” saith he, “the Head
of the body, the Church.” And he said not “of the fullness,” <span
id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) (although this too is signified,) out
of a wish to show His great friendliness to us, in that He who is thus
above, and above all, connected Himself with those below. For everywhere
He is first; above first; in the Church first, for He is the Head; in
the Resurrection first. That is,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p20"></span>[Col.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>. “That He might have the preëminence.” So
that in generation also He is first. And this is what Paul is chiefly
endeavoring to show. For if this be made good, that He was before all
the Angels; then there is brought in along with it this also as a
consequence, that He did their works by commanding them. And what is
indeed wonderful, he makes a point to show that He is first in the later
generation. Although elsewhere he calls Adam first ([1 Cor. xv.
45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.2"></span>.), as in truth he is; but here he takes the
Church for the whole race of mankind. For He is first of the Church; and
first of men after the flesh, like as of the Creation. <span
id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) And therefore he here uses the word
“firstborn.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p22"></span>What is in this place the meaning of
“the Firstborn”? Who was created first, or rose before all; as in the
former place it means, Who was before all things. And here indeed he
uses the word “firstfruits,” saying, “Who is the <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) <span id="page_272">p. 272</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_272"></span>Firstfruits, the Firstborn from the
dead, that in all things He might have the preëminence,” showing that
the rest also are such as He; but in the former place it is not the
“Firstfruits” of creation. <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743) And
it is there, “The Image of the invisible God,” and then, “Firstborn.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25"></span>[Col.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>.
“For it was the good pleasure of the Father, that in Him should all the
fullness dwell. And having made peace through the Blood of His Cross,
through Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, whether things upon
the earth, or things in the heavens.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p26"></span>Whatsoever things are of the Father,
these he saith are of the Son also, and that with more of intensity,
because that He both became “dead” <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) for, and united Himself to us. He
said, “Firstfruits,” as of fruits. He said not “Resurrection,” but
“Firstfruits,” showing that He hath sanctified us all, and offered us,
as it were, a sacrifice. The term “fullness” some use of the Godhead,
like as John said, “Of His fullness have all we received.” That is,
whatever was the Son, the whole Son dwelt there, not a sort of energy,
but a Substance.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p28"></span>He hath no cause to assign but the will
of God: for this is the import of, “it was the good pleasure…in Him.
And…through Him to reconcile all things unto Himself.” Lest thou
shouldest think that He undertook the office of a minister only, he
saith, “unto Himself.” <span id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) ([2 Cor.
v. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>.) And yet he elsewhere says, that He
reconciled us to God, as in the Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians. And
he well said, “Through Him to make an end of reconciling”; <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) for they were already reconciled; but
completely, he says, and in such sort, as no more to be at enmity with
Him. How? For not only the reconciliation was set forth, but also the
manner of the reconciliation. “Having made peace through the Blood of
His Cross.” The word “reconcile,” shows the enmity; the words “having
made peace,” the war. “Through the Blood of His Cross, through Himself,
whether things upon the earth, or things in the heavens.” A great thing
indeed it is to reconcile; but that this should be through Himself too,
is a greater thing; and a greater still,—how through Himself? Through
His Blood. Through His Blood; and he said not simply His Blood, but what
is yet greater, through the Cross. So that the marvels are five: He
reconciled us; to God; through Himself; through Death; through the
Cross. Admirable again! How he has mixed them up! For lest thou
shouldest think that it is one thing merely, or that the Cross is
anything of itself, <span id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) he saith
“through Himself.” How well he knows that this was a great thing.
Because not by speaking words, but by giving Himself up for the
reconciliation, He so wrought everything.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32"></span>But what is “things in the heavens”? For
with reason indeed is it said, “the things upon the earth,” for those
were filled with enmity, and manifoldly divided, and each one of us was
utterly at variance with himself, and with the many; but how made He
peace amongst “the things in the heavens”? Was war and battle there
also? How then do we pray, saying, “Thy will be done, as in heaven, so
on earth”? ([Matt. vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>.) What is it then? The earth was divided
from heaven, the Angels were become enemies to men, through seeing the
Lord insulted. “To sum up,” he saith, “all things in Christ, the things
in the heavens, and the things upon the earth.” ([Eph. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32.2"></span>.)
How? The things in heaven indeed in this way: He translated Man thither,
He brought up to them the enemy, the hated one. Not only made He the
things on earth <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) to be at peace,
but He brought up to them him that was their enemy and foe. Here was
peace profound. Angels again appeared on the earth thereafter, because
that Man too had appeared in heaven. And it seems to me that Paul was
caught up on this account ([2 Cor. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p33.1"></span>.),
and to show that the Son also had been received up thither. For in the
earth indeed, the peace was twofold; with the things of heaven, and with
themselves; but in heaven it was simple. For if the Angels rejoice over
one sinner that repenteth, much more will they over so many.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p34"></span>All this God’s power hath wrought. Why
then place ye confidence in Angels? <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) saith he. For so far are they from
bringing you near, that they were ever your enemies, except God Himself
had reconciled you with them. Why then run ye to them? Wouldest thou
know the hatred which the Angels had against us, how great it was; and
how averse to us they always were? They were sent to take vengeance in
the cases of the Israelites, of David, of the Sodomites, of the Valley
of weeping. <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) ([Ex. xxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p36.2"></span>.)
Not so however now, but, on the contrary, they sang upon the earth <span
id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) ([2 Sam. xxiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p37.2"></span>.)
with exceed<span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii-Page_273"></span>ing joy. And He led these down to
men <span id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) ([Gen. xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p38.1"></span>.), and led men up to them.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p39"></span>And observe, I pray you, the marvel in
this: He brought these first down hither, and then he took up man to
them; earth became heaven, because that heaven was about to receive the
things of earth. Therefore when we give thanks, we say, “Glory to God in
the highest, and on earth peace, good will to men.” Behold, he saith,
even men appeared well-pleasing to Him thereafter. What is “good will”?
([Eph. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014), [Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p39.1"></span>, Sept.) Reconciliation. No longer is the
heaven a wall of partition. At first the Angels were according to the
number of the nations; but now, not to the number of the nations, but
that of the believers. Whence is this evident? Hear Christ saying, “See
that ye despise not one of these little ones, for their Angels do always
behold the face of My Father which is in heaven.” ([Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p39.2"></span>.)
For each believer hath an Angel; since even from the beginning, every
one of those that were approved had his Angel, as Jacob says, “The Angel
that feedeth me, and delivereth me from my youth.” <span
id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) ([Gen.
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.4"></span>,
nearly.) If then we have Angels, let us be sober, as though we were in
the presence of tutors; for there is a demon present also. <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) Therefore we pray, asking <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) for the Angel of peace, and everywhere
we ask for peace <span id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) (for there is
nothing equal to this); peace, in the Churches, in the prayers, in the
supplications, in the salutations; and once, and twice, and thrice, and
many times, does he that is over the Church give it, “Peace be unto
you.” Wherefore? Because this is the Mother of all good things; this is
the foundation of joy. Therefore Christ also commanded the Apostles on
entering into the houses straightway to say this, as being a sort of
symbol of the good things; for He saith, “When ye come into the houses,
say, Peace be unto you;” <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) for
where this is wanting, everything is useless. And to His disciples
Christ said, “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you.” ([John
xiv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p44.2"></span>.) This prepareth the way for love. And he
that is over the Church, says not, “Peace be unto you,” simply, but
“Peace be unto all.” For what if with this man we have peace, but with
another, war and fighting? what is the gain? For neither in the body,
should some of its elements be at rest and others in a state of
variance, is it possible that health should ever be upheld; but only
when the whole of them are in good order, and harmony, and peace, and
except the whole are at rest, and continue within their proper limits,
all will be overturned. And, further, in our minds, except all our
thoughts are at rest, peace will not exist. So great a good is peace, as
that the makers and producers of it are called the sons of God ([Matt.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p44.3"></span>.), with reason; because the Son of God for
this cause came upon the earth, to set at peace the things in the earth,
and those in the heavens. But if the peacemakers are the sons of God,
the makers of disturbance are sons of the devil.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p45"></span>What sayest thou? Dost thou excite
contentions and fightings? And doth any ask who is so unhappy? Many
there are who rejoice at evil, and who do rather rend in pieces the Body
of Christ, than did the soldiers pierce it with the spear, or the Jews
who struck it through with the nails. A less evil was that than this;
those Members, so cut through, again united, but these when torn off, if
they be not united here, will never be united, but remain apart from the
Fullness. When thou art minded to war against thy brother, bethink thee
that thou warrest against the members of Christ, and cease from thy
madness. For what if he be an outcast? What if he be vile? What if he be
open to contempt? So saith He, “It is not the will of My Father that one
of these little ones should perish.” ([Matt. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p45.1"></span>.)
And again, “Their Angels do always behold the face of My Father which is
in heaven.” ([Matt. 18.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p45.2"></span>.) God for his sake and thine even became a
servant, and was slain; and dost thou consider him to be nothing? Surely
in this respect also thou fightest against God, in that thou deliverest
a judgment contrary to His. When he that is over the Church cometh in,
he straightway says, “Peace unto all”; when he preacheth, “Peace unto
all”; when he blesseth, “Peace unto all”; when he biddeth to salute,
“Peace unto all”; when the Sacrifice is finished, “Peace unto all”: and
again, in the middle, “Grace to you and peace.” How then is it not
monstrous, if, while hearing so many times that we are to have peace, we
are in a state of feud with each other; and receiving peace, and giving
it back, are at war with him <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758)
that giveth it to us? Thou sayest, “And to thy spirit.” And dost thou
traduce him abroad? Woe is me! that the majestic usages <span
id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) of the Church are become <span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_274"></span>forms
of things merely, not a truth. Woe is me! that the watchwords of this
army proceed no farther than to be only words. Whence also ye are
ignorant wherefore is said, “Peace unto all.” But hear what follows,
what Christ saith; “And into whatsoever city or village ye shall
enter…as ye enter into the house, salute it; and if the house be worthy,
let your peace come upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your peace
return to you.” ([Matt. 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p47.1"></span>.) We are therefore ignorant; because we
look upon this merely as a figure of words; and we assent not to them in
our minds. For do I <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) give the
Peace? It is Christ who deigneth to speak by us. Even if at all other
times we are void of grace, yet are we not now, for your sakes. For if
the Grace of God wrought in an ass and a diviner, for the sake of an
economy, and the advantage of the Israelites ([Num.
22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p48.1"></span>.), it is quite clear that it will not
refuse to operate even in us, but for your <span
id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761) sakes will endure even this.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p50"></span>Let none say then that I am mean, and
low, and worthy of no consideration, and in such a frame of mind attend
to me. <span id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762) For such I am; but God’s
way always is, to be present even with such for the sake of the many.
And, that ye may know this, with Cain He vouchsafed to talk for Abel’s
sake ([Gen. iv](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.1"></span>.), with the devil for Job’s ([Job
i](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p51.2"></span>.),
with Pharaoh for Joseph’s ([Gen.
xli](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.3"></span>.), with Nebuchadnezzar for Daniel’s ([Dan.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000), [Dan.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.4"></span>.), with Belshazzar, for the same ([Dan.
v](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p51.5"></span>.).
And Magi moreover obtained a revelation ([Matt.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.6"></span>.); and Caiaphas prophesied, though a slayer
of Christ, and an unworthy man, because of the worthiness of the
priesthood. ([John xi. 49](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.7"></span>.) And it is said to have been for this
reason that Aaron was not smitten with leprosy. For why, tell me, when
both had spoken against Moses did she <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) alone suffer the punishment? ([Num.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p52.1"></span>.) Marvel not: for if in worldly dignities,
even though ten thousand charges be laid against a man, yet is he not
brought to trial before he has laid down his office, in order that it
may not be dishonored along with him; much more in the case of spiritual
office, be he whosoever he may, the grace of God works in him, for
otherwise everything is lost: but when he hath laid it down, either
after he is departed or even here, then indeed, then he will suffer a
sorer punishment.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p53"></span>Do not, I pray you, think that these
things are spoken from us; it is the Grace of God which worketh in the
unworthy, not for our sakes, but for yours. Hear ye then what Christ
saith. “If the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it.” ([Matt. x.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p53.1"></span>.) And how becometh it worthy? If “they
receive you” ([Luke x. 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p53.2"></span>.), He saith. “But if they receive you not,
nor hear your words,…verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that
city.” What boots it then, that ye receive us, and hear not the things
we say? What gain is it that ye wait upon <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) us, and give no heed to the things
which are spoken to you? This will be honor to us, this the admirable
service, which is profitable both to you and to us, if ye hear us. Hear
also Paul saying, “I wist not, brethren, that he was High Priest.”
([Acts xxiii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p54.1"></span>.) Hear also Christ saying, “All whatsoever
they bid you observe” ([Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p54.2"></span>.),
that “observe and do.” Thou despisest not me, but the Priesthood; when
thou seest me stripped of this, then despise me; then no more will I
endure to impose commands. But so long as we sit upon this throne, <span
id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765) so long as we have the first place, we
have both the dignity and the power, even though we are unworthy. If the
throne of Moses was of such reverence, that for its sake they were to be
heard, much more the throne of Christ. It, we have received by
succession; from it we speak; since the time that Christ hath vested in
us the ministry of reconciliation.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p56"></span>Ambassadors, whatever be their sort,
because of the dignity of an embassy, enjoy much honor. For observe;
they go alone into the heart of the land of barbarians, through the
midst of so many enemies; and because the law of embassy is of mighty
power, all honor them; all look towards them with respect, all send them
forth with safety. And we now have received a word of embassy, and we
are come from God, for this is the dignity of the Episcopate. We are
come to you on an embassy, requesting you to put an end to the war, and
we say on what terms; not promising to give cities, nor so and so many
measures of corn, nor slaves, nor gold; but the kingdom of heaven,
eternal life, society with Christ, the other good things, which neither
are we able to tell you, so long as we are in this flesh, and the
present life. Ambassadors then we are, and we wish to enjoy honor, not
for our own sakes, far be it, for we know its worthlessness, but for
yours; that ye may hear with earnestness the things we say; that ye may
be profited, that not with listlessness or indifference ye may attend to
what is spoken. See ye not ambassadors, how all pay court to them? We
are God’s ambassadors to men; but, if this of<span id="page_275">p.
275</span> <span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_275"></span>fend you, <span
id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766) not we, but the Episcopate itself, not
this man or that, but the Bishop. Let no one hear me, but the dignity.
Let us then do everything according to the will of God, that we may live
to the glory of God, and be counted worthy of the good things promised
to those that love Him, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c. &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_731"></span>[270:732](1130061.htm#fr_731) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span> See Hom. ii. § 3 fin.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[270:733](1130061.htm#fr_732) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span> Viz. Arianism.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[270:734](1130061.htm#fr_733) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span> χαρακτήρων καὶ ὁμοιώσεως. The argument
is, that invisibleness being mentioned, the image must have it, as if
one should say, “the picture of a venerable man,” one would understand a
venerable expression in the features. Compare St. Athanasius against
Arianism, Disc. 1, c. vi. § 20, Tr. and note d. \[The argument is fine
spun, and not convincing. The image must be of the same essence, or
substance in this case; but an image cannot be invisible, otherwise it
were not an image. Compare Meyer, and especially Lightfoot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_734"></span>[270:735](1130061.htm#fr_734) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span> \[The words, “and angels are images” are
omitted by the common text, with several <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>mss</span>., but manifestly to escape an
apparent difficulty, because it has been noticed above that angels are
never called images.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_735"></span>[271:736](1130061.htm#fr_735) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span> i.e. is anything else meant by the word
πρωτότοκος, than that He is the Firstfruits of the Creation. This may be
his meaning, or “that he, the Only-begotten, is the Beginning of the
Creation.” See note on St. Athanasius against Arianism, Disc. 1, Oxf.
Tr.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[271:737](1130061.htm#fr_736) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span> P. of Samosata held the Divine Word, or
Reason, to be a mere Attribute, and not a Person. The Person of our Lord
would thus be simply Human, only with a Divine influence. See St. Ath.
Def. of Nic. Def. c. v. § 11, Tr. This text of St. Paul is quoted
against P. of Samosata, Conc. Ant. i. Labbe, t. i, p. 846, by the
orthodox Bishops. See also Epiph. Hær. 45. The heretics might allow what
is said here of the Word as an Attribute; the refutation follows
presently.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[271:738](1130061.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span> One <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>ms</span>. has, “first the things in
heaven,” &c., which agrees with the sense.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[271:739](1130061.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span> i.e. “In Him,” in the beginning of the
verse, is said in such a sense as to agree with “through Him.”

<span id="fn_739"></span>[271:740](1130061.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16"></span> \[Chrys. here seems to insist on the
local sense of εἰς, “into,” which above, and in Rev. Ver., is translated
“unto.” All things in Him consist, being created into Him. But the fancy
is of doubtful value.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_740"></span>[271:741](1130061.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19"></span> τοῦ πληρώματος. Here used of the
universe, somewhat as [1 Cor. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>,
only in a more extended sense.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[271:742](1130061.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21"></span> Cat. “and first of men even as he that
was first of Creation after the flesh,” then one Par. and Br. M. read,
“For this cause both here and there the word ‘Firstborn’ is used. But
what is ‘Firstborn of all creation’? It is for ‘First Created,’ as
‘Firstborn from the dead’ is for ‘Who rose again before all.’ And as
there he puts ‘Who is before all,’ so here also he has put
‘Firstfruits.’” \[A Paris <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>ms</span>. has the same reading, except that
for “First Created” it has “First Creator.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_742"></span>[271:743](1130061.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p23"></span> Rec. text ἀρχὴ, St. Chrys. has ἀπαρχὴ
\[and so six cursives. But this reading is clearly wrong, and vitiates
the following statements of Chrys. For the meaning of “beginning” here,
see Lightfoot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_743"></span>[272:744](1130061.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p24"></span> The same <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “but only *the Firstborn*,
and not even this in the first place, but after saying, ‘Who is the
Image,’” &c.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[272:745](1130061.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p27"></span> νεκρὸς γέγονε, alluding to the
expression, πρωτότοκος ἐκ νεκρῶν.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[272:746](1130061.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29"></span> \[“The reconciliation is always
represented as made to the Father. The reconciler is sometimes the
Father Himself, sometimes the Son.”—Lightfoot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_746"></span>[272:747](1130061.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p30"></span> ἀποκαταλλάξαι as ἀπολύτρωσις, above?
\[The compound verb may mean to reconcile completely or
finally.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_747"></span>[272:748](1130061.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p31"></span> Or “by itself” (ἑαυτὸ), i.e. separate
from the Divine Person, as it would be if there had been a several Human
Personality. (Cat. and Bodl. ἑαυτὸν.)

<span id="fn_748"></span>[272:749](1130061.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p33"></span> Bodl. Extr. \[Catena\], “He made not
him staying on earth,” &c.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[272:750](1130061.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p35"></span> \[Chrys. shows no suspicion of that
combination of the Jewish (Essene) doctrine of angels with the Gnostic
doctrine of æons, which we now know to have prevailed at Colossæ (see
Lightfoot on Col., Int. II.).—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_750"></span>[272:751](1130061.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p36"></span> [Judg.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#005), [Ps.
84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006), [2 Sam.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p36.1"></span>.
seems hardly applicable).

<span id="fn_751"></span>[272:752](1130061.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p37"></span> Downes conjectures, “Peace on earth.”
[Luke ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[273:753](1130061.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p38"></span> Gr. αὐτοὺς, one suspects ἄνους
(ἀνθρώπους), which has been conjectured.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[273:754](1130061.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40"></span> “Feedeth” is said of God in the text.
On the passage, St. Chrys. does not notice the mention of the Angel. He
quotes it, however, in his first Homily de laudibus B. Pauli. He also
infers the doctrine from [Acts xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.1"></span>;
Hom. xxvi. St. Jerome, on [Isa. lxvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.2"></span>,
quotes all these passages. Bp. Bull, Ser. xii. adds, [Eccl. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[273:755](1130061.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p40.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p41"></span> See St. Hermas, Past. 1, ii. pr. 6, §
1, and Cotelerius, note 14, t. i., p. 93, who cites Origen, Hom. xii. in
Luc. S. Greg. Nyss. de Vita Mosis, p. 194; Petavius, Theol. Dog. de Ang.
l. ii. c. 8, cites St. Basil, contr. Eunom. p. 70, and on [Ps.
xxxiii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p41.1"></span> p. 220, &c.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[273:756](1130061.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p42"></span> \[There was among the forms of prayer
in Chrys.’s day this, “Ask for the angel of peace.” See Field’s
Annotations.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_756"></span>[273:757](1130061.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p43"></span> In Hom. xxxii. on St. Matt. he mentions
a prayer for Peace. See also Const. [Ap.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p43.1"></span>.
viii. c. 37 fin.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[273:758](1130061.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p44"></span> [Matt.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012), [Luke
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p44.1"></span>, but neither accurately. \[That is, neither
Gospel is here accurately quoted. Chrys. often makes slight mistakes in
quoting, as we do.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_758"></span>[273:759](1130061.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p46"></span> i.e. the Bishop. \[This is the person
several times above called “he that is over,” ὁπροεστὼς, the same word
that is employed by Justin Martyr, I. Apol. c. 65, for the person
presiding in an assembly for worship.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_759"></span>[273:760](1130061.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p47"></span> τὰ σεμνὰ.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[274:761](1130061.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p48"></span> This implies that he was Bishop, and
consequently that these Homilies were delivered at Constantinople.
\[Below he distinctly declares himself to be the Bishop.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_761"></span>[274:762](1130061.htm#fr_761) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p49"></span> So Sav. Ben. “our.”

<span id="fn_762"></span>[274:763](1130061.htm#fr_762) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p51"></span> Or “even so, let him attend to me.”

<span id="fn_763"></span>[274:764](1130061.htm#fr_763) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p51.8"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p52"></span> Miriam.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[274:765](1130061.htm#fr_764) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p54"></span> θεραπεύετε.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[274:766](1130061.htm#fr_765) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p55"></span> \[This would seem clearly to indicate
that these homilies were delivered at Constantinople. The passage below,
on ch. iii. 2–4, does not necessarily show the contrary.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_766"></span>[275:767](1130061.htm#fr_766) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p57"></span> πρόσαντες. “Up hill,” “against the
grain.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 1:21,22](1130062)
