[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130125)  [Next](1130127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_528"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p2"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.v.iii-p2.2"></span>[Titus i.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012)<span
id="v.v.iii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p3"></span>“One of themselves, even a prophet of their
own, said, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.
This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith; Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments
of men, that turn from the truth.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.v.iii-p4.1"></span>There</span> are several questions here. First,
who it was that said this? Secondly, why Paul quoted it? Thirdly, why he
brings forward a testimony that is not correct? Let us then offer a
seasonable solution of these, having premised some other things. For
when Paul was discoursing to the Athenians, in the course of his
harangue he quoted these words, “To the Unknown God”: and again, “For we
also are His offspring, as certain also of your own poets have said.”
([Acts 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="v.v.iii-p4.2"></span>.)
It was Epimenides <span id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470) who said
this, himself a Cretan, and whence he was move moved to say it is
necessary to mention. It is this. The Cretans have a tomb of Jupiter,
with this inscription. “Here lieth Zan, whom they call Jove.” On account
of this inscription, then, the poet ridiculing the Cretans as liars, as
he proceeds, introduces, to increase the ridicule, this passage.

<span id="v.v.iii-p6"></span>For even a tomb, O King, of thee

<span id="v.v.iii-p7"></span>They made, who never diedst, but aye shalt
be.

<span id="v.v.iii-p8"></span>If then this testimony is true, observe
what a difficulty! For if the poet is true who said that they spoke
falsely, in asserting that Jupiter could die, as the Apostle says, it is
a fearful thing! Attend, beloved, with much exactness. The poet said
that the Cretans were liars for saying that Jupiter was dead. The
Apostle confirmed his testimony: so, according to the Apostle, Jupiter
is immortal: for he says, “this witness is true”! What shall we say
then? Or rather how shall we solve this? The Apostle has not said this,
but simply and plainly applied this testimony to their habit of
falsehood. Else why has he not added, “For even a tomb, O king, of thee,
they made”? So that the Apostle has not said this, but only that one had
well said, “The Cretians are always liars.” But it is not only from
hence that we are confident that Jupiter is not a God. From many other
arguments we are able to prove this, and not from the testimony of the
Cretans. Besides, he has not said, that in this they were liars. Nay and
it is more probable that they were deceived as to this point too. <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471) For they believed in other gods, on
which account the Apostle calls them liars.

<span id="v.v.iii-p10"></span>And as to the question, why does he cite
the testimonies of the Greeks? It is because we put them most to
confusion when we bring our testimonies and accusations from their own
writers, when we make those their accusers, who are admired among
themselves. For this reason he elsewhere quotes those words, “To the
Unknown God.” For the Athenians, as they did not receive all their gods
from the beginning, but from time to time admitted some other, as those
from the Hyperboreans, the worship of Pan, and the greater and the
lesser mysteries, so these same, conjecturing that besides these there
might be some other God, of whom they were ignorant, that they might be
duly devout to him also, erected to him an altar, with this inscription,
“To the Unknown God,” thereby almost implying, “if there might be some
God unknown to them.” He therefore said to them, Him whom you have by
anticipation acknowledged, I declare to you. But those words, “We also
are His offspring,” are quoted from Aratus, who having previously said,
“Earth’s paths are full of Jove, the sea is full”—adds, “For we too are
His offspring,” in which I conceive he shows that we are sprung from
God. How then does Paul wrest what is said of Jupiter to the God of the
universe? He has not transferred to God what belongs to Jupiter. But
what is applicable to God, and was neither justly nor properly applied
to Jupiter, this he restores to God, since the name of God belongs to
Him alone, and is not lawfully bestowed upon idols.

<span id="v.v.iii-p11"></span>And from what writers should he address
them? From the Prophets? They would not have believed them. Since with
the Jews too he does not argue from the Gospels, but from the Prophets.
For this reason he says, “Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, to them that
are without law, as without law, to those that are under the Law, as
under the Law.” ([1 Cor. 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="v.v.iii-p11.1"></span>.)
Thus does God too, as in the case of the wise men, He does not conduct
them by an Angel, nor a Prophet, nor an Apostle, nor an Evangelist, but
how? By a star. For as their art made them conversant with these, He
made use of such <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_529"></span>means to guide them. So in the case of the
oxen, that drew the ark. “If it goeth up by the way of his own coast,
then He hath done us this great evil” ([1 Sam. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009)<span id="v.v.iii-p11.2"></span>.),
as their prophets suggested. Do these prophets then speak the truth? No;
but he refutes and confounds them out of their own mouths. Again, in the
case of the witch, because Saul believed in her, he caused him to hear
through her what was about to befall him. Why then did Paul stop the
mouth of the spirit, that said, “These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation”? ([Acts xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017)<span id="v.v.iii-p11.3"></span>.)
And why did Christ hinder the devils from speaking of Him? In this case
there was reason, since the miracles were going on. For here it was not
a star that proclaimed Him, but He Himself; and the demons again were
not worshiped <span id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472) ; for it was
not an image that spoke, that it should be forbidden. He also suffered
Balaam to bless, and did not restrain him. Thus He everywhere
condescends.

<span id="v.v.iii-p13"></span>And what wonder? for He permitted opinions
erroneous, and unworthy of Himself, to prevail, as that He was a body
formerly, <span id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473) and that He was
visible. In opposition to which He says, “God is a Spirit.” ([John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="v.v.iii-p14.1"></span>.)
Again, that He delighted in sacrifices, which is far from His nature.
And He utters words at variance with His declarations of Himself, and
many such things. For He nowhere considers His own dignity, but always
what will be profitable to us. And if a father considers not his own
dignity, but talks lispingly with his children, and calls their meat and
drink not by their Greek names, but by some childish and barbarous
words, much more doth God. Even in reproving He condescends, as when He
speaks by the prophet, “Hath a nation changed their gods?” ([Jer. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011)<span id="v.v.iii-p14.2"></span>.),
and in every part of Scripture there are instances of His condescension
both in words and actions.

<span id="v.v.iii-p15"></span>[Tit.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)<span id="v.v.iii-p15.1"></span>.
“Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p16"></span>This he says, because their disposition
was froward, deceitful, and dissolute. They have these numberless bad
qualities; and because they are prone to lying, deceiving, gluttonous,
and slothful, severe reproof is necessary. For such characters will not
be managed by mildness, “therefore rebuke them.” He speaks not here of
Gentiles, but of his own people. “Sharply.” Give them, he says, a stroke
that cuts deep. For one method is not to be employed with all, but they
are to be differently dealt with, according to their various characters
and dispositions. He does not here have recourse to exhortation. For as
he who treats with harshness the meek and ingenuous, may destroy them;
so he who flatters one that requires severity, causes him to perish, and
does not suffer him to be reclaimed.

<span id="v.v.iii-p17"></span>“That they may be sound in the faith.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p18"></span>This then is soundness, to introduce
nothing spurious, nor foreign. But if they who are scrupulous about
meats are not sound, but are sick and weak; for, “Them that are weak,”
he says, “receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations” ([Rom xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)<span id="v.v.iii-p18.1"></span>.);
what can be said of those who observe the same fasts, (with the Jews,)
who keep the sabbaths, who frequent the places that are consecrated by
them? I speak of that at Daphne, <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) of that which is called the cave of
Matrona, and of that plain in Cilicia, which is called Saturn’s. How are
these sound? With them a heavier stroke is necessary. Why then does he
not do the same with the Romans? Because their dispositions were
different, they were of a nobler character.

<span id="v.v.iii-p20"></span>[Tit.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014)<span id="v.v.iii-p20.1"></span>.
“Not giving heed,” he says, “to Jewish fables.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p21"></span>The Jewish tenets were fables in two ways,
because they were imitations, and because the thing was past its season,
for such things become fables at last. For when a thing ought not to be
done, and being done, is injurious, it is a fable even as it is useless.
As then those <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475) ought not to be
regarded, so neither ought these. For this is not being sound. For if
thou believest the Faith, why dost thou add other things, as if the
faith were not sufficient to justify? Why dost thou enslave thyself by
subjection to the Law? Hast thou no confidence in what thou believest?
This is a mark of an unsound and unbelieving mind. For one who is
faithful does not doubt, but such an one evidently doubts.

<span id="v.v.iii-p23"></span>[Tit.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span id="v.v.iii-p23.1"></span>.
“Unto the pure,” he says, “all things are pure.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p24"></span>Thou seest that this is said to a
particular purpose.

<span id="v.v.iii-p25"></span>“But unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving is nothing pure.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p26"></span>Things then are not clean or unclean from
their own nature, but from the disposition of him who partakes of them.

<span id="v.v.iii-p27"></span>“But even their mind and conscience is
defiled.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p28"></span>[Tit.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span id="v.v.iii-p28.1"></span>.
“They profess that they know God; but in works they deny Him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p29"></span>The swine therefore is clean. Why then was
it forbidden as unclean? It was not unclean by nature; for, “all things
are pure.” Nothing is more unclean than a fish, inasmuch as it even
<span id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_530"></span>feeds upon human flesh. But it was
permitted and considered clean. Nothing is more unclean than a bird, for
it eats worms; or than a stag, which is said to have its name <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) from eating serpents. Yet all these
were eaten. Why then was the swine forbidden, and many other things? Not
because they were unclean, but to check excessive luxury. But had this
been said, they would not have been persuaded; they were restrained
therefore by the fear of uncleanness. For tell me, if we enquire nicely
into these things, what is more unclean than wine; or than water, with
which they mostly purified themselves? They touched not the dead, and
yet they were cleansed by the dead, for the victim was dead, and with
that they were cleansed. This therefore was a doctrine for children. In
the composition of wine, does not dung form a part? For as the vine
draws moisture from the earth, so does it from the dung that is thrown
upon it. In short, if we wish to be very nice, everything is unclean,
otherwise if we please not to be nice, nothing is unclean. Yet all
things are pure. God made nothing unclean, for nothing is unclean,
except sin only. For that reaches to the soul, and defiles it. Other
uncleanness is human prejudice.

<span id="v.v.iii-p31"></span>“But unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is
defiled.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p32"></span>For how can there be anything unclean
among the pure? But he that has a weak soul makes everything unclean,
and if there be set abroad a scrupulous enquiry into what is clean or
unclean, he will touch nothing. For even these things are not clean, I
speak of fish, and other things, according to their notions; (for “their
mind and conscience,” he says, “is defiled,”) but all are impure. Yet
Paul says not so; he turns the whole matter upon themselves. For nothing
is unclean, he says, but themselves, their mind and their conscience;
and nothing is more unclean than these; <span
id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) but an evil will is unclean.

<span id="v.v.iii-p34"></span>“They profess that they know God, but in
works they deny Him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every
good work reprobate.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p35"></span>[Tit.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001)<span id="v.v.iii-p35.1"></span>.
“But speak thou the things that become sound doctrine.”

<span id="v.v.iii-p36"></span>This then is uncleanness. They are
themselves unclean. But be not thou silent on that account. Do thy part,
although they may not receive thee. Advise and counsel them, though they
may not be persuaded. Here he censures them more severely. For they who
are mad imagine that nothing stands still, yet this arises not from the
objects that are seen, but from the eyes that see. Because they are
unsteady and giddy, they think that the earth turns round with them,
which yet turns not, but stands firm. The derangement <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) is of their own state, not from any
affection of the element. So it is here, when the soul is unclean, it
thinks all things unclean. Therefore scrupulous observances are no mark
of purity, but it is the part of purity to be bold in all things. For he
that is pure by nature ventures upon all things, they that are defiled,
upon nothing. This we may say against Marcion. Seest thou that it is a
mark of purity to be superior to all defilement, to touch nothing
implies impurity. This holds even with respect to God. That He assumed
flesh is a proof of purity; if through fear He had not taken it, there
would have been defilement. He who eats not things that seem unclean, is
himself unclean and weak, he who eats, is neither. Let us not call such
pure, they are the unclean. He is pure, who dares to feed upon all
things. All this caution we ought to exercise towards the things that
defile the soul. For that is uncleanness, that is defilement. None of
these things is so. Those who have a vitiated palate think what is set
before them is unclean, but this is the effect of their disorder. It
becomes us therefore to understand the nature of things pure, and things
unclean.

<span id="v.v.iii-p38"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.v.iii-p38.1"></span>Moral</span>. What then is unclean? Sin,
malice, covetousness, wickedness. <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) As it is written: “Wash you, make
you clean, put away the evil of your doings.” ([Isa. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span id="v.v.iii-p39.1"></span>.)
“Create in me a clean heart, O God.” ([Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span id="v.v.iii-p39.2"></span>.)
“Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing.”
([Isa. lii. 52](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#052)<span
id="v.v.iii-p39.3"></span>.) These observances were emblems of
purifications. <span id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) “Touch not a
dead body,” it is said. For sin is such, it is dead and offensive. “The
leper is unclean.” For sin is a leprosy, various and multiform. And that
they had this meaning, appears from what follows. For if the leprosy is
general, and overspreads the whole body, he is clean; if it is partial,
he is unclean. Thus you see that what is various and changeable is the
unclean thing. He again whose seed passes from him is unclean, consider
one that is so in soul, casting away his seed. He who is uncircumcised
is unclean. These things are not allegorical <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) but typical, for he who does not
cut off the wickedness of his heart is the unclean person. He who
worketh on the Sabbath is to be stoned, that is, he who is not at all
times devoted to God, shall perish. <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) You see how many varieties <span
id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span id="v.v.iii-Page_531"></span>of
uncleanness there are. The woman in child-bed is unclean. Yet God made
child-birth, and the seed of copulation. Why then is the woman unclean,
unless something further was intimated? And what was this? He intended
to produce piety in the soul, and to deter it from fornication. For if
she is unclean who has borne a child, much more she who has committed
fornication. If to approach his own wife is not altogether pure, much
less to have intercourse with the wife of another. He who attends a
funeral is unclean, much more he who has mixed in war and slaughter. And
many kinds of uncleanness would be found, if it were necessary to
recount them all. But these things are not now required of us. But all
is transferred to the soul.

<span id="v.v.iii-p43"></span>For bodily things are nearer to us, from
these therefore he introduced instruction. But it is not so now. For we
ought not to be confined to figures, and shadows, but to adhere to the
truth, and to uphold it: sin is the unclean thing. From that let us
flee, from that let us abstain. “If thou comest near it, it will
bite <span id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) thee.” ([Ecclesiasticus
21.2](../../../bib/apo/sir021.htm#002)<span id="v.v.iii-p44.1"></span>.)
Nothing is more unclean than covetousness. Whence is this manifest? From
the facts themselves. For what does it not defile? the hands, the soul,
the very house where the ill-gotten treasure is laid up. But the Jews
consider this as nothing. And yet Moses carried off the bones of Joseph.
Samson drank from the jawbone of an ass, and ate honey from the lion,
and Elijah was nourished by ravens, and by a widow woman. And tell me,
if we were to be precise about these things, what can be more unclean
than our books, which are made of the skins of animals? The fornicator,
then, is not the only one that is unclean, but others more than he, as
the adulterer. But both the one and the other are unclean, not on
account of the intercourse, (for according to that reasoning a man
cohabiting with his own wife would be unclean,) but because of the
wickedness of the act, and the injury done to his neighbor in his
nearest interests. Dost thou see that it is wickedness that is unclean?
He who had two wives was not unclean, and David who had many wives was
not unclean. But when he had one unlawfully, he became unclean. Why?
Because he had injured and defrauded his neighbor. And the fornicator is
not unclean on account of the intercourse, but on account of the manner
of it, because it injures the woman, and they injure one another, making
the woman common, and subverting the laws of nature. For she ought to be
the wife of one man, since it is said, “Male and female created He
them.” ([Gen. i. 27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="v.v.iii-p44.2"></span>.) And, “they twain shall be one flesh.” Not
“those many,” but “they twain shall be one flesh.” Here then is
injustice, and therefore the act is wicked. Again, when anger exceeds
due measure, it makes a man unclean, not in itself, but because of its
excess. Since it is not said, “He that is angry,” merely, but “angry
without a cause.” Thus every way to desire overmuch is unclean, for it
proceeds from a greedy and irrational disposition. Let us therefore be
sober, I beseech you, let us be pure, in that which is real purity, that
we may be thought worthy to see God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with
whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[528:1471](1130126.htm#fr_1470) <span
id="v.v.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p5"></span> The words here quoted are found in
Callimachus, Hymn ad Jov. v. 8, to whom Theodoret ascribes them. The
“evil beasts,” &c., is found in Hesiod, Theogon. v. 26, applied to
shepherds. Downes suggested that Epimenides may have borrowed from
Hesiod, and Callimachus from him.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[528:1472](1130126.htm#fr_1471) <span
id="v.v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p9"></span> He seems to mean in thinking Jupiter a
God.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[529:1473](1130126.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="v.v.iii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p12"></span> i.e. by Saul. [1 Sam. xxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008)<span id="v.v.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[529:1474](1130126.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="v.v.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p14"></span> This word seems to refer to the time when
the opinions were allowed to prevail.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[529:1475](1130126.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="v.v.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p19"></span> See on Stat. Hom. xvii.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[529:1476](1130126.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="v.v.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p22"></span> i.e. heathen fables.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[530:1477](1130126.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="v.v.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p30"></span> ἔλαφος.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[530:1478](1130126.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="v.v.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p33"></span> B. “none of these things is unclean.”

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[530:1479](1130126.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="v.v.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p37"></span> al. “the notion,” ὑπόνοια, and so B.; it
is better than ἀπόνοια.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[530:1480](1130126.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="v.v.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p39"></span> Sav. “fornication,” but πονηρία is
repeated in the next quotation, and has most authority.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[530:1481](1130126.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="v.v.iii-p39.4"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p40"></span> al. “of uncleannesses.”

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[530:1482](1130126.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="v.v.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p41"></span> This hardly makes sense. Read ἀληθεία for
ἀλληγορία. “These things are not truth, but types,” which is his usual
way of speaking. Just above, Savile’s text is followed.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[530:1483](1130126.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="v.v.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p42"></span> See on Stat. Hom. xii., where it appears
that he does not exclude a reference to the Lord’s Day.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[531:1484](1130126.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="v.v.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p44"></span> Sav. δήξεται, which reading Ben.
unaccountably neglects, having δέξεται, and in Lat. *suscipiet*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus 2:2-5](1130127)
