[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130046)  [Next](1130048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vi-Page_203"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.vi-p2.2"></span>[Philippians ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>“If there is therefore any comfort in
Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if
any tender mercies and compassions, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be of the
same mind, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind; doing
nothing through faction or through vainglory; but in lowliness of mind,
each counting other better than himself; not looking each of you to his
own things, but each of you also to the things of others.”

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>There</span> is nothing better, there is
nothing more affectionate, than a spiritual teacher; such an one
surpasses the kindness of any natural father. Do but consider, how this
blessed one entreats the Philippians concerning the things which were to
their own advantage. What says he, in exhorting them concerning concord,
that cause of all good things? See how earnestly, how vehemently, with
how much sympathy he speaks, “If there be therefore any comfort in
Christ,” that is, if ye have any comfort in Christ, as if he had said,
If thou makest any account of me, if thou hast any care of me, if thou
hast ever received good at my hands, do this. This mode of earnestness
we use when we claim a matter which we prefer to everything else. For if
we did not prefer it to everything, we should not wish to receive in it
our recompense for all things, nor say that through it all is
represented. We indeed remind men of our carnal claims; for example, if
a father were to say, If thou hast any reverence for thy father, if any
remembrance of my care in nourishing thee, if any affection towards me,
if any memory of the honor thou hast received of me, if any of my
kindness, be not at enmity with thy brother; that is, for all those
things, this is what I ask in return.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span>But Paul does not so; he calls to our
remembrance no carnal, but all of them spiritual benefits. That is, if
ye wish to give me any comfort in my temptations, and encouragement in
Christ, if any consolation of love, if ye wish to show any communion in
the Spirit, if ye have any tender mercies and compassions, fulfil ye my
joy. “If any tender mercies and compassions.” Paul speaks of the concord
of his disciples as compassion towards himself, thus showing that the
danger was extreme, if they were not of one mind. If I can obtain
comfort from you, if I can obtain any consolation from our love, if I
can communicate with you in the Spirit, if I can have fellowship with
you in the Lord, if I can find mercy and compassion at your hands, show
by your love the return of all this. All this have I gained, if ye love
one another.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6"></span>[Philip.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.
“Fulfil ye my joy.”

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p7"></span>That the exhortation might not seem to be
made to people who were still deficient, see how he says not, “do me
joy,” but “fulfil my joy”; that is, Ye have begun to plant it in me, ye
have already given me some portion of peacefulness, but I desire to
arrive at its fulness? Say, what wouldest thou? that we deliver thee
from dangers? that we supply somewhat to thy need? Not so, but “that ye
be of the same mind, having the same love,” in which ye have begun,
“being of one accord, of one mind.” Just see, how often he repeats the
same thing by reason of his great affection! “That ye be of the same
mind,” or rather, “that ye be of one mind.” For this is more than “the
same.”

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p8"></span>“Having the same love.” That is, let it
not be simply about faith alone, but also in all other things; for there
is such a thing as to be of the same mind, and yet not to have love.
“Having the same love,” that is, love and be loved alike; do not thou
enjoy much love, and show less love, so as to be covetous even in this
matter; but do not suffer it in thyself. “Of one accord,” he adds, that
is, appropriating with one soul, the bodies of all, not in substance,
for that is impossible, but in purpose and intention. Let all things
proceed as from one soul. What means “of one accord”? He shows when he
says “of one mind.” Let your mind be one, as if from one soul.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9"></span>[Philip.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>.
“Doing nothing through faction.”

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p10"></span>He finally demands this of them, and
tells <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) them the way how this may
be. “Doing nothing through faction or vainglory.” This, as I always say,
is the cause of all evil. Hence come fightings and contentions. Hence
come envyings and strifes. Hence it is that love waxes cold, when we
love the praise of men, when we are slaves to the honor which is paid by
the many, for it is not possible for a man to be the slave of praise,
and also a true servant of God. How then shall we flee vainglory? for
thou hast not yet told us the way. Listen then to what follows.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p12"></span>“But in lowliness of mind, each counting
other better than himself.” Oh how full of true wisdom, how universal a
gathering-word <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) of our <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vi-Page_204"></span>salvation is the lesson he has put forth!
If thou deemest, he means, that another is greater than thyself, and
persuadest thyself so, yea more, if thou not only sayest it, but art
fully assured of it, then thou assignest him the honor, and if thou
assignest him the honor, thou wilt not be displeased at seeing him
honored by another. Do not then think him simply greater than thyself,
but “better,” which is a very great superiority, and thou dost not think
it strange nor be pained thereby, if thou seest him honored. Yea, though
he treat thee with scorn, thou dost bear it nobly, for thou hast
esteemed him greater than thyself. Though he revile thee, thou dost
submit. Though he treat thee ill, thou bearest it in silence. For when
once the soul is fully assured that he is greater, it falls not into
anger when it is ill-treated by him, nor yet into envy, for no one would
envy those who are very far above himself, for all things belong to his
superiority.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p14"></span>Here then he instructs the one party to
be thus minded. But when he too, who enjoys such honor from thee, is
thus affected toward thee, consider what a double wall there is erected
of gentle forbearance \[comp. [Philip. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p14.1"></span>.\]; for when thou esteemest him thus worthy
of honor, and he thee likewise, no painful thing can possibly arise; for
if this conduct when shown by one is sufficient to destroy all strife,
who shall break down the safeguard, when it is shown by both? Not even
the Devil himself. The defense is threefold, and fourfold, yea manifold,
for humanity is the cause of all good; and that you may learn this,
listen to the prophet, saying, “Hadst thou desired sacrifice, I would
have given it: Thou wilt not delight in burnt offerings. The sacrifice
for God is a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart God will not
despise.” <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) ([Ps.
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>.) Not simply humility, but intense
humility. As in the case of bodily substances, that which is “broken”
will not rise against that which is “solid,” but, how many ills soever
it may suffer, will perish itself rather than attack the other, so too
the soul, even if constantly suffering ill, will choose rather to die,
than to avenge itself by attack.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p16"></span>How long shall we be puffed up thus
ridiculously? For as we laugh, when we see children drawing themselves
up, and looking haughty, or when we see them picking up stones and
throwing them, thus too the haughtiness <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) of men belongs to a puerile intellect,
and an unformed mind. “Why are earth and ashes proud?” ([Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>.) Art thou highminded, O man? and why? tell
me what is the gain? Whence art thou highminded against those of thine
own kind? Dost not thou share the same nature? the same life? Hast not
thou received like honor from God? But thou art wise? Thou oughtest to
be thankful, not to be puffed up. Haughtiness is the first act of
ingratitude, for it denies <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) the
gift of grace. He that is puffed up, is puffed up as if he had excelled
by his own strength, and he who thinks he has thus excelled is
ungrateful toward Him who bestowed that honor. Hast thou any good? Be
thankful to Him who gave it. Listen to what Joseph said, and what
Daniel. For when the king of Egypt sent for him, and in the presence of
all his host asked him concerning that matter in which the Egyptians,
who were most learned in these things, had forsaken the field, when he
was on the point of carrying off everything from them, and of appearing
wiser than the astrologers, the enchanters, the magicians, and all the
wise men of those times, and that from captivity and servitude, and he
but a youth (and his glory was thus greater, for it is not the same
thing to shine when known, and contrary to expectation, so that its
being unlooked for rendered him the more admirable); what then, when he
came before Pharaoh? Was it “Yea, I know”? But what? When no one urged
it on him, he said from his own excellent spirit, “Do not
interpretations belong to God?” <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586)
Behold he straightway glorified his Master, therefore he was glorified.
And this also is no small thing. For that God had revealed it to him was
a far greater thing than if he had himself excelled. For he showed that
his words were worthy of credit, and it was a very great proof of his
intimacy with God. There is no one thing so good as to be the intimate
friend of God. “For if,” says the Scripture, “he \[Abraham\] was
justified by works, he hath whereof to glory, but not toward God.”
([Rom. iv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p19.3"></span>.) For if he who has been vouchsafed grace
maketh his boast in God, that he is loved of Him, because his sins are
forgiven, he too that worketh hath whereof to boast, but not before God,
as the other (for it <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) is a proof
of our excessive weakness); he who has received wisdom of God, how much
more admirable is he? He glorifies God and is glorified of Him, for He
says, “Them that honor Me, I will honor.” ([1 Sam. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p21"></span>Again, listen to him who descended from
Joseph, than whom no one was wiser. “Art thou wiser,” <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) says he, “than Daniel?” ([Ezek.
xxviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>.) This Daniel then, when all the wise men
that were in Babylon, and the astrologers moreover, the prophets, the
magicians, the en<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vi-Page_205"></span>chanters, yea when the whole of their
wisdom was not only coming to be convicted, but to be wholly destroyed
(for their being destroyed was a clear proof that they had deceived
before), this Daniel coming forward, and preparing to solve the king’s
question, does not take the honor to himself, but first ascribes the
whole to God, and says, “But as for me, O king, it is not revealed to me
for any wisdom that I have beyond all men.” ([Dan. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22.2"></span>.)
And “the king worshiped him, and commanded that they should offer an
oblation.” ([Dan. ii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p22.3"></span>.) Seest thou his humility? seest thou his
excellent spirit? seest thou this habit of lowliness? Listen also to the
Apostles, saying at one time, "Why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though
by our own power or godliness we had made this man to walk? ([Acts iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22.4"></span>.)
And again, “We are men of like passions with you.” ([Acts xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22.5"></span>.)
Now if they thus refused the honors paid them, men who by reason of the
humility and power of Christ wrought greater deeds than Christ (for He
says, “He that believeth in Me shall do greater works than those that I
do” ([John xiv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p22.6"></span>, abr.)), shall not we wretched and
miserable men do so, who cannot even beat away gnats, <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) much less devils? who have not power
to benefit a single man, much less the whole world, and yet think so
much of ourselves that the Devil himself is not like us?

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p24"></span>There is nothing so foreign to a
Christian soul as haughtiness. Haughtiness, I say, not boldness nor
courage, for these are congenial. But these are one thing, and that
another; so too humility is one thing, and meanness, flattery, and
adulation another.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p25"></span>I will now, if you wish, give you
examples of all these qualities. For these things which are contraries,
seem in some way to be placed near together, as the tares to the wheat,
and the thorns to the rose. But while babes might easily be deceived,
they who are men in truth, and are skilled in spiritual husbandry, know
how to separate what is really good from the bad. Let me then lay before
you examples of these qualities from the Scriptures. What is flattery,
and meanness, and adulation? Ziba flattered <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) David out of season, and falsely
slandered his master. ([2 Sam. xvi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p26.2"></span>.) Much more did Ahitophel flatter Absalom.
([2 Sam. xvii. 1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p26.3"></span>.) But David was not so, but he was humble.
For the deceitful are flatterers, as when they say, “O king, live for
ever.” ([Dan. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p26.4"></span>.) Again, what flatterers the magicians are.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p27"></span>We shall find much to exemplify this in
the case of Paul in the Acts. When he disputed with the Jews he did not
flatter them, but was humble-minded (for he knew how to speak boldly),
as when he says, “I, brethren, though I had done nothing against the
people, or the customs of our fathers, yet was delivered prisoner from
Jerusalem.” ([Acts xxviii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p28"></span>That these were the words of humility,
listen how he rebukes them in what follows, “Well spake the Holy Ghost,
By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in nowise understand, and seeing ye
shall see, and in nowise perceive.” ([Acts
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p29"></span>Seest thou his courage? Behold also the
courage of John the Baptist, which he used before Herod; when he said,
“It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother Philip’s wife.” ([Mark
vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p29.1"></span>.) This was boldness, this was courage. Not
so the words of Shimei, when he said, “Begone, thou man of blood” ([2
Sam. xvi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p29.2"></span>.), and yet he too spake with boldness; but
this is not courage, but audacity, and insolence, and an unbridled
tongue. Jezebel too reproached Jehu, when she said, “The slayer of his
master” ([2 Kings ix. 31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p29.3"></span>.), but this was audacity, not boldness.
Elias too reproached, but this was boldness and courage; “I do not
trouble Israel, but thou and thy father’s house.” ([1 Kings xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p29.4"></span>.)
Again, Elias spake with boldness to the whole people, saying, “How long
will ye go lame on both your thighs?” ([1 Kings xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p29.5"></span>,
LXX.) Thus to rebuke was boldness and courage. This too the prophets
did, but that other was audacity.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p30"></span>Would you see words both of humility and
not of flattery, <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) listen to Paul,
saying, “But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man’s judgment; yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know
nothing against myself, yet am I not hereby justified.” ([1 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p31.2"></span>.)
This is of a spirit that becomes a Christian; and again, “Dare any of
you, having a matter against his neighbor, go to law before the
unrighteous, and not before the saints”? ([1 Cor. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p31.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32"></span>Would you see the flattery of the
foolish Jews? listen to them, saying, “We have no king but Cæsar.”
([John xix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p32.1"></span>.) Would you see humility? listen to Paul
again, when he says, “For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as
Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.” ([2 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32.2"></span>.)
Would you see both flattery and audacity? “Audacity” ([1 Sam. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32.3"></span>.)
in the case of Nabal, and “flattery” ([1 Sam. xxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32.4"></span>.)
in that of the Ziphites? For in their purpose they betrayed David. Would
you see “wisdom” ([1 Sam. xxvi.
5-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p32.5"></span>.) and not flattery, <span id="page_206">p.
206</span> <span id="iv.iii.vi-Page_206"></span>that of David, how he
gat Saul into his power, and yet spared him? Would you see the flattery
of those who murdered Mephibosheth, <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) whom also David slew? In fine, and as
it were in outline, to sum up all, audacity is shown when one is
enraged, and insults another for no just cause, either to avenge
himself, or in some unjust way is audacious; but boldness and courage
are when we dare to face perils and deaths, and despise friendships and
enmities for the sake of what is pleasing to God. Again, flattery and
meanness are when one courts another not for any right end, but hunting
after some of the things of this life; but humility, when one does this
for the sake of things pleasing to God, and descends from his own proper
station that he may perform something great and admirable. If we know
these things, happy are we if we do them. For to know them is not
enough. For Scripture says, “Not the hearers of a law, but the doers of
a law shall be justified.” ([Rom. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p33.2"></span>.)
Yea, knowledge itself condemneth, when it is without action and deeds of
virtue. Wherefore that we may escape the condemnation, let us follow
after the practice, that we may obtain those good things that are
promised to us, by the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[203:582](1130047.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p11"></span> \[Field here makes a conjectural
alteration which is little better, and we follow the documents.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_582"></span>[203:583](1130047.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p13"></span> συγκρότημα.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[204:584](1130047.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p15"></span> \[Quoted, of course, from the Sept.,
which here differs considerably from the Hebrew.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_584"></span>[204:585](1130047.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p17"></span> ἀπόνοια.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[204:586](1130047.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p18"></span> Lit. “takes away,” i.e. takes the
credit from the Giver.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[204:587](1130047.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p19"></span> [Gen. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p19.1"></span>.
This he said to the baker and cupbearer in prison, but he also said to
Pharaoh, “It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of pence,”
c. [Gen. 41.16](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[204:588](1130047.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p20"></span> He may mean our “boasting” of “such”
things as we do, or the fact that our goodness extends not to God.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[204:589](1130047.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22"></span> E.V. “Thou art,” but \[Chrys. quotes
the Sept.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_589"></span>[205:590](1130047.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p22.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p23"></span> This hyperbolical expression may have a
moral meaning with respect to petty annoyances, and in allusion to the
fan used in the Holy Eucharist. Bingham xv. c. 3, § 6.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[205:591](1130047.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p26"></span> Compare [2 Sam. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#026)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p26.1"></span>.
He means that Ziba had recourse to unworthy means of winning David’s
favor. And that Ahitophel was ready to serve Absalom from selfish
motives.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[205:592](1130047.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p31"></span> \[All of Field’s <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.vi-p31.1"></span>mss</span>. give
“flattery” (instead of “freedom,” as the text of most editions), and he
has inserted “not” by conjecture, as it is said below in the case of
David.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_592"></span>[206:593](1130047.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p32.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p33"></span> [2 Sam. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>.
So some copies of LXX., for Ishbosheth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 2:5-8](1130048)
