[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130005)  [Next](1130007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>commentary <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)
of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>epistle of St. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p6"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p7"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>galatians.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p8"></span>————————————

<span id="iii.iii.i-p9"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p10"></span>[Gal.
1.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p11"></span>“Paul, an Apostle, (not from men,
neither through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who
raised Him from the dead;) and all the brethren which are with me, unto
the Churches of Galatia: Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p12"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>The</span> exordium <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) is full of a vehement and lofty spirit, and
not the exordium only, but also, so to speak, the whole Epistle. For
always to address one’s disciples with mildness, even when they need
severity is not the part of a teacher but it would be the part of a
corrupter and enemy. Wherefore our Lord too, though He generally spoke
gently to His disciples, here and there uses sterner language, and at
one time pronounces a blessing, at another a rebuke. Thus, having said
to Peter, “Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona,” ([Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="iii.iii.i-p13.2"></span>.)
and having promised to lay the foundation of the Church upon his
confession, shortly afterwards He says, “Get thee behind Me, Satan: thou
art a stumbling block unto Me.” ([Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="iii.iii.i-p13.3"></span>.)
Again, on another occasion, “Are ye also even yet without
understanding?” ([Matt. xv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p13.4"></span>.) And what awe He inspired them with
appears from John’s saying, that, when they beheld Him conversing with
the Samaritan woman, though they reminded Him to take food, no one
ventured to say, “What seekest Thou, or why speakest thou with her?”
([John iv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p13.5"></span>.) Thus taught, and walking in the steps of
his Master, Paul hath varied his discourse according to the need of his
disciples, at one time using knife and cautery, at another, applying
mild remedies. To the Corinthians he says, “What will ye? shall I come
unto you with a rod, or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?” ([1 Cor.
vi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p13.6"></span>.) but to the Galatians, “O foolish
Galatians.” ([Gal. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p13.7"></span>.) And not once only, but a second time,
also he has employed this reproof, and towards the conclusion he says
with a reproachful allusion to them, “Let no man trouble me;” ([Gal. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="iii.iii.i-p13.8"></span>.)
but he soothes them again with the words, “My little children, of whom I
am again in travail:” ([Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="iii.iii.i-p13.9"></span>.)
and so in many other instances.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p14"></span>Now that this Epistle breathes an
indignant spirit, is obvious to every one even on the first perusal; but
I must explain the cause of his anger against the disciples. Slight and
unimportant it could not be, or he would not have used such vehemence.
For to be exasperated by common matters is the part of the little-<span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="iii.iii.i-Page_2"></span>minded,
morose, and peevish; just as it is that of the more redolent and
sluggish to lose heart in weighty ones. Such a one was not Paul. What
then was the offence which roused him? it was grave and momentous, one
which was estranging them all from Christ, as he himself says further
on, “Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye receive circumcision,
Christ will profit you nothing;” ([Gal. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>.)
and again, “Ye who would be justified by the Law, ye are fallen away
from Grace.” ([Gal. v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p14.2"></span>.) What then is this? For it must be
explained more clearly. Some of the Jews who believed, being held down
by the preposessions of Judaism, and at the same time intoxicated by
vain-glory, and desirous of obtaining for themselves the dignity of
teachers, came to the Galatians, and taught them that the observance of
circumcision, sabbaths, and new-moons, was necessary, and that Paul in
abolishing these things was not to be borne. For, said they, Peter and
James and John, the chiefs of the Apostles and the companions of Christ,
forbade them not. Now in fact they did not forbid these things, but this
was not by way of delivering positive doctrine, but in condescension to
the weakness of the Jewish believers, which condescension Paul had no
need of when preaching to the Gentiles; but when he was in Judæa, he
employed it himself <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) also. But these
deceivers, by withholding the causes both of Paul’s condescension and
that of his brethren, misled the simpler ones, saying that he was not to
be tolerated, for he appeared but yesterday, while Peter and his
colleagues were from the first,—that he was a disciple of the Apostles,
but they of Christ,—that he was single, but they were many, and pillars
of the Church. They accused him too of acting a part; saying, that this
very man who forbids circumcision observes the rite elsewhere, and
preaches one way to you and another way to others.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p16"></span>Since Paul then saw the whole Galatian
people in a state of excitement, a flame kindled against their Church,
and the edifice shaken and tottering to its fall, filled with the mixed
feelings of just anger and despondency, (which he has expressed in the
words, “I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my
voice,”—[Gal. iv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>.) he writes the Epistle as an answer to
these charges. This is his aim from the very commencement, for the
underminers of his reputation had said, The others were disciples of
Christ but this man of the “Apostles.” Wherefore he begins thus, “Paul,
an Apostle not from men, neither through man.” For, these deceivers, as
I was saying before, had said that this man was the last of all the
Apostles and was taught by them, for Peter, James, and John, were both
first called, and held a primacy among the disciples, and had also
received their doctrines from Christ Himself; and that it was therefore
fitting to obey them rather than this man; and that they forbad not
circumcision nor the observance of the Law. By this and similar language
and by depreciating Paul, and exalting the honor of the other Apostles,
though not spoken for the sake of praising them, but of deceiving the
Galatians, they induced them to adhere unseasonably to the Law. Hence
the propriety of his commencement. As they disparaged his doctrine,
saying it came from men, while that of Peter came from Christ, he
immediately addresses himself to this point, declaring himself an
apostle “not from men, neither through man.” It was Ananias who baptized
him, but it was not he who delivered him from the way of error and
initiated him into the faith; but Christ Himself sent from on high that
wondrous voice, whereby He inclosed him in his net. For Peter and his
brother, and John and his brother, He called when walking by the
seaside, ([Matt. iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.2"></span>.) but Paul after His ascension into heaven.
([Acts 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p16.3"></span>.)
And just as these did not require a second call, but straightway left
their nets and all that they had, and followed Him, so this man at his
first vocation pressed vigorously forward, waging, as soon as he was
baptized, an implacable war with the Jews. In this respect he chiefly
excelled the other Apostles, as he says, “I labored more abundantly than
they all;” ([1 Cor. xv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.4"></span>.) at present, however, he makes no such
claim, but is content to be placed on a level with them. Indeed his
great object was, not to establish any superiority for himself, but, to
overthrow the foundation of their error. The not being “from men” has
reference to all alike for the Gospel’s root and origin is divine, but
the not being “through man” is peculiar to the Apostles; for He called
them not by men’s agency, but by His own. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p20"></span>But why does he not speak of his
vocation rather than his apostolate, and say, “Paul” called “not by
man?” Because here lay the whole question; for they said that the office
of a teacher had been committed to him by men, namely by the Apostles,
whom therefore it behooved him to obey. But that it was not entrusted to
him by men, Luke declares in the <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_3"></span>words, “As they ministered to the Lord, and
fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul.” ([Acts
xiii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p21"></span>From this passage it is manifest <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) that the power of the Son and Spirit is one,
for being commissioned by the Spirit, he says that he was commissioned
by Christ. This appears in another place, from his ascription of the
things of God to the Spirit, in the words which he addresses to the
elders at Miletus: “Take heed unto yourselves, and to all the flock, in
the which the Holy Ghost hath made you bishops.” ([Acts xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span id="iii.iii.i-p22.3"></span>.)
Yet in another Epistle he says, “And God hath set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers.” ([1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="iii.iii.i-p22.4"></span>.)
Thus he ascribes indifferently the things of the Spirit to God, and the
things of God to the Spirit. Here too he stops the mouths of heretics,
by the words “through Jesus Christ and God the Father;” for, inasmuch as
they said this term “through” was applied to the Son as importing
inferiority, see what he does. He ascribes it to the Father, thus
teaching us not to prescribe laws to the ineffable Nature, nor define
the degrees of Godhead which belong to the Father and Son. For to the
words “through Jesus Christ” he has added, “and God the Father;” for if
at the mention of the Father alone he had introduced the phrase “through
whom,” they might have argued sophistically that it was peculiarly
applicable to the Father, in that the acts of the Son were to be
referred to Him. But he leaves no opening for this cavil, by mentioning
at once both the Son and the Father, and making his language apply to
both. This he does, not as referring the acts of the Son to the Father,
but to show that the expression implies no distinction of Essence. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) Further, what can now be said by those, who
have gathered a notion of inferiority from the Baptismal formula,—from
our being baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit? <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) For if the Son be inferior
because He is named after the Father, what will they say seeing that, in
the passage before us, the Apostle beginning from Christ proceeds to
mention the Father?—but let us not even utter such a blasphemy, let us
not swerve from the truth in our contention with them; rather let us
preserve, even if they rave ten thousand times, the due measures of
reverence. Since then it would be the height of madness and impiety to
argue that the Son was greater than the Father because Christ was first
named, so we dare not hold that the Son is inferior to the Father,
because He is placed after Him in the Baptismal formula.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p25"></span>“Who raised Him from the dead.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p26"></span>Wherefore is it, O Paul, that, wishing
to bring these Judaizers to the faith, you introduce none of those great
and illustrious topics which occur in your Epistle to the Philippians,
as, “Who, being in the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an
equality with God,” ([Philip. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>.)
or which you afterwards declared in that to the Hebrews, “the effulgence
of his glory, and the very image of His substance;” ([Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.i-p26.2"></span>.)
or again, what in the opening of his Gospel the son of thunder sounded
forth, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God;” ([John i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p26.3"></span>..) or what Jesus Himself oftentimes
declared to the Jews, “that His power and authority was equal to the
Father’s?” ([John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)<span id="iii.iii.i-p26.4"></span>,
&c.) Do you omit all these, and make mention of the economy of His
Incarnation only, bringing forward His cross and dying? “Yes,” would
Paul answer. For had this discourse been addressed to those who had
unworthy conceptions of Christ, it would have been well to mention those
things; but, inasmuch as the disturbance comes from persons who fear to
incur punishment should they abandon the Law, he therefore mentions that
whereby all need of the Law is excluded, I mean the benefit conferred on
all through the Cross and the Resurrection. To have said that “in the
beginning was the Word,” and that “He was in the form of God, and made
Himself equal with God,” and the like, would have declared the divinity
of the Word, but would have contributed nothing to the matter in hand.
Whereas it was highly pertinent thereto to add, “Who raised Him from the
dead,” for our chiefest benefit was thus brought to remembrance, and men
in general are less interested by discourses concerning the majesty of
God, than by those which set forth the benefits which come to mankind.
Wherefore, omitting the former topic, he discourses of the benefits
which had been conferred on us.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p27"></span>But here the heretics insultingly
exclaim, “Lo, the Father raises the Son!” For when once infected, they
are wilfully deaf to all sublimer doctrines; and taking by itself and
insisting on what is of a less exalted nature, and expressed in less
exalted terms, either on account of the Son’s humanity, or in honor of
the Father, or for some other temporary purpose, they outrage, I will
not say the Scripture, but themselves. I would fain ask such persons,
why they say this? do they hope to prove the Son weak and powerless to
raise *one* body? <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_4"></span>Nay, verily, faith in Him enabled the very
shadows of those who believed in Him to effect the resurrection of the
dead. ([Acts. v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>.) Then believers in Him, though mortal, yet
by the very shadows of their earthly bodies, and by the garments which
had touched these bodies, could raise the dead, but He could not raise
Himself? Is not this manifest madness, a great stretch of folly? Hast
thou not heard His saying, “Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up?” ([John ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p27.2"></span>.) and again, “I have power to lay down my
life, and I have power to take it again?” ([John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="iii.iii.i-p27.3"></span>.)
Wherefore then is the Father said to have raised Him up, as also to have
done other things which the Son Himself did? It is in honor of the
Father, and in compassion to the weakness of the hearers.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p28"></span>“And all the brethren which are with
me.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p29"></span>Why is it that he has on no other
occasion in sending an epistle added this phrase? For either he puts his
own name only or that of two or three others, but here has mentioned the
whole number and so has mentioned no one by name.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p30"></span>On what account then does he this?

<span id="iii.iii.i-p31"></span>They made the slanderous charge that he
was singular in his preaching, and desired to introduce novelty in
Christian teaching. Wishing therefore to remove their suspicion, and to
show he had many to support him in his doctrine, he has associated with
himself “the brethren,” to show that what he wrote he wrote with their
accord. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p33"></span>“Unto the Churches of Galatia.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p34"></span>Thus it appears, that the flame of error
had spread over not one or two cities merely, but the whole Galatian
people. Consider too the grave indignation contained in the phrase,
“unto the Churches of Galatia:” he does not say, “to the beloved” or “to
the sanctified,” and this omission of all names of affection or respect,
and this speaking of them as a society merely, without the addition
“Churches of God,” for it is simply “Churches of Galatia,” is strongly
expressive of deep concern and sorrow. Here at the outset, as well as
elsewhere, he attacks their irregularities, and therefore gives them the
name of “Churches,” in order to shame them, and reduce them to unity.
For persons split into many parties cannot properly claim this
appellation, for the name of “Church” is a name of harmony and concord.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p35"></span>“Grace to you and peace from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p36"></span>This he always mentions as
indispensible, and in this Epistle to the Galatians especially; for
since they were in danger of falling from grace he prays that they may
recover it again, and since they had come to be at war with God, he
beseeches God to restore them to the same peace.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p37"></span>“God the Father.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p38"></span>Here again is a plain confutation of the
heretics, who say that John in the opening of his Gospel, where he says
“the Word was God,” used the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>Θεὸς</span> without the article, to imply an
inferiority in the Son’s Godhead; and that Paul, where he says that the
Son was “in the form of God,” did not mean the Father, because the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p38.2"></span>Θεὸς</span> is
without the article. For what can they say here, where Paul says, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p38.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p38.4"></span>πὸ Θεοῦ Πατρος</span>,
and not <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p38.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p38.6"></span>πὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ</span>? And it is in no
indulgent mood towards them that he calls God, “Father,” but by way of
severe rebuke, and suggestion of the source whence they became sons, for
the honor was vouchsafed to them not through the Law, but through the
washing of regeneration. Thus everywhere, even in his exordium, he
scatters traces of the goodness of God, and we may conceive him speaking
thus: “O ye who were lately slaves, enemies and aliens, what right have
ye suddenly acquired to call God your Father? it was not the Law which
conferred upon you this relationship; why do ye therefore desert Him who
brought you so near to God, and return to your tutor? <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p40"></span>But the Name of the Son, as well as that
of the Father, had been sufficient to declare to them these blessings.
This will appear, if we consider the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ with
attention; for it is said, “thou shalt call His Name Jesus; for it is He
that shall save His people from their sins;” ([Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="iii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>.)
and the appellation of “Christ” calls to mind the unction of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p41"></span>[Gal.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p41.1"></span>.
“Who gave himself for our sins.” <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p43"></span>Thus it appears, that the ministry which
He undertook was free and uncompelled; that He was delivered up by
Himself, not by another. Let not therefore the words of John, “that the
Father gave His only-begotten Son” ([John iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii.i-p43.1"></span>.)
for us, lead you to derogate from the dignity of the Only-begotten, or
to infer therefrom that He is only human. For the Father is said to have
given Him, not as implying that the Son’s ministry was a servile one,
but to teach us that it seemed good to the Father, as Paul too has shown
in the immediate context: “according to the will of our God, and
Father.” He says not <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_5"></span>“by the command,” but “according to the
will,” for inasmuch as there is an unity of will in the Father and the
Son, that which the Son wills, the Father wills also.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p44"></span>“For our sins,” <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) says the Apostle; we had pierced
ourselves with ten thousand evils, and had deserved the gravest
punishment; and the Law not only did not deliver us, but it even
condemned us, making sin more manifest, without the power to release us
from it, or to stay the anger of God. But the Son of God made this
impossibility possible for he remitted our sins, He restored us from
enmity to the condition of friends, He freely bestowed on us numberless
other blessings.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p46"></span>[Gal.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>.
“That He might deliver us out of this present evil world.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p47"></span>Another class of heretics <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) seize upon these words of Paul, and
pervert his testimony to an accusation of the present life. Lo, say
they, he has called this present world evil, and pray tell me what does
“world” \[age\] <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p48.1"></span>αἴων</span> mean but time measured by days
and seasons? Is then the distinction of days and the course of the sun
evil? no one would assert this even if he be carried away to the extreme
of unreasonableness. “But” they say, “it is not the ‘time,’ but the
present ‘life,’ which he hath called evil.” Now the words themselves do
not in fact say this; but the heretics do not rest in the words, and
frame their charge from them, but propose to themselves a new mode of
interpretation. At least therefore they must allow us to produce our
interpretation, and the rather in that it is both pious and rational. We
assert then that evil cannot be the cause of good, yet that the present
life is productive of a thousand prizes and rewards. And so the blessed
Paul himself extols it abundantly in the words, “But if to live in the
flesh, if this is the fruit of my work, then what I shall choose I wont
not;” ([Philip. i. 22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p48.2"></span>.) and then placing before himself the
alternative of living upon earth, and departing and being with Christ,
he decides for the former. But were this life evil, he would not have
thus spoken of it, nor could any one, however strenuous his endeavor,
draw it aside into the service of virtue. For no one would ever use evil
for good, fornication for chastity, envy for benevolence. And so, when
he says, that “the mind of the flesh is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can it be,” ([Rom. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.i-p48.3"></span>.)
he means that vice, as such, cannot become virtue; and the expression,
“evil world,” must be understood to mean evil actions, and a depraved
moral principle. Again, Christ came not to put us to death and deliver
us from the present life in that sense, but to leave us in the world,
and prepare us for a worthy participation of our heavenly abode.
Wherefore He saith to the Father, “And these are in the world, and I
come to Thee; I pray not that Thou shouldest take them from the world,
but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil,” ([John
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p48.4"></span>.) i.e., from sin. Further, those who will
not allow this, but insist that the present life is evil, should not
blame those who destroy themselves; for as he who withdraws himself from
evil is not blamed, but deemed worthy of a crown, so he who by a violent
death, by hanging or otherwise, puts an end to his life, ought not to be
condemned. Whereas God punishes such men more than murderers, and we all
regard them with horror, and justly; for if it is base to destroy
others, much more is it to destroy one’s self. Moreover, if this life be
evil, murderers would deserve a crown, as rescuing us from evil. Besides
this, they are caught by their own words, for in that they place the sun
in the first, and the moon in the second rank of their deities, and
worship them as the givers of many goods, their statements are
contradictory. For the use of these and the other heavenly bodies, is
none other than to contribute to our present life, which they say is
evil, by nourishing and giving light to the bodies of men and animals
and bringing plants to maturity. How is it then that the constitution of
this “evil life” is so ministered to by those, who according to you are
gods? Gods indeed they are not, far from it, but works of God created
for our use; nor is this world evil. And if you tell me of murderers, of
adulterers, of tomb-robbers, these things have nothing to do with the
present life, for these offences proceed not from that life which we
live in the flesh, but from a depraved will. For, if they were
necessarily connected with this life, as embraced in one lot with it, no
man would be free or pure from them, for no man can escape the
characteristic accidents of humanity, such as, to eat and drink, to
sleep and grow, to hunger and thirst, to be born and die, and the like;
no man can ever become superior to these, neither sinner nor just man,
king nor peasant, We all are subject to the necessity of nature. And so
if vice were an essential element of this life, no one could avoid it,
any more than the things just mentioned. And let me not be told that
good men are rare, for natural necessity is insuperable by all, so that
as long as one virtuous man shall be found, my argument will in no wise
be invalidated. Miserable, wretched man! what is it thou sayest? Is this
life evil, wherein we have learnt to know God, and meditate on <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="iii.iii.i-Page_6"></span>things to
come, and have become angels instead of men, and take part in the choirs
of the heavenly powers? What other proof do we need of an evil and
depraved mind?

<span id="iii.iii.i-p49"></span>“Why then,” they say, “does Paul call
the present life evil?” In calling the present world \[age\] evil, he
has accommodated himself to our usage, who are wont to say, “I have had
a bad day,” thereby complaining not of the time itself, but of actions
or circumstances. And so Paul in complaining of evil principles of
action has used these customary forms of speech; and he shows that
Christ hath both delivered us from our offences, and secured us for the
future. The first he has declared in the words, “Who gave Himself for
our sins;” and by adding, “that He might deliver us out of this present
evil world,” he has pronounced our future safety. For neither of these
did the Law avail, but grace was sufficient for both.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p50"></span>[Gal.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>.
“According to the will of our God and Father.” <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p53"></span>Since they were terrified by their
notion that by deserting that old Law and adhering to the new, they
should disobey God, who gave the Law, he corrects their error, and says,
that this seemed good to the Father also: and not simply “the Father,”
but “our Father,” which he does in order to affect them by showing that
Christ has made His Father our Father.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p54"></span>[Gal.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii.i-p54.1"></span>.
“To whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p55"></span>This too is new and unusual, for we
never find the word, “Amen” placed at the beginning of an Epistle, but a
good way on; here, however he has it in his beginning, to show that what
he had already said contained a sufficient charge against the Galatians,
and that his argument was complete, for a manifest offence does not
require an elaborate crimination. Having spoken of the Cross, and
Resurrection, of redemption from sin and security for the future, of the
purpose of the Father, and the will of the Son, of grace and peace and
His whole gift, he concludes with an ascription of praise.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p56"></span>Another reason for it is the exceeding
astonishment into which he was thrown by the magnitude of the gift, the
superabundance of the grace, the consideration who we were, and what God
had wrought, and that at once and in a single moment of time. Unable to
express this in words, he breaks out into a doxology, sending up for the
whole world an eulogium, not indeed worthy of the subject, but such as
was possible to him. Hence too he proceeds to use more vehement
language; as if greatly kindled by a sense of the Divine benefits, for
having said, “To whom be the glory for ever and ever, Amen,” he
commences with a more severe reproof.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p57"></span>[Gal.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.i-p57.1"></span>.
“I marvel that ye are so quickly <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)
removing from Him that called you in the grace of Christ, unto a
different Gospel.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p59"></span>Like the Jews who persecuted Christ,
they imagined their observance of the Law was acceptable to the Father,
and he therefore shows that in doing this they displeased not only
Christ, but the Father also, for that they fell away thereby not from
Christ only, but from the Father also. As the old covenant was given not
by the Father only, but also by the Son, so the covenant of grace
proceeded from the Father as well as the Son, and Their every act is
common: “All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine.” ([John xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii.i-p59.1"></span>.)
By saying that they had fallen off from the Father, he brings a twofold
charge against them, of an apostasy, and of an immediate apostasy. The
opposite extreme a late apostasy, is also blameworthy, but he who falls
away at the first onset, and in the very skirmishing, displays an
example of the most extreme cowardice, of which very thing he accuses
them also saying: “How is this that your seducers need not even time for
their designs, but the first approaches suffice for your overthrow and
capture? And what excuse can ye have? If this is a crime among friends,
and he who deserts old and useful associates is to be condemned,
consider what punishment he is obnoxious to who revolts from God that
called him.” He says, “I marvel,” not only by way of reproof, that after
such bounty, such a remission of their sins, such overflowing kindness,
they had deserted to the yoke of servitude, but also in order to show,
that the opinion he had had of them was a favorable and exalted one.
For, had he ranked them among ordinary and easily deceived persons, he
would not have felt surprise. “But since you,” he says, “are of the
noble sort and have suffered, much, I do marvel.” Surely this was enough
to recover and lead them back to their first expressions. He alludes to
it also in the middle of the Epistle, “Did ye suffer so many things in
vain? if it be indeed in vain.” ([Gal. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p59.2"></span>.)
“Ye are removing;” he says not, “ye are removed,” that is, “I will not
believe or suppose that your seduction is complete;” this is the
language of one about to recover them, which further on he expresses yet
more clearly in the words, “I have confidence to you-ward in the Lord
that ye will be none otherwise minded.” ([Gal. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii.i-p59.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p60"></span>“From Him that called you in the grace
of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p61"></span><span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_7"></span>The calling is from the Father, but the
cause of it is the Son. He it is who hath brought about reconciliation
and bestowed it as a gift, for we were not saved by works in
righteousness: or I should rather say that these blessings proceed from
Both; as He says, “Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine.” ([John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii.i-p61.1"></span>.)
He says not “ye are removing from the Gospel” but “from God who called
you,” a more frightful expression, and more likely to affect them. Their
seducers did not act abruptly but gradually, and while they removed them
from the faith in fact, left names unchanged. It is the policy of Satan
not to set his snares in open view; had they urged them to fall away
from Christ, they would have been shunned as deceivers and corrupters,
but suffering them so far to continue in the faith, and putting upon
their error the name of the Gospel, without fear they undermined the
building employing the terms which they used as a sort of curtain to
conceal the destroyers themselves. As therefore they gave the name of
Gospel to this their imposture, he contends against the very name, and
boldly says, “unto a different Gospel,”—

<span id="iii.iii.i-p62"></span>[Gal.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.i-p62.1"></span>.
“Which is not another Gospel.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p63"></span>And justly, for there is not
another. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) Nevertheless the
Marcionites <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) are misled by this
phrase, as diseased persons are injured even by healthy food, for they
have seized upon it, and exclaim, “So Paul himself has declared there is
no other Gospel.” For they do not allow all the Evangelists, but one
only, and him mutilated and confused according to their pleasure. Their
explanation of the words, “according to my Gospel and the preaching of
Jesus Christ,” ([Rom. xvi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p65.2"></span>.) is sufficiently ridiculous; nevertheless,
for the sake of those who are easily seduced, it is necessary to refute
it. We assert, therefore, that, although a thousand Gospels were
written, if the contents of all were the same, they would still be one,
and their unity no wise infringed by the number of writers. So, on the
other hand, if there were one writer only, but he were to contradict
himself, the unity of the things written would be destroyed. For the
oneness of a work depends not on the number of its authors, but on the
agreement or contradictoriness of its contents. Whence it is clear that
the four Gospels are one Gospel; for, as the four say the same thing,
its oneness is preserved by the harmony of the contents, and not
impaired by the difference of persons. And Paul is not now speaking of
the number but of the discrepancy of the things spoken. With justice
might they lay hold of this expression, if the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke differed in the signification of their contents, and in their
doctrinal accuracy; but as they are one and the same, let them cease
being senseless and pretending to be ignorant of these things which are
plain to the very children.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p66"></span>[Gal.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.i-p66.1"></span>.
“Only there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p67"></span>That is to say, ye will not recognize
another Gospel, so long as your mind is sane, so long as your vision
remains healthy, and free from distorted and imaginary phantoms. For as
the disordered eye mistakes the object presented to it, so does the mind
when made turbid by the confusion of evil thoughts. Thus the madman
confounds objects; but this insanity is more dangerous than a physical
malady, for it works injury not in the regions of sense, but of the
mind; it creates confusion not in the organ of bodily vision, but in the
eye of the understanding.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p68"></span>“And would <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) pervert the Gospel of Christ.” They had,
in fact, only introduced one or two commandments, circumcision and the
observance of days, but he says that the Gospel was subverted, in order
to show that a slight adulteration vitiates the whole. For as he who but
partially pares away the image on a royal coin renders the whole
spurious, so he who swerves ever so little from the pure faith, soon
proceeds from this to graver errors, and becomes entirely corrupted.
Where then are those who charge us with being contentious in separating
from heretics, and say that there is no real difference between us
except what arises from our ambition? Let them hear Paul’s assertion,
that those who had but slightly innovated, subverted the Gospel. Not to
say that the Son of God is a created Being, is a small matter. Know you
not that even under the elder covenant, a man who gathered sticks on the
sabbath, and transgressed a single commandment, and that not a great
one, was punished with death? ([Num.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p69.2"></span>.) and that Uzzah, who supported the Ark
when on the point of being overturned, was struck suddenly dead, because
he had intruded upon an office which did not pertain to him? ([2 Sam.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.i-p69.3"></span>.)
Wherefore if to transgress the sabbath, and to touch the falling Ark,
drew down the wrath of God so signally as to deprive the offender of
even a momentary respite, shall he who corrupts unutterably awful
doctrines find excuse and par<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_8"></span>don? Assuredly not. A want of zeal in small
matters is the cause of all our calamities; and because slight errors
escape fitting correction, greater ones creep in. As in the body, a
neglect of wounds generates fever, mortification, and death; so in the
soul, slight evils overlooked open the door to graver ones. It is
accounted a trivial fault that one man should neglect fasting; that
another, who is established in the pure faith, dissembling on account of
circumstances, should surrender his bold profession of it, neither is
this anything great or dreadful; that a third should be irritated, and
threaten to depart from the true faith, is excused on the plea of
passion and resentment. Thus a thousand similar errors are daily
introduced into the Church, and we are become a laughing-stock to Jews
and Greeks, seeing that the Church is divided into a thousand parties.
But if a proper rebuke had at first been given to those who attempted
slight perversions, and a deflection from the divine oracles, such a
pestilence would not have been generated, nor such a storm have seized
upon the Churches. You will now understand why Paul calls circumcision a
subversion of the Gospel. There are many among us now, who fast on the
same day as the Jews, and keep the sabbaths in the same manner; and we
endure it nobly or rather ignobly and basely. And why do I speak of Jews
seeing that many Gentile customs are observed by some among us; omens,
auguries, presages, distinctions of days, a curious attention to the
circumstances of their children’s birth, and, as soon as they are born,
tablets with impious inscriptions are placed upon their unhappy heads,
thereby teaching them from the first to lay aside virtuous endeavors,
and drawing part of them at least under the false domination of
fate. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) But if Christ in no way
profits those that are circumcised, what shall faith hereafter avail to
the salvation of those who have introduced such corruptions? Although
circumcision was given by God, yet Paul used every effort to abolish it,
because its unseasonable observance was injurious to the Gospel. If then
he was so earnest against the undue maintenance of Jewish customs, what
excuse can we have for not abrogating Gentile ones? Hence our affairs
are now in confusion and trouble, hence have our learners being filled
with pride, reversed the order of things throwing every thing into
confusion, and their discipline having been neglected by us their
governors, they spurn our reproof however gentle. And yet if their
superiors were even more worthless and full of numberless evils, it
would not be right for the disciple to disobey. It is said of the Jewish
doctors, that as they sat in Moses’ seat, their disciples were bound to
obey them, though their works were so evil, that the Lord forbad His
disciples to imitate them. What excuse therefore is there for those who
insult and trample on men, rulers of the Church, and living, by the
grace of God, holy lives? If it be unlawful for us to judge each other,
much more is it to judge our teachers.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p71"></span>[Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii.i-p71.1"></span>.
“But though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you any
Gospel other than that which we preached unto you, let him be anathema.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p72"></span>See the Apostle’s wisdom; to obviate the
objection that he was prompted by vainglory to applaud his own doctrine,
he includes himself also in his anathema; and as they betook themselves
to authority, that of James and John, he mentions angels also saying,
“Tell me not of James and John; if one of the most exalted angels of
heaven corrupt the Gospel, let him be anathema.” The phrase “of heaven”
is purposely added, because priests are also called angels. “For the
priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger \[angel\] of the Lord of hosts.” ([Mal.
ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p72.1"></span>.) Lest therefore it should be thought that
priests are here meant, by the term “angels,” he points out the
celestial intelligences by the addition, “from heaven.” And he says not,
if they preach a contrary Gospel, or subvert the whole of the true one,
let them be anathema; but, if they even slightly vary, or incidentally
disturb, my doctrine. “As we have said before, so say I now again.” That
his words might not seem to be spoken in anger, or with exaggeration, or
with recklessness he now repeats them. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Sentiments may perhaps change, when an
expression has been called forth by anger, but to repeat it a second
time proves that it is spoken advisedly, and was previously approved by
the judgment. When Abraham was requested to send Lazarus, he replied,
“They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them: if they hear them
not, neither will they be persuaded, if one rise from the dead.” ([Luke
xvi. 31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p73.6"></span>.) And Christ introduces Abraham thus
speaking, to show that He would have the Scriptures accounted more
worthy of credence, even than one raised from the dead: Paul too, (and
when I say Paul, I mean Christ, who directed his mind,) prefers them
before an angel come down from heaven. And justly, for the angels,
though mighty, are but servants and ministers, but the Scriptures were
all written and sent, not by servants, but <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>
<span id="iii.iii.i-Page_9"></span>by God the Lord of all. He says, if
“any man” preach another Gospel to you than that which we have
preached,—not “if this or that man:” and herein appears his prudence,
and care of giving offence, for what needed there still any mention of
names, when he had used such extensive terms as to embrace all, both in
heaven and earth? In that he anathemized evangelists and angels, he
included every dignity, and his mention of himself included every
intimacy and affinity. “Tell me not,” he exclaims, “that my
fellow-apostles and colleagues have so spoken; I spare not myself if I
preach such doctrine.” And he says this not as condemning the Apostles
for swerving from the message they were commissioned to deliver; far
from it, (for he says, whether we or they thus preach;) but to show,
that in the discussion of truth the dignity of persons is not to be
considered.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p74"></span>[Gal.
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>. “For <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)
am I now persuading men: or God?” or am I seeking to please men? if I
were still pleasing men, I should not be a servant of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p76"></span>Granting, says he, that I might deceive
you by these doctrines, could I deceive God, who knows my yet unuttered
thoughts, and to please whom is my unceasing endeavor? See here the
Apostolical spirit, the Evangelical loftiness! So too he writes to the
Corinthians, “For we are not again commending ourselves unto you, but
speak as giving you occasion of glorying;” ([2 Cor. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)<span id="iii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>.)
and again, “But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you, or of man’s judgment.” ([1 Cor. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.i-p76.2"></span>.)
For since he is compelled to justify himself to his disciples, being
their teacher, he submits to it; but he is grieved at it, not on account
of chagrin, far from it, but on account of the instability of the minds
of those led away and on account of not being fully trusted by them.
Wherefore Paul now speaks, as it were, thus:—Is my account to be
rendered to you? Shall I be judged by men? My account is to God, and all
my acts are with a view to that inquisition, nor am I so miserably
abandoned as to pervert my doctrine, seeing that I am to justify what I
preach before the Lord of all.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p77"></span>He thus expressed himself, as much with
a view of withstanding their opinions, as in self-defence; for it
becomes disciples to obey, not to judge, their master. But now, says he,
that the order is reversed, and ye sit as judges, know that I am but
little concerned to defend myself before you; all, I do for God’s sake,
and in order that I may answer to Him concerning my doctrine. He who
wishes to persuade men, is led to act tortuously and insincerely, and to
employ deceit and falsehood, in order to engage the assent of his
hearers. But he who addresses himself to God, and desires to please Him,
needs simplicity and purity of mind, for God cannot be deceived. Whence
it is plain that I have thus written to you not from the love of rule,
or to gain disciples, or to receive honor at your hands. My endeavor has
been to please God, not man. Were it otherwise, I should still consort
with the Jews, <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) still persecute the
Church, I who have cast off my country altogether, my companions, my
friends, my kindred, and all my reputation, and taken in exchange for
these, persecution, enmity, strife, and daily-impending death, have
given a signal proof that I speak not from love of human applause. This
he says, being about to narrate his former life, and sudden conversion,
and to demonstrate clearly that it was sincere. And that they might not
be elevated by a notion that he did this by way of self-vindication to
them, he premises, “For do I now persuade men?” He well knew how, on a
fitting occasion, to correct his disciples, in a grave and lofty tone:
assuredly he had other sources whence to demonstrate the truth of his
preaching,—by signs and miracles, by dangers, by prisons, by daily
deaths, by hunger and thirst, by nakedness, and the like. Now however
that he is speaking not of false apostles, but of the true, who had
shared these very perils, he employs another method. For when his
discourse was pointed towards false apostles, he institutes a comparison
by bringing forward his endurance of danger, saying, “Are they ministers
of Christ? (I speak as one beside himself) I more; in labors more
abundantly, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in
deaths oft.” ([2 Cor. xi. 23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p78.2"></span>.) But now he speaks of his former manner of
life and says,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p79"></span>[Gal.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)<span id="iii.iii.i-p79.1"></span>.
“For <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) I make known to you, brethren,
as touching the Gospel which was preached by me that it is not after
man. For neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it
came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p81"></span>You observe how sedulously he affirms
that he was taught of Christ, who Himself, without human intervention,
condescended to reveal to him all knowledge. And if he were asked for
his proof that God Himself thus immediately revealed to him these
ineffable mysteries, he would instance his former manner of life,
arguing that his conversion would not have been so <span id="page_10">p.
10</span> <span id="iii.iii.i-Page_10"></span>sudden, had it not been by
Divine revelation. For when men have been vehement and eager on the
contrary side, their conviction, if it is effected by human means,
requires much time and ingenuity. It is clear therefore that he, whose
conversion is sudden, and who has been sobered in the very height of his
madness, must have been vouchsafed a Divine revelation and teaching, and
so have at once arrived at complete sanity. On this account he is
obliged to relate his former life, and to call the Galatians as
witnesses of past events. That the Only-Begotten Son of God had Himself
from heaven vouchsafed to call me, says he, you who were not present,
could not know, but that I was a persecutor you do know. For my violence
even reached your ears, and the distance between Palestine and Galatia
is so great, that the report would not have extended thither, had not my
acts exceeded all bounds and endurance. Wherefore he says,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p82"></span>[Gal.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p82.1"></span>. “For <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)
ye have heard of my manner of life in time past in the Jews’ religion,
how that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and made havoc
of it.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p85"></span>Observe how he shrinks not from
aggravating each point; not saying simply that he “persecuted” but
“beyond measure,” and not only “persecuted” but “made havoc of it,”
which signifies an attempt to extinguish, to pull down, to destroy, to
annihilate, the Church.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p86"></span>[Gal.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p86.1"></span>. “And I advanced in the Jews’ religion
beyond many of mine own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly
zealous for the traditions of my fathers.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p87"></span>To obviate the notion that his
persecution arose from passion, vain-glory, or enmity, he shows that he
was actuated by zeal, not indeed “according to knowledge,” ([Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.i-p87.1"></span>.)
still by a zealous admiration of the traditions of his fathers. This is
his argument; <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) —if my efforts
against the Church sprung not from human motives, but from religious
though mistaken zeal, why should I be actuated by vain-glory, now that I
am contending for the Church, and have embraced the truth? If it was not
this motive, but a godly zeal, which possessed me when I was in error,
much more now that I have come to know the truth, ought I to be free
from such a suspicion. As soon as I passed over to the doctrines of the
Church I shook off my Jewish prejudices, manifesting on that side a zeal
still more ardent; and this is a proof that my conversion is sincere,
and that the zeal which possesses me is from above. What other
inducement could I have to make such a change, and to barter honor for
contempt, repose for peril, security for distress? none surely but the
love of truth.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p89"></span>[Gal.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii.i-p89.1"></span>.
“But when it was the good pleasure of God, Who separated me, even from
my mother’s womb, and called me through His grace, to reveal His Son in
me, that I might preach Him among the Gentiles, immediately I conferred
not with flesh and blood.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p90"></span>Here his object is to show, that it was
by some secret providence that he was left for a time to himself. For if
he was set apart from his mother’s womb to be an Apostle and to be
called to that ministry, yet was not actually called till that juncture,
which summons he instantly obeyed, it is evident that God had some
hidden reason for this delay. What this purpose was, you are perhaps
eager to learn from me, and primarily, why he was not called with the
twelve. But in order not to protract this discourse by digressing from
that which is more pressing, I must entreat your love not to require all
things from me, but to search for it by yourselves, and to beg of God to
reveal it to you. Moreover I partly discussed this subject when I
discoursed before you on the change of his name from Saul to Paul;
which, if you have forgotten, you will fully gather from a perusal of
that volume. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) At present let us
pursue the thread of our discourse, and consider the proof he now
adduces that no natural event had befallen him,—that God Himself had
providentially ordered the occurrence.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p92"></span>“And called me through His grace.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p93"></span>God indeed says that He called him on
account of his excellent capacity, as He said to Ananias, “for he is a
chosen vessel unto Me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings,”
([Acts ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p93.1"></span>.) that is to say, capable of service, and
the accomplishment of great deeds. God gives this as the reason for his
call. But he himself everywhere ascribes it to grace, and to God’s
inexpressible mercy, as in the words, “Howbeit for this cause I obtained
mercy,” not that I was sufficient or even serviceable, but “that in me
as chief might Jesus Christ show forth all His long-suffering, for an
ensample of them which should hereafter believe on Him unto eternal
life.” ([1 Tim. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p93.2"></span>.) Behold his overflowing humility; I
obtained mercy, says he, that no one might despair, when the worst of
men had shared His bounty. For this is the force of the words, “that He
might show forth all His long-suffering for an ensample of them which
should hereafter believe on Him.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p94"></span>“To reveal His Son <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) in me.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p96"></span><span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_11"></span>Christ says in another place, “No one
knoweth who the Son is, save the Father; and who the Father is, save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal Him.” ([Luke x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span id="iii.iii.i-p96.1"></span>.)
You observe that the Father reveals the Son, and the Son the Father; so
it is as to Their glory, the Son glorifies the Father, and the Father
the Son; “glorify Thy Son, that the Son may glorify Thee,” and, “as I
have glorified Thee.” ([John 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.i-p96.2"></span>.)
But why does he say, “to reveal His Son in me,” and not “to me?” it is
to signify, that he had not only been instructed in the faith by words,
but that he was richly endowed with the Spirit;—that the revelation had
enlightened his whole soul, and that he had Christ speaking within
him. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p98"></span>“That I might preach Him among the
Gentiles.” For not only his faith, but his election to the Apostolic
office proceeded from God. The object, says he, of His thus specially
revealing Himself to me, was not only that I might myself behold Him,
but that I might also manifest Him to others. And he says not merely,
“others,” but, “that I might preach Him among the Gentiles,” thus
touching beforehand on that great ground of his defence which lay in the
respective characters of the disciples; for it was necessary to preach
differently to the Jews and to the heathen.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p99"></span>“Immediately I conferred not with flesh
and blood.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p100"></span>Here he alludes to the Apostles, naming
them after their physical nature; however, that he may have meant to
include all mankind, I shall not deny. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p102"></span>[Gal.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p102.1"></span>. “Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them
which were Apostles before me.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p103"></span>These words weighed by themselves seem
to breath an arrogant spirit, and to be foreign to the Apostolic temper.
For to give one’s suffrage for one’s self, and to admit no man to share
one’s counsel, is a sign of folly. It is said, “Seest thou a man wise in
his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him;” ([Prov.
xxvi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p103.1"></span>.) and, “Woe unto them that are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!” ([Isa. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p103.2"></span>.) and Paul himself in another place, “Be
not wise in your own conceits.” ([Rom. xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p103.3"></span>.) Surely one who had been thus taught, and
had thus admonished others, would not fall into such an error, even were
he an ordinary man; much less then Paul himself. Nevertheless, as I
said, this expression nakedly considered may easily prove a snare and
offence to many hearers. But if the cause of it is subjoined, all will
applaud and admire the speaker. This then let us do; for it is not the
right course to weigh the mere words, nor examine the language by
itself, as many errors will be the consequence, but to attend to the
intention of the writer. And unless we pursue this method in our own
discourses, and examine into the mind of the speaker, we shall make many
enemies, and every thing will be thrown into disorder. Nor is this
confined to words, but the same result will follow, if this rule is not
observed in actions. For surgeons often cut and break certain of the
bones; so do robbers; yet it would be miserable indeed not to be able to
distinguish one from the other. Again, homicides and martyrs, when
tortured, suffer the same pangs, yet is the difference between them
great. Unless we attend to this rule, we shall not be able to
discriminate in these matters; but shall call Elijah and Samuel and
Phineas homicides, and Abraham a son-slayer; that is, if we go about to
scrutinize the bare facts, without taking into account the intention of
the agents. Let us then inquire into the intention of Paul in thus
writing, let us consider his scope, and general deportment towards the
Apostles, that we may arrive at his present meaning. Neither formerly,
nor in this case, did he speak with a view of disparaging the Apostles
or of extolling himself, (how so? when he included himself under his
anathema?) but always in order to guard the integrity of the Gospel.
Since the troublers of the Church said that they ought to obey the
Apostles who suffered these observances, and not Paul who forbade them,
and hence the Judaizing heresy had gradually crept in, it was necessary
for him manfully to resist them, from a desire of repressing the
arrogance of those who improperly exalted themselves, and not of
speaking ill of the Apostles. And therefore he says, “I conferred not
with flesh and blood;” for it would have been extremely absurd for one
who had been taught by God, afterwards to refer himself to men. For it
is right that he who learns from men should in turn take men as his
counsellors. But he to whom that divine and blessed voice had been
vouchsafed, and who had been fully instructed by Him that possesses all
the treasures of wisdom, wherefore should he afterwards confer with men?
It were meet that he should teach, not be taught by them. Therefore he
thus spoke, not arrogantly, but to exhibit the dignity of his own
commission. “Neither went I up,” says he, “to Jerusalem to them which
were Apostles before me.” Because they were continually repeating that
the Apostles were before him, and were called before him, he says, “I
went not up to them.” Had it been needful for him to communicate with
them, He, who revealed to him his commission, would have given him this
injunction. <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_12"></span>Is it true, however, that he did not go up
thither? <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) nay, he went up, and not
merely so, but in order to learn somewhat of them. When a question arose
on our present subject in the city of Antioch, in the Church which had
from the beginning shown so much zeal, and it was discussed whether the
Gentile believers ought to be circumcised, or were under no necessity to
undergo the rite, this very Paul himself and Silas <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) went up. How is it then that he says, I
went not up, nor conferred? First, because he went not up of his own
accord, but was sent by others; next, because he came not to learn, but
to bring others over. For he was from the first of that opinion, which
the Apostles subsequently ratified, that circumcision was unnecessary.
But when these persons deemed him unworthy of credit and applied to
those at Jerusalem he went up not to be farther instructed, but to
convince the gain-sayers that those at Jerusalem agreed with him. Thus
he perceived from the first the fitting line of conduct, and needed no
teacher, but, primarily and before any discussion, maintained without
wavering what the Apostles, after much discussion, ([Acts
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p105.3"></span>.) subsequently ratified. This Luke shows
by his own account, that Paul argued much at length with them on this
subject before he went to Jerusalem. But since the brethren chose to be
informed on this subject, by those at Jerusalem, he went up on their own
account, not on his own. And his expression, “I went not up,” signifies
that he neither went at the outset of his teaching, nor for the purpose
of being instructed. Both are implied by the phrase, “Immediately I
conferred not with flesh and blood.” He says not, “I conferred,” merely,
but, “immediately;” and his subsequent journey was not to gain any
additional instruction.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p106"></span>[Gal.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p106.1"></span>. “But I went away into Arabia.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p107"></span>Behold a fervent soul! he longed to
occupy regions not yet tilled, but lying in a wild state. Had he
remained with the Apostles, as he had nothing to learn, his preaching
would have been straitened, for it behooved them to spread the word
every where. Thus this blessed man, fervent in spirit, straightway
undertook to teach wild barbarians, <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)
choosing a life full of battle and labor. Having said, “I went into
Arabia,” he adds, “and again I returned unto Damascus.” Here observe his
humility; he speaks not of his successes, nor of whom or of how many he
instructed. Yet such was his zeal immediately on his baptism, that he
confounded the Jews, and so exasperated them, that they and the Greeks
lay in wait for him with a view to kill him. This would not have been
the case, had he not greatly added to the numbers of the faithful; since
they were vanquished in doctrine, they had recourse to murder, which was
a manifest sign of Paul’s superiority. But Christ suffered him not to be
put to death, preserving him for his mission. Of these successes,
however, he says nothing, and so in all his discourses, his motive is
not ambition, nor to be honored more highly than the Apostles, nor
because he is mortified at being lightly esteemed, but it is a fear lest
any detriment should accrue to his mission. For he calls himself, “one
born out of due time,” and, “the first of sinners,” and “the last of the
Apostles,” and, “not meet to be called an Apostle.” And this he said,
who had labored more than all of them; which is real humility; for he
who, conscious of no excellence, speaks humbly of himself, is candid but
not humble; but to say so after such trophies, is to be practised in
self-control.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p109"></span>[Gal.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p109.1"></span>. “And again I returned unto Damascus.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p110"></span>But what great things did he not
probably achieve in this city? for he tells us that the governor under
Aretas the king set guards about the whole of it, hoping to entrap this
blessed man. Which is a proof of the strongest kind that he was
violently persecuted by the Jews. Here, however, he says nothing of
this, but mentioning his arrival and departure is silent concerning the
events which there occurred, nor would he have mentioned them in the
place I have referred to, ([2 Cor. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p110.1"></span>.) had not circumstances required their
narration.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p111"></span>[Gal.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p111.1"></span>. “Then after three years I went up to
Jerusalem <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) to visit Cephas.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p113"></span>What can be more lowly than such a
soul? After such successes, wanting nothing of Peter, not even his
assent, but being of equal dignity with him, (for at present I will say
no more,) he comes to him as his elder and superior. And the only object
of this journey was to visit Peter; thus he pays due respect to the
Apostles, and esteems himself not only not their better but not their
equal. Which is plain from this journey, for Paul was induced to visit
Peter by the same feeling from which many of our brethren sojourn with
holy men: or rather by a humbler feeling for they do so for their own
benefit, but this blessed man, not for his own instruction or
correction, but merely for the sake of <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
<span id="iii.iii.i-Page_13"></span>beholding and honoring Peter by his
presence. He says, “to visit Peter;” he does not say to see, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p113.1"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p113.2"></span>δεῖν</span>,) but to
visit and survey, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p113.3"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p113.4"></span>στορῆσαι</span>,) a word which those, who
seek to become acquainted with great and splendid cities, apply to
themselves. Worthy of such trouble did he consider the very sight of
Peter; and this appears from the Acts of the Apostles also. ([Acts
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p113.5"></span>etc.) For on his arrival at Jerusalem, on
another occasion, after having converted many Gentiles, and, with labors
far surpassing the rest, reformed and brought to Christ Pamphylia,
Lycaonia, Cilicia, and all nations in that quarter of the world, he
first addresses himself with great humility to James, as to his elder
and superior. Next he submits to his counsel, and that counsel contrary
to this Epistle. “Thou seest, brother, how many thousands there are
among the Jews of them which have believed; therefore shave thy head,
and purify thyself.” ([Acts xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii.i-p113.6"></span>
f.) Accordingly he shaved his head, and observed all the Jewish
ceremonies; for where the Gospel was not affected, he was the humblest
of all men. But where by such humility he saw any injured, he gave up
that undue exercise of it, for that was no longer to be humble but to
outrage and destroy the disciples.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p114"></span>[Gal.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p114.1"></span>. “And tarried with him fifteen days.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p115"></span>To take a journey on account of him was
a mark of respect; but to remain so many days, of friendship and the
most earnest affection. <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p117"></span>[Gal.
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p117.1"></span>. “But other of the Apostles saw I none,
save James, <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) the Lord’s brother.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p119"></span>See what great friends he was with
Peter especially; on his account he left his home, and with him he
tarried. This I frequently repeat, and desire you to remember, that no
one, when he hears what this Apostle seems to have spoken against Peter,
may conceive a suspicion of him. He premises this, that when he says, “I
resisted Peter,” no one may suppose that these words imply enmity and
contention; for he honored and loved his person more than all and took
this journey for his sake only, not for any of the others. “But other of
the Apostles saw I none, save James.” “I saw him merely, I did not learn
from him,” he means. But observe how honorably he mentions him, he says
not “James” merely, but adds this illustrious title, so free is he from
all envy. Had he only wished to point out whom he meant, he might have
shown this by another appellation, and called him the son of Cleophas,
as the Evangelist does. <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) But as he
considered that he had a share in the august titles of the Apostles, he
exalts himself by honoring James; and this he does by calling him “the
Lord’s brother,” although he was not by birth His brother, but only so
reputed. Yet this did not deter him from giving the title; and in many
other instances he displays towards all the Apostles that noble
disposition, which beseemed him.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p121"></span>[Gal.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p121.1"></span>. “Now touching the things which I write
unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p122"></span>Observe throughout the transparent
humility of this holy soul; his earnestness in his own vindication is as
great as if he had to render an account of his deeds, and was pleading
for his life in a court of justice.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p123"></span>[Gal.
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p123.1"></span>. “Then I came into the regions of Syria
and Cilicia.” <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p125"></span>After his interview with Peter, he
resumes his preaching and the task which lay before him, avoiding Judæa,
both because of his mission being to the Gentiles, and of his
unwillingness to “build upon another man’s foundation.” Wherefore there
was not even a chance meeting, as appears from what follows.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p126"></span>[Gal.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p126.1"></span>. “And I was still unknown by face unto the
Churches of Judæa; but they only heard say, he that once persecuted us
now preacheth the faith of which he once made havoc.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p127"></span>What modesty in thus again mentioning
the facts of his persecuting and laying waste the Church, and in thus
making infamous his former life, while he passes over the illustrious
deeds he was about to achieve! He might have told, had he wished it, all
his successes, but he mentions none of these and stepping with one word
over a vast expanse, he says merely, “I came into the regions of Syria
and Cilicia;” and, “they had heard, that he, which once persecuted us,
now preacheth the faith of which he once made havoc.” The purpose of the
words, “I was unknown to the Churches of Judæa,” is to show, that so far
from preaching to them the necessity of circumcision, he was not known
to them even by sight.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p128"></span>[Gal.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p128.1"></span>. “And they glorified God in me.” See here
again how accurately he observes the rule of his humility; he says not,
they admired me, they applauded or were astonished at me, but ascribes
all to Divine grace by the words, “they glorified God in me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:5](1130006.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p2"></span> \[Properly so-called. His other works on
the Scriptures are in the form of homilies, or expository sermons, with
the exception of his continuous commentary on the first six chapters of
Isaiah. But as Schaff says “his homilies are expository and his
commentaries are homiletical.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:6](1130006.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p13"></span> “The two threads which run through this
Epistle—the defence of the Apostle’s own authority, and the maintenance
of the doctrine of grace—are knotted together in the opening salutation.
By expanding his official title into a statement of his direct
commission from God, he meets the personal attack of his enemies; and by
dwelling on the work of redemption in connection with the name of Christ
([v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.) he resists their doctrinal
errors.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:7](1130006.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p15"></span> \[As is narrated, for example, in [Acts
xxi. 20-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>, which was, Baur and his Tübingen critics
to the contrary notwithstanding, in accordance with Paul’s principle and
practice, as announced in [1 Cor. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p15.2"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_7"></span>[2:8](1130006.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p17"></span> “Not from men as an ultimate, nor
through man as a mediate authority.”—Ellicott.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p18"></span>“In the first clause, ‘from men,’ he
distinguishes himself from the false apostles who did not derive their
authority from God at all; in the second, ‘through man,’ he ranks
himself with the twelve who were commissioned directly from God. The
singular is used in second clause, ‘through man,’ because offices which
emanate from a body of men are conferred by their single
representative.”—Lightfoot.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p19"></span>\[“Paul has in second clause used the
singular because the contrast is ‘through Jesus Christ.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_8"></span>[3:9](1130006.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p22"></span> This digression, and others which
follow, were occasioned by the controversies of the day; the Arians and
Macedonians denying the co-equality and consubstantiality of <span
class="c16"><span id="iii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>Father, Son</span>, and
<span class="c16"><span id="iii.iii.i-p22.2"></span>Holy Ghost</span>.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:10](1130006.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p23"></span> \[“To urge this use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>διἃ</span> in connection
with Son and the Father as direct evidence for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p23.2"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p23.3"></span>μοουσια</span> of the
Father and the Son (as Chrysostom and Theod.) may perhaps be rightly
deemed precarious. Yet there is something *very* noticeable in this use
of a common preposition with both the first and second persons of the
Trinity by a writer so cumulative and yet for the most part so exact in
his use of prepositions as St. Paul.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:11](1130006.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p24"></span> \[That is, from the order of the three
names.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_11"></span>[4:12](1130006.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p32"></span> \[Meyer agrees with Lightfoot and
Ellicott in the view that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p32.1"></span>πἁντες</span> means not all the Christians
of the place where he was (probably Ephesus), but only his traveling
companions; but he differs from them in holding that “the impressive
effect of the epistle could not but be strengthened by indicating that
these brethren collectively desired to address the very same
instructions, warnings and exhortations to the Galatians.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_12"></span>[4:13](1130006.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p38.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p39"></span> \[The word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>παιδαγωγός</span>, the same that is used in
[Gal. 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#025)<span id="iii.iii.i-p39.2"></span>,
and translated ‘school-master’ in the A.V., but ‘tutor’ in the Rev.
Ver.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_13"></span>[4:14](1130006.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p42"></span> \[“The Galatians had practically
ignored the atoning death of Christ; compare [Gal.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021), [Gal.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p42.1"></span>.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_14"></span>[5:15](1130006.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p45"></span> \[“The idea of satisfaction is implied
not in the preposition <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p45.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p45.2"></span>πέρ</span> but the whole nature of the
case.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_15"></span>[5:16](1130006.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p48"></span> That is, the Manichees, who considered
matter intrinsically evil, and paid divine honors to the sun, moon, and
stars. Vid. Epiph. *Hær.* lxvi. \[On Mani and the Manichean heresy see
Schaff, *Church History*, Vol. II. pp. 498–508 where a full account of
the literature is given also.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_16"></span>[6:17](1130006.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p51"></span> \[“And not by our own merits. cf. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p51.1"></span>τοῦ καλέσαντος</span>,
[Gal. 1.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p51.2"></span>.”—Lightfoot.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p52"></span>“The salvation was willed by God to whom
Christ was obedient ([Philip. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p52.1"></span>.).”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_17"></span>[6:18](1130006.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p58"></span> \[This note of time helps to fix the
date of the Epistle as being about 56 or 57 during Paul’s two years’
stay at Ephesus ([Acts 19: 10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p58.1"></span>.). So most modern expositors, though
Lightfoot and some others put it later.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](1130006.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p64"></span> \[The Revised version brings out the
difference of the words for “another.” The <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p64.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p64.2"></span>τερον</span>, “a different kind of” gospel,
the second is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p64.3"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p64.4"></span>λλο</span>, “another,” simply. “To a
different sort of gospel,—nay, it is not another gospel. There cannot be
two gospels. Only certain men are troubling you and trying to pervert
the gospel of Christ. But a perverted gospel is no gospel at
all.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:20](1130006.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p64.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p65"></span> Marcion flourished about <span
class="c16"><span id="iii.iii.i-p65.1"></span>a.d.</span> 120–130. His
doctrine was a compound of various preceding theologies, chiefly the
Gnostic. He received only a part of St. Luke’s Gospel. Tertull. *in*
*Marc.* iv. 2–4. He it was who on asking Polycarp to “acknowledge” him,
received for answer, “I acknowledge thee as the first-born of Satan.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[7:21](1130006.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p69"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p69.1"></span>θέλοντες</span>: On this word Jerome aptly
says, *Volunt sed non valent*. The troubling of the Galatians, however,
did actually take place.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_21"></span>[8:22](1130006.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p69.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p70"></span> \[There is an eloquent passage on this
same subject of foolish and sinful superstitions among Christians in
Homily xii. on Ephesians, near the end.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_22"></span>[8:23](1130006.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p73"></span> \[Though this view of Chrysostom, that
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p73.1"></span>προειρήκαμεν</span> refers to what
immediately precedes is held by many others, it is not tenable for two
reasons; 1. St. Paul would have used the singular <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p73.2"></span>προειρηκα</span>, as he
does in <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p73.3"></span>λέγω</span>, immediately following. 2 The
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p73.4"></span>πρό</span> in
composition, and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p73.5"></span>καί ἄρτι</span>, both, mark some greater
distinction of time than this would allow.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_23"></span>[9:24](1130006.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p75"></span> \[“I speak thus strongly, for my
language shall not be misconstrued. Will any one now say that careless
of winning the favor of God, I seek to ingratiate myself with men?”
Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_24"></span>[9:25](1130006.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p78"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p78.1"></span>χριστοῦ δοῦλος</span> should not be taken in
an historical sense, as Chrysostom. This would be feeble and lacking in
depth of thought. No, it is to be taken in its ethical
character.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_25"></span>[9:26](1130006.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p80"></span> \[The reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p80.1"></span>γάρ</span> (Rev. Ver. W. H.) gives a reason
for what is implied in the sentence preceding, while <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i-p80.2"></span>δέ</span>, an inferior
reading, means ‘but,’ (now to enter more particularly on the subject of
my letter) “I make known to you.”—So Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_26"></span>[10:27](1130006.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p83"></span> \[“He begins here the *historical
proof* that he was indebted for his gospel to the *revelation* he had
mentioned.”—Meyer.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p84"></span>“My early education was such that no
human agency could have brought the change (from Judaism to
Christianity). It required a direct interposition from
God.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_27"></span>[10:28](1130006.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p88"></span> \[Chrysostom’s interpretation of this
passage is hardly sustained by the context. It is not a proof of his
sincerity that he is adducing; he is continuing and completing the
statement that his former manner of life was proof that he could not
have received the Gospel from man.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_28"></span>[10:29](1130006.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p91"></span> \[Vid. *Hom. de Mut. Nom.* t. iii. p.
98. Ed. Ben.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_29"></span>[10:30](1130006.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p95"></span> \[“In his pre-Christian blindness Paul
had known Christ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p95.1"></span>κατὰ σάρκα</span>, [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p95.2"></span>.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_30"></span>[11:31](1130006.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p96.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p97"></span> \[“<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p97.1"></span>Εν ἐμοί</span> means ‘in my mind,’ ‘in my
consciousness.’ [2 Cor. iv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p97.2"></span>,” in opposition to Lightfoot who says, “‘In
me’ means, as the context shows, not a revelation made inwardly to
himself, but through him to others.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_31"></span>[11:32](1130006.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p101"></span> \[“Flesh and blood,” is twice used
elsewhere ([Matt. 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017), [Eph.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p101.1"></span>,) to denote “weak human nature,” “feeble
man.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_32"></span>[12:33](1130006.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p103.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p104"></span> \[Paul here simply means he did not go
to Jerusalem before he began preaching.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_33"></span>[12:34](1130006.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p105"></span> Of those who were sent with St. Paul
from Antioch to Jerusalem, Barnabas is the only one named in [Acts xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.i-p105.1"></span>,
and it would rather seem from [Acts.
15.22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p105.2"></span>, that Silas was then at Jerusalem, and did
not accompany St. Paul till his return from thence.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[12:35](1130006.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p108"></span> \[“This journey is to be looked upon
not as having for its object a quiet preparation, but as a first
experiment of extraneous ministry.”—Meyer. Farrar, *Life and Work of
Paul*. Ch. xi. takes the opposite view and says, “No one, I think, who
reads this passage attentively can deny that it gives the impression of
an intentional retirement from human intercourse.” So also Schaff, who
says it was a sort of substitute for the three years intercourse with
Jesus enjoyed by the other Apostles. *Ap. Ch.* 236.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_35"></span>[12:36](1130006.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p112"></span> \[First visit to Jerusalem, [Acts ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)<span id="iii.iii.i-p112.1"></span>.
For a reconciliation of the two accounts of this visit see *Handy Com.
on Gal.* Excursus A (by Sanday).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_36"></span>[13:37](1130006.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p116"></span> \[And yet it was not long enough to
have allowed his receiving his doctrine and Gospel from Peter. Besides
he had already been preaching three years.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_37"></span>[13:38](1130006.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p117.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p118"></span> “Thus this James is distinguished from
the circle of the twelve ([1 Cor. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii.i-p118.1"></span>.)
to which Peter belonged but included in the number of Apostles in the
wider sense, which explains the merely supplementary mention of this
Apostle.”—Meyer.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[13:39](1130006.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p120"></span> \[Compare [John
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025), [Matt.
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p120.1"></span>. But see Lightfoot’s learned and
exhaustive essay on “The Brethren of the Lord,” *Com. on Gal.* pp.
88–127, and Schaff, *Church History,* I, 272–275.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_39"></span>[13:40](1130006.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p124"></span> \[Compare [Acts ix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)<span id="iii.iii.i-p124.1"></span>,
where Luke says the brethren took Paul to Cæsarea, and thence despatched
him to Tarsus (in Cilicia).—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians 2:1,2](1130007)
