[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130016)  [Next](1130018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span>[Eph.
2.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>“And you did He quicken, when ye were dead
through your trespasses and sins, wherein aforetime ye walked, according
to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the
air, of the spirit that now worketh in the sons of disobedience; among
whom we also all once lived, in the lusts of our flesh, doing the
desires of the flesh, and of the mind; and were by nature children of
wrath even as the rest.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p4.1"></span>There</span> is, we know, a corporal, and
there is also a spiritual, dying. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) Of the first it is no crime to
partake, nor is there any peril in it, inasmuch as there is no blame
attached to it, for it is a matter of nature, not of deliberate choice.
It had its origin in the transgression of the first-created man, and
thenceforward in its issue it passed into a nature, and, at all events,
will quickly be brought to a termination; whereas this spiritual dying,
being a matter of deliberate choice, has criminality, and has no
termination. Observe then how Paul, having already shown how exceedingly
great a thing it is, in so much that to heal a deadened soul is a far
greater thing than to raise the dead, so now again lays it down in all
its real greatness.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span>“And you,” saith he “when ye were dead
through your trespasses and sins, wherein aforetime ye walked according
to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the
air, of the spirit that now worketh in the sons of disobedience.” You
observe the gentleness of Paul, and how on all occasions he encourages
the hearer, not bearing too hard upon him. For whereas he had said, Ye
have arrived at the very last degree of wickedness, (for such is the
meaning of becoming dead,) that he may not excessively distress
them, <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) (because men are put to
shame when their former misdeeds are brought forward, cancelled though
they be, and no longer attended with danger,) he gives them, as it were,
an accomplice, that it may not be supposed that the work is all their
own, and that accomplice a powerful one. And who then is this? The
Devil. He does much the same also in the Epistle to the Corinthians,
where, after saying, “Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters,” ([1 Cor. vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p7.1"></span>.) and after enumerating all the other vices,
and adding in conclusion, “shall inherit the kingdom of God;” he then
adds, “and such were some of you;” he does not say absolutely, “ye
were,” but “some of you were,” that is, thus in some sort were ye. Here
the heretics attack us. They tell us that these expressions (“prince of
all the power of the air,” etc.) are used with reference to God, and
letting loose their unbridled tongue, they fit these <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="iii.iv.v-Page_66"></span>things to
God, which belong to the Devil alone. How then are we to put them to
silence? By the very words they themselves use; for, if He is righteous,
as they themselves allow, and yet hath done these things, this is no
longer the act of a righteous being, but rather of a being most
unrighteous and corrupted; and corrupted God cannot possibly be.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>Further, why does he call the Devil “the
prince” of the world? Because nearly the whole human race has
surrendered itself to him and all are willingly and of deliberate choice
his slaves. And to Christ, though He promises unnumbered blessings, not
any one so much as gives any heed; whilst to the Devil, though promising
nothing of the sort, but sending them on to hell, all yield themselves.
His kingdom then is in this world, and he has, with few exceptions, more
subjects and more obedient subjects than God, in consequence of our
indolence.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p9"></span>“According to the power,” saith he, “of
the air, of the spirit.” <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216)

<span id="iii.iv.v-p11"></span>Here again he means, that Satan occupies
the space under Heaven, and that the incorporeal powers are spirits of
the air, under his operation. For that his kingdom is of this age, i.e.,
will cease with the present age, hear what he says at the end of the
Epistle; “Our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the
principalities, against powers, against the world rulers of this
darkness;” ([Eph. vi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p11.1"></span>.) where, lest when you hear of world-rulers
you should therefore say that the Devil is uncreated, he elsewhere
([Gal. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p11.2"></span>.) calls a perverse time, “an evil world,”
not of the creatures. For he seems to me, having had dominion beneath
the sky, not to have fallen from his dominion, even after his
transgression.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p12"></span>“That now worketh,” he says, “in the sons
of disobedience.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p13"></span>You observe that it is not by force, nor
by compulsion, but by persuasion, he wins us over; “disobedience” or
“untractableness” is his word, as though one were to say, by guile and
persuasion he draws all his votaries to himself. And not only does he
give them a word of encouragement by telling them they have an
associate, but also by ranking himself with them, for he says,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p14"></span>“Among whom we also all once lived.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p15"></span>“All,” because he cannot say that any one
is excepted.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p16"></span>“In the lusts of our flesh, doing the
desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature children of
wrath, even as the rest.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p17"></span>That is, having no spiritual affections.
Yet, lest he should slander the flesh, or lest it should be supposed
that the transgression was not great, observe how he guards the matter,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p18"></span>“Doing,” he says, “the desires of the
flesh and of the mind.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p19"></span>That is, the pleasurable passions. We
provoked God to anger, he saith, we provoked Him to wrath, we were
wrath, and nothing else. For as he who is a child of man is by nature
man, so also were we children of wrath <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) even as others; i.e., no one was free,
but we all did things worthy of wrath.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p21"></span>[Eph.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.v-p21.1"></span>.
“But God, being rich in mercy.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p22"></span>Not merely merciful, but rich in mercy;
as it is said also in another place; “In the multitude of thy mercies.”
([Ps. lxix. 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p22.1"></span>.) And again, “Have mercy upon me, according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies.” ([Ps. li.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.v-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.v-p23"></span>[Eph.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.v-p23.1"></span>.
“For His great love, <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) wherewith
He loved us.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p25"></span>Why did He love us? For these things are
not deserving of love, but of the sorest wrath, and punishment. And thus
it was of great mercy.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p26"></span>[Eph.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.v-p26.1"></span>.
“Even when we were dead through our trespasses He quickened us together
with Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p27"></span>Again is Christ introduced, and it is a
matter well worthy of our belief, because if the Firstfruits live, so do
we also. He hath quickened both Him, and us. Seest thou that all this is
said of Christ incarnate? Beholdest thou “the exceeding greatness of His
power to us-ward who believe?” ([Eph. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.v-p27.1"></span>.)
Them that were dead, them that were children of wrath, them hath he
quickened. Beholdest thou “the hope of his calling?”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p28"></span>[Eph.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.v-p28.1"></span>.
“He raised us up with Him and made us sit with Him.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p29"></span>Beholdest thou the glory of His
inheritance? <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="iii.iv.v-Page_67"></span>That “He hath raised us up together,” is
plain. But that He “hath made us sit with Him in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus,” how does this hold? It holds as truly, as that He hath
raised us together. For as yet no one is actually raised, <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) excepting that inasmuch as as the Head
hath risen, we also are raised, just as in the history, when Jacob did
obeisance, his wife also did obeisance to Joseph. ([Gen.
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv.v-p31.1"></span>.)
And so in the same way “hath He also made us to sit with Him.” For since
the Head sitteth, the body sitteth also with it, and therefore he adds
“in Christ Jesus.” Or again, if it means, not this, it means that by the
laver of Baptism He hath “raised us up with Him.” How then in that case
hath He made “us to sit with Him?” Because, saith he, “if we suffer we
shall also reign with Him,” ([2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv.v-p31.2"></span>.)
if we be dead with Him we shall also live with Him. Truly there is need
of the Spirit and of revelation, in order to understand the depth of
these mysteries. And then that ye may have no distrust about the matter,
observe what he adds further.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p32"></span>[Eph.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv.v-p32.1"></span>.
“That in the ages to come, He might show the exceeding riches of His
grace, in kindness towards us, in Christ Jesus.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p33"></span>Whereas he had been speaking of the
things which concerned Christ, and these might be nothing to us, (for
what, it might be said, is it to us, that He rose) therefore he shows
that they do moreover extend to us, inasmuch as He is made one with us.
Only that our concern in the matter he states separately. “Us,” saith
he, “who were dead through our trespasses He raised up with Him, and
made us sit with Him.” Wherefore, as I was saying, be not unbelieving,
take the demonstration he adduces both from former things, and from His
Headship, and also from His desire to show forth His goodness. For how
will He show it, unless this come to pass? And He will show it in the
ages to come. What? that the blessings are both great, and more certain
than any other. For now the things which are said may to the unbelievers
seem to be foolishness; but then all shall know them. Wouldest thou
understand too, how He hath made us sit together with Him? Hear what
Christ Himself saith to the disciples, “Ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” ([Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv.v-p33.1"></span>.)
And again, “But to sit on My right hand and on My left hand is not Mine
to give, but it is for them for whom it hath been prepared of My
Father.” ([Matt. xx. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p33.2"></span>.) So that it hath been prepared. And well
saith he, “in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus,” for to sit on His
right hand is honor above all honor, it is that beyond which there is
none other. This then he saith, that even we shall sit there. Truly this
is surpassing riches, truly surpassing is the greatness of His power, to
make us sit down with Christ, Yea, hadst thou ten thousand souls,
wouldest thou not lose them for His sake? Yea, hadst thou to enter the
flames, oughtest thou not readily to endure it? And He Himself too saith
again, “Where I am, there shall also My servant be.” ([John. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv.v-p33.3"></span>.)
Why surely had ye to be cut to pieces every day, ought ye not, for the
sake of these promises cheerfully to embrace it? Think, where He
sitteth? above all principality and power. And with whom it is that thou
sittest? With Him. And who thou art? One dead, by nature a child of
wrath. And what good hast thou done? None. Truly now it is high time to
exclaim, “Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the
knowledge of God!” ([Rom. xi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p33.4"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.v-p34"></span>[Eph.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv.v-p34.1"></span>.
“For by grace,” saith he “have ye been saved.” <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

<span id="iii.iv.v-p36"></span>In order then that the greatness of the
benefits bestowed may not raise thee too high, observe how he brings
thee down: “by grace ye have been saved,” saith he,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p37"></span>“Through faith;”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p38"></span>Then, that, on the other hand, our
free-will be not impaired, he adds also our part in the work, and yet
again cancels it, and adds,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p39"></span>“And that not of ourselves.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p40"></span>Neither is faith, <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) he means, “of ourselves.” Because had
He not come, had He not called us, how had we been able to believe? for
“how,” saith he, “shall they believe, unless they hear?” ([Rom. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.v-p41.1"></span>.)
So that the work of faith itself is not our own.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p42"></span>“It is the gift,” said he, “of God,” it
is “not of works.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p43"></span>Was faith then, you will say, enough to
save us? No; but God, saith he, hath required this, lest He should save
us, barren and without work at all. His expression is, that faith
saveth, but it is because God so willeth, that faith saveth. Since, how,
tell me, doth faith save, without works? This itself is the gift of God.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p44"></span>[Eph.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.v-p44.1"></span>.
“That no man should glory.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p45"></span>That he may excite in us proper feeling
<span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="iii.iv.v-Page_68"></span>touching this gift of grace. “What then?”
saith a man, “Hath He Himself hindered our being justified by works?” By
no means. But no one, he saith, is justified by works, in order that the
grace and loving-kindness of God may be shown. He did not reject us as
having works, but as abandoned of works He hath saved us by grace; so
that no man henceforth may have whereof to boast. And then, lest when
thou hearest that the whole work is accomplished not of works but by
faith, thou shouldest become idle, <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) observe how he continues,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p47"></span>[Eph.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv.v-p47.1"></span>.
“For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works,
which God afore prepared that we should walk in them.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p48"></span>Observe the words he uses. He here
alludes to the regeneration, which is in reality a second creation. We
have been brought from non-existence into being. As to what we were
before, that is, the old man, we are dead. What we are now become,
before, we were not. Truly then is this work a creation, yea, and more
noble than the first; for from that one, we have our being; but from
this last, we have, over and above, our well being.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p49"></span>“For good works, which God afore prepared
that we should walk in them.” <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)

<span id="iii.iv.v-p51"></span>Not merely that we should begin, but that
we should walk in them, for we need a virtue which shall last
throughout, and be extended on to our dying day. If we had to travel a
road leading to a royal city, and then when we had passed over the
greater part of it, were to flag and sit down near the very close, it
were of no use to us. This is the hope of our calling; for “for good
works” he says. Otherwise it would profit us nothing.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p52"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p52.1"></span>Moral</span>. Thus here he rejoices not that
we should work one work, but all; for, as we have five senses, and ought
to make use of all in their proper season, so ought we also the several
virtues. Now were a man to be temperate and yet unmerciful, or were he
to be merciful and yet grasping, or were he to abstain indeed from other
people’s goods, and yet not bestow his own, it would be all in vain. For
a single virtue alone is not enough to present us with boldness before
the judgment-seat of Christ; no, we require it to be great, and various,
and universal, and entire. Hear what Christ saith to the disciples, “Go,
ye and make disciples of all the nations,—teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I commanded you.” ([Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.v-p52.2"></span>.)
And again, “Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, shall
be called least in the kingdom of Heaven,” ([Matt. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.v-p52.3"></span>.)
that is, in the resurrection; nay, he shall not enter into the kingdom;
for He is wont to call the time also of the resurrection, the kingdom.
“If he break one,” saith He, “he shall be called least,” so that we have
need of all. And observe how it is not possible to enter without works
of mercy; but if even this alone be wanting, we shall depart into the
fire. For, saith He, “Depart, ye cursed, into the eternal fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his angels.” Why and wherefore? “For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink.” ([Matt. xxv. 42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p52.4"></span>.) Beholdest thou, how without any other
charge laid against them, for this one alone they perished. And for this
reason alone too were the virgins also excluded from the bride-chamber,
though sobriety surely they did possess. As the Apostle saith “and the
sanctification, without which no man shall see the Lord.” ([Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.v-p52.5"></span>.)
Consider then, that without sobriety, it is impossible to see the Lord;
yet it does not necessarily follow that with sobriety it is possible to
see Him, because often-times something else stands in the way. Again, if
we do all things ever so rightly, and yet do our neighbor no service,
neither in that case shall we enter into the kingdom. Whence is this
evident? From the parable of the servants entrusted with the talents.
For, in that instance, the man’s virtue was in every point unimpaired,
and there had been nothing lacking, but forasmuch as he was slothful in
his business, he was rightly cast out. Nay, it is possible, even by
railing only, to fall into Hell. “For whosoever” saith Christ, “shall
say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire.”
([Matt. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p52.6"></span>.) And if a man be ever so right in all
things, and yet be injurious, he shall not enter.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p53"></span>And let no one impute cruelty to God, in
that he excludes those who fail in this matter, from the kingdom of
Heaven. For even with men, if any one do any thing whatsoever contrary
to the law, he is banished from the king’s presence. And if he
transgresses so much as one of the established laws, if he lays a false
accusation against another, he forfeits his office. And if he commits
adultery, and is detected, he is disgraced, and even though he have done
ten thousand right acts, he is undone; and if he commits murder, and is
convicted, this again is enough to destroy him. Now if the laws of men
are so carefully guarded, how much more should those of God be. “But He
is good,” a man says. How long are we to be uttering this <span
id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span id="iii.iv.v-Page_69"></span>foolish
talk? foolish, I say, not because He is not good, but in that we keep
thinking that His goodness will be available to us for these purposes,
though I have again and again used ten thousand arguments on this
subject. Listen to the Scripture, which saith, “Say not, His mercy is
great, He will be pacified for the multitude of my sins.”
([Ecclesiasticus 5.6](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p53.1"></span>.) He does not forbid us to say, “His mercy
is great.” This is not what He enjoins; rather he would have us
constantly say it, and with this object Paul raises all sorts of
arguments, but his object is what follows. Do not, he means, admire the
loving-kindness of God with this view, with a view to sinning, and
saying, “His mercy will be pacified for the multitude of my sins.” For
it is with this object that I too discourse so much concerning His
goodness, not that we may presume upon it, and do any thing we choose,
because in that way this goodness will be to the prejudice of our
salvation; but that we may not despair in our sins, but may repent. For
“the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance,” ([Rom. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.v-p53.2"></span>.)
not to greater wickedness. And if thou become depraved, because of His
goodness, thou art rather belying Him before men. I see many persons
thus impugning the long-suffering of God; so that if thou use it not
aright, thou shalt pay the penalty. Is God a God of loving-kindness?
Yes, but He is also a righteous Judge. Is He one who maketh allowance
for sins? True, yet rendereth He to every man according to his works.
Doth He pass by iniquity and blot out transgressions? True, yet maketh
He inquisition also. How then is it, that these things are not
contradictions? Contradictions they are not, if we distinguish them by
their times. He doeth away iniquity here, both by the laver of Baptism,
and by penitence. There He maketh inquisition of what we have done by
fire and torment. “If then,” some man may say, “I am cast out, and
forfeit the kingdom, whether I have wrought ten thousand evil deeds or
only one, wherefore may I not do all sorts of evil deeds?” This is the
argument of an ungrateful servant; still nevertheless, we will proceed
to solve even this. Never do that which is evil in order to do thyself
good; for we shall, all alike fall short of the kingdom, yet in Hell we
shall not all undergo the same punishment, but one a severer, another a
milder one. For now, if thou and another have “despised God’s goodness,”
([Rom. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p53.3"></span>.) the one in many instances, and the other
in a few, ye will alike forfeit the kingdom. But if ye have not alike
despised Him, but the one in a greater, the other in a less degree, in
Hell ye shall feel the difference.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p54"></span>Now then, why, it may be said, doth He
threaten them who have not done works of mercy, that they shall depart
into the fire, and not simply into the fire, but into that which is
“prepared for the devil and his angels?” ([Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="iii.iv.v-p54.1"></span>.)
Why and wherefore is this? Because nothing so provokes God to wrath. He
puts this before all terrible things; for if it is our duty to love our
enemies, of what punishment shall not he be worthy, who turns away even
from them that love him, and is in this respect worse than the heathen?
So that in this case the greatness of the sin will make such an one go
away with the devil. Woe to him, it is said, who doeth not alms; and if
this was the case under the Old Covenant, much more is it under the New.
If, where the getting of wealth was allowed, and the enjoyment of it,
and the care of it, there was such provision made for the succoring the
poor, how much more in that Dispensation, where we are commanded to
surrender all we have? For what did not they of old do? They gave
tithes, and tithes again upon tithes for orphans, widows, and strangers;
whereas some one was saying to me in astonishment at another, “Why, such
an one gives tithes.” What a load of disgrace does this expression
imply, since what was not a matter of wonder with the Jews has come to
be so in the case of the Christians? If there was danger then in
omitting tithes, think how great it must be now.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p55"></span>Again, drunkenness shall not inherit the
kingdom. Yet what is the language of most people? “Well, if both I and
he are in the same case, that is no little comfort.” What then? First of
all, that thou and he shall not reap the same punishment; but were it
otherwise, neither is that any comfort. Fellowship in sufferings has
comfort in it, when the miseries have any proportion in them; but when
they exceed all proportion, and carry us beyond ourselves, no longer do
they allow of our receiving any comfort at all. For tell the man that is
being tortured, and has entered into the flames, that such an one is
undergoing the same, still he will not feel the comfort. Did not all the
Israelites perish together? What manner of comfort did that afford them?
Rather, did not this very thing distress them? And this was why they
kept saying, We are lost, we are perished, we are wasted away. What
manner of comfort then is there here? In vain do we comfort ourselves
with such hopes as these. There is but one only comfort, to avoid
falling into that unquenchable fire; but it is not possible for one who
has fallen into it to find comfort, where there is the gnashing of
teeth, where there is the weeping, where is the worm that dieth not, and
the fire that is not quenched. For shalt thou conceive any comfort at
all, tell me, when thou art in so great tribulation <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="iii.iv.v-Page_70"></span>and
distress? Wilt thou then be any longer thyself? Let us not, I pray and
entreat you, let us not vainly deceive ourselves and comfort ourselves
with arguments like these; no, let us practise those virtues, which
shall avail to save us. The object before us is to sit together with
Christ, and art thou trifling about such matters as these? Why, were
there no other sin at all, how great punishment ought we not to suffer
for these very speeches themselves, because we are so insensate, so
wretched, and so indolent, as, even with so vast a privilege before us,
to talk thus? Oh! how much shalt thou have to lament, when thou shalt
then consider them that have done good! When thou shalt behold slaves
and base-born who have labored but a little here, there made partakers
of the royal throne, will not these things be worse to thee than
torment? For if even now, when thou seest any in high reputation, though
thou art suffering no evil, thou regardest this as worse than any
punishment, and by this alone art consumed, and bemoanest thyself, and
weepest, and judgest it to be as bad as ten thousand deaths; what shalt
thou suffer then? Why, even were there no hell at all, the very thought
of the kingdom, were it not enough to destroy and consume thee? And that
such will be the case, we have enough in our own experience of things to
teach us. Let us not then vainly flatter our own souls with speeches
like these; no, let us take heed, let us have a regard for our own
salvation, let us make virtue our care, let us rouse ourselves to the
practice of good works, that we may be counted worthy to attain to this
exceeding glory, in Jesus Christ our Lord with whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and
for ages of ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[65:215](1130017.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span> \[The Commentators, except Meyer, refer
the νεκροὺς to spiritual death, as Chrysostom does. Meyer refers it to
“eternal death, the eternal condemnation,” and says the νεκροὺς is
proleptic. He distinctly says it does not refer to physical death,
though Ellicott represents him as saying that it does.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_215"></span>[65:216](1130017.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span> \[Paul’s motive in this passage is
probably not what Chrysostom says, but, on the contrary, to show how
desperately bad their state was.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_216"></span>[66:217](1130017.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p10"></span> \[“The word ἀήρ which is commonly
confined to the region of the air, may be extended to all that
supra-terrestrial but sub-celestial region which seems to be, if not the
abode, at least the haunt of evil spirits, cf. [Job i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p10.1"></span>.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_217"></span>[66:218](1130017.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p20"></span> Chrysostom understands the words
according to the order in which they stand in the original text, ἦμεν
τέκνα φύσει ὀργῆς, “we were natural” or “genuine children of wrath,”
referring “by nature” not to “we were” but to “children.” To say that we
were by “nature” under wrath, might have seemed all one with saying that
God created Adam under wrath. When then we so speak, we must take the
word “nature” in S. Augustine’s sense, not to mean our literal nature,
but “as referring to our birth.” “*In eo quod dixi, ‘naturâ esse malæ
animæ nullo modo queunt,’ si quæritur quomodo accipiamus quod ait
Apostolus, ‘Fuimus et nos naturâ filii irœ, &c.’” respondemus, naturam
in his verbis meis me intelligi voluisse illam, quæ proprie natura
dicitur, in quâ sine vitiis creati sumus. Nam ista propter originem
natura appellatur, quæ origo utique habet vitium, quod est contra
naturam*. August. *Retract*. i. 15. §. 6. vid, also *de Lib. Arb*. iii.
54.\] “That man is a born subject of wrath from birth, an object of the
divine condemnation, is not at all a doctrine of the Apostle, according
to whom man by his actual sin falls under the wrath of God, inasmuch as
he becomes subject to and follows the inborn principle of sin in
opposition to his moral will which he likewise by nature bears in
himself. Certainly man is born with this natural sinful quality, i.e.,
with the principle of sin, by the awakening and development of which the
moral will is vanquished ([Rom. 7:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000),
[John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p20.1"></span>.) It is not, however, the mere fact of this
inborn presence having its basis in his flesh that in and of itself
makes him a child of wrath, but he only becomes so when that
constitution of his moral nature, that mingling of the two opposite
principles in his natural disposition has brought about the victory of
the sin-principle, which however is the case with every
one.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_218"></span>[66:219](1130017.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p24"></span> \[Διὰ τὴν πολλὴν ἀγάπην αὐτοῦ: “namely,
in order to satisfy it.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_219"></span>[67:220](1130017.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p30"></span> \[This is Meyer’s view. He says: “By
virtue of the dynamic connection of Christ with believers as the head
with its body their revivification is objectively comprehended in His.”

<span id="iii.iv.v-p31"></span>Ellicott says; “Though the simple meaning
of συνήγειρεν and συνεκάθισεν seems to confine their reference to what
is future and objective; still as συνεζωοποιησεν though primarily
spiritual and present may have a physical and future reference, so here
a present spiritual resurrection and enthronement may be alluded
to.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_220"></span>[67:221](1130017.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p35"></span> \[“Confirmatory explanation of the truth
and justice of the expression, ‘the exceeding riches of His grace’ by a
recurrence to the statement made parenthetically in verse
5.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_221"></span>[67:222](1130017.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p41"></span> \[Meyer objects to this interpretation
saying: “How violent is this taking to pieces of the text, since οὐκ ἐξ
ὑμῶν and οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων present themselves in a manner alike natural and
weighty as elements belonging to one flow of the discourse! The τοῦτο
refers to the salvation just designated as regards its specific mode.”
So substantially Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_222"></span>[68:223](1130017.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p46"></span> \[This is not the object of Paul in the
statement of [Eph. 2.10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p46.1"></span>, but as Meyer says: “[Eph.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p46.2"></span>is the reason assigned for the immediately
preceding οὐκ ἐξ ὑμῶν…καυχήσηται. For if we are God’s handiwork our
salvation cannot be of our own acquiring, and if we are created in
Christ unto good works how could the merit of our works be the cause of
our salvation or the subject of our boasting?”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_223"></span>[68:224](1130017.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p50"></span> \[God, before we were created in Christ,
made ready for us, prepared a sphere of moral action or (to use the
simile of Chrysostom) a road, with the intent that we should walk in it.
This sphere, this road was good works, ἔργα ἀγαθά.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 2:11,12](1130018)
