[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130065)  [Next](1130067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.viii-p2.2"></span>[Colossians iii.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>“Mortify your members which are upon the
earth; fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness,
which is idolatry; for which things’ sake, cometh the wrath of God upon
the sons of disobedience; in the which ye also walked aforetime, when ye
lived in these things.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span>I <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>know</span> that many are offended by the
foregoing discourse, but what can I do? ye heard what the Master
enjoined. Am I to blame? what shall I do? See ye not the creditors, when
debtors are obstinate, how they wear <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) collars? Heard ye what Paul proclaimed
today? “Mortify,” he saith, “your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which
is idolatry.” What is worse than such a covetousness? This is worse than
any desire. This is still more grievous than what I was speaking of, the
madness, and the silly weakness about silver. “And covetousness,” he
<span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span
id="iv.iv.viii-Page_294"></span>saith, “which is idolatry.” See in what
the evil ends. Do not, I pray, take what I said amiss, for not by my own
good-will, nor without reason, would I have enemies; but I was wishful
ye should attain to such virtue, as that I might hear of you the things
I ought. <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) So that I said it not
for authority’s sake, nor of imperiousness, <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) but out of pain and of sorrow. Forgive
me, forgive! I have no wish to violate decency by discoursing upon such
subjects, but I am compelled to it.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p8"></span>Not for the sake of the sorrows of the
poor do I say these things, but for your salvation; for they will
perish, will perish, that have not fed Christ. For what, if thou dost
feed some poor man? still so long as thou livest so voluptuously and
luxuriously, all is to no purpose. For what is required is, not the
giving much, but not too little for the property thou hast; for this is
but playing at it.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p9"></span>“Mortify therefore your members,” he
saith, “which are upon the earth.” What sayest thou? Was it not thou
that saidst, “Ye are buried; ye are buried together with Him; ye are
circumcised: we have put off the body of the sins of the flesh” ([Col.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012), [Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>.); how then again sayest thou,
“Mortify”? <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) Art thou sporting?
Dost thou thus discourse, as though those things were in us? There is no
contradiction; but like as if one, who has clean scoured a statue that
was filthy, or rather who has recast it, and displayed it bright
afresh, <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) should say that the rust
was eaten off and destroyed, and yet should again recommend diligence in
clearing away the rust, he doth not contradict himself, for it is not
that rust which he scoured off that he recommends should be cleared
away, but that which grew afterwards; so it is not that former putting
to death he speaks of, nor those fornications, but those which do
afterwards grow.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p12"></span>He said that this is not our life, but
another, that which is in heaven. Tell me now. When he said, Mortify
your members that are upon the earth, is then the earth also accused? or
does he speak of the things upon the earth as themselves sins? <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p14"></span>“Fornication, uncleanness,” he saith.
He has passed over the actions which it is not becoming even to mention,
and by “uncleanness” has expressed all together.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p15"></span>“Passion,” he said, “evil desire.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p16"></span>Lo! he has expressed the whole in the
class. For envy, anger, sorrow, all are “evil desire.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17"></span>“And covetousness,” he saith, “which is
idolatry. For which things’ sake cometh the wrath of God upon the sons
of disobedience.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p18"></span>By many things he had been withdrawing
them; by the benefits which are already given, by the evils to come from
which we had been delivered, being who, and wherefore; and all those
considerations, as, for instance, who we were, and in what
circumstances, and that we were delivered therefrom, how, and in what
manner, and on what terms. These were enough to turn one away, but this
one is of greater force than all; unpleasant indeed to speak of, not
however to disservice, but even serviceable. “For which things’ sake
cometh,” he saith, “the wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.” He
said not, “upon you,” but, “upon the sons of disobedience.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p19"></span>“In the which ye also walked aforetime,
when ye lived in them.” In order to shame them, he saith, “when ye lived
in them,” and implying praise, as now no more so living: at that time
they might.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p20"></span>[Col.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p20.1"></span>. “But now put ye also away all these.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p21"></span>He speaks always both universally and
particularly; but this is from earnestness.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p22"></span>[Col.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>.
“Anger, wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking out of your mouth. Lie
not one to another.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23"></span>“Shameful speaking,” he saith, “out of
your mouth,” clearly intimating that it pollutes it.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p24"></span>[Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>. “Seeing that ye have put off the old man
with his doings, and have put on the new man, which is being renewed
unto knowledge after the image of Him that created him.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p25"></span>It is worth enquiring here, what can be
the reason why he calls the corrupt life, “members,” and “man,” and
“body,” and again the virtuous life, the same. And if “the man” means
“sins,” how is it that he saith, “with his doings”? For once he said,
“the old man,” showing that this is not man, but the other. The moral
choice doth rather determine one than the substance, and is rather “man”
than the other. For his substance casteth him not into hell, nor leadeth
him into the kingdom, but men themselves: and we neither love nor hate
any one so far as he is man, but so far as he is such or such a man. If
then the substance be the body, and in either sort cannot be
accountable, how doth he say that it is evil? <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) But what is that he saith, “with <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="iv.iv.viii-Page_295"></span>his
doings”? He means the choice, with the acts. And he calleth him “old,”
on purpose to show his deformity, and hideousness, and imbecility; and
“new,” as if to say, Do not expect that it will be with this one even as
with the other, but the reverse: for ever as he farther advances, he
hasteneth not on to old age, but to a youthfulness greater than the
preceding. For when he hath received a fuller knowledge, he is both
counted worthy of greater things, and is in more perfect maturity, in
higher vigor; and this, not from youthfulness alone, but from that
“likeness” also, “after” which he is. Lo! the best life is styled a
creation, after the image of Christ: for this is the meaning of, “after
the image of Him that created him,” for Christ too came not finally
to <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) old age, but was so beautiful
as it is not even possible to tell.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p28"></span>[Col.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p28.1"></span>. “Where there cannot be Greek and Jew,
circumcision and uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman:
but Christ is all, and in all.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p29"></span>Lo! here is a third encomium of this
“man.” With him, there is no difference admitted either of nation, or of
rank, or of ancestry, seeing he hath nothing of externals, nor needeth
them; for all external things are such as these, “circumcision, and
uncircumcision, bondman, freeman, Greek,” that is, proselyte, “and Jew,”
from his ancestors. If thou have only this “man,” thou wilt obtain the
same things with the others that have him.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p30"></span>“But Christ,” he saith, “is all, and in
all”: Christ will be all things to you, both rank, and descent, “and”
Himself “in you all.” Or he says another thing, to wit, that ye all are
become one Christ, being His body.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p31"></span>[Col.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>. “Put on, therefore, as the elect of God,
holy and beloved.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p32"></span>He shows the easiness of virtue, so
that they might both possess it continually, and use it as the greatest
ornament. The exhortation is accompanied also with praise, for then its
force is greatest. For they had been before <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) holy, but not elect; but now both
“elect, and holy, and beloved.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p34"></span>“A heart of compassion.” He said not
“mercy,” but with greater emphasis used the two words. And he said not,
that it should be as towards brethren, but, as fathers towards children.
For tell me not that he sinned, therefore he said “a heart.” And he said
not “compassion,” lest he should place them <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) in light estimation, but “a heart of
compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, longsuffering; forbearing one
another, and forgiving each other, if any man have a complaint against
any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p36"></span>Again, he speaks after the class, <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) and he always does it; for from
kindness comes humbleness of mind, and from this, longsuffering.
“Forbearing,” he saith, “one another,” that is, passing things
over. <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) And see, how he has shown
it to be nothing, by calling it a “complaint,” and saying, “even as
Christ forgave you.” Great is the example! and thus he always does; he
exhorts them after Christ. “Complaint,” he calls it. In these words
indeed he showed it to be a petty matter; but when he has set before us
the example, he has persuaded us that even if we had serious charges to
bring, we ought to forgive. For the expression, “Even as Christ,”
signifies this, and not this only, but also with all the heart; and not
this alone, but that they ought even to love. For Christ being brought
into the midst, bringeth in all these things, both that even if the
matters be great, and even if we have not been the first to injure, even
if we be of great, they of small account, even if they are sure to
insult us afterwards, we ought to lay down our lives for them, (for the
words, “even as,” demand this;) and that not even at death only ought
one to stop, but if possible, to go on even after death.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p39"></span>[Col.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>. “And above all these things put on love,
which is the bond of perfectness.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p40"></span>Dost thou see that he saith this? For
since it is possible for one who forgives, not to love; yea, he saith,
thou must love him too, and he points out a way whereby it becomes
possible to forgive. For it is possible for one to be kind, and meek,
and humbleminded, and longsuffering, and yet not affectionate. And
therefore, he said at the first, “A heart of compassion,” both love and
pity. “And above all these things, love, which is the bond of
perfectness.” Now what he wishes to say is this; that there is no profit
in those things, for all those things fall asunder, except they be done
with love; this it is which clenches them all together; whatsoever good
thing it be thou mentionest, if love be away, it is nothing, it melts
away. And it is as in a ship, even though her rigging be large, yet if
there be no girding ropes, it is of no service; and in an house, if
there be no tie beams, it is the same; and in a body, though the bones
be large, if there be no ligaments, they are of no service. For
whatsoever good deeds any may have, all do vanish away, if love be not
there. He said not that it is the summit, but what is greater, “the
bond”; this is more necessary than the other. For “summit” indeed is an
intensity of perfectness, but “bond” is the holding fast <span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.iv.viii-Page_296"></span>together of those things which produce
the perfectness; it is, as it were, the root.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p41"></span>[Col.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p41.1"></span>. “And let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to the which also ye were called in one body; and be ye
thankful.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p42"></span>“The peace of God.” This is that which
is fixed and steadfast. If on man’s account indeed thou hast peace, it
quickly comes to dissolution, but if on God’s account, never. Although
he had spoken of love universally, yet again he comes to the particular.
For there is a love too which is immoderate; for instance, when out of
much love one makes accusations without reason, and is engaged in
contentions, and contracts aversions. Not this, saith he, not this do I
desire; not overdoing things, <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843)
but as God made peace with you, so do ye also make it. How made He
peace? Of His own will, not having received anything of you. What is
this? “Let the peace of God rule <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)
in your hearts.” If two thoughts are fighting together, set not anger,
set not spitefulness to hold the prize, but peace; for instance, suppose
one to have been insulted unjustly; of the insult are born two thoughts,
the one bidding him to revenge, the other to endure; and these wrestle
with one another: if the Peace of God stand forward as umpire, it
bestows the prize on that which bids endure, and puts the other to
shame. How? by persuading him that God is Peace, that He hath made peace
with us. Not without reason he shows the great struggle there is in the
matter. Let not anger, he saith, act as umpire, let not contentiousness,
let not human peace, for human peace cometh of avenging, of suffering no
dreadful ill. But not this do I intend, he saith, but that which He
Himself left.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p45"></span>He hath represented an arena within, in
the thoughts, and a contest, and a wrestling, and an umpire. Then again,
exhortation, “to the which ye were called,” he saith, that is, for the
which ye were called. He has reminded them of how many good things peace
is the cause; on account of this He called thee, for this He called
thee, so as to receive a worthy <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845)
prize. For wherefore made He us “one body”? Was it not that she might
rule? Was it not that we might have occasion of being at peace?
Wherefore are we all one body? and now are we one body? Because of peace
we are one body, and because we are one body, we are at peace. But why
said he not, “Let the peace of God be victorious,” but “be umpire”? He
made her the more honorable. He would not have the evil thought to come
to wrestle with her, but to stand below. And the very name “prize”
cheered the hearer. For if she have given the prize to the good thought,
however impudently the other behave, it is thereafter of no use. And
besides, the other being aware that, perform what feats he might, he
should not receive the prize; however he might puff, and attempt still
more vehement onsets, would desist as laboring without profit. And he
well added, “And be ye thankful.” For this is to be thankful, and very
effectively, <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) to deal with his
fellow-servants as God doth with himself, to submit himself to the
Master, to obey; to express his gratitude for all things, <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) even though one insult him, or beat
him.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p49"></span>For in truth he that confesses thanks
due to God for what he suffers, will not revenge himself on him that has
done him wrong, since he at least that takes revenge, acknowledges no
gratitude. But let not us follow him (that exacted) <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) the hundred pence, lest we hear, “Thou
wicked servant,” for nothing is worse than this ingratitude. So that
they who revenge are ungrateful.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p51"></span>But why did he begin his list with
fornication? For having said, “Mortify your members which are upon the
earth” ([Col. 3.5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p51.1"></span>.), he immediately says, “fornication”; and
so he does almost everywhere. Because this passion hath the greatest
sway. For even when writing his Epistle to the Thessalonians he did the
same. ([1 Thess. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p51.2"></span>.) And what wonder? since to Timothy even
he saith, “Keep thyself pure” ([1 Tim. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p51.3"></span>.); and again elsewhere, “Follow after
peace with all men, and the sanctification,” without which “no man shall
see the Lord.” ([Heb. xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p51.4"></span>.) “Put to death,” he says, “your members.”
Ye know of what sort that is which is dead, namely, hated, loathed,
dropping to decay. If thou put anything to death, it doth not when dead
continue dead, but presently is corrupted, like the body. Extinguish
then the heat; and nothing that is dead will continue. He shows one
having the same thing in hand, which Christ wrought in the Laver;
therefore also he calleth them “members,” as though introducing some
champion, thus advancing his discourse to greater emphasis. And he well
said, “Which are upon the earth,” for here they continue, and here they
are corrupted, far rather than these our members. So that not so truly
is the body of the earth, as sin is earthly, for the former indeed
appears even beautiful at times, but those members never. And those
members lust after all things that are <span id="page_297">p. 297</span>
<span id="iv.iv.viii-Page_297"></span>upon the earth. If the eye be
such, it seeth not the things in the heavens; if the ear, if the hand,
if thou mention any other member whatsoever. The eye seeth bodies, and
beauties, and riches; these are the things of earth, with these it is
delighted: the ear with soft strains, and harp, and pipe, and filthy
talking; these are things which are concerned with earth.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p52"></span>When therefore he has placed his
hearers above, near the throne, he then says, “Mortify your members
which are upon the earth.” For it is not possible to stand above with
these members; for there is nothing there for them to work upon. And
this clay is worse than that, for that clay indeed becometh gold, “for
this corruptible,” he saith, “must put on incorruption” ([1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p52.1"></span>.), but this clay can never be retempered
more. So that these members are rather “upon the earth” than those.
Therefore he said not, “of the earth,” but, “which are upon the earth,”
for it is possible that these should not be upon the earth. For it is
necessary that these <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) should be
“upon the earth,” but that those <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)
should, is not necessary. For when the ear hears nothing of what is here
uttered, but only in the heavens, when the eye sees nothing of what is
here, but only what is above, it is not “upon the earth”; when the mouth
speaketh nothing of the things here, it is not “upon the earth”; when
the hand doeth no evil thing—these are not of things “upon the earth,”
but of those in the heavens.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p55"></span>So Christ also saith, “If thy right eye
causeth thee to stumble,” that is, if thou lookest unchastely, “cut it
out” ([Matt. v. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p55.1"></span>.), that is, thine evil thought. And he
(Paul) seems to me to speak of “fornication, uncleanness, passion,
desire” as the same, namely fornication: by means of all these
expressions drawing us away from that thing. For in truth this is “a
passion”; and like as the body is subject to any affection, either to
fever or to wounds, so also is it with this. And he said not Restrain,
but “Mortify” (put to death), so that they never rise up more, and “put
them away.” That which is dead, we put away; for instance, if there be
callosities in the body, their body is dead, and we put it away. Now, if
thou cut into that which is quick, it produces pain, but if into that
which is dead, we are not even sensible of it. So, in truth, is it with
the passions; they make the soul unclean; they make the soul, which is
immortal, passible.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p56"></span>How covetousness is said to be
idolatry, we have oftentimes explained. For the things which do most of
all lord it over the human race, are these, covetousness, and
unchasteness, and evil desire. “For which things’ sake cometh,” he
saith, “the wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.” Sons of
disobedience, he calls them, to deprive them of excuse, and to show that
it was because they would not be obedient, that they were in that
condition. “In the which ye also,” he saith, “walked aforetime,” and
(afterward) became obedient. He points them out as still in them, and
praises them, saying, “But now do ye also put away all these, anger,
wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking.” But against others he
advanceth his discourse. Under the head of “passion and railing” he
means revilings, just as under “wrath” he means wickedness. <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) And in another place, to shame them,
he says, “for we are members one of another.” ([Eph. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p57.1"></span>.) He makes them out to be as it were
manufacturers of men; casting away this one, and receiving that. He
spoke of a man’s “members” ([Col.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p57.2"></span>.); here he saith, “all.” He spoke of his
heart, wrath, mouth, blasphemy, eyes, fornication, covetousness, hands
and feet, lying, the understanding itself, and the old mind. One royal
form it hath, that, namely, of Christ. They whom he has in view, appear
to me rather to be of the Gentiles. For like as earth, being but sand,
even though one part be greater, another less, losing its own previous
form, doth afterwards become gold; and like as wool, of whatever kind it
be, receiveth another aspect, and hides its former one: so truly is it
also with the faithful. “Forbearing,” he saith, “one another”; he
showeth what is just. Thou forbearest him, and he thee; and so he says
in the Epistle to the Galatians, “Bear ye one another’s burdens.” ([Gal.
vi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p57.3"></span>.) “And be ye thankful,” he saith. For this
is what he everywhere especially seeks; the chiefest of good things.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p58"></span>Give we thanks then in all things;
whatever may have happened; for this is thankfulness. For to do so in
prosperity indeed, is no great thing, for the nature of the
circumstances of itself impels one thereto; but when being in
extremities we give thanks, then it is admirable. For when, in
circumstances under which others blaspheme, and exclaim discontentedly,
we give thanks, see how great philosophy is here. First, thou hast
rejoiced God; next, thou hast shamed the devil; thirdly, thou hast even
made that which hath happened to be nothing; for all at once, thou both
givest thanks, and God cuts short the pain, and the devil departs. For
if thou have exclaimed discontentedly, he, as having succeeded to his
wish, standeth close by thee, and God, as being blasphemed, leaveth
thee, and thy calamity is heightened; but if thou have given thanks, he,
as gaining nought, departs; and God, as being honored, requites <span
id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span id="iv.iv.viii-Page_298"></span>thee
with greater honor. And it is not possible, that a man, who giveth
thanks for his evils should be sensible of them. For his soul rejoiceth,
as doing what is right; forthwith his conscience is bright, it exults in
its own commendation; and that soul which is bright, cannot possibly be
sad of countenance. But in the other case, along with the misfortune,
conscience also assails him with her lash; whilst in this she crowns,
and proclaims him.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p59"></span>Nothing is holier than that tongue,
which in evils giveth thanks to God; truly in no respect doth it fall
short of that of martyrs; both are alike crowned, both this, and they.
For over this one also stands the executioner to force it to deny God,
by blasphemy; the devil stands over it, torturing it with executioner
thoughts, darkening it with despondencies. If then one bear his griefs,
and give thanks, he hath gained a crown of martyrdom. For instance, is
her little child sick, and doth she give God thanks? this is a crown to
her. What torture so bad that despondency is not worse? still it doth
not force her to vent forth a bitter word. It dies: again she hath given
thanks. She hath become the daughter of Abraham. For if she sacrificed
not with her own hand, yet was she pleased with the sacrifice, which is
the same; she felt no indignation when the gift was taken away.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p60"></span>Again, is her child sick? She hath made
no amulets. <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) It is counted to her
as martyrdom, for she sacrificed her son in her resolve. For what, even
though those things are unavailing, and a mere cheat and mockery, still
there were nevertheless those who persuaded her that they do avail: and
she chose rather to see her child dead, than to put up with idolatry. As
then she is a martyr, whether it be in her own case, or in her son’s,
that she hath thus acted; or in her husband’s, or in any other’s of her
dearest; so is that other one an idolatress. For it is evident that she
would have done sacrifice, had it been allowed her to do sacrifice; yea,
rather, she hath even now performed the act of sacrifice. For these
amulets, though they who make money by them are forever rationalizing
about them, and saying, “we call upon God, and do nothing
extraordinary,” and the like; and “the old woman is a Christian,” says
he, “and one of the faithful”; the thing is idolatry. Art thou one of
the faithful? sign the Cross; say, this I have for my only weapon; this
for my remedy; and other I know none. Tell me, if a physician should
come to one, and, neglecting the remedies belonging to his art, should
use incantation, should we call that man a physician? By no means: for
we see not the medicines of the healing art; so neither, in this case,
do we see those of Christianity.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p62"></span>Other women again tie about them <span
id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) the names of rivers, and venture
numberless things of like nature. Lo, I say, and forewarn you all, that
if any be detected, I will not spare them again, whether they have made
amulet, or incantation, or any other thing of such an art as this. What
then, saith one, is the child to die? If he have lived through this
means, he did then die, but if he have died without this, he then lived.
But now, if thou seest him attaching himself to harlots, thou wishest
him buried, and sayest, “why, what good is it for him to live?” but when
thou seest him in peril of his salvation, dost thou wish to see him
live? Heardest thou not Christ saying, “He that loseth his life, shall
find it; and he that findeth it, shall lose it”? ([Matt. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p63.1"></span>.) Believest thou these sayings, or do they
seem to thee fables? Tell me now, should one say, “Take him away to an
idol temple, and he will live”; wouldest thou endure it? No! she
replies. Why? “Because,” she saith, “he urges me to commit idolatry; but
here, there is no idolatry, but simple incantation:” this is the device
of Satan, this is that wiliness of the devil to cloak over the deceit,
and to give the deleterious drug in honey. After he found that he could
not prevail with thee in the other way, <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) he hath gone this way about, to
stitched charms, and old wives’ fables; and the Cross indeed is
dishonored, and these charms preferred before it. Christ is cast out,
and a drunken and silly old woman is brought in. That mystery of ours is
trodden under foot, and the imposture of the devil dances.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p65"></span>Wherefore then, saith one, doth not God
reprove the aid from such sources? He hath many times reproved, and yet
hath not persuaded thee; He now leaveth thee to thine error, for It
saith, “God gave them up unto a reprobate mind.” ([Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p65.1"></span>.) These things, moreover, not even a Greek
who hath understanding could endure. A certain demagogue in Athens is
reported once to have hung these things about him: when a philosopher
who was his instructor, on beholding them, rebuked him, expostulated,
satirized, made sport of him. For in so wretched a plight are we, as
even to believe in these things!

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p66"></span>Why, saith one, are there not now those
who raise the dead, and perform cures? Yes, then, why, I say: why are
there not now those who have a contempt for this present life? Do we
serve God for hire? When man’s nature was weaker, when the Faith had to
be planted, there were even many such; but now he would <span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="iv.iv.viii-Page_299"></span>not
have us to hang upon these signs, but to be ready for death. Why then
clingest thou to the present life? why lookest thou not on the future?
and for the sake of this indeed canst bear even to commit idolatry, but
for the other not so much as to restrain sadness? For this cause it is
that there are none such now; because that (future) life hath seemed to
us honorless, seeing that for its sake we do nothing, whilst for this
there is nothing we refuse to undergo. And why too that other farce,
ashes, and soot, and salt? and the old woman again brought in? A farce
truly, and a shame! And then, “an eye,” say they, “hath caught the
child.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67"></span>Where will these satanical doings end?
How will not the Greeks laugh? how will they not gibe when we say unto
them, “Great is the virtue of the Cross”; how will they be won, when
they see us having recourse to those things, which themselves laugh to
scorn? Was it for this that God gave physicians and medicines? What
then? Suppose they do not cure him, but the child depart? Whither will
he depart? tell me, miserable and wretched one! Will he depart to the
demons? Will he depart to some tyrant? Will he not depart to heaven?
Will he not depart to his own Lord? Why then grievest thou? why weepest
thou? why mournest thou? why lovest thou thine infant more than thy
Lord? Is it not through Him that thou hast this also? Why art thou
ungrateful? Dost thou love the gift more than the Giver? “But I am
weak,” she replies, “and cannot bear the fear of God.” Well, if in
bodily evils the greater covers the less, much rather in the soul, fear
destroyed fear, and sorrow, sorrow. Was the child beautiful? But be it
what it may, not more beauteous is he than Isaac: and he too was an only
one. Was it born in thine old age? So too was he. But is it fair? Well:
however fair it may be, it is not lovelier than Moses ([Acts vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p67.1"></span>.), who drew even barbarian eyes unto a
tender love of him, and this too at a time of life when beauty is not
yet disclosed; and yet this beloved thing did the parents cast into the
river. Thou indeed both seest it laid out, and deliverest it to the
burying, and goest to its monument; but they did not so much as know
whether it would be food for fishes, or for dogs, or for other beasts
that prey in the sea; and this they did, knowing as yet nothing of the
Kingdom, nor of the Resurrection.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p68"></span>But suppose it is not an only child;
but that after thou hast lost many, this also hath departed. But not so
sudden is thy calamity as was Job’s, and (his was) of sadder
aspect? <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) It is not when a roof
has fallen in, it is not as they are feasting the while, it is not
following on the tidings of other calamities.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p70"></span>But was it beloved by thee? But not
more so than Joseph, the devoured of wild beasts; but still the father
bore the calamity, and that which followed it, and the next to that. He
wept; but acted not with impiety; he mourned, but he uttered not
discontent, but stayed at those words, saying, “Joseph is not, Simeon is
not, and will ye take Benjamin away? all these things are against
me.” <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) ([Gen. xlii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p71.1"></span>.) Seest thou how the constraint of famine
prevailed with him to be regardless of his children? and doth not the
fear of God prevail with thee as much as famine?

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p72"></span>Weep: I do not forbid thee: but aught
blasphemous neither say nor do. Be thy child what he may, he is not like
Abel; and yet nought of this kind did Adam say; although that calamity
was a sore one, that his brother should have killed him. But I am
reminded of others also that have killed their brothers; when, for
instance, Absalom killed Amnon the eldest born ([2 Sam.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p72.1"></span>.), and King David loved his child, <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) and sat indeed in sackcloth and ashes,
but he neither brought soothsayers, nor enchanters, (although there were
such then, as Saul shows,) but he made supplication to God. So do thou
likewise: as that just man did, so do thou also; the same words say
thou, when thy child is dead, “I shall go to him, but he will not come
to me.” ([2 Sam. xii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p73.1"></span>.) This is true wisdom, this is affection.
However much thou mayst love thy child, thou wilt not love so much as he
did then. For even though his child were born of adultery, yet that
blessed man’s love of the mother was at its height, <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) and ye know that the offspring shares
the love of the parents. And so great was his love toward it, that he
even wished it to live, though it would be his own accuser, but still he
gave thanks to God. What, thinkest thou, did Rebecca suffer, when his
brother threatened Jacob, and she grieved not her husband, but bade him
send her son away? ([Gen. 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046), [Gen.
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p74.2"></span>.) When thou hast suffered any calamity,
think on what is worse than it; and thou wilt have a sufficient
consolation; and consider with thyself, what if he had died in battle?
what if in fire? And whatsoever our sufferings may be, let us think upon
things yet more fearful, and we shall have comfort sufficient, and let
us ever look around us on those who have undergone more terrible things,
and if we ourselves have ever suffered heavier calamities. So doth Paul
also exhort us; as when he saith, “Ye have not <span id="page_300">p.
300</span> <span id="iv.iv.viii-Page_300"></span>yet resisted unto
blood, striving against sin” ([Heb. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p74.3"></span>.): and again, “There hath no temptation
taken you but such as man can bear.” ([1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p74.4"></span>.) Be then our sufferings what they may,
let us look round on what is worse; (for we shall find such,) and thus
shall we be thankful. And above all, let us give thanks for all things
continually; for so, both these things will be eased, and we shall live
to the glory of God, and obtain the promised good things, whereunto may
all we attain, through the grace and love toward man, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_831"></span>[293:832](1130066.htm#fr_831) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span> \[This very natural inadvertence in
free speaking is duly changed, by the group of <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>mss</span>. which make so many changes, into
“how they put collars on them.” These wooden collars were a disgrace,
like the stocks.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_832"></span>[294:833](1130066.htm#fr_832) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span> Or perhaps, “I could wish…that *I*
might hear from *you* what is right.” Gr. παρ᾽ ὑμῶν.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[294:834](1130066.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span> ἀξιώματος, wish to maintain dignity.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[294:835](1130066.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p10"></span> i.e. put to death.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[294:836](1130066.htm#fr_835) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11"></span> \[The word is ἄνωθεν, as in [John
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>,
and here necessarily means anew or afresh,—a sense so rare as to justify
calling attention to it.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_836"></span>[294:837](1130066.htm#fr_836) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p13"></span> \[This is a passing allusion to the
Manichæans, who held that matter is necessarily the seat of evil, and
might try to interpret the apostle as here accusing the earth of being
evil. The passage has been expanded in the often above mentioned group
of documents, and so in the editions before Field, so as to be fuller
and more perspicuous, thus: “But lo! say the heretics, Paul accuseth the
creation; for he said before, ‘Set your mind on the things that are
above, not on the things that are upon the earth;’ again he saith,
‘Mortify your members which are upon the earth.’ But the words ‘ upon
earth’ are here expressive of sin, not an accusing of creation. For it
is thus he calls sins themselves, things upon earth, either from their
being wrought by earthly thoughts and upon earth, or from their showing
sinners to be earthly.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_837"></span>[294:838](1130066.htm#fr_837) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p26"></span> As the Manichees interpreted his
words.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[295:839](1130066.htm#fr_838) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27"></span> οὐ πρὸς γῆρας ἐτελεύτησεν, Lat. “Nec
senex mortuus est” (died not old). But the other sense seems more
suitable. In either sense it is opposed to the view ascribed to
Byzantine artists. See Rio’s Poésie Chrétienne.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[295:840](1130066.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p33"></span> ἐγένοντο, i.e. he had before called
them holy, c. l. v. 2.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[295:841](1130066.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p35"></span> ἐκείνους, “the objects.”

<span id="fn_841"></span>[295:842](1130066.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37"></span> κατ᾽ εἶδος, from genus to species, as
remarked above, on v. 7.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[295:843](1130066.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p38"></span> παραπεμπόμενοι, al. παραδέχόμενοι
“receiving one another.”

<span id="fn_843"></span>[296:844](1130066.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p43"></span> \[Literally, “not superperfectly,” a
singular expression, omitted in all editions before Field, but found in
all the <span class="c16"><span id="iv.iv.viii-p43.1"></span>mss</span>.
he cites.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_844"></span>[296:845](1130066.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p44"></span> \[Literally, act as umpire, or as
judge in the games.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_845"></span>[296:846](1130066.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p46"></span> ἀξιόπιστον. Usually “worthy of
credit,” but sometimes rather in a secondary sense, “worthy of honor.”

<span id="fn_846"></span>[296:847](1130066.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p47"></span> This must mean “in a way that has
power of prevailing with God,” so to speak, “putting Him to shame, if he
do not grant the favor.” Comp. <span id="iv.iv.viii-p47.1"></span>Hebrew
vi. 10.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[296:848](1130066.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p48"></span> \[Compare Chrys.’s famous motto,
“Glory to God for all things”.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_848"></span>[296:849](1130066.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p50"></span> Sav. \[and one <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p50.1"></span>ms</span>.\] has ὀφείλοντα, “that owed,”
which makes no sense; <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p50.2"></span>mss</span>. Par. only τὸν τὰ ἑκατὸν; Downes
conj. ἀπαιτοῦντα τὰ.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[297:850](1130066.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p53"></span> The sinful passions.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[297:851](1130066.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p54"></span> The bodily organs.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[297:852](1130066.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p57"></span> He means that the word used expresses
a natural emotion or act, but the abuse of this is intended; and so it
may be necessary to speak evil of one.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[298:853](1130066.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p61"></span> περίαπτα. See on Stat. Hom. xix. p.
470 and note 4. Perhaps it should be ἐπέδησε, “she hath tied on.”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[298:854](1130066.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p63"></span> i.e. their children, περιάπτουσι. In
what he says presently after, he must be referring to the temporal ill
effects of immorality.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[298:855](1130066.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p64"></span> i.e. of direct idolatry.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[299:856](1130066.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p69"></span> \[This abrupt sentence was expanded as
usual, in what came to be the common printed text.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_856"></span>[299:857](1130066.htm#fr_856) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p71"></span> Or (Gr.), “are come upon me.”

<span id="fn_857"></span>[299:858](1130066.htm#fr_857) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p73"></span> He passes on to the child of
Bathsheba.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[299:859](1130066.htm#fr_858) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p74"></span> ἤκμαζεν. [2 Sam. xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p74.1"></span>
gives the impression that David laid the crime to his own charge, and
regarded her as wronged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 3:16,17](1130067)
