[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130103)  [Next](1130105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Homily XI.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.xii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.xii-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy iii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p3"></span>“Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not
doubletongued, not given much to wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. And let these
also first be proved: then let them use the office of a Deacon, being
found blameless.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>Discoursing</span> of Bishops, and having
described their character, and the qualities which they ought to
possess, and having passed over the order of Presbyters, he proceeds to
that of Deacons. The reason of this omission was, that between
Presbyters and Bishops there was no great difference. Both had
undertaken the office of Teachers and Presidents in the Church, and what
he has said concerning Bishops is applicable to Presbyters. For they are
only superior in having the power of ordination, and seem to have no
other advantage over Presbyters.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p5"></span>“Likewise the Deacons.” That is, they
should have the same qualities as Bishops. And what are these same? To
be blameless, sober, hospitable, patient, not brawlers, not covetous.
And that he means this when he says “likewise,” is evident from what he
says in addition, “grave, not doubletongued”; that is, not hollow or
deceitful. For nothing so debases a man as deceit, nothing is so
pernicious in the Church as insincerity. “Not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre; holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.” Thus he explains what he means by “blameless.” And here he
requires, though in other words, that he be “not a novice,” where he
says, “Let these also first be proved,” where the conjunction “also” is
added, as connecting this with what had been said before of Bishops, for
nothing intervenes between. And there is the same reason <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) for the “not a novice” in that
case. For would it not be absurd, that when a newly purchased slave is
not entrusted with anything in a house, till he has by long trial given
proofs of his character, yet that one should enter into the Church of
God from a state of heathenism, and be at once placed in a station of
preeminence?

<span id="v.iii.xii-p7"></span>[1 Tim.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)<span id="v.iii.xii-p7.1"></span>.
“Even so must the women <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) be
grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p9"></span>Some have thought that this is said of
women generally, but it is not so, for why should he introduce anything
about women to interfere with his subject? He is speaking of those who
hold the rank of Deaconesses.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p10"></span>[1 Tim.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p10.1"></span>. “Let the Deacons be husbands of one wife.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p11"></span>This <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203) must be understood therefore to
relate to Deaconesses. For that order is necessary and useful and
honorable in the Church. Observe how he requires the same virtue from
the Deacons, as from the Bishops, for though they were not of equal
rank, they must equally be blameless; equally pure.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p13"></span>“Ruling their children and their own
houses well.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p14"></span>[1 Tim.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p14.1"></span>. “For they that have used the office of a
Deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and much boldness in
the faith which is in Christ Jesus.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p15"></span>Everywhere they are required to rule
their children well, that others may not be scandalized by their
misconduct.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p16"></span>“They that use the office of a Deacon
well, purchase to themselves a good degree,” that is, advancement, “and
much boldness in the faith of Jesus Christ”; as if he would say, that
those <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="v.iii.xii-Page_442"></span>who have been found vigilant in the lower
degree <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) will soon ascend to
the higher.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p18"></span>[1 Tim.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xii-p18.1"></span>.
“These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly. But
if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave
thyself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
pillar and ground of the truth.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p19"></span>That he may not plunge Timothy into
dejection by giving him orders about such matters, he says, I write thus
not as though I were not coming, but I will indeed come, still in case I
should be delayed, that thou mayest not be distressed. And this he
writes to him to prevent his being dejected, but to others in order to
rouse them to greater earnestness. For his presence, though only
promised, would have great effect. Nor let it seem strange that, though
foreseeing everything through the Spirit, he was yet ignorant of this,
and only says, I hope to come, but if I tarry, which implies
uncertainty. For since he was led by the Spirit, and did not act from
his own inclination, he was naturally uncertain about this matter.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p20"></span>“That thou mayest know,” he says, “how
thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the Church
of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.” Not like that
Jewish house. For it is this that maintains the faith and the preaching
of the Word. For the truth is the pillar and the ground of the
Church. <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205)

<span id="v.iii.xii-p22"></span>[1 Tim.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p22.1"></span>. “And without controversy great is the
mystery of godliness; God \[He who\] <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit.”

<span id="v.iii.xii-p24"></span>Here he speaks of the Dispensation in
our behalf. Tell me not of the bells, nor of the holy of holies, nor of
the high priest. The Church is the pillar of the world. Consider this
mystery, and thou mayest be struck with awe: for it is indeed “a great
mystery,” and “a mystery of godliness,” and that “without controversy”
or question, for it is beyond all doubt. Since in his directions to the
Priests he had required nothing like what is found in Leviticus he
refers the whole matter to Another, saying, “God was manifest in the
flesh.” The Creator was seen incarnate. “He was justified in the
Spirit.” As it is said, “Wisdom is justified of her children,” or
because He practiced no guile, as the Prophet says, “Because he had done
no violence, neither was guile found in his mouth.” ([Isa.
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009), [1 Pet.
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p24.1"></span>.) “Seen of Angels.” So that Angels together
with us saw the Son of God, not having before seen Him. Great, truly
great, was this mystery! “Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world.” He was heard of and believed in through all parts of the world,
as the Prophet foreshowed, saying, “Their sound is gone out into all the
world.” ([Ps. xix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p24.2"></span>.) Think not that these things are mere
words, for they are not, but full of hidden realities. “Received up into
glory.” He ascended upon clouds. “This Jesus,” it is said, “Who is taken
up from you, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into
heaven.” ([Acts i. 11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p24.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xii-p25"></span>The discretion of the blessed Paul is
observable. When he would exhort the Deacons to avoid excess in wine, he
does not say, “Be not drunken,” but “not” even “given to much wine.” A
proper caution; for if those who served in the Temple did not taste wine
at all, much more should not these. For wine produces disorder of mind,
and where it does not cause drunkenness, it destroys the energies and
relaxes the firmness of the soul.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p26"></span>The dispensation in our behalf he calls
a “mystery,” and well may it be so called, since it is not manifest to
all, nay, it was not manifest to the Angels, for how could it, when it
was “made known by the Church”? ([Eph. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="v.iii.xii-p26.1"></span>.)
Therefore he says, “without controversy great is the mystery.” Great
indeed was it. For God became Man, and Man became God. A Man was seen
without sin! A Man was received up, was preached in the world! Together
with us the Angels saw Him. This is indeed a mystery! Let us not then
expose <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207) this mystery. Let us
not lay it forth everywhere, but let us live in a manner worthy of the
mystery. They to whom a mystery is intrusted are great persons. We
account it a mark of favor, if a king intrusts a secret to us. But God
has committed His mystery to us, yet are we ungrateful to our
Benefactor, as if we had not received the greatest benefits. Our
insensibility to such a kindness should strike us with horror. And how
is that a mystery which all know? In the first place all do not know it,
and before then too they knew it not, but now it is made manifest. <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208)

<span id="v.iii.xii-p29"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xii-p29.1"></span>Moral</span>. In keeping this mystery, then,
let us be faithful to our trust. So great a mystery has He intrusted to
us, and we do not trust Him even with our money, though He has bid us
lay up our wealth with Him, where none can take it away, neither can
moth nor thief waste it. And He promises to pay us a hundred-fold, yet
we obey Him not. Yet here if we intrust any with a deposit, we receive
nothing back in addition, but are thankful if that is restored which we
deposited. If a thief steals it there, He saith, set that to My account;
I say not to thee, a thief <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="v.iii.xii-Page_443"></span>has taken it, or moth devoured it. He
repays a hundred-fold here, and eternal life is superadded hereafter,
yet do we not lay up our treasure there! “But,” you say, “He repays
slowly.” Well this too is a proof of the greatness of His gift, that He
does not repay here in this mortal life; or rather He does repay even
here a hundred-fold. For did not Paul leave here his tools, <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) Peter his rod and hook, and Matthew
his seat of custom? and was not the whole world opened to them more than
to kings? Were not all things laid at their feet? Were they not
appointed rulers, <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) and lords?
Did not men commit their lives into their hands? suspend themselves
wholly upon their counsel, and enlist in their service? And do we not
see many similar occurrences even now? Many men of poor and humble
means, who did but handle the spade, and had hardly a sufficiency of
necessary food, having but the character of monks, have been celebrated
above all men, and honored of kings.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p32"></span>Are these things inconsiderable? Well,
consider that these are but additions, the principal sum is stored up
for the life to come. Despise riches, if thou wouldest have riches. If
thou wouldest be truly rich, become poor. For such are the paradoxes of
God. He would not have thee rich from thy own care, but from His grace.
Leave these things to Me, He says; make spiritual things thy concern,
that thou mayest know My power. Flee from that yoke of slavery, which
riches impose. As long as thou cleavest to them, thou art poor. When
thou despisest them, thou art doubly rich, in that such things shall
flow in upon thee from every side, and in that thou shalt want none of
those things, which the multitude want. For not to possess much, but to
need little, is to be rich indeed. The king, so long as he wants aught,
differs not from the poor man. For this is poverty, to stand in need of
others; and by this argument the king is poor, in so far as he stands in
need of his subjects. But he that is crucified, to the world is not so;
he wants for nothing; for his hands are sufficient for his subsistence,
as Paul said, “These hands have ministered to my necessities, and to
them that were with me.” ([Acts xx.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034)<span id="v.iii.xii-p32.1"></span>.)
These are his words who says, “As having nothing, yet possessing all
things.” ([2 Cor. vi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p32.2"></span>.) This is he who was thought a God by the
inhabitants of Lystra. If thou wouldest obtain worldly things, seek
Heaven; if you wouldest enjoy things here, despise them. For, “Seek ye
first the kingdom of God,” He saith, “and all these things shall be
added unto you.” ([Matt. vi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p32.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xii-p33"></span>Why dost thou admire these trifles? Why
long for things of no real worth? How long is one poor? <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) how long a beggar? Raise thine eyes
to heaven, think of the riches there, and smile at gold; think of how
little use it is; that the enjoyment of it lasts but for the present
life, and that compared with eternity, the present life is as a grain of
sand, or as a drop of water to the boundless ocean. This wealth is not a
possession, it is not property, it is a loan for use. For when thou
diest, willingly or unwillingly, all that thou hast goes to others, and
they again give it up to others, and they again to others. For we are
all sojourners; and the tenant of the house is more truly perchance the
owner of it, for the owner dies, and the tenant lives, and still enjoys
the house. And if the latter hires it, the other might be said to hire
it too: for he built it, and was at pains with it, and fitted it up.
Property, in fact, is but a word: we are all owners in fact but of other
men’s possessions. Those things only are our own, which we have sent
before us to the other world. Our goods here are not our own; we have
only a life interest in them; or rather they fail us during our lives.
Only the virtues of the soul are properly our own, as alms-giving and
charity. Worldly goods, even by those without, were called external
things, because they are without us. But let us make them internal. For
we cannot take our wealth with us, when we depart hence, but we can take
our charities. But let us rather send them before us, that they may
prepare for us an abode in the eternal mansions. ([Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.xii-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xii-p35"></span>Goods <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) are named from use, <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) not from lordship, and are not our
own, and possessions are not a property but a loan. For how many masters
has every estate had, and how many will it have! There is a sensible
proverb, (and popular proverbs, when they contain any wisdom, are not to
be despised,) “O field, how many men’s hast thou been, and how many
men’s wilt thou be?” This we should say to our houses and all our goods.
Virtue alone is able to depart with us, and to accompany us to the world
above. Let us then give up and extinguish that love of wealth, that we
may kindle in us an affection for heavenly things. These two affections
cannot possess one soul. For it is said, “Either he will hate the one,
and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
other.” ([Matt. vi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p37.1"></span>.) Seest thou a man with a long train of
attendants, clearing a way <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214)
along the streets, clothed in silken garments, riding aloft, and
stiffening his neck? Be not overawed, but smile. As we laugh when we see
children playing at kings, so laugh at his state, for it is no better
than theirs, nor indeed so pleasant, for there is not the same innocence
<span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="v.iii.xii-Page_444"></span>and simplicity as with children. With
them it is laughter and pleasure, here is a man made ridiculous and
contemptible.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p39"></span>Glorify God, Who has kept thee free from
this theatrical ostentation. For, if thou wilt, humble as thy station
is, thou mayest be higher than he who is exalted in his chariot. And
why? because, though his body is a little raised from the earth, his
soul is fixed upon it, for “My strength,” he saith, “cleaveth to my
flesh” ([Ps. cii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span
id="v.iii.xii-p39.1"></span>.), but thou in thy spirit walkest in
heaven. What though he has many attendants clearing his way? is he more
honored by this than his horse? and what an absurdity is it, to drive
men before one to clear the way for a beast to pass! Then what sort of
honor is it to bestride a horse? an honor shared by his slaves. Yet some
are so vain of this, that they have it led after them even though they
do not want it. What greater folly can there be? To wish to be
distinguished by their horses, by the costliness of their garments, by
their retinue! What can be more contemptible than glory which consists
in horses, and servants? Art thou virtuous? use not such distinctions.
Have ornaments in thyself. Be not indebted for thy glory to the presence
of others. To such honor the most wicked, corrupt, and base of men may
attain; all indeed who are rich. Actors and dancers may ride on
horseback with a servant running before them, yet are they but actors
and dancers still. Their horses and attendants procure them no respect.
For when the graces of the soul are wanting to such persons, the
addition of these external things is superfluous and vain. And as when a
wall is weak, or a body disordered, whatever you put upon it, it still
remains unsound and decayed; so in this case; the soul continues the
same, and receives no advantage from things without, not though the man
wear a thousand ornaments of gold. Let us not therefore be anxious for
such things. Let us withdraw ourselves from temporal things, and pursue
greater, even spiritual distinctions, which will render us truly objects
of veneration, that we also may obtain the blessings of futurity,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[441:1202](1130104.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p6"></span> He had not noticed this reason on the
passage, probably because he considered that St. Paul purposely deferred
it to this place.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[441:1203](1130104.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p8"></span> E.V.: “Their wives.” The other is
literal. \[R.V.: “Women.”\]

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[441:1204](1130104.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p12"></span> i.e. the verse before.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[442:1205](1130104.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p17"></span> Or, “in things below.” He may refer to
the Deacon’s temporal ministry.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[442:1206](1130104.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p21"></span> i.e. the truth in itself supports the
Church, the Church through it supports the world.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[442:1207](1130104.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p23"></span> \[ὄς is better attested than θεός, and
has been adopted in the R.V.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[442:1208](1130104.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p27"></span> The word ἐκπομπεύωμεν seems to be used
in a bad sense, as of disgracing, or irreverently handling, the sacred
doctrine.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[442:1209](1130104.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p28"></span> So B. Sav. mar. and Old Lat. The
printed text is, “It is a mystery which all know, yea, rather, which all
knew not before, but which is now made manifest to all.”

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[443:1210](1130104.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p30"></span> σμίλην.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[443:1211](1130104.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p31"></span> δίοικητὰς.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[443:1212](1130104.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p34"></span> See on [Philip. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019)<span id="v.iii.xii-p34.1"></span>,
Hom. ii.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[443:1213](1130104.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p36"></span> χρήματα.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[443:1214](1130104.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p37"></span> κεχρῆσθαι.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[443:1215](1130104.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="v.iii.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p38"></span> σοβοῦντα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 4:1-3](1130105)
