[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130054)  [Next](1130056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.xiv-p2.2"></span>[Philippians iii.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p3"></span>“For many walk, of whom I told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the
cross of Christ: whose end is perdition, whose god is the belly, and
whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. For our
citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we wait for a Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation,
that it may be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the
working whereby He is able even to subject all things unto Himself.”

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> is so incongruous in a
Christian, and foreign to his character, as to seek ease and rest; and
to be engrossed with the present life is foreign to our profession and
enlistment. Thy Master was crucified, and dost thou seek ease? Thy
Master was pierced with nails, and dost thou live delicately? Do these
things become a noble soldier? Wherefore Paul saith, “Many walk, of whom
I told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ.” Since there were some who made a
pretense of Christianity, yet lived in ease and luxury, and this is
contrary to the Cross: therefore he thus spoke. For the cross belongs to
a soul at its post for the fight, longing to die, seeking nothing like
ease, whilst their conduct is of the contrary sort. So that even if they
say, they are Christ’s, still they are as it were enemies of the Cross.
For did they love the Cross, they would strive to live the crucified
life. Was not thy Master hung upon the tree? Do thou otherwise imitate
Him. Crucify thyself, though no one crucify thee. Crucify thyself, not
that thou mayest slay thyself, God forbid, for that is a wicked thing,
but as Paul said, “The world hath been crucified unto me and I unto the
world.” ([Gal. vi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p4.2"></span>.) If thou lovest thy Master, die His death.
Learn how great is the power of the Cross; how many good things it hath
achieved, and doth still: how it is the safety of our life. Through it
all things are done. Baptism is through the Cross, for we must receive
that seal. The laying on of hands is through the Cross. If we are on
journeys, if we are at home, wherever we are, the Cross is a great good,
the armor of salvation, a shield which cannot be beaten down, a weapon
to oppose the devil; thou bearest the Cross when thou art at enmity with
him, not simply when thou sealest thyself by it, but when thou sufferest
the things belonging to the Cross. Christ thought fit to call our
sufferings by the name of the Cross. As when he saith, “Except a man
take up his cross and follow Me” ([Matt. xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p4.3"></span>.), i.e. except he be prepared to die.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p5"></span>But these being base, and lovers of
life, and lovers of their bodies, are enemies of the Cross. And every
one, who is a friend of luxury, and of present safety, is an enemy of
that Cross in which Paul makes his boast: which he embraces, with which
he desires to be incorporated. As when he saith, “I am crucified unto
the world, <span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_243"></span>and the world unto me.” But here he
saith, “I now tell you weeping.” Wherefore? Because the evil was urgent,
because such deserve tears. Of a truth the luxurious are worthy of
tears, who make fat that which is thrown about them, I mean the body,
and take no thought of that soul which must give account. Behold thou
livest delicately, behold thou art drunken, to-day and to-morrow, ten
years, twenty, thirty, fifty, a hundred, which is impossible; but if
thou wilt, let us suppose it. What is the end? What is the gain? Nought
at all. Doth it not then deserve tears, and lamentations, to lead such a
life; God hath brought us into this course, that He may crown us, and we
take our departure without doing any noble action. Wherefore Paul
weepeth, where others laugh, and live in pleasure. So sympathetic is he:
such thought taketh he for all men. “Whose god,” saith he, “is the
belly.” For this have they a God! <span
id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) That is, “let us eat and drink!” Dost
thou see, how great an evil luxury is? to some their wealth, and to
others their belly is a god. Are not these too idolaters, and worse than
the common? And their “glory is in their shame.” ([1 Cor. xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>.)
Some say it is circumcision. I think not so, but this is its meaning,
they make a boast of those things, of which they ought to be ashamed. It
is a fearful thing to do shameful actions; yet to do them, and be
ashamed, is only half so dreadful. But where a man even boasts himself
of them, it is excessive senselessness.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p7"></span>Do these words apply to them alone? And
do those who are here present escape the charge? And will no one have
account to render of these things? Does no one make a god of his belly,
or glory in his shame? I wish, earnestly I wish, that none of these
charges lay against us, and that I did not know any one involved in what
I have said. But I fear lest the words have more reference to us than to
the men of those times. For when one consumes his whole life in drinking
and reveling, and expends some small trifle on the poor, whilst he
consumes the larger portion on his belly, will not these words with
justice apply to him? No words are more apt to call attention, or more
cutting in reproof, than these: “Whose god is the belly, whose glory is
in their shame.” And who are these? They, he says, who mind earthly
things. “Let us build houses.” Where, I ask? On the earth, they answer.
Let us purchase farms; on the earth again: let us obtain power; again on
the earth: let us gain glory; again on the earth: let us enrich
ourselves; all these things are on the earth. These are they, whose god
is their belly; for if they have no spiritual thoughts, but have all
their possessions here, and mind these things, with reason have they
their belly for their god, in saying, “Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die.” And about thy body, thou grievest, tell me, that it
is of earth, though thus thou art not at all injured. But thy soul thou
draggest down to the earth, when thou oughtest to render even thy body
spiritual; for thou mayest, if thou wilt. Thou hast received a belly,
that thou mayest feed, not distend it, that thou mayest have the mastery
over it, not have it as mistress over thee: that it may minister to thee
for the nourishment of the other parts, not that thou mayest minister to
it, not that thou mayest exceed limits. The sea, when it passes its
bounds, doth not work so many evils, as the belly doth to our body,
together with our soul. The former overfloweth all the earth, the latter
all the body. Put moderation for a boundary to it, as God hath put the
sand for the sea. Then if its waves arise, and rage furiously, rebuke
it, with the power which is in thee. See how God hath honored thee, that
thou mightest imitate Him, and thou wilt not; but thou seest the belly
overflowing, destroying and overwhelming thy whole nature, and darest
not to restrain or moderate it.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p8"></span>“Whose God,” he saith, “is their belly.”
Let us see how Paul served God: let us see how gluttons serve their
belly. Do not they undergo ten thousand such deaths? do not they fear to
disobey whatever it orders? do not they minister impossibilities to it?
Are not they worse than slaves? “But our citizenship,” says he, “is in
Heaven.” Let us not then seek for ease here; there do we shine, where
also our citizenship is. “From whence also,” saith he, “we wait for a
Saviour,” the Lord Jesus Christ: “who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his glory.” By
little and little he hath carried us up. He saith, “From Heaven” and
“Our Saviour,” showing, from the place and from the Person, the dignity
of the subject. “Who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation,”
saith he. The body now suffereth many things: it is bound with chains,
it is scourged, it suffereth innumerable evils; but the body of Christ
suffered the same. This, then, he hinted at when he said, “That it may
be conformed to the body of his glory.” Wherefore the body is the same,
but putteth on incorruption. “Shall fashion anew.” Wherefore the fashion
is different; or perchance he has spoken figuratively of the change.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p9"></span>He saith, “the body of our humiliation,”
because it is now humbled, subject to destruction, to pain, because it
seemeth to be worthless, and to have nothing beyond that of other
animals. “That it may be conformed to the body of his glory.” What?
shall this our body be fashioned like unto Him, who sitteth at the right
<span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_244"></span>hand of the Father, to Him who is
worshiped by the Angels, before whom do stand the incorporeal Powers, to
Him who is above all rule and power, and might? If then the whole world
were to take up weeping and lament for those who have fallen from this
hope, could it worthily lament? because, when a promise is given us of
our body being made like to Him, it still departs with the demons. I
care not for hell henceforth; whatever can be said, having fallen from
so great glory, now and henceforth consider hell to be nothing to this
falling away. What sayest thou, O Paul? To be made like unto Him? Yes,
he answereth; then, lest you should disbelieve, he addeth a reason;
“According to the working whereby He is able even to subject all things
unto Himself.” He hath power, saith he, to subject all things unto
Himself, wherefore also destruction and death. Or rather, He doth this
also with the same power. For tell me, which requireth the greater
power, to subject demons, and Angels, and Archangels, and Cherubim, and
Seraphim, or to make the body incorruptible and immortal? The latter
certainly much more than the former; he showed forth the greater works
of His power, that you might believe these too. Wherefore, though ye see
these men rejoicing, and honored, yet stand firm, be not offended at
them, be not moved. These our hopes are sufficient to raise up even the
most sluggish and indolent.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p10"></span>[Philip.
4.1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>. “Wherefore,” saith he, “my brethren,
beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my
beloved.”

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p11"></span>“So.” How? Unmoved. See how he addeth
praise after exhortation, “my joy and my crown,” not simply joy but
glory too, not simply glory but my crown too. Which glory nought can
equal, since it is the crown of Paul. “So stand fast in the Lord, my
beloved,” i.e. in the hope of God. <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665)

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p13"></span>[Phil.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p13.1"></span>.
“I exhort Euodia, and exhort Syntyche, to be of the same mind in the
Lord. Yea, I beseech thee also, true yokefellow, help these women.”

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p14"></span>Some say Paul here exhorts his own
wife; but it is not so, but some other woman, or the husband of one of
them. “Help these women, for they labored with me in the Gospel, with
Clement also, and the rest of my fellow-workers whose names are in the
book of life.” Seest thou how great a testimony he beareth to their
virtue? For as Christ saith to his Apostles, “Rejoice not that the
spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in
the book of life” ([Luke x. 20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.); so Paul testifieth to them, saying,
“whose names are in the book of life.” These women seem to me to be the
chief of the Church which was there, and he commendeth them to some
notable man whom he calls his “yokefellow,” to whom perchance he was
wont to commend them, as to a fellow-worker, and fellow-soldier, and
brother, and companion, as he doth in the Epistle to the Romans, when he
saith, “I commend unto you Phebe our sister, who is a servant of the
Church that is at Cenchrea.” ([Rom. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p14.2"></span>.)
“Yokefellow;” either some brother of theirs, or a husband of hers; as if
he had said, Now thou art a true brother, now a true husband, because
thou hast become a Member. “For they labored with me in the Gospel.”
This protection <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) came from home,
not from friendship, but for good deeds. “Labored with me.” What sayest
thou? Did women labor with thee? Yes, he answereth, they too contributed
no small portion. Although many were they who wrought together with him,
yet these women also acted with him amongst the many. The Churches then
were no little edified, for many good ends are gained where they who are
approved, be they men, or be they women, enjoy from the rest such honor.
For in the first place the rest were led on to a like zeal; in the
second place, they also gained <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667)
by the respect shown; and thirdly, they made those very persons more
zealous and earnest. Wherefore thou seest that Paul hath everywhere a
care for this, and commendeth such men for consideration. As he saith in
the Epistle to the Corinthians: “Who are the first-fruits of Achaia,”
([1 Cor. xvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p16.2"></span>.) Some say that the word “yokefellow,”
(Syzygus,) is a proper name. Well, what? Whether it be so, or no, we
need not accurately enquire, <span id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) but
observe that he gives his orders, that these women should enjoy much
protection.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p18"></span>All we have, saith he, is in the
heavens, our Saviour, our city, whatever a man can name: “whence,” saith
he, “we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ.” And this is an act
of His kindness and love toward man. He Himself again cometh to us, he
doth not drag us thither, but takes us, and so departs with us. And this
is a mark of great honor; for if He came to us when we were enemies,
much rather doth He now when we are become friends. He doth not commit
this to the Angels, nor to servants, but Himself cometh to call us to
His royal man<span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_245"></span>sion. See, we also “shall be caught up
in the clouds” ([1 Thess. iv. 17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p18.1"></span>.), doing him honor.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p19"></span>Who then is to be found “the faithful
and wise servant”? Who are they that are deemed worthy of such good
things? How miserable are those who fail! For if we were forever to
weep, should we do aught worthy of the occasion? For were you to make
mention of hells innumerable, you would name nothing equal to that pain
which the soul sustaineth, when all the world is in confusion, when the
trumpets are sounding, when the Angels are rushing forward, the first,
then the second, then the third, then ten thousand ranks, are pouring
forth upon the earth; then the Cherubim, (and many are these and
infinite;) the Seraphim; when He Himself is coming, with His ineffable
glory; when those meet Him, who had gone to gather the elect into the
midst; when Paul and his companions, and all who in his time had been
approved, are crowned, are proclaimed aloud, are honored by the King,
before all His heavenly host. For if hell did not exist, how fearful a
thing it is, that the one part should be honored, and the other
dishonored! Hell, I confess, is intolerable, yea, very intolerable, but
more intolerable than it is the loss of the Kingdom. Consider; if any
king, or the son of a king, having taken his departure, and been
successful in innumerable wars, and become the object of admiration,
should with his army entire, return to any city, in his chariot, with
his trophies, with his innumerable ranks of golden shields, with his
spearmen, his body-guard all about him, whilst the whole city was
adorned with crowns, whilst all the rulers of the world accompanied him,
and all the soldiery of foreign nations followed him as captives, then
præfects, satraps, and in the presence of all the rulers, and all that
splendor, he should receive the citizens who meet him, and kiss them,
and stretch forth his hand, and give them freedom of access, and
converse with them, all standing around, as with friends, and tell them
that all that journey was undertaken for their sake, and should lead
them into his palace, and give them a share of it, even if the rest
should not be punished, to how great punishment would not this be equal?
But if in the case of men it were a bitter thing to fall away from this
glory, much more is it so with God, when all the heavenly Powers are
present with the King, when the demons, bound, and bowing down their
heads, and the devil himself is led along in chains, and all military
force that opposeth itself, when the Powers of the heavens, when He
Himself, cometh upon the clouds.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p20"></span>Believe me, I am not even able to
finish my words, from the grief which lays hold of my soul at this
relation. Consider of how great glory we shall be deprived, when it is
in our power not to be deprived of it. For this is the misery, that we
suffer these things, when it is in our power not to suffer them. When he
receiveth the one part and leadeth them to His Father in heaven, and
rejecteth the other, whom Angels take and drag against their will,
weeping, and hanging down their heads, to the fire of hell, when they
have first been made a spectacle to the whole world, what grief, think
you, is there? Let us then make haste, while there is time, and take
great thought of our own salvation. How many things have we to say like
the rich man? If any one would now suffer us, we would take counsel of
the things that are profitable! But no one doth suffer us. And that we
shall so say, is clear, not from him alone, but from many others. And
that you may learn this, how many men have been in fevers, and said, if
we recover, we shall never again fall into the same state. Many such
words we shall then say, but we shall be answered as the rich man was,
that there is a gulf, that we have received our good things here. ([Luke
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p20.1"></span>.) Let us groan then, I entreat you,
bitterly, rather let us not only groan, but pursue virtue too; let us
lament now, for salvation, that we may not then lament in vain. Let us
weep now, and not weep then, at our evil lot. This weeping is of virtue,
that of unprofitable repentance; let us afflict ourselves now, that we
may not then; for it is not the same thing to be afflicted here and
there. Here, thou art afflicted for a little time, or rather thou dost
not perceive thy affliction, knowing that thou art afflicted for thy
good. But there, the affliction is more bitter, because it is not in
hope, <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) nor for any escape, but
without limit, and throughout.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p22"></span>But may we all be freed from this, and
obtain remission. But let us pray and be diligent, that we may obtain
the remission. Let us be diligent, I entreat; for if we are diligent, we
prevail even through our prayer: if we pray earnestly, God grants our
request; but if we neither ask Him, nor do earnestly aught of this sort,
nor work, how is it possible that we should ever succeed? By sleeping?
Not at all. For it is much if even by running, and stretching forth, and
being conformed to His death, as Paul said, we shall be able to succeed,
not to say sleeping. “If by any means I may attain,” saith he. But if
Paul said, “If by any means I may attain,” what shall we say? For it is
not possible by sleeping to accomplish even worldly business, not to say
spiritual. By sleeping, not even from friends can anything be received,
far less from God. Not even fathers honor them who sleep, far less doth
God. Let us labor <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_246"></span>for a little time, that we may have rest
for ever. We must at all events be afflicted. If we are not afflicted
here, it awaits us there. Why choose we not to be afflicted here, that
there we may have rest, and obtain the unspeakable blessings, in Christ
Jesus, with whom, to the Father together with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
power, and honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_664"></span>[243:665](1130055.htm#fr_664) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p6"></span> There is some false reading here. Old.
Lat. has “What is their God? This, ‘Let us eat and drink!’”

<span id="fn_665"></span>[244:666](1130055.htm#fr_665) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p12"></span> \[Chrys. strangely overlooks the fact
that in the Epistle “the Lord” usually means Christ. Standing in the
Lord may be readily understood if we contrast it with efforts to stand
outside of Christ, apart from him. Compare (Meyer) [1 Thess. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p12.1"></span>,
and often in Paul’s writings.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_666"></span>[244:667](1130055.htm#fr_666) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p15"></span> προστασία, he means the recommendation
to protection.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[244:668](1130055.htm#fr_667) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p16"></span> i.e. a reward, see on [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p16.1"></span>,
Hom. xv.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[244:669](1130055.htm#fr_668) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p17"></span> \[Upon this whole passage, [Phil.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p17.1"></span>,
nothing is really known to this day beyond what Chrys. here says. The
view that Syzygus is a proper name is preferred by Meyer and Grimm
(Thayer), and Westcott and Hort so print in the margin. A complete
discussion may be found in Lightfoot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_669"></span>[245:670](1130055.htm#fr_669) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p21"></span> It is worth observing, that, although
he has referred to the rich man in *Hades*, he is here speaking of
*Gehenna*, and of present self-denial as a means of escaping *eternal*
punishment after Judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 4:4-7](1130056)
