[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130062)  [Next](1130064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.v-p2.2"></span>[Colossians i.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>“Even the mystery which hath been hid from
all ages and generations: but now hath it been manifested to His saints,
to whom God was pleased to make known what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of
glory: whom we proclaim, admonishing every man, and teaching every man
in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.1"></span>Having</span> said what we have come to, and
showed the lovingkindness of God and the honor, by the greatness of the
things given, he introduces yet another consideration that heightens
them, namely, that neither before us did any one know Him. <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775) As he doth also in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, saying, neither Angels, nor principalities, nor any other
created power, but only the Son of God knew. ([Eph.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>.)
And he said, not simply hid, but “quite hid,” and that even if it hath
but now come to pass, yet it is of old, and from the beginning God
willed these things, and they were so planned out; but why, he saith not
yet. “From the ages,” from the beginning, as one might say. And with
reason he calleth that a mystery, which none knew, save God. And where
hid? In Christ; as he saith in the Epistle to the Ephesians ([Eph. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.2"></span>.), or
as when the Prophet saith, “From everlasting even to everlasting Thou
art.” ([Ps. xc. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.3"></span>.) But now hath been manifested, he saith, “to
His saints.” So that it is altogether of the dispensation of God. “But
now hath been manifested,” he saith. He saith not, “is come to pass,”
but, “hath been manifested to His saints.” So that it is even now still
hid, since it hath been manifested to His saints alone.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span><span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v-Page_280"></span>Let not others therefore deceive you, for
they know not. Why to them alone? “To whom He was pleased,” he saith.
See how everywhere He stops the mouth of their questions. “To whom God
was pleased to make known,” he saith. Yet His will is not without
reason. By way of making them accountable for grace, rather than
allowing them to have high thoughts, as though it were of their own
achieving, he said, “To whom he was pleased to make known.” “What is the
riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles.” He hath spoken
loftily, and accumulated emphasis, seeking, out of his great
earnestness, for amplification upon amplification. For this also is an
amplification, the saying indefinitely, “The riches of the glory of this
mystery among the Gentiles.” For it is most of all apparent among the
Gentiles, as he also says elsewhere, “And that the Gentiles might
glorify God for His mercy.” ([Rom. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.v-p6.1"></span>.) For
the great glory of this mystery is apparent among others also, but much
more among these. For, on a sudden, to have brought men more senseless
than stones to the dignity of Angels, simply through bare words, and
faith alone, without any laboriousness, is indeed glory and riches of
mystery: just as if one were to take a dog, quite consumed with hunger
and the mange, foul, and loathsome to see, and not so much as able to
move, but lying cast out, and make him all at once into a man, and to
display him upon the royal throne. They were wont to worship stones and
the earth; but they learned that themselves are better both than the
heaven and the sun, and that the whole world serveth them; they were
captives and prisoners of the devil: on a sudden they are placed above
his head, and lay commands on him and scourge him: from being captives
and slaves to demons, they are become the body of The Master of the
Angels and the Archangels; from not knowing even what God is, they are
become all at once sharers even in God’s throne. Wouldest thou see the
countless steps they overleaped? First, they had to learn that stones
are not gods; secondly, that they not only are not gods, but inferior
even to men; thirdly, to brutes even; fourthly, to plants even; fifthly,
they brought together the extremes: <span
id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776) that not only stones but not earth
even, nor animals, nor plants, nor man, nor heaven; or, to begin again,
that not stones, not animals, not plants, not elements, not things
above, not things below, not man, not demons, not Angels, not
Archangels, not any of those Powers above, ought to be worshiped by the
nature of man. Being drawn up, <span id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777)
as it were, from some deep, they had to learn that the Lord of all, He
is God, that Him alone is it right to worship; that the virtuous
life <span id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) is a good thing; that this
present death is not death, nor this life, life; that the body is
raised, that it becomes incorruptible, that it will ascend into heaven,
that it obtains even immortality, that it standeth with Angels, that it
is removed thither. But Him who was there below, having cleared at a
bound all these steps, He has placed on high upon the throne, having
made Him that was lower than the stones, higher in dominion than the
Angels, and the Archangels, and the thrones, and the dominions. Truly
“What is the riches of the glory of this mystery?” Just as if one should
show a fool to be all at once made a philosopher; yea rather, whatsoever
one should say, it would be as nothing: for even the words of Paul are
undefined. “What is the riches,” he saith, “of the glory of this mystery
among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you?” Again, they had to learn
that He who is above, and who ruleth Angels and dominions, and all the
other Powers, came down below, and was made Man, and suffered countless
things, and rose again, and was received up.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p10"></span>All these things were of the mystery; and
he sets them down together with lofty praise, saying, “Which is Christ
in you?” But if He be in you, why seek ye Angels? “Of this mystery.” For
there are other mysteries besides. But this is really a mystery, which
no one knew, which is marvelous, which is beside the common expectation,
which was hid. “Which is Christ in you,” he saith, “the hope of glory,
whom we proclaim,” bringing Him from above. “Whom we,” not Angels:
“teaching” and “admonishing”: not imperiously nor using constraint, for
this too is of God’s lovingkindness to men, not to bring them to Him
after the manner of a tyrant. Seeing it was a great thing he had said,
“teaching,” he added, “admonishing,” which is rather like a father than
an instructor. “Whom,” saith he, “we proclaim, admonishing every man,
and teaching every man in all wisdom.” So that all wisdom is needed.
That is, saying all things in wisdom. For the ability to learn such
things exists not in every one. “That we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus.” What sayest thou, “every man”? Yea; this is what we
are earnestly desirous of doing, he saith. For what, if this do not come
to pass? the blessed Paul endeavored. “Perfect.” This then is
perfection, the other is imperfect: so that if one have not even the
whole of wisdom, he is imperfect. “Perfect in Christ Jesus,” not in the
Law, nor in Angels, for that is not per<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>
<span id="iv.iv.v-Page_281"></span>fection. “In Christ,” that is, in the
knowledge of Christ. For he that knows what Christ has done, will have
higher thoughts than to be satisfied with Angels.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p11"></span>“In Christ Jesus”; [Col.
1.29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv.v-p11.1"></span>.
“Whereunto I labor also, striving.” And he said not, “I am desirous”
merely, nor in any indifferent way, but “I labor, striving,” with great
earnestness, with much watching. If I, for your good, thus watch, much
more ought ye. Then again, showing that it is of God, he saith,
“according to His working which worketh in me mightily.” He shows that
this is the work of God. He, now, that makes me strong for this,
evidently wills it. Wherefore also when beginning he saith, “Through the
will of God.” ([Col. 1.1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p11.2"></span>.) So that it is not only out of modesty he so
expresses himself, but insisting on the truth of the Word as well. “And
striving.” In saying this, he shows that many are fighting against him.
Then great is his tender affection.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p12"></span>[Col.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.v-p12.1"></span>.
“For I would have you know how greatly I strive for you, and for them at
Laodicea.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p13"></span>Then lest this should seem owing to their
peculiar weakness, he joined others also with them, and as yet condemned
them not. But why does he say, “And as many as have not seen my face in
the flesh”? He shows here after a divine manner, that they saw him
constantly in the Spirit. And he bears witness to their great love.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p14"></span>[Col.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.v-p14.1"></span>.
“That their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in love,
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, that they
may know the mystery of God the Father, <span
id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) and of Christ: in whom are all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p16"></span>Now henceforward he is hastening and in
pangs to enter upon the doctrine, neither accusing them, nor clearing
them of accusation. “I strive,” he saith. To what end? That they may be
knit together. What he means is something like this; that they may stand
firm in the faith. He doth not however so express himself; but
extenuates the matter of accusation. That is, that they may be united
with love, not with necessity nor with force. For as I have said, he
always avoids offending, by leaving it to themselves; <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) and therefore “striving,” because I
wish it to be with love, and willingly. For I do not wish it to be with
the lips merely, nor merely that they shall be brought together, but
“that their hearts may be comforted.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p18"></span>“Being knit together in love unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding.” That is, that they may
doubt about nothing, that they may be fully assured in all things. But I
meant full assurance which is by faith, for there is a full assurance
which cometh by arguments, but that is worthy of no consideration. I
know, he saith, that ye believe, but I would have you fully assured: not
“unto riches” only, but “unto all riches”; that your full assurance may
be intense, as well as in all things. And observe the wisdom of this
blessed one. He said not, “Ye do ill that ye are not fully assured,” nor
accused them; but, ye know not how desirous I am that ye may be fully
assured, and not merely so, but with understanding. For seeing he spoke
of faith; suppose not, he saith, that I meant barely and unprofitably,
but with understanding and love. “That they may know the mystery of God
the Father and of Christ.” So that this is the mystery of God, the being
brought unto Him by the Son. “And of Christ, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” But if they are in Him, then wisely
also no doubt He came at this time. Wherefore then do some foolish
persons object to Him, “See how He discourseth with the simpler sort.”
“In whom are all the treasures.” He himself knows all things. “Hid,” for
think not in truth that ye already have all; they are hidden also even
from Angels, not, from you only; so that you ought to ask all things
from Him. He himself giveth wisdom and knowledge. Now by saying,
“treasures,” he shows their largeness, by “All,” that He is ignorant of
nothing, by “hid,” that He alone knoweth.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p19"></span>[Col.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.v-p19.1"></span>.
“This I say, that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p20"></span>Seest thou that he saith, I have therefore
said this, that ye may not seek it from men. “Delude you,” he saith,
“with persuasiveness of speech.” For what if any doth speak, and speak
persuasively?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p21"></span>[Col.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>.
“For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p22"></span>The direct thing to have said here was,
“even though I be absent in the flesh, yet, nevertheless, I know the
deceivers”; but instead he has ended with praise, “Joying and beholding
your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ.” “Your
order,” he means, your good order. “And the steadfastness of your faith
in Christ.” This is still more in the way of encomium. And he said not
“faith,” but steadfastness, as to soldiers standing in good order and
firmly. Now that which is steadfast, neither deceit nor trial can shake
asunder. Not only, he saith, have ye not fallen, but no one hath so much
as thrown you into disorder. He hath set himself over them, that they
may fear him as though present; for thus is order preserved. From
solidity follows compactedness, for you <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> <span id="iv.iv.v-Page_282"></span>will then produce
solidity, when having brought many things together, you shall cement
them compactedly and inseparably; thus a solidity is produced, as in the
case of a wall. But this is the peculiar work of love; for those who
were by themselves, when it hath closely cemented and knit them
together, it renders solid. And faith, again, doeth the same thing; when
it allows not reasonings to intrude themselves. For as reasonings
divide, and shake loose, so faith causes solidity and compactness.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p23"></span>For seeing God hath bestowed upon us
benefits surpassing man’s reasoning, suitably enough He hath brought in
faith. It is not possible to be steadfast, when demanding reasons. For
behold all our lofty doctrines, how destitute they are of reasonings,
and dependent upon faith alone. God is not anywhere, and is everywhere.
What hath less reason in it than this? Each by itself is full of
difficulty. For, indeed, He is not in place; nor is there any place in
which He is. He was not made, He made not Himself, He never began to be.
What reasoning will receive this, if there be not faith? Does it not
seem to be utterly ridiculous, and more endless than a riddle?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p24"></span>Now that He hath no beginning, and is
uncreate, and uncircumscribed, and infinite, is, as we have said, a
manifest difficulty; but let us consider His incorporealness, whether we
can search out this by reasoning. God is incorporeal. What is
incorporeal? A bare word, and no more, for the apprehension has received
nothing, has impressed nothing upon itself; for if it does so impress,
it comes to nature, and what constitutes body. So that the mouth speaks
indeed, but the understanding knows not what it speaks, save one thing
only, that it is not body, this is all it knows. And why do I speak of
God? In the case of the soul, which is created, inclosed, circumscribed,
what is incorporealness? say! show! Thou canst not. Is it air? But air
is body, even though it be not compact, and it is plain from many proofs
that it is a yielding body. Fire is body, whilst the energy of the soul
is bodiless. Wherefore? Since it penetrateth everywhere. If it is
not <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) itself body, then that which
is incorporeal exists in place, therefore it is circumscribed; and that
which is circumscribed has figure; and figures are linear, and lines
belong to bodies. Again, that which is without figure, what conception
does it admit? It has no figure, no form, no outline. Seest thou how the
understanding becomes dizzy?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p26"></span>Again, That Nature \[viz. God’s\] is not
susceptible of evil. But He is also good of His own will; it is
therefore susceptible. But one may not so say, far be it! Again, was He
brought into being, willing it, or not willing it? But neither may one
say this. Again, circumscribes He the world, or no? If He circumscribes
it not, He is Himself circumscribed, but if He circumscribes it, He is
infinite in His nature. Again, circumscribes He Himself? If He
circumscribes Himself, then He is not without beginning to Himself, but
to us; therefore He is not in His nature without beginning. Everywhere
one must grant contradictories.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p27"></span>Seest thou how great the darkness is; and
how everywhere there is need of faith. This it is, that is solid. But,
if you will, let us come to things which are less than these. That
substance hath an operation. And what in His case is operation? Is it a
certain motion? Then He is not immutable: for that which is moved, is
not immutable: for, from being motionless it becomes in motion. But
nevertheless He is in motion, and never stands still. But what kind of
motion, tell me; for amongst us there are seven kinds; down, up, in,
out, right, left, circular, or, if not this, increase, decrease,
generation, destruction, alteration. But is His motion none of these,
but such as the mind is moved with? No, nor this either. Far be it! for
in many things the mind is even absurdly moved. Is to will, to operate,
or not? If to will is to operate, and He wills all men to be good, and
to be saved ([1 Tim. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p27.1"></span>.), how comes it not to pass? But to will is
one thing, to operate, another. To will then is not sufficient for
operation. How then saith the Scripture, “He hath done whatsoever He
willed”? ([Ps. cxv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p27.2"></span>.) And again, the leper saith unto Christ, “If
Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” ([Matt. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.v-p27.3"></span>.)
For if this follows in company with the will, what is to be said? Will
ye that I mention yet another thing? How were the things that are, made
out of things that are not? How will they be resolved into nothing? What
is above the heaven? And again, what above that? and what above that?
and beyond that? and so on to infinity. What is below the earth? Sea,
and beyond this, what? and beyond that again? Nay; to the right, and to
the left, is there not the same difficulty?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p28"></span>But these indeed are things unseen. Will
ye that I lead the discourse to those which are seen; those which have
already happened? Tell me, how did the beast contain Jonah in its belly,
without his perishing? Is it not void of reason, and its motions without
control? How spared it the righteous man? How was it that the heat did
not suffocate him? How was it that it putrefied him not? For if to be in
the deep only, is past contriving, to be both in the creature’s bowels,
and in that heat, is very far <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v-Page_283"></span>more unaccountable. If from within we
breathe <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) the air, how did the
respiration suffice for two animals? And how did it also vomit him forth
unharmed? And how too did he speak? And how too was he self-possessed,
and prayed? Are not these things incredible? If we test them by
reasonings, they are incredible, if by faith, they are exceeding
credible.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p30"></span>Shall I say something more than this? The
wheat in the earth’s bosom decays, and rises again. Behold marvels,
opposite, and each surpassing the other; marvelous is the not becoming
corrupted, marvelous, after becoming so, is the rising again. Where are
they that make sport of such things, and disbelieve the Resurrection and
say, This bone how shall it be cemented to that? and introduce such like
silly tales. Tell me, how did Elias ascend in a chariot of fire? Fire is
wont to burn, not to carry aloft. How lives he so long a time? In what
place is he? Why was this done? Whither was Enoch translated? Lives he
on like food with us? and what is it hinders him from being here? Nay,
but does he not eat? And wherefore was he translated? Behold how God
schooleth us by little and little. He translated Enoch; no very great
thing that. This instructed us for the taking up of Elias. He shut in
Noe into the ark ([Gen. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p30.1"></span>.); nor is this either any very great thing.
This instructed us for the shutting up of the prophet within the whale.
Thus even the things of old stood in need of forerunners and types. For
as in a ladder the first step sends on to the second, and from the first
it is not possible to step to the fourth, and this sends one on to that,
that that may be the way to the next; and as it is not possible either
to get to the second before the first; so also is it here.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p31"></span>And observe the signs of signs, and thou
wilt discern this in the ladder which Jacob saw. “Above,” it is said,
“the Lord stood fast, and underneath Angels were ascending and
descending.” ([Gen. xxviii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>.) It was prophesied that the Father hath a
Son; it was necessary this should be believed. Whence wouldest thou that
I show thee the signs of this? From above, downward? From beneath,
upward? Because He begetteth without passion, <span
id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) for this reason did she that was
barren first bear. Let us rather go higher. It was necessary to be
believed, that He begat of Himself. What then? The thing happens
obscurely indeed, as in type and shadow, but still it doth happen, and
as it goes on it becomes somehow clearer. A woman is formed out of man
alone, and he remains whole and entire. Again, it was necessary there
should be some sure sign of the Conception of a Virgin. So the barren
beareth, not once only, but a second time and a third, and many times.
Of His birth then of a Virgin, the barren is a type, and she sends the
mind forward to faith. Again, this was a type of God being able to beget
alone. For if man is the chief agent, <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) and birth takes place without him, in
a more excellent way, much rather, is One begotten of the Chiefest
Agent. There is still another generation, which is a type of the Truth.
I mean, ours by the Spirit. Of this again the barren a type, the fact
that it is not of blood ([John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.v-p33.1"></span>.);
this pertains to the generation above. The one—as also the types—shows
that the generation is to be without passion; the other, that it could
proceed from one above.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p34"></span>Christ is above, ruling over all things:
it was necessary this should be believed. The same takes place in the
earth with respect to man. “Let Us make man after Our image and
likeness” ([Gen. i. 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p34.1"></span>.), for dominion of all the brutes. Thus He
instructed us, not by words, but by actions. Paradise showed the
separateness of his nature, and that man was the best thing of all.
Christ was to rise again; see now how many sure signs there were; Enoch,
Elias, Jonas, the fiery furnace, the case of Noah, baptism, the seeds,
the plants, our own generation, that of all animals. For since on this
everything was at stake, it, more than any other, had abundance of
types.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p35"></span>That the Universe <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) is not without a Providence we may
conjecture from things amongst ourselves, for nothing will continue to
exist, if not provided for; but even herds, and all other things stand
in need of governance. And that the Universe was not made by chance,
Hell is a proof, and so was the deluge in Noah’s day, the fire, <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) the overwhelming of the Egyptians in
the sea, the things which happened in the wilderness.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p38"></span>It was necessary too that many things
should prepare the way for Baptism; yea, thousands of things; those, for
instance, in the Old Testament, those in the Pool, <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) the cleansing of him that was not
sound in health, the deluge itself, and all the things that have been
done in water, the baptism of John.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p40"></span>It was necessary to be believed that God
giveth up His Son; a man did this by anticipation, Abraham the
Patriarch. Types then of all these things, if we are so inclined, we
shall <span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v-Page_284"></span>find by searching in the Scriptures. But
let us not be weary, but attune ourselves by these things. Let us hold
the faith steadfastly, and show forth strictness of life: that having
through all things returned thanks to God, we may be counted worthy of
the good things promised to them that love Him, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_775"></span>[279:776](1130063.htm#fr_775) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span> \[Or, “know it,” a reading having some
support, and adopted by Field.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_776"></span>[280:777](1130063.htm#fr_776) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span> ὅτι τὰ ἄκρα συνήγαγον εἰς ταὐτόν. There is
no authority for thus omitting ὅτι. It may mean, “That I (i.e. God) have
brought together the extremes into one, and not,” &c.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[280:778](1130063.htm#fr_777) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span> ἀνιμωμένος. Compare Plato, Rep. lib. vii.
init.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[280:779](1130063.htm#fr_778) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p9"></span> καλὸν ἡ θαυμαστὴ πολιτεία. Lit. “the
admirable conversation \[course of life\].” He seems to mean a life of
Virginity, which he says is peculiar to the Gospel; lib. cont. Judæos, §
7; Ben. t. i. p. 568 a; and elsewhere, as on [Rom. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.v-p9.1"></span>, Hom.
xiii.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[281:780](1130063.htm#fr_779) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p15"></span> Rec. text καὶ πατρὸς, E.V. “of God, and
of the Father”; but the sense in either case is, of Him Who is God and
Father.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[281:781](1130063.htm#fr_780) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p17"></span> ἐπιτρέπων, i.e. to draw such inferences
as would be harsh if stated by himself.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[282:782](1130063.htm#fr_781) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p25"></span> Savile conjectures that “not” should be
inserted, and the sense seems absolutely to require it.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[283:783](1130063.htm#fr_782) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p29"></span> \[This is obscure, and was altered by the
simplifying text into “For how breathed he the air in that place? How,”
&c.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_783"></span>[283:784](1130063.htm#fr_783) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p32"></span> ἀπαθῶς, i.e. without being changed. This
refers to the Eternal Generation, as the sequel shows. Compare St.
Athanasius against Arianism, Disc. l. c. 8.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[283:785](1130063.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p33"></span> κυριώτερον ἄνθρωπος. One would have
expected ἀνὴρ, but ἄνθρωπος has just been opposed to γυνή.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[283:786](1130063.htm#fr_785) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p36"></span> τὰ πάντα.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[283:787](1130063.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p37"></span> i.e. of Sodom.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[283:788](1130063.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p39"></span> Hales suggests that this may be the Laver
in the Temple, but it is not called κολυμβήθρα in LXX. The pool of
Bethesda is meant, as is evident from the like mention of types
increasing in clearness on [John v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.v-p39.1"></span>,
Hom. xxxvi. init., where this is classed with those of the Old
Testament. The following instance refers to the cleansing in [Lev. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.v-p39.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 2:6,7](1130064)
