[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130064)  [Next](1130066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.vii-p2.2"></span>[Colossians ii.
16-19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>“Let no man therefore judge you in meat,
or in drink, or in respect of a feast day, or a new moon, or a sabbath
day: which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body is Christ’s.
Let no man rob you of your prize by a voluntary humility and worshiping
of the Angels, dwelling in the things which he hath not seen, vainly
puffed up by his fleshly mind, and not holding fast the Head, from whom
all the body being supplied and knit together, through the joints and
bands, increaseth with the increase of God.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>Having</span> first said darkly, “Take heed
lest there shall be any one that maketh spoil of you after the tradition
of men” ([Col. 2.8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p4.2"></span>.); and again, further back, “This, I say,
that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech” ([Col.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p4.3"></span>.); thus preoccupying their soul, and working
in it anxious thoughts; next, having inserted those benefits, and
increased this effect, he then brings in his reproof last, and says,
“Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a
feast day, or a new moon, or a sabbath day.” Seest thou how he
depreciates them? If ye have obtained such things, he saith, why make
yourselves accountable for these petty matters? And he makes light of
them, saying, “or in the part <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) of
a feast day,” for in truth they did not retain the whole of the former
rule, “or a new moon, or a sabbath day.” He said not, “Do not then
observe them,” but, “let no man judge you.” He showed that they were
transgressing, and undoing, but he brought his charge against others.
Endure not those that judge you, he saith, nay, not so much as this
either, but he argues with those persons, almost stopping their mouths,
and saying, Ye ought not to judge. But he would not have reflected on
these. He said not “in clean and unclean,” nor yet “in feasts of
Tabernacles, and unleavened bread, and Pentecost,” but “in part of a
feast”: for they ventured not to keep the whole; and if they did observe
it, yet not so as to celebrate the feast. “In part,” he saith, showing
that the greater part is done away. For even if they did keep sabbath,
they did not do so with precision. “Which are a shadow of the things to
come”; he means, of the New Covenant; “but the body” is “Christ’s.” Some
persons here punctuate thus, “but the body” is “of Christ,” i.e. the
truth is come in with Christ: others thus; “The Body of Christ let no
man adjudge away from you,” that is, thwart you of it. The term <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>καταβραβευθῆναι</span>,
is employed when the victory is with one party, and the prize with
another, when though a victor thou art thwarted. Thou standest above the
devil and sin; why dost thou again subject thyself to sin? Therefore he
said that “he is a debtor to fulfill the whole law” ([Gal. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5.2"></span>.);
and again, “Is Christ” found to be “the minister of sin” ([Gal. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5.3"></span>.)?
which he said when writing to the Galatians. When he had filled them
with anger through saying, “adjudge away from you,” then he begins;
“being a voluntary,” <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) he saith,
“in humility and worshiping of Angels, intruding into things he hath not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.” How “in humility,” or how
“puffed up”? He shows that the whole arose out of vainglory. But what is
on the whole the drift of what is said? There are some who maintain that
we must be brought near by Angels, not by Christ, that were too great a
thing for us. Therefore it is that he turns over and over again what has
been done by Christ, “through the Blood of His Cross” ([Col.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>.); on this account he says that “He suffered
for us”; that “He loved us.” ([1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>.)
And besides in this very same thing, moreover, they were elevated
afresh. And he said not “introduction by,” but “worshiping of” Angels.
“Intruding into things he hath not <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) <span id="page_289">p. 289</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vii-Page_289"></span>seen.” ([Eph. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>.)
For he hath not seen Angels, and yet is affected as though he had.
Therefore he saith, “Puffed up by his fleshly mind vainly,” not about
any true fact. About this doctrine, he is puffed up, and puts forward a
show of humility. By his carnal mind, not spiritual; his reasoning is of
man. “And not holding fast the Head,” he saith, “from whom all the
body.” All the body thence hath its being, and its well-being. Why,
letting go the Head, dost thou cling to the members? If thou art fallen
off from it, thou art lost. “From whom all the body.” Every one, be he
who he may, thence has not life only, but also even connection. All the
Church, so long as she holds The Head, increaseth; because here is no
more passion of pride and vainglory, nor invention of human fancy.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>Mark that “from <span
id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) whom,” meaning the Son. “Through the
joints and bands,” he says, “being supplied, and knit together,
increases with the increase of God”; he means, that which is according
to God, that of the best life.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p10"></span>[Col.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>. “If ye died with Christ.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p11"></span>He puts that in the middle, and on
either side, expressions of greater vehemence. “If ye died with Christ
from the elements of the world,” he saith, “why as though living in the
world do ye subject yourselves to ordinances?” This is not the
consequence, for what ought to have been said is, “how as though living
are ye subject to those elements?” But letting this pass, what saith he?

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p12"></span>[Col.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>.
“Handle not, nor taste, nor touch; all which things are to perish with
the using; after the precepts and doctrines of men.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p13"></span>Ye are not in the world, he saith, how
is it ye are subject to its elements? how to its observances? And mark
how he makes sport of them, “touch not, handle not, taste not,” as
though they were cowards and keeping themselves clear of some great
matters, “all which things are to perish with the using.” He has taken
down the swollenness of the many, and added, “after the precepts and
doctrines of men.” What sayest thou? Dost thou speak even of the Law?
Henceforth it is but a doctrine of men, after the time is come. <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) Or, because they adulterated it, or
else, he alludes to the Gentile institutions. The doctrine, he says, is
altogether of man.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p15"></span>[Col.
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>. “Which things have indeed a show of wisdom
in will worship, and humility, and severity to the body; but are not of
any value against the indulgence of the flesh.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p16"></span>“Show,” he saith; not power, not truth.
So that even though they have a show of wisdom, let us turn away from
them. For he may seem to be a religious person, and modest, and to have
a contempt for the body.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p17"></span>“Not of any value against the indulgence
of the flesh.” For God hath given it honor, but they use it not with
honor. Thus, when it is a doctrine, he knows how to call it honor. They
dishonor the flesh, he says, depriving it, and stripping it of its
liberty, not giving leave to rule it with its will. God hath honored the
flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p18"></span>[Col.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p18.1"></span>.
“If then ye were raised together with Christ.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p19"></span>He brings them together, having above
established that He died. Therefore he saith, “If then ye were raised
together with Christ, seek the things that are above.” No observances
are there. “Where Christ is seated on the right hand of God.” Wonderful!
Whither hath he led our minds aloft! How hath he filled them with mighty
aspiration! It was not enough to say, “the things that are above,” nor
yet, “where Christ is,” but what? “seated on the right hand of God.”
From that point he was preparing them henceforward to see the earth.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p20"></span>[Col.
3.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p20.1"></span>. “Set your mind on the things that are
above, not on the things that are upon the earth. For ye died, and your
life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is your life shall be
manifested, then shall ye also with Him be manifested in glory.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p21"></span>This is not your life, he saith, it is
some other one. He is now urgent to remove them, and insists upon
showing that they are seated above, and are dead; from both
considerations establishing the position, that they are not to seek the
things which are here. For whether ye be dead, ye ought not to seek
them; or Whether ye be above, ye ought not to seek them. Doth Christ
appear? Neither doth your life. It is in God, above. What then? When
shall we live? When Christ shall be manifested, who is your life; then
seek ye glory, then life, then enjoyment.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p22"></span>This is to prepare the way for drawing
them off from pleasure and ease. Such is his wont: when establishing one
position, he darts off to another; as, for instance, when discoursing of
those who at supper were beforehand with one another, he all at once
falls upon the observance of the Mysteries. <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) For he hath a great rebuke when it is
administered unsuspected. “It is hid,” he saith, from you. “Then shall
ye also with Him be manifested.” So that, now, ye do not appear. See how
he hath removed them into the very heaven. For, as I said, he is always
bent upon showing that they have the <span id="page_290">p. 290</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vii-Page_290"></span>very same things which Christ hath;
and through all his Epistles, the tenor is this, to show that in all
things they are partakers with Him. Therefore he uses the terms, Head,
and Body, and does everything to convey this to them.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p24"></span>If therefore we shall then be
manifested, let us not grieve, when we enjoy not honor: if this life be
not life, but it be hidden, we ought to live this life as though dead.
“Then shall ye also,” he saith, “with Him be manifested in glory.” “In
glory,” he said, not merely “manifested.” For the pearl too is hidden so
long as it is within the oyster. If then we be treated with insult, let
us not grieve; or whatever it be we suffer; for this life is not our
life, we are strangers and sojourners. “For ye died,” he saith. Who is
so witless, as for a corpse, dead and buried, either to buy servants, or
build houses, or prepare costly raiment? None. Neither then do ye; but
as we seek one thing only, namely, that we be not in a naked state, so
here too let us seek one thing and no more. Our first man is buried:
buried not in earth, but in water; not death-destroyed, but buried by
death’s destroyer, not by the law of nature, but by the governing
command that is stronger than nature. For what has been done by nature,
may perchance be undone; but what has been done by His command, never.
Nothing is more blessed than this burial, whereat all are rejoicing,
both Angels, and men, and the Lord of Angels. At this burial, no need is
there of vestments, nor of coffin, nor of anything else of that kind.
Wouldest thou see the symbol of this? I will show thee a pool wherein
the one was buried, the other raised; in the Red Sea the Egyptians were
sunk beneath it, but the Israelites went up from out of it; in the same
act he buries the one, generates the other.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p25"></span>Marvel not that generation and
destruction take place in Baptism; for, tell me, dissolving and
cementing, are they not opposite? It is evident to all. Such is the
effect of fire; for fire dissolves and destroys wax, but it cements
together metallic earth, and works it into gold. So in truth here also,
the force of the fire, having obliterated the statue of wax, has
displayed a golden one in its stead; for in truth before the Bath we
were of clay, but after it of gold. Whence is this evident? Hear him
saying, “The first man is of the earth, earthy, the second man is the
Lord from heaven.” ([1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p25.1"></span>.)
I spoke of a difference as great as that between clay and gold; but
greater still do I find the difference between heavenly and earthy; not
so widely do clay and gold differ, as do things earthy and heavenly.
Waxen we were, and clay-formed. For the flame of lust did much more melt
us, than fire doth wax, and any chance temptation did far rather shatter
us than a stone doth things of clay. And, if ye will, let us give an
outline of the former life, and see whether all was not earth and water,
and full of fluctuation and dust, and instability, and flowing away.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p26"></span>And if ye will, let us scrutinize not
the former things, but the present, and see whether we shall not find
everything that is, mere dust and water. For what wilt thou tell me of?
authority and power? for nothing in this present life is thought to be
more enviable than these. But sooner may one find the dust when on the
air stationary, than these things; especially now. For to whom are they
not under subjection? To those who are lovers of them; to eunuchs; to
those who will do anything for the sake of money; to the passions of the
populace; to the wrath of the more powerful. He who was yesterday up
high on his tribunal, <span id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) who had
his heralds shouting with thrilling voice, and many to run before, and
haughtily clear the way for him through the forum, is to-day mean and
low, and of all those things bereft and bare, like dust blast-driven,
like a stream that hath passed by. And like as the dust is raised by our
feet, so truly are magistracies also produced by those who are engaged
about money, and in the whole of life have the rank and condition of
feet; and like as the dust when it is raised occupies a large portion of
the air, though itself be but a small body, so too doth power; and like
as the dust blindeth the eyes, so too doth the pride of power bedim the
eyes of the understanding.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p28"></span>But what? Wilt thou that we examine that
object of many prayers, wealth? Come, let us examine it in its several
parts. It hath luxury, it hath honors, it hath power. First then, if
thou wilt, let us examine luxury. Is it not dust? yea, rather, it goeth
by swifter than dust, for the pleasure of luxurious living reacheth only
to the tongue, and when the belly is filled, not to the tongue even.
But, saith one, honors are of themselves pleasant things. Yet what can
be less pleasant than that same honor, when it is rendered with a view
to money? When it is not from free choice and with a readiness of mind,
it is not thou that reapest the honor, but thy wealth. So that this very
thing makes the man of wealth, most of all men, dishonored. For, tell
me; suppose all men honored thee, who hadst a friend; the while
confessing that thou, to be sure, wert good for nothing, but that they
were compelled to honor thee on his account; could they possibly in any
other way have so dishonored thee? So that our wealth is the cause of
dishonor to us, seeing it is more honored than are its very possessors,
and a <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii-Page_291"></span>proof rather of weakness than of power.
How then is it not absurd that we are not counted of as much value as
earth and ashes, (for such is gold,) but that we are honored for its
sake? With reason. But not so he that despiseth wealth; for it were
better not to be honored at all, than so honored. For tell me, were one
to say to thee, I think thee worthy of no honor at all, but for thy
servants’ sakes I honor thee, could now anything be worse than this
dishonor? But if to be honored for the sake of servants, who are
partakers of the same soul and nature with ourselves, be a disgrace,
much more then is it such, to be honored for the sake of meaner things,
such as the walls and courts of houses, and vessels of gold, and
garments. A scorn indeed were this, and shame; better die than be so
honored. For, tell me, if thou wert in peril in this thy pride, and some
low and disgusting person were to be willing to extricate thee from thy
peril, what could be worse than this? What ye say one to another about
the city, I wish to say to you. Once on a time our <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) city gave offense to the
Emperor, <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) and he gave orders that
the whole of it should utterly be destroyed, men, children, houses, and
all. (For such is the wrath of kings, they indulge their power as much
as ever they choose, so great an evil is power.) It was then in the
extremest of perils. The neighboring city, however, this one on the
sea-coast, went and besought the king in our behalf: upon which the
inhabitants of our city said that this was worse than if the city had
been razed to the ground. So, to be thus honored is worse than being
dishonored. For see whence honor hath its root. The hands of cooks
procure us to be honored, so that to them we ought to feel gratitude;
and swineherds supplying us with a rich table, and weavers, and
spinners, and workers in metal, and confectioners, and table furnishers.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31"></span>Were it not then better not to be
honored at all, than to be beholden to these for the honor? And besides
this, moreover, I will endeavor to prove clearly that opulence is a
condition full of dishonor; it embases the soul; and what is more
dishonorable than this? For tell me, suppose one had a comely person,
and passing all in beauty, and wealth were to go to him and promise to
make it ugly, and instead of healthy, diseased, instead of cool,
inflamed; and having filled every limb with dropsy, were to make the
countenance bloated, and distend it all over; and were to swell out the
feet, and make them heavier than logs, and to puff up the belly, and
make it larger than any tun; and after this, it should promise not even
to grant permission to cure him, to those who should be desirous of
doing so, (for such is the way with power,) but would give him so much
liberty as to punish any one that should approach him to withdraw him
from what was harming him; well then, tell me, when wealth works these
effects in the soul, how can it be honorable?

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p32"></span>But this power is a more grievous thing
than the disease itself; as for one in disease not to be obedient to the
physician’s injunctions is a more serious evil than the being diseased;
and this is the case with wealth, seeing it creates inflammation in
every part of the soul, and forbids the physicians to come near it. So
let us not felicitate these on the score of their power, but pity them;
for neither were I to see a dropsical patient lying, and nobody
forbidding him to take his fill of whatever drinks he pleased and of
meats that are harmful, would I felicitate him because of his power. For
not in all cases is power a good thing, nor are honors either, for these
too fill one with much arrogance. But if thou wouldest not choose that
the body should along with wealth contract such a disease, how comest
thou to overlook the soul, and when contracting not this scourge alone,
but another also? For it is on fire all over with burning fevers and
inflammations, and that burning fever none can quench, for wealth will
not allow of this, having persuaded it that those things are gains,
which are really losses, such as not enduring any one and doing
everything at will. For no other soul will one find so replete with
lusts so great and so extravagant, as theirs who are desirous of being
rich. For what silly trifles do they not picture to themselves! One may
see these devising more extravagant things than limners of
hippocentaurs, and chimæras, and dragon-footed things, and Scyllas, and
monsters. And if one should choose to give a picture of one lust of
theirs, neither Scylla, nor chimæra, nor hippocentaur will appear
anything at all by the side of such a prodigy; but you will find it to
contain every wild beast at once.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p33"></span>And perchance some one will suppose that
I have been myself possessed of much wealth, seeing I am so true to what
really comes of it. It is reported of one (for I will first confirm what
I have said from the legends of the Greeks)—it is reported amongst them
of a certain king, that he became so insolent in luxury, as to make a
plane tree of gold, <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) and <span
id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii-Page_292"></span>a sky
above it, and there sate, and this too when invading a people skilled in
warfare. Now was not this lust hippocentaurean, was it not Scyllæan?
Another, again, used <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) to cast men
into a wooden bull. Was not this a very Scylla? And even him, <span
id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) the king I just mentioned, the
warrior, <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) wealth made, from a man
a woman, from a woman, what shall I say? a brute beast, and yet more
degraded than this for the beasts, if they lodge under a tree, take up
with nature, and seek for nothing further; but the man in question
overshot the nature even of beasts.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p38"></span>What then can be more senseless than are
the wealthy? And this arises from the greediness of their desires. But,
are there not many that admire him? Therefore truly do they share in the
laughter he incurs. That displayed not his wealth but his folly. How
much better than that golden plane tree is that which the earth
produceth! For the natural is more grateful than the unnatural. But what
meant that thy golden heaven, O senseless one? Seest thou how wealth
that is abundant maketh men mad? How it inflamed them? I suppose he
knows not the sea even, and perchance will presently have a mind to walk
upon it. <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) Now is not this a
chimaera? is it not a hippocentaur? But there are, at this time also,
some who fall not short even of him, but are actually much more
senseless. For in point of senselessness, wherein do they differ, tell
me, from that golden plane tree, who make silver jars, pitchers, and
scent bottles? And wherein do those women differ, (ashamed indeed I am,
but it is necessary to speak it,) who make chamber utensils of
silver? <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) It is ye should be
ashamed, that are the makers of these things. When Christ is famishing,
dost thou so revel in luxury? yea rather, so play the fool! What
punishment shall these not suffer? And inquirest thou still, why there
are robbers? why murderers? why such evils? when the devil has thus made
you ridiculous. For the mere having of silver dishes indeed, this even
is not in keeping with a soul devoted to wisdom, but is altogether a
piece of luxury; but the making unclean vessels also of silver, is this
then luxury? nay, I will not call it luxury, but senselessness; nay, nor
yet this, but madness; nay rather, worse than even madness.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p41"></span>I know that many persons make jokes at
me for this; but I heed them not, only let some good result from it. In
truth, to be wealthy does make people senseless and mad. Did their power
reach to such an excess, they would have the earth too of gold, and
walls of gold, perchance the heaven too, and the air of gold. What a
madness is this, what an iniquity, what a burning fever! Another, made
after the image of God, is perishing of cold; and dost thou furnish
thyself with such things as these? O the senseless pride! What more
would a madman have done? Dost thou pay such honor to thine excrements,
as to receive them in silver? I know that ye are shocked at hearing
this; but those women that make such things ought to be shocked, and the
husbands that minister to such distempers. For this is wantonness, and
savageness, and inhumanity, and brutishness, and lasciviousness. What
Scylla, what chimæra, what dragon, yea rather what demon, what devil
would have acted on this wise? What is the benefit of Christ? what of
the Faith? when one has to put up with men being heathens, yea rather,
not heathens, but demons? If to adorn the head with gold and pearls be
not right; one that useth silver for a service so unclean, how shall he
obtain pardon? Is not the rest enough, although even it is not bearable,
chairs and footstools all of silver? although even these come of
senselessness. But everywhere is excessive pride; everywhere is
vainglory. Nowhere is it use, but everywhere excess.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p42"></span>I am afraid lest, under the impulse of
this madness, the race of woman should go on to assume some portentous
form: for it is likely that they will wish to have even their hair of
gold. Else declare that ye were not <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) at all affected by what was said, nor
were excited greatly, and fell a longing, and had not shame withheld
you, would not have refused. For if they dare to do what is even more
absurd than this, much more, I think, will they long for their hair, and
lips, and eyebrows, and every part to be overlaid with molten gold.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p44"></span>But if ye are incredulous, and think I
am speaking in jest, I will relate what I have heard, or rather what is
now existing. The king of the Persians wears his beard golden; those who
are adepts at such work winding leaf of gold about his hairs as about
the woof, and it is laid up as a prodigy.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p45"></span>Glory to Thee, O Christ; with how many
good things hast Thou filled us! How hast Thou provided for our health!
From how great monstrousness, from how great unreasonable<span
id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii-Page_293"></span>ness,
hast Thou set us free! Mark! I forewarn you, I advise no longer; but I
command and charge; let him that wills, obey, and him that wills not, be
disobedient; that if ye women do continue thus to act, I will not suffer
it, nor receive you, nor permit you to pass across this threshold. For
what need have I of a crowd of distempered people? And what if, in my
training of you, I do not forbid what is not <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) excessive? And yet Paul forbade both
gold and pearls. ([1 Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p46.1"></span>.) We are laughed at by the Greeks, our
religion appears a fable.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p47"></span>And to the men I give this advice: Art
thou come to school to be instructed in spiritual philosophy? Divest
thyself of that pride! This is my advice both to men and women; and if
any act otherwise, henceforward I will not suffer it. The disciples were
but twelve, and hear what Christ saith unto them, “Would ye also go
away?” ([John vi. 67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p47.1"></span>.) For if we go on for ever flattering you,
when shall we reclaim you? when shall we do you service? “But,” saith
one, “there are other sects, and people go over.” This is a cold
argument, “Better is one that doeth the will of the Lord, than ten
thousand transgressors.” ([Ecclesiasticus
16.3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p47.2"></span>.) For, what wouldest thou choose thyself,
tell me; to have ten thousand servants that were runaways and thieves,
or a single one that loved thee? Lo! I admonish and command you to break
up both those gay deckings for the face, and such vessels as I have
described, and give to the poor, and not to be so mad.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p48"></span>Let him that likes quit me at once; let
him that likes accuse me, I will not suffer it in any one. When I am
about to be judged at the Tribunal of Christ, ye stand afar off, and
your favor, while I am giving in my account. “Those words have ruined
all! he says, <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) ‘let him not <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) go and transfer himself to another
sect!’ Nay! he is weak! condescend to him!” To what point? Till when?
Once, and twice, and thrice, but not perpetually.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p51"></span>Lo! I charge you again, and protest
after the pattern of the blessed Paul, “that if I come again I will not
spare.” ([2 Cor. xiii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p51.1"></span>.) But when ye have done as ye ought, then
ye will know how great the gain is, how great the advantage. Yes! I
entreat and beseech you, and would not refuse to clasp your knees and
supplicate you <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) in this behalf.
What softness is it! What luxury, what wantonness! This is not luxury,
but wantonness. What senselessness is it! What madness! So many poor
stand around the Church; and though the Church has so many children, and
so wealthy, she is unable to give relief to even one poor person; “but
one is hungry, and another is drunken” ([1 Cor. xi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p52.1"></span>.); one voideth his excrement even into
silver, another has not so much as bread! What madness! what brutishness
so great as this? May we never come to the proof, whether we will
prosecute the disobedient, nor to the indignation which allowing <span
id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) these practices would cause us; but
that willingly and with patience we may avoid all this, that we may live
to God’s glory, and be delivered from the punishment in the other world,
and may obtain the good things promised to those who love Him, through
the grace and love toward man, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_810"></span>[288:811](1130065.htm#fr_810) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span> \[The word here rendered “respect” means
primarily “part.” But it is exegetically wrong to insist on this sense
as Chrys. does, for the *phrase* designates the category or class of
things. See Meyer or Lightfoot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_811"></span>[288:812](1130065.htm#fr_811) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span> E.V. marg.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[288:813](1130065.htm#fr_812) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span> \[“Not” is wanting in the best documents
for N.T. text, and so is rightly omitted in Rev. Ver. The participle
must then take a different sense, such as dwelling in the things which
he hath seen, poring over and confining himself to these. The expression
is obscure, and was simplified by inserting “not.” Comp. Meyer.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_813"></span>[289:814](1130065.htm#fr_813) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p9"></span> ἐξ, which makes Him a source of action
in Himself.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[289:815](1130065.htm#fr_814) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p14"></span> καιρὸν, i.e. *the* time of Christ’s
Advent, or “after its time.”

<span id="fn_815"></span>[289:816](1130065.htm#fr_815) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p23"></span> See his Comment on [1 Cor. xi.
17-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p23.1"></span>. Hom. xxvii. on 1 Cor., where he says that
the supper referred to was “when the solemn service was *completed*,
*after* the Communion of the Mysteries.”

<span id="fn_816"></span>[290:817](1130065.htm#fr_816) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p27"></span> Montfaucon thinks this refers to
Eutropius, whose disgrace occasioned two Homilies of St. Chrys. Ben. t.
iii. This is questioned in the recent Paris Edition.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[291:818](1130065.htm#fr_817) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p29"></span> i.e. his native Antioch.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[291:819](1130065.htm#fr_818) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p30"></span> τῷ κρατοῦντι, the Emperor Theodosius.
This was preached under his successor Arcadius. For an account of the
events referred to, see Pref. to Homilies on the statues. The
“neighboring city,” however, is not named there, though the sympathy of
neighboring cities is mentioned in Hom. ii. It is supposed to be
Seleucia. \[“Our city” might be naturally used to denote what *was*, at
the time of which he is speaking, the city of himself and his
fellow-citizens. See above, Hom. iii., near the end, the clear proof
that these homilies on Colossians were delivered in
Constantinople.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_819"></span>[291:820](1130065.htm#fr_819) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p34"></span> Ed. Par. refers to Herod. vii. 27,
where such a tree is mentioned as given to Darius; also to Diod. Sic.
xix. 49, and Brisson de Regn. Pers. l. i. c. 77.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[292:821](1130065.htm#fr_820) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p35"></span> Sav. ἐνέβαλλε. He must mean the brazen
bull of Phalaris.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[292:822](1130065.htm#fr_821) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p36"></span> τέως δὲ τῶν πρότερον. And besides among
them of earlier times, wealth made that king, the warrior, from a man, a
woman; from a woman, what shall I say? Savile τὸν, which is better, and
neglected by Ed. Par. The sequel shows that the same king is meant.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[292:823](1130065.htm#fr_822) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p37"></span> \[The syntax is obscure, and the
passage probably corrupt; but the general meaning is plain.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_823"></span>[292:824](1130065.htm#fr_823) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p39"></span> Alluding to Xerxes, see Herod. vii. 35.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[292:825](1130065.htm#fr_824) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p40"></span> ἀμίδας. St. Clem Al. mentions the like
absurdity, Pædag. ii. 3.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[292:826](1130065.htm#fr_825) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p43"></span> \[The “not,” though found in all
documents, seems (Field) quite out of place. Without it, the meaning is,
“Now confess that you were somewhat attracted towards the idea
expressed, and started up, and fell a longing,” &c. Copyists probably
understood “the thing said” to be the rebuke just given, and hence felt
the “not” to be necessary.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_826"></span>[293:827](1130065.htm#fr_826) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p46"></span> \[Here again the “not” seems
unsuitable, if not destructive of the sense, and is omitted by
Field.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_827"></span>[293:828](1130065.htm#fr_827) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p49"></span> i.e. the Preacher says.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[293:829](1130065.htm#fr_828) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p50"></span> \[Field inserts “not” upon the
authority of one <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.vii-p50.1"></span>ms</span>. The sentence is intelligible
without it.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_829"></span>[293:830](1130065.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p52"></span> ἱκετηρίαν θεῖναι. He alludes to the
ancient custom of formally supplicating for defense or relief, as by
sitting on the hearth. Sophocl. Œd. Tyr. 1, &c.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[293:831](1130065.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p53"></span> ἐπιτρέψαι. Perhaps ἐπιτρῖψαι,
“aggravating,” as Ben. t. i. p. 24. B, and p. 225. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 3:5-7](1130066)
