[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130050)  [Next](1130052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.x-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.x-p2.2"></span>[Philippians ii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p3"></span>“But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send
Timothy shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I
know your state. For I have no man likeminded, who will care truly for
your state. For they all seek their own, not the things of Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.x-p4.1"></span>He</span> had said, “have fallen out unto the
progress of the Gospel; so that my bonds became manifest in Christ
throughout the whole prætorian guard.” ([Phil.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.x-p4.2"></span>.)
Again, “Yea, and if I am offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith.” ([Philip. ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p4.3"></span>.) By these words he strengthened them.
Perchance they might suspect that his former words were spoken just to
comfort them. What then? “I send Timothy unto you,” says he; for they
desired to hear all things that concerned him. And wherefore said he
not, “that ye may know my state,” but, “that I may know yours”? Because
Epaphroditus would have reported his state before the arrival of
Timothy. Wherefore further on he says, “But I counted it necessary to
send to you Epaphroditus, my brother ([Philip. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.x-p4.4"></span>.);
but I wish to learn of your affairs. For it is likely that he had
remained long time with Paul through his bodily weakness. So that he
says, I wish to “know your state.” See then how he refers everything to
Christ, even the mission of Timothy, saying, “I hope in the Lord Jesus,”
that is, I am confident that God will facilitate this for me, that I too
may be of good courage, when I know your state. As I refreshed you when
ye heard the very things of me which ye had prayed for, that the Gospel
had advanced, that its enemies were put to shame, that the means by
which they thought to injure, rather made me rejoice; thus too do I wish
to learn of your affairs, that I too may be of good courage <span
id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="iv.iii.x-Page_224"></span>when I
know your state. Here he shows that they ought to rejoice for his bonds,
and to be conformed to them, for they begat in him great pleasure; for
the words, “that I too may be of good comfort,” imply, just as you are.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p5"></span>Oh, what longing had he toward Macedonia!
He testifies the same to the Thessalonians, as when he says, “But we,
brethren, being bereaved of <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) you
for a short season,” &c. ([1 Thess. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii.x-p6.1"></span>.)
And here he says, “I hope to send Timothy” that I may “know your state,”
which is a proof of excessive care: for when he could not himself be
with them, he sent his disciples, as he could not endure to remain, even
for a little time, in ignorance of their state. For he did not learn all
things by revelation of the Spirit, and for this we can see some reason;
for if the disciples had believed that it were so, they would have lost
all sense of shame, <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) but now from
expectation of concealment, they were more easily corrected. In a high
degree did he call their attention by saying, “that I too may be of good
comfort,” and rendered them more zealous, so that, when Timothy came he
might not find any other state of things, and report it to him. He seems
to have acted in like sort in his own person, when he delayed his coming
to the Corinthians, that they might repent; wherefore he wrote, “to
spare you I forbare to come to Corinth.” ([2 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.x-p7.1"></span>.)
For his love was manifested not simply in reporting his own state, but
in his desire to learn of theirs; for this is the part of a soul which
has a care of others, which takes thought for them, which is always
wrestling for them.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p8"></span>At the same time too, he honors them by
sending Timothy. “What sayest thou? dost thou send Timothy? and
wherefore?” Because “I have no one likeminded”; that is, none of those
whose care is like mine, none who “will care truly for you.” ([Philip.
ii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p8.1"></span>.) Had he then no one of those who were with
him? No one likeminded, that is, who has yearnings and takes thought for
you as I do. No one would lightly choose, he means, to make so long a
journey for this purpose. Timothy is the one with me who loves
you. <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) For I might have sent
others, but there was none like him. This then is that likemindedness,
to love the disciples as the master loves them. “Who,” says he, “will
truly care for you,” that is, as a father. “For they all seek their own,
not the things of Jesus Christ” ([Philip. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.x-p9.1"></span>.),
their own comfort, their own safety. This too he writes to Timothy. But
why doth he lament such things as these? To teach us his hearers not to
fall in like sort, to teach his hearers not to seek for remission from
toil; for he who seeks remission from toil, seeks not the things that
are Christ’s, but his own. We ought to be prepared against every toil,
against every distress.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p10"></span>[Philip.
2.22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022)<span id="iv.iii.x-p10.1"></span>.
“Ye know the proof of him, that as a child serveth a father, so he
served with me in furtherance of the Gospel.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p11"></span>And that I speak not at random, “ye
yourselves,” he says, “know, that as a child serveth a father, so he
served with me in furtherance of the Gospel.” He presents then Timothy
to them, and with reason, that he might enjoy much honor from them. This
too he does when he writes to the Corinthians, and he says, “Let no man
therefore despise him, for he worketh the work of the Lord as I also
do.” ([1 Cor. xvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p11.1"></span>.) This he said not as caring for him, but
for those who receive him, that they might receive a great reward.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p12"></span>[Philip.
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.x-p12.1"></span>.
“Him therefore,” he says, “I hope to send forthwith, so soon as I shall
see how it will go with me,” that is, when I see where I stand, and what
end my affairs will have.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p13"></span>[Philip.
2.24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.x-p13.1"></span>.
“But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come to you shortly.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p14"></span>I am not therefore sending him, as though
I myself would not come, but that I may be of good courage when I know
your state, that even in the mean time I may not be ignorant of it. “But
I trust in the Lord,” says he. See how he makes all things depend on
God, and speaks nothing of his own mind. That is, God willing. <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641)

<span id="iv.iii.x-p16"></span>[Philip.
2.25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.x-p16.1"></span>.
“But I counted it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and
fellow-worker, and fellow-soldier.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p17"></span>And him too he sends with the same
praises as Timothy, for he commended him on these two points; first, in
that he loved them, when he says, “who will care truly for you”; and
secondly, in that he had approved himself in the Gospel. And for the
same reason, and in the same terms, he praises this man also: and how?
By calling him a brother, and a fellow-worker, and not stopping at this
point, but also “fellow-soldier,” he showed how he shared in his
dangers, and testifies of him the same things which he testifies of
himself. For “fellow-soldier” is more than “fellow-worker”; for
perchance he gave aid in quiet matters, yet not so in wars and dangers;
but in saying “fellow-soldier,” he showed this too.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p18"></span>[Philip.
2.25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.x-p18.1"></span>.
“To send to you your messenger, and minister to my needs”; that is, I
give you your own, since I send to you him that is your <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span id="iv.iii.x-Page_225"></span>own, or,
perhaps, that is your Teacher. <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642)
Again he adds many things concerning his love, in saying,

<span id="iv.iii.x-p20"></span>[Phil.
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.x-p20.1"></span>.
“Since he longed after you all, and was sore troubled, because ye had
heard that he was sick. For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God
had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might not
have sorrow upon sorrow.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p21"></span>Here he aims at a farther point, making
it manifest, that Epaphroditus too was well aware, how he was beloved of
them. And this is no light thing toward loving. You know how he was
sick, he says; and he grieved that on his recovery he did not see you,
and free you from the grief ye had by reason of his sickness. Here too
he gives another reason for sending so late to them, not from any
remissness, but he kept Timothy because he had no one else, (for, as he
had written, he had “no one likeminded,”) and Epaphroditus because of
his sickness. He then shows that this was a long sickness, and had
consumed much time, by adding, “for he was sick nigh unto death.” You
see how anxious Paul is to cut off from his disciples all occasion of
slighting or contempt, and every suspicion that his not coming was
because he despised them. For nothing will have such power to draw a
disciple toward one, as the persuasion that his superior cares for him,
and that he is full of heaviness on his account, for this is the part of
exceeding love. Because “ye have heard,” he says, “that he was sick; for
he was sick nigh unto death.” And that I am not making an excuse, hear
what follows. “But God had mercy on him.” What sayest thou, O heretic?
Here it is written, that God’s mercy retained and brought back again him
who was on the point of departure. And yet if the world is evil, it is
no mercy to leave a man in the evil. Our answer to the heretic is easy,
but what shall we say to the Christian? for he perchance will question,
and say, “if to depart and to be with Christ is far better,” how saith
he that he hath obtained mercy? I would ask why the same Apostle says,
that “it is more needful to abide with you”? <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) For as it was needful for him, so too
for this man, who would hereafter depart to God with more exceeding
riches, and greater boldness. Hereafter that would take place, even if
it did not now, but the winning souls is at an end for those who have
once departed thither. In many places too, Paul speaks according to the
common habits of his hearers, and not every where in accordance with his
own heavenly wisdom: for he had to speak to men of the world who still
feared death. Then he shows how he esteemed Epaphroditus, and thence he
gets for him respect, by saying, that his preservation was so useful to
himself, that the mercy which had been shown to Epaphroditus reached him
also. Moreover, without this the present life is a good; were it not so,
why does Paul rank with punishment untimely deaths? as when he says,
“For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and not a few sleep”
([1 Cor. xi. 30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p22.2"></span>.); for the future life is not (merely)
better than an evil state, since (then) it were not good, but better
than a good state.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p23"></span>“Lest I should have,” he says, “sorrow
upon sorrow”; sorrow from his death in addition to that which sprung
from his sickness. By this he shows how much he prized Epaphroditus.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p24"></span>[Philip.
2.28](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#028)<span id="iv.iii.x-p24.1"></span>.
“I have sent him therefore the more diligently.” What means “more
diligently”? It is, without procrastination, without delay, with much
speed, having bidden him lay all aside, and to go to you, that he might
be freed from heaviness; for we rejoice not on hearing of the health of
those we love, so much as when we see them, and chiefly so when this
happens contrary to hope, as it was in the case of Epaphroditus.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p25"></span>“I have sent him therefore the more
diligently, that when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may
be the less sorrowful.” How “less sorrowful”? Because if ye rejoice, I
too rejoice, and he too joys at a pleasure of such sort, and I shall be
“less sorrowful.” He said not sorrowless, but “less sorrowful,” to show
that his soul never was free from sorrow: for he who said, “Who is weak,
and I am not weak? who is made to stumble, and I burn not?” ([2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii.x-p25.1"></span>.),
when could such an one be free from sorrow? That is, this despondency I
now cast off.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p26"></span>[Philip.
2.29](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii.x-p26.1"></span>.
“Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p27"></span>“In the Lord” either means spiritually
and with much zeal, or rather “in the Lord” means God willing. Receive
him in a manner worthy of saints, as saints should be received with all
joy.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p28"></span>All this he does for their sakes, not for
that of his messengers, for greater gain has the doer than the receiver
of a good deed. “And such hold in honor,” that is, receive him in a
manner worthy of saints.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p29"></span>[Philip.
2.30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.x-p29.1"></span>.
“Because for the work of Christ he came nigh unto death, hazarding his
life, to supply that which was lacking in your service towards me.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p30"></span>This man had been publicly sent by the
city of the Philippians, who had come as minister to Paul, and perchance
bringing him some contri<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x-Page_226"></span>bution, for toward the end of the Epistle
he shows that he also brought him money, when he says, “Having received
of Epaphroditus the things that came from you.” ([Philip. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.x-p30.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.x-p31"></span>It is probable then, that on his arrival
at the city of Rome, he found Paul in great and urgent peril, so that
those who were accustomed to resort to him were unable safely to do so,
but were themselves in peril by their very attendance; which is wont to
happen chiefly in very great dangers, and the exceeding wrath of kings,
(for when any one has offended the king, and is cast into prison, and is
strictly guarded, then even his servants are debarred from access, which
probably then befell Paul,) and that Epaphroditus, being of a noble
nature, despised all danger, that he might go in unto him, and minister
unto him, and do everything which need required. He therefore sets forth
two facts, by which he gains for him their respect; the one, that he was
in jeopardy well nigh unto death, he says, for my sake; the other, that
in so suffering he was representing their city, so that the recompense
for that his peril would be accounted to those who sent him, as if the
city had sent him as their ambassador, so that a kind reception of him
and approval of what he had done may rather be called a participation in
the things that he had dared. And he said not, “for my sake,” but
obtains the more credit for his words, by saying, “because for the work
of God,” since he acted not for my sake, but for God’s sake “he was nigh
unto death.” What then? though by the providence of God he died not, yet
he himself regarded not his life, and gave himself up to any suffering
that might befall him, so as not to remit his attendance on me. And if
he gave himself up to death to attend on Paul, much more would he have
endured this for the Gospel’s sake. Or rather, this also had been for
the Gospel’s sake, even to have died for Paul. For we may bind about our
brows the crown of martyrdom, not only by refusing to sacrifice, but
such causes as these also make death martyrdom, and if I may say
something startling, these latter do so far more than the former. For he
who dares to face death for the lesser cause, will much rather for the
greater. Let us therefore, when we see the Saints in danger, regard not
our life, for it is impossible without daring ever to perform any noble
act, but need is that he who takes thought beforehand for his safety
here, should fall from that which is to come.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p32"></span>“To supply,” he says, “your lack of
service toward me.” What is this? the city was not present, but by
sending him, it fulfilled through him all service toward me. He
therefore supplied your lack of service, so that for this reason too he
deserves to enjoy much honor, since, what ye all should have done, this
hath he performed on your behalf. Here he shows that there is also a
foregoing service rendered by those in safety to those in danger, for so
he speaks of the lack, <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) and the
lack of service. Seest thou the spirit of the Apostle? These words
spring not from arrogance, but from his great care towards them; for he
calls the matter a “service” and a “lack,” that they may not be puffed
up, but be moderate, nor think that they have rendered some great thing,
but rather be humble-minded.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p34"></span>For we owe the saints a debt, and are not
doing them a favor. For as supplies are due by those who are in peace
and not engaged in war to such as stand in the army and fight (for these
stand on their behoof), thus too is it here. For if Paul had not taught,
who would have cast him into prison? Wherefore we ought to minister to
the Saints. For is it not absurd to contribute to an earthly king, when
engaged in war, all that he wants, as clothing and food, not according
to his need alone, but abundantly, whilst to the King of Heaven, when
engaged in war, and contending against far more bitter foes (for it is
written, “our wrestling is not against flesh and blood”) ([Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.x-p34.1"></span>.),
we will not supply urgent necessity? What folly is this! What
ingratitude! What base love of gain! But, as it seems, the fear of man
has greater force with us than hell, and the future torments. For this
cause, in truth, all things are turned upside down; for political
affairs are daily accomplished with much earnestness, and one must not
be left behind, whilst of spiritual things there is no account taken at
all; but the things which are demanded of us of necessity, and with
compulsion, as though we were slaves, and against our wills, are laid
down by us with much readiness, while such as are asked from willing
minds, and as if from free men, are again deficient. I speak not against
all, but against those who are behindhand with these supplies. For might
not God have made these contributions compulsory? Yet He would not, for
He has more care of you than of those whom you support. Wherefore He
would not that you should contribute of necessity, since there is no
recompense. And yet many of those who stand here are lower minded <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) than the Jews. Consider how great
things the Jews gave, tithes, <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646)
first-fruits, tithes again, and again other tithes, and besides this
thirteenths, and the shekel, and no one said, how much they devour; for
the more they receive, the greater is the reward. <span id="page_227">p.
227</span> <span id="iv.iii.x-Page_227"></span>They say not, They
receive much, they are gluttons; which words I hear now from some. They
for their part, while they are building houses, and buying estates,
still think they have nothing; but if any priest is clothed in dress
more bright than usual, and enjoys more than what is necessary for his
sustenance, or has an attendant, that he may not be forced himself to
act unbecomingly, they set the matter down for riches. And in truth we
are rich even at this rate, and they admit it against their will; for
we, though we have but little, are rich, whilst they, though they get
everything about them, are poor.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p37"></span>How far shall our folly extend? does it
not suffice to our punishment that we do no good deed, but must we add
to it the punishment of evil speaking? For if what he has were your
gifts, you lose your reward by upbraiding him for what you gave. In a
word, if thou didst give it, why dost thou upbraid him? You have already
borne witness to his poverty, by saying that what he has are your gifts.
Why then dost thou upbraid? Thou shouldest not have given, didst thou
intend so to do. But dost thou speak thus, when another gives? It is
then more grievous, in that when thou thyself hast not given, thou
upbraidest for another man’s good deeds. How great reward thinkest thou
those who are thus spoken of will receive? It is for God’s sake they
thus suffer. How and wherefore? Had they so willed, they might have
taken up a trader’s life, even though they received it not from their
ancestors. For I hear many speaking thus at random, when we say that a
certain man is poor. Had he willed, they say, he might have been rich,
and then tauntingly add, His father, his grandfather, and I know not who
was so; but now see what a robe he wears! But what? tell me, ought he to
go about naked? You then start nice questionings on these points, but
see lest thou thus speakest against thyself. Listen to that exhortation
of Christ, which says, “Judge not that ye be not judged.” ([Matt. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.x-p37.1"></span>.)
He might, it is true, if he had willed, have led a trader’s or a
merchant’s life, and would surely not have lacked. But he would not.
What then, says one, is he here profited? Tell me, what is he profited?
Does he wear silken robes? Does he proudly clear his way through the
forum with a troop of followers? Is he borne along on horseback? Does he
build houses, having where to dwell? If he act so, I too accuse him, and
spare him not, but declare that he is unworthy of the priesthood. For
how can he exhort others not to spend their time on these superfluities,
who cannot advise himself? But if he has sufficient for support, is he
therefore doing wrong? Would you have him lead a vagabond life, and beg?
Wouldest not thou too, his disciple, be put to shame? But if thy father
in the flesh did this, thou wouldest think shame of the thing. If thy
spiritual father be compelled so to do, wilt thou not veil thy head, and
even think thou art sinking into the earth? It is written, “A father’s
dishonor is a reproach to the children.” ([Ecclesiasticus
3.11](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.2"></span>.) But what? Should he perish with famine?
This were not like a pious man; for God willeth it not. But what do they
straightway philosophize? It is written, say they, “Get you no gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purses, neither two coats, nor yet staves”
([Matt. 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.3"></span>.), whilst these men have three or four
garments, and beds well spread. I am forced now to heave a bitter sigh,
and, but that it had been indecorous, I had wept too! How so? Because we
are such curious searchers into the motes of others, while we feel not
the beams in our own eyes. Tell me, why sayest thou not this to thyself?
The answer is, Because the command is laid only on our Teachers. When
then Paul says, “having food and covering we shall be therewith content”
([1 Tim. vi. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.4"></span>.), says he this only to Teachers? By no
means, but to all men; and this is clear, if we will begin farther back.
For what does he say? “Godliness with contentment is great gain ([1 Tim.
vi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.5"></span>.); for we brought nothing into this world,
it is certain that neither can we carry anything out” ([1 Tim. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.x-p37.6"></span>.);
he then straightway adds, “And having food and covering, we shall be
therewith content; but they that desire to be rich, fall into a
temptation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts.” ([1 Tim.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.x-p37.7"></span>.)
You see that this is spoken to all; and how is it when he says again,
“Make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof” ([Rom.
xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.8"></span>.), is not this said absolutely to all? and
what when he says, “Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but
God shall bring to nought both it and them” ([1 Cor. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.x-p37.9"></span>.);
or what when he says, “But she that giveth herself to pleasure, is dead
while she liveth” ([1 Tim. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p37.10"></span>.), speaking of a widow. Is then the widow a
Teacher? Has not he said himself, “But I permit not a woman to teach,
nor to have dominion over a man”? ([1 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.x-p37.11"></span>.)
But if a widow, in old age, (and age has need of great attendance,) and
a woman’s nature too, (for the woman’s sex, being weak, has need of more
refreshment,) if then, where there is both the age and the nature, he
suffers her not to live in luxury, but even says that she is dead, (for
he did not simply forbid a life of luxury, but said, “she who giveth
herself to luxury is dead while she liveth,”) and thus hath cut her off,
(for she that is dead is cut off,) what indulgence then will any man
have, who does those things, for which a woman and an aged one too is
punished?

<span id="iv.iii.x-p38"></span>Yet no one gives a thought to these
things, <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x-Page_228"></span>no one searches them out. And this I have
been compelled to say, not from any wish to free the priests from these
charges, but to spare you. They indeed suffer no harm at your hands,
even if it is with cause and justice that they are thus charged of being
greedy of gain; for, whether ye speak, or whether ye forbear, they must
there give an account to the Judge, so that your words hurt them not at
all; but if your words are false besides, they for their part gain by
these false accusations, whilst ye hurt yourselves by these means. But
it is not so with you; for be the things true, which ye bring against
them, or be they false, ye speak ill of them to your hurt. And how so?
If they be true, in that ye judge your Teachers, and subvert order, ye
do it to your hurt. For if we must not judge a brother, much less a
Teacher. But if they be false, the punishment and retribution is
intolerable; for of “every idle word ye shall give account.” ([Matt.
xii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p38.1"></span>.) For your sake then I thus act and labor.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p39"></span>But as I said, no one searches out these
things, no one busies himself about these things, no one communes with
himself on any of these things. Would ye that I should add still more?
“Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath, saith the Christ, is not
worthy of Me.” ([Luke 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033), [Matt.
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p39.1"></span>.) What when he says, “It is hard for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of heaven”? ([Matt.
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023), [Mark
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p39.2"></span>.) What when he says again, “Woe unto you
that are rich, for ye have received your consolation”? ([Luke vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.x-p39.3"></span>.)
No one searches this out, no one bears it in mind, no one reasons with
himself, but all sit as severe inquisitors on other men’s cases. Yet
this is to make themselves sharers in the charges. But listen, that for
your own sake I may free the priests from the charges, which ye say lie
against them, for the persuasion that they transgress the law of God,
inclines you not a little towards evil. Come then, let us examine this
matter. Christ said, “Provide neither gold nor silver, neither two
coats, neither shoes, nor girdle, nor yet staves.” ([Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.x-p39.4"></span>.)
What then? tell me, did Peter transgress this command? Surely he did so,
in having a girdle and a garment, and shoes, for listen to the words of
the Angel, “Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals.” ([Acts xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.x-p39.5"></span>.)
And yet he had no such great need of sandals, for at that season a man
may go even unshod; their great use is in the winter, and yet he had
them. What shall we say of Paul, when he writes thus to Timothy, “Do thy
diligence to come before winter”? ([2 Tim. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.x-p39.6"></span>.)
He gives him orders too and says, “The cloak that I left at Troas with
Carpus bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the
parchments.” ([2 Tim. iv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p39.7"></span>.) See he speaks of a cloak, and no one can
say that he had not another which he wore; for if he did not wear one at
all, it were superfluous to order this one to be brought, and if he
could not be without one to wear, it is clear he had a second.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p40"></span>What shall we say of his remaining “two
whole years in his own hired dwelling”? ([Acts xxviii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.x-p40.1"></span>.)
Did then this chosen vessel disobey Christ? this man who said, “Yet I
live; and yet no longer I, but Christ liveth in me” ([Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.x-p40.2"></span>.),
concerning whom Christ testified, saying, “He is a chosen vessel unto
Me”? ([Acts ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p40.3"></span>.) I ought to leave this difficulty with you,
without supplying any solution to the question. I ought to exact of you
this penalty for your negligence in the Scriptures, for this is the
origin of all such difficulties. For we know not the Scriptures, we are
not trained in the law of God, and so we become sharp inquirers into the
faults of others, whilst we take no account of our own. I ought then to
have exacted from you this penalty. But what shall I do? Fathers freely
give to their sons many things beyond what is fitting: when their
fatherly compassion is kindled, on seeing their child with downcast
look, and wasted with grief, they themselves also feel sharper pangs
than he, and rest not until they have removed the ground of his
dejection.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p41"></span>So be it at least here, be ye at least
dejected at not receiving, that ye may receive well. What then is it?
They opposed not, far be it; but diligently followed the commands of
Christ, for those commands were but for a season, and not enduring; and
this I say not from conjecture, but from the divine Scriptures. And how?
Luke relates that Christ said to His disciples, “When I sent you forth
without purse, and wallet, and girdle, and shoes, lacked ye anything?
And they said nothing. ([Luke xxii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span id="iv.iii.x-p41.1"></span>.)
But for the future provide them.” But tell me, what could he do? could
he have but one coat? How then? If need was that this be washed, should
he, because without it, stay at home? should he without it go abroad in
an unbecoming manner, when need called? Consider what a thing it would
have been that Paul, who made the circuit of the world with such great
success, should remain at home for want of raiment, and thus hinder his
noble work. And what if violent cold had set in, or rain had drenched
it, or perhaps frozen in, how could he dry his raiment? must he again
remain without it? And what if cold had deprived his body of strength?
must he waste away with disease, and be unable to speak? For hear what
he says to Timothy, to prove that they were not furnished with
adamantine bodies, “Use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake, and thine
often infirmities.” ([1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.x-p41.2"></span>.)
And again, when he speaks of another, “I counted it necessary to send to
you your messenger, and minister to my needs.” ([Philip. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.x-p41.3"></span>.)
“For indeed <span id="page_229">p. 229</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x-Page_229"></span>he was sick, nigh unto death; but God had
mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me also.” ([Philip. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.x-p41.4"></span>.)
So that they were subject to every sort of sickness. What then? must
they die? By no means. For what cause then did Christ at that time give
them that command? To show His own power, and to prove that in after
times He was able to do it, though He did it not. But wherefore did He
not do it? They were much more admirable than the Israelites, whose
shoes did not wax old, neither their garments, and that too whilst they
were journeying through that desert where the glowing rays of the sun
strike so hot, that they are capable of consuming even stones. (Ref. to
[Deut. xxix. 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p41.5"></span>.) Why then did he do this? For thy sake. For
since thou wouldest not remain in health, but be full of wounds, He gave
you that which might serve for medicine. And this is hence manifest;
could He not Himself have fed them? He that gave to thee, who wast an
enemy with Him, would He not much more have given to Paul? He who gave
to the Israelites, those murmurers, those fornicators, those idolaters,
would He not much more have given to Peter, who spent all for His sake?
He who suffered wicked men to possess aught, would He not much more have
freely given to John, who for Him forsook even his father? Yet he would
not: through your hands he feeds them, that you may be sanctified. And
see the excess of His lovingkindness. He chose that His disciples should
be in want, that thou mightest be a little refreshed.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p42"></span>For if He had freed them from all want,
they would have been much more admirable, far more glorious. But then
that which is to thee salvation would have been cut off. God willed not
then that they should be admirable, that thou mightest be saved, but
that they should rather be lowered. He hath suffered them to be less
accounted of, that thou mightest be able to be saved. The Teacher who
receiveth is not equally reverenced, but he who receives not is chiefly
honored. But then in the latter case the disciple is not benefited, he
is hindered of his fruit. Seest thou the wisdom of God who thus loveth
man? For as He Himself sought not His own glory, nor had respect to
Himself, but when He was in glory, chose to be dishonored for thy sake,
thus too is it in the case of your Teachers. When they might have been
highly reverenced, He preferred that they should be subject to contempt
for thy sake, that thou mightest be able to profit, that thou mightest
be able to be rich. For he is in want of the things of this life, that
you may abound in things spiritual. If then He might have made them
above all want, He showed that for thy sake He suffers them to be in
want. Knowing then these things, let us turn ourselves to well doing,
not to accusations. Let us not be overcurious about the failings of
others, but take account of our own; let us reckon up the excellences of
other men, while we bear in mind our faults; and thus shall we be well
pleasing to God. For he who looks at the faults of others, and at his
own excellences, is injured in two ways; by the latter he is carried up
to arrogance, through the former he falls into listlessness. For when he
perceives that such an one hath sinned, very easily will he sin himself;
when he perceives that he hath in aught excelled, very easily becometh
he arrogant. He who consigns to oblivion his own excellences, and looks
at his failings only, whilst he is a curious enquirer of the
excellences, not the sins, of others, is profited in many ways. And how?
When he sees that such an one hath done excellently, he is raised to
emulate the same; when he sees that he himself hath sinned, he is
rendered humble and modest. If we act thus, if we thus regulate
ourselves, we shall be able to obtain the good things which are
promised, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_638"></span>[224:639](1130051.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p6"></span> ἀπορφανισθέντες.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[224:640](1130051.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p7"></span> He means that if they thought he knew
their exact condition by revelation, they would lose a motive for
improvement, in the hope of standing well in his eyes. Such motives are
of course still a part of our moral education.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[224:641](1130051.htm#fr_640) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p9"></span> Or, “the one who loves you with me,” i.e.
“as I.”

<span id="fn_641"></span>[224:642](1130051.htm#fr_641) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p15"></span> \[This has the appearance of rough notes
taken in shorthand. The usual editions place this brief sentence before
“see,” and thus make a somewhat better connection, but without known
<span class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.x-p15.1"></span>ms</span>.
authority.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_642"></span>[225:643](1130051.htm#fr_642) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p19"></span> Referring to the word translated
“Messenger,” which is “Apostle,” and may mean “Bishop,” as Theodoret
clearly takes it here. In [2 Cor. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.x-p19.1"></span>,
St. Chrys. understands it “messengers” or “deputies.”

<span id="fn_643"></span>[225:644](1130051.htm#fr_643) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p22"></span> \[So Field, with most documents. The
altered text has “for you,” “on your account,” as in [Philip. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p22.1"></span>.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_644"></span>[226:645](1130051.htm#fr_644) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p33"></span> \[The word means “a falling behind,” in
contrast with something foregoing.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_645"></span>[226:646](1130051.htm#fr_645) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p35"></span> ταπεινότεροι, in a bad sense.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[226:647](1130051.htm#fr_646) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p36"></span> [Lev.
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#030), [Deut.
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028), [Deut.
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p36.1"></span>. Of the shekel, see on St. Matt. Hom. lviii.
init., where he says it was paid by all the first-born. He is probably
mistaken, as St. Peter paid it, though he was a younger brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 3:1-3](1130052)
