[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130090)  [Next](1130092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_401"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> remark of Photius, that St.
Chrysostom’s more finished works were those which he composed at
Antioch, does not seem to afford a sufficient criterion for assigning a
date to each set of Homilies. Tillemont appears to have been misled by
it in the instance of those on the Epistles to Timothy, which he has on
such grounds supposed to have been delivered at Constantinople.
Montfaucon, however, alleges two reasons for placing them at Antioch.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>1. That he speaks much of the Monks, as he
used to do there, owing to the neighborhood of a large number of them,
who lived in strict discipline and exemplary devotion. 2. That in
speaking of Timothy’s office as Bishop, he never says a word of being
one himself. A third reason may be added, which is perhaps more
conclusive than either of these. In Hom. viii. on [2 Tim.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p4.1"></span> he
seems pretty evidently to allude to the burning of the Temple of Apollo
at Daphne. One can hardly doubt the allusion, in reading the full
account in the Homily on St. Babylas; nor can it well be supposed that
he would thus refer to it as a thing well known at any other place than
Antioch.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>The Homilies on the Epistle to Titus are fixed
at Antioch by the mention of Daphne and the cave of Matrona in Hom. iii.
(2). A passage in Hom. i. (4) seems to place him in a paternal relation
to the people, as the plural *we* is constantly used by him for the
singular. But the whole context seems rather to allude to another as
Bishop, and he must be understood to speak as one of a body of clergy,
in which in fact he held the second place.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>Those on the Epistle to Philemon cannot easily
be assigned to any particular date. The promise he mentions in the last
Homily does not seem to afford a clue to it, but may possibly do so. The
composition of these Homilies has been remarked on as negligent by
Hemsterhusius, so that he takes them to have been extemporaneous
effusions taken down by others. There may be some ground for this in the
style, and in the paraphrastic character of the various readings, but as
a commentary they are unusually closed and exact, and point out much of
what regards the persuasive character of the Epistle that is not
generally noticed.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>For the Translation and some illustrative
notes, the Editors are indebted to the Rev. <span class="c16"><span
id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>James Tweed</span>, M.A., of Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge. The text of the New Paris edition has been chiefly
used, as it is improved from the Benedictine. Savile’s has been compared
with it in many parts, and in every difficulty, and where both failed, a
better reading has been sometimes found in the <span class="c16"><span
id="v.ii-p7.2"></span>ms.</span> marked B, which is in the British
Museum marked Burney 48. The differences are, however, slight, and
affect the Greek more than the Translation. A Venice <span
class="c16"><span id="v.ii-p7.3"></span>ms.</span> which usually agrees
with this has been collated for the Homilies on the Epistle to Philemon.
An old Latin version published at Basle has been noticed in some places,
where its variations appear to be derived from Greek copies.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>C. <span class="c16"><span
id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>M\[arriot\]</span>.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>Oxford</span>, 1843.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homilies on 1 Timothy.](1130092)
