[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130130)  [Next](1130132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="v.vi.i-Page_545"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.vi.i-p1.1"></span>homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="v.vi.i-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="v.vi.i-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.vi.i-p4.1"></span>epistle of St. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p5"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="v.vi.i-p5.1"></span>to</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p6"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.vi.i-p6.1"></span>Philemon.</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="v.vi.i-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi.i-p8.1"></span>Argument.</span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p9"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.vi.i-p9.1"></span>First,</span> it is necessary to state the
argument of the Epistle, then also the matters that are questioned
respecting it. What then is the argument? Philemon was a man of
admirable and noble character. That he was an admirable man is evident
from the fact, that his whole household was of believers, <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) and of such believers as even to be
called a Church: therefore he says in this Epistle, “And to the Church
that is in thy house.” ([Philem.
2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002)<span id="v.vi.i-p10.4"></span>.) He
bears witness also to his great obedience, and that “the bowels of the
Saints are refreshed in him.” ([Philem.
7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007)<span id="v.vi.i-p10.5"></span>.) And
he himself in this Epistle commanded him to prepare him a lodging.
([Philem. 22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022)<span
id="v.vi.i-p10.6"></span>.) It seems to me therefore that his house was
altogether <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) a lodging for the
Saints. This excellent <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) man,
then, had a certain slave named Onesimus. This Onesimus, having stolen
something from his master, had run away. For that he had stolen, hear
what he says: “If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee aught, I will
repay thee.” ([Phlm. 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019)<span id="v.vi.i-p12.2"></span>.)
Coming therefore to Paul at Rome, and having found him in prison, and
having enjoyed the benefit of his teaching, he there also received
Baptism. For that he obtained there the gift of Baptism is manifest from
his saying, “Whom I have begotten in my bonds.” ([Philem.
10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010)<span id="v.vi.i-p12.3"></span>.)
Paul therefore writes, recommending him to his master, that on every
account he should forgive him, and receive him as one now
regenerate. <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531)

<span id="v.vi.i-p14"></span>But because some say, that it was
superfluous that this Epistle should be annexed, since he is making a
request about a small matter in behalf of one man, let them learn who
make these objections, that they are themselves deserving of very many
censures. For it was not only proper that these small Epistles, in
behalf of things so necessary, should have been inscribed, <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) but I wish that it were possible to
meet with one who could deliver to us the history of the Apostles, not
only all they wrote and spoke of, but of the rest of their conversation,
even what they ate, and when they ate, when they walked, and where they
sat, <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) what they did every day,
in what parts they were, into what house they entered, and where they
lodged <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) —to relate everything
with minute exactness, so replete with advantage is all that was done by
them. But the greater part, not knowing the benefit that would result
thence, proceed to censure it.

<span id="v.vi.i-p18"></span>For if only seeing those places where they
sat or where they were imprisoned, mere lifeless spots, we often
transport our minds thither, and imagine their virtue, and are excited
by it, <span id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span
id="v.vi.i-Page_546"></span>and become more zealous, much more would
this be the case, if we heard their words and their other actions. But
concerning a friend a man enquires, where he lives, what he is doing,
whither he is going: and say, should we not make these enquiries <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) about these the general instructors
of the world? For when a man leads a spiritual life, the habit, the
walk, the words and the actions of such an one, in short, all that
relates to him, profits the hearers, and nothing is a hindrance or
impediment.

<span id="v.vi.i-p20"></span>But it is useful for you to learn that this
Epistle was sent upon necessary matters. Observe therefore how many
things are rectified thereby. We have this one thing first, that in all
things it becomes one to be earnest. For if Paul bestows so much concern
upon a runaway, a thief, and a robber, and does not refuse nor is
ashamed to send him back with such commendations; much more does it
become us not to be negligent in such matters. Secondly, that we ought
not to abandon the race of slaves, even if they have proceeded to
extreme wickedness. For if a thief and a runaway become so virtuous that
Paul was willing to make him a companion, and says in this Epistle,
“that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me” ([Philem.
13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.i-p20.1"></span>.),
much more ought we not to abandon the free. Thirdly, that we ought not
to withdraw slaves from the service of their masters. For if Paul, who
had such confidence in Philemon, was unwilling to detain Onesimus, so
useful and serviceable to minister to himself, without the consent of
his master, much less ought we so to act. For if the servant is so
excellent, he ought by all means to continue in that service, and to
acknowledge the authority of his master, that he may be the occasion of
benefit to all in that house. Why dost thou take the candle from the
candlestick to place it in the bushel?

<span id="v.vi.i-p21"></span>I wish it were possible to bring into the
cities those (servants) who are without. “What,” say you, “if he also
should become corrupt.” And why should he, I beseech you? Because he has
come into the city? But consider, that being without he will be much
more corrupt. For he who is corrupt being within, will be much more so
being without. For here he will be delivered from necessary care, his
master taking that care upon himself; but there the concern about those
things will draw him off perhaps even from things more necessary, and
more spiritual. On this account the blessed Paul, when giving them the
best counsel, said, “Art thou called, being a servant? care not for it:
but if even thou mayest be made free, use it rather” ([1 Cor. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021)<span id="v.vi.i-p21.1"></span>.);
that is, abide in slavery. <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536)
But what is more important than all, that the word of God be not
blasphemed, as he himself says in one of his Epistles. “Let as many
servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all
honor, that the name of God and His doctrine be not blasphemed.” ([1
Tim. vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001)<span
id="v.vi.i-p22.3"></span>.) For the Gentiles also will say, that even
one who is a slave can be well pleasing to God. But now many are reduced
to the necessity of blasphemy, and of saying Christianity has been
introduced into life for the subversion of everything, masters having
their servants taken from them, and it is a matter of violence.

<span id="v.vi.i-p23"></span>Let me also say one other thing. He teaches
us not to be ashamed of our domestics, if they are virtuous. For if
Paul, the most admirable of men, speaks thus much in favor of this one,
much more should we speak favorably of ours. There being then so many
good effects—and yet we have not mentioned all—does any one think it
superfluous that this Epistle was inserted? And would not this be
extreme folly? Let us then, I beseech you, apply to the Epistle written
by the Apostle. For having gained already so many advantages from it, we
shall gain more from the text. <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537)

<span id="v.vi.i-p25"></span>\[<span class="c16"><span
id="v.vi.i-p25.1"></span>Note</span>.—The views of the Fathers on
Slavery and Emancipation were very conservative, as slavery was
interwoven with the whole structure of the Roman empire and could not be
suddenly abolished without a radical social revolution. But the spirit
of Christianity always suggested and encouraged individual emancipation
and the ultimate abolition of the institution by teaching the universal
love of God, the common redemption and brotherhood of men, and the
sacredness of personality. Comp. Bishop Lightfoot’s Commentary on
*Colossians and Philemon,* and Schaff’s *Church History,* I. 793–798;
II. 347–354; III. 115–122. Möhler, in his *Vermischte Schriften,* II.
896 sqq., has collected the views of St. Chrysostom on slavery, and says
that since the time of the Apostle Paul no one has done more valuable
service to slaves than St. Chrysostom.—P.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[545:1529](1130131.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="v.vi.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p10"></span> B. and a Venice <span class="c16"><span
id="v.vi.i-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p10.2"></span>πιστῶν</span>. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p10.3"></span>πιστὴν</span>, which applies to the household
as one.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[545:1530](1130131.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="v.vi.i-p10.7"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p11.1"></span>πάντων ἕνεκεν</span>. The phrase occurs again
in a few lines, where it is translated, “on every account.”

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[545:1531](1130131.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="v.vi.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p12.1"></span>θαυμαστὸς</span> as before.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[545:1532](1130131.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="v.vi.i-p12.4"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p13"></span> B. and Ven. here add, “And on this score
forgive him everything. And so much for the argument. Now let us proceed
to the solution of the questions. Inasmuch as some venture to say,” &c.
and presently, “For I say not only this, that it was proper,…but add
this also, that I wish.”

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[545:1533](1130131.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="v.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p15"></span> He means in the Canon, as before by the
word “annexed.”

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[545:1534](1130131.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="v.vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p16"></span> So B. and Ven. Edd. “where they sat and
when they walked.”

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[545:1535](1130131.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="v.vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p17"></span> Lat. “landed,” but <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi.i-p17.1"></span>κατήχθησαν</span> bears the
other sense, and he means evidently, “in what part of the house.” B. and
Ven. have, “I would not have been weary of relating.”

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[546:1536](1130131.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="v.vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p19"></span> B. and Ven. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p19.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p19.2"></span>ρωτῶντας</span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[546:1537](1130131.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="v.vi.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p22"></span> So also he says on the place, and
Theodoret too, although he calls it a hyperbole. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi.i-p22.1"></span>Εἰ καὶ</span> is properly
“if even,” but the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p22.2"></span>καὶ</span> may be taken with the *following*
word, as “also”; see Kühner, § 824, anm. 1, who quotes Eur. Andr. 1080,
and Xen. Mem. i. c. 6, § 12.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[546:1538](1130131.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="v.vi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi.i-p24.1"></span>τῆς ὑφῆς.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1130132)
