[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130121)  [Next](1130123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.x"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Homily X.</span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.x-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv.x-p2.2"></span>[2 Timothy iv.
9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)<span
id="v.iv.x-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p3"></span>“Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me:
For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is
departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is
profitable to me for the ministry. And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.
The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with
thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.x-p4.1"></span>It</span> is worth while to enquire why he calls
Timothy to him, inasmuch as he was intrusted with a Church, and a whole
nation. It was not from arrogance. For Paul was ready to come to him;
for we find him saying, “But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how
thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God.” ([1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.x-p4.2"></span>.) But
he was withholden by a strong necessity. He was no longer master of his
own movements. He was in prison, and had been confined by Nero, and was
all but on the point of death. That this might not happen before he saw
his disciple, he therefore sends for him, desiring to see him before he
dies, and perhaps to deliver much in charge to him. Wherefore he says,
“Hasten to come to me before the winter.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p5"></span>“For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved
this present world.” He does not say, “That I may see thee before I
depart this life,” which would have grieved him, but “because I am
alone,” he says, “and have no one to help or support me.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p6"></span>“For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved
this present world, and is departed to Thessalonica”; that is, having
loved his own ease and security from danger, he has chosen rather to
live luxuriously at home, than to suffer hardships with me, and share my
present danger. He has blamed him alone, not for the sake of blaming
him, but to confirm us, that we may not be effeminate in declining toils
and dangers, for this is, “having loved this present world.” At the same
time he wishes to draw his disciple to him.

<span id="v.iv.x-p7"></span>“Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p8"></span>These he does not censure. For Titus was one
of the most admirable men, so that to him he intrusted the affairs of
the island, no small island, I mean, but that great one of Crete.

<span id="v.iv.x-p9"></span>“Only Luke is with me.” For he adhered to
him inseparably. It was he who wrote the Gospel, and the General <span
id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432) Acts; he was devoted to labors, and
to learning, and a man of fortitude; of him Paul writes, “whose praise
is in the Gospel <span id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433) throughout
all the Churches.” ([2 Cor. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.x-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.x-p12"></span>“Take Mark, and bring him with thee, for he
is profitable to me for the ministry.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p13"></span>It is not for his own relief, but for the
ministry of the Gospel that he wanted him. For though imprisoned, he did
not cease to preach. So it was on the same account he sent for Timothy,
not for his own, but for the Gospel’s sake, that his death might
occasion no disturbance to the faithful, when many of his own disciples
were present to prevent tumults, and to console those who would scarce
have endurance to bear up at his death. For it is probable that the
believers at Rome were men of consequence.

<span id="v.iv.x-p14"></span>“And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. The
cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest bring with
thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p15"></span>The word here translated “cloak” <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434) may <span id="page_514">p.
514</span> <span id="v.iv.x-Page_514"></span>mean a garment, or, as some
say, a bag, in which the books were contained. But what had he to do
with books, who was about to depart and go to God? He needed them much,
that he might deposit them in the hands of the faithful, who would
retain them in place of his own teaching. All the faithful, then, would
suffer a great blow, but particularly those who were present at his
death, and then enjoyed his society. But the cloak he requires, that he
might not be obliged to receive one from another. For we see him making
a great point of avoiding this; and elsewhere, when he was addressing
those from Ephesus, he says, “Ye know that these hands have ministered
to my necessities, and to those that were with me” ([Acts
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="v.iv.x-p16.1"></span>.);
and again, “It is more blessed to give than to receive.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p17"></span>[2 Tim.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.x-p17.1"></span>.
“Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him
according to his works.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p18"></span>Here he again makes mention of his trial,
not wishing merely to censure and accuse the man, but to prepare his
disciple for the conflicts, that he might bear them firmly. Though they
be mean and contemptible persons, and without honor, who cause these
trials, they ought all, he says, to be borne with fortitude. For he who
suffers wrong from any great personage, receives no little distinction
from the superiority of him who does the wrong. But he who is injured by
a vile and abject person, suffers the greater annoyance. “He did me much
evil,” he says, that is, he persecuted me in various ways. But these
things will not go unpunished! For the Lord will reward him according to
his works. As he said above: “What persecutions I endured, but out of
them all the Lord delivered me.” ([2 Tim. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.x-p18.1"></span>.) So
also here he consoles his disciples by a double consideration, that he
himself had suffered wrong, and that the other would be rewarded for his
evil deeds. Not that the Saints rejoice in the punishment of their
persecutors, but that the cause of the Gospel required it, and the
weaker would derive consolation from it.

<span id="v.iv.x-p19"></span>[2 Tim.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.x-p19.1"></span>.
“Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p20"></span>That is, he is hostile to us, and opposes
us. He has not said, Revenge, punish, expel him, although by the grace
given him he might have so done, but he does no such thing; nor does he
arm Timothy against him, but only commands him to avoid him, leaving
vengeance to God, and for the consolation of the weaker he has said that
He will reward him, which is a prophecy rather than an imprecation. And
that he says these things to prepare the mind of his disciple, is
manifest also from what follows. But see how he mentions other of his
trials.

<span id="v.iv.x-p21"></span>[2 Tim.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.x-p21.1"></span>.
“At my first answer,” he says, “no man stood with me, but all men
forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p22"></span>Do you see how he spares his friends,
notwithstanding it was a grievous thing they had done? For it is not the
same thing to be despised by aliens, as by our own friends. Do you see
his intense dejection? It cannot be said, that I was assailed by those
without, but had comfort in the attention and support of my friends; for
these also betrayed me. “All men,” he says, “forsook me.” And this was
no light offense. For if he that in war abandons one who is exposed to
danger, and shrinks from meeting the hands of his enemies, is justly
smitten by his friends, as having utterly betrayed their cause, much
more in the case of the Gospel. But what “first answer,” does he speak
of? He had stood before Nero, and had escaped. But afterwards, because
he had converted his cup-bearer, he was beheaded. And here again is
encouragement for his disciple in what follows.

<span id="v.iv.x-p23"></span>[2 Tim.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.x-p23.1"></span>.
“Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p24"></span>Though deserted by man, God doth not permit
him to suffer any harm. He strengthened me, he says, that is, He gave me
boldness in speaking. He suffered me not to sink.

<span id="v.iv.x-p25"></span>“That by me the preaching might be fully
known.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p26"></span>That is, might be fulfilled. Observe his
great humility. He does not say He strengthened me as deserving of His
gift, but that “the preaching,” with which I was intrusted, “might be
fully known.” As if any one should wear a purple robe and a diadem, and
to that circumstance should owe his safety.

<span id="v.iv.x-p27"></span>“And that all the Gentiles might hear.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p28"></span>What is this? That the luster of the
Gospel, and the care of His Providence for me, might be known to all.

<span id="v.iv.x-p29"></span>“And I was delivered out of the mouth of
the lion.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p30"></span>[2 Tim.
4.18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.x-p30.1"></span>.
“And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p31"></span>See how near he had been to death. He had
fallen into the very jaws of the lion. For he calls Nero a lion from his
ferocity, and the violent and daring character of his government. “The
Lord delivered me,” he says, “and will deliver.” But if he says, “He
will deliver me,” why does he say, “I am ready to be offered”? Attend to
the expression, “He delivered me,” he says, “from the lion’s mouth”; and
again, “He will deliver me,” not from the lion’s mouth, but “from every
evil work.” For then He delivered me from the danger; but now that
enough has been done for the Gospel, He will yet again <span
id="page_515">p. 515</span> <span id="v.iv.x-Page_515"></span>deliver me
from every sin, that is, He will not suffer me to depart with
condemnation. For that he should be able to “resist unto blood striving
against sin” ([Heb. xii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.x-p31.1"></span>.), and not yield, is a deliverance from
another lion, even the devil, so that this preservation is greater than
the former when he seems to be given up.

<span id="v.iv.x-p32"></span>“And will preserve me unto His heavenly
kingdom; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p33"></span>This then is salvation, when we shine forth
there. But what means, “He will preserve me unto His kingdom”? He will
deliver me from all blame, and preserve me there. For this is to be
preserved unto His kingdom, to die here on account of it. For “He that
hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.” ([John
xii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)<span
id="v.iv.x-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.x-p34"></span>“To whom be glory.” Lo, here is a doxology
to the Son.

<span id="v.iv.x-p35"></span>[2 Tim.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.x-p35.1"></span>.
“Salute Priscilla and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p36"></span>For he was then in Rome, of whom he said
“The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that
day.” ([2 Tim. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.x-p36.1"></span>.) By this naming of him, he makes those of his
household also more zealous in such good actions.

<span id="v.iv.x-p37"></span>“Salute Priscilla and Aquila.” These are
they of whom he makes continual mention, with whom too he had lodged,
and who had taken Apollos to them. He names the woman first, as being I
suppose more zealous, and more faithful, for she had then received
Apollos; or it might be done indifferently. And it was to them no slight
consolation to be thus saluted. <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435) It conveyed a demonstration of
esteem and love, and a participation in much grace. For the bare
salutation of that holy and blessed man was sufficient to fill with
grace him who received it.

<span id="v.iv.x-p39"></span>[2 Tim.
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.x-p39.1"></span>.
“Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p40"></span>This Trophimus and Tychicus, we know from
the book of the Acts, sailed away with him from Judea, and were
everywhere his companions, perhaps as being more zealous than the rest.

<span id="v.iv.x-p41"></span>“Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick.”
Why then didst thou not heal him, instead of leaving him? The Apostles
could not do everything, or they did not dispense miraculous gifts upon
all occasions, lest more should be ascribed to them than was right. The
same thing is observable of those blessed and righteous men, who were
before them, as in the case of Moses, whose voice was weak. Why was not
this defect removed? Nay, he was often afflicted with grief and
dejection, and he was not admitted into the Land of Promise.

<span id="v.iv.x-p42"></span>For many things were permitted by God, that
the weakness of human nature might be manifested. And if with these
defects the insensible Jews could ask, Where is Moses who brought us out
of the land of Egypt ([Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.x-p42.1"></span>.)?
how would they not have been affected towards him if he had brought them
also into the Land of Promise? If he had not been suffered to be
overpowered by the fear of Pharaoh, would they not have thought him a
God? We see that the people of Lystra were thus affected in the case of
Paul and Barnabas, thinking them to be Gods, when they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out and saying, “Sirs, why
do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you.” ([Acts
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.x-p42.2"></span>.)
Peter, again, when he had healed the man lame from his birth, when all
were amazed at the miracle, answered and said, “Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our
own power or holiness we had made this man to walk”? ([Acts iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.x-p42.3"></span>.)
Hear also the blessed Paul, saying, “There was given to me a thorn in
the flesh, lest I should be exalted above measure.” ([2 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.x-p42.4"></span>.) But
this, you say, was an expression of humility. Far from it. The thorn was
not sent him that he might be humble, nor does he say this only out of
humility. There are other causes besides to be assigned for it. Observe
therefore how God, accounting for it, says, “My grace is sufficient for
thee”; not “that thou mayest not be exalted above measure,” but what?
“For my strength is made perfect in weakness.” Two ends therefore were
answered at once: what was doing was made clearly manifest, and the
whole was ascribed to God. For this cause he has said elsewhere, “We
carry this treasure in earthen vessels” ([2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.x-p42.5"></span>.);
that is, in bodies weak and liable to suffering. Why? “That the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.” If our bodies
were not subject to infirmity, all would be ascribed to them. And
elsewhere we see him grieving at the infirmity of Epaphroditus,
concerning whom he writes, “He was sick nigh unto death, but God had
mercy on him.” ([Philip. ii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.x-p42.6"></span>.) And many other instances there are of his
ignorance of events, which was profitable both for him and his
disciples.

<span id="v.iv.x-p43"></span>“Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick.”
Miletus was near Ephesus. Did this happen then when he sailed to Judea,
or upon some other occasion? For after he had been in Rome, he returned
to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these parts, we know
not. <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436) We see him however
deserted by all. “For Demas,” he says, “hath forsaken me. Crescens <span
id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span id="v.iv.x-Page_516"></span>is
departed into Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. Erastus abode at Corinth.
Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p45"></span>[2 Tim.
4.21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.x-p45.1"></span>.
“Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and
Pudens and Linus, and Claudia.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p46"></span>This Linus, some say, was second <span
id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437) Bishop of the Church of Rome after
Peter. “And Claudia.” You see how zealous for the faith the women were,
how ardent! Such was Priscilla and this Claudia, already crucified,
already prepared for the battle! But why, when there were so many
faithful, does he mention only these women? Manifestly because they in
purpose had already withdrawn from worldly affairs, and were illustrious
above other. For a woman, as such, meets not with any impediments. It is
the work of divine grace, that this sex should be impeded only in the
affairs of this life, or rather not even in them. For a woman undertakes
no small share of the whole administration, being the keeper of the
house. And without her not even political affairs could be properly
conducted. For if their domestic concerns were in a state of confusion
and disorder, those who are engaged in public affairs would be kept at
home, and political business would be ill managed. So that neither in
those matters, as neither in spiritual, is she inferior. For she is
able, if so inclined, to endure a thousand deaths. Accordingly many
women have suffered martyrdom. She is able to practice chastity even
more than men, no such strong flame disturbing her; and to show forth
modesty and gravity, and “holiness, without which no one shall see the
Lord” ([Heb. xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.x-p47.1"></span>.); and contempt of wealth, if she will, and in
short all other virtues.

<span id="v.iv.x-p48"></span>“Do thy diligence to come before winter.”
See how he urges him, yet he does not say anything to grieve him. He
does not say, “Before I die,” lest he should afflict him; but, “Before
winter,” that thou be not detained.

<span id="v.iv.x-p49"></span>“Eubulus,” he says, “greeteth thee, and
Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.” He does not
mention the rest by name. Seest thou that those were the most zealous?

<span id="v.iv.x-p50"></span>[2 Tim.
4.22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.x-p50.1"></span>.
“The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p51"></span>There can be no better prayer than this.
Grieve not for my departure. The Lord will be with thee. And he says,
not “with thee,” but “with thy spirit.” Thus there is a twofold
assistance, the grace of the Spirit, <span
id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) and God helping it. And otherwise
God will not be with us, if we have not spiritual grace. For if we be
deserted by grace, how shall He be with us?

<span id="v.iv.x-p53"></span>“Grace be with us. Amen.”

<span id="v.iv.x-p54"></span>Thus he prays for himself too, that they
may always be well-pleasing to Him, that they may have grace together
with the spiritual gift, for where this is, nothing will be grievous.
For as he who beholds the king, and is in favor with him, is sensible of
no uneasiness; so though our friends forsake us, though we be overtaken
by calamity, we shall feel no distress, if that grace be with us and
fortify us.

<span id="v.iv.x-p55"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.x-p55.1"></span>Moral</span>. But how shall we draw down grace
upon us? By doing what is pleasing to God, and obeying Him in all
things. In great houses do we not see those domestics in favor, who do
not regard their own interest, but with all zeal and alacrity promote
their masters’, and who not from the compulsion of the master, but from
their own affection and good disposition, order all things well. When
they are always before their eyes, when they are engaged in the house,
when they are not occupied in any private concerns, nor caring for their
own, but rather consider their masters’ concerns as their own. For he
who makes what is his own his master’s, does not really give up his own
to his master, but makes his interest his own; he commands even as
himself in his affairs, <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439) and
rules equally with him. He is often as much feared by the domestics, and
whatever he says his master says too, and he is henceforth dreaded by
all his enemies.

<span id="v.iv.x-p57"></span>And if he who in worldly concerns prefers
his masters interests to his own, does not really neglect his own
interest, but rather advance it the more; much more is this the case in
spiritual matters. Despise thine own concerns, and thou wilt receive
those of God. This He Himself wills. Despise each, and seize upon the
kingdom of heaven. Dwell there, not here. Be formidable there, not here.
If thou art formidable there thou wilt be formidable not to men, but to
demons, and even to the devil himself. But if thy dependence is on
worldly wealth, thou wilt be contemptible to them, and often to men too.
Whatever be thy riches, thou wilt be rich in servile things. But if thou
despisest these, thou wilt be radiant in the house of the King.

<span id="v.iv.x-p58"></span>Such were the Apostles, despising a servile
house and worldly wealth! And see how they commanded in the affairs of
their Master. “Let one,” they said, “be delivered from disease, another
from the possession of devils: bind this man, and loose that.” This was
done by them on earth, but it was fulfilled as in Heaven. For, “whatever
ye shall bind on earth,” said He, <span id="page_517">p. 517</span>
<span id="v.iv.x-Page_517"></span>“shall be bound in Heaven.” ([Matt.
xviii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.x-p58.1"></span>.) And greater power than His own did He give
them. And that I lie not, appears from His own words. “He that believeth
in Me, greater works shall he do than these which I do.” ([John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.x-p58.2"></span>.)
Why so? Because this honor is reflected upon the Master. <span
id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440) As in our own affairs, if the
servant has great power, the master is the more admired, for if the
servant is so powerful, much more is he who commands him. But if any
man, neglecting his master’s service thinks only of his wife, his son,
or his servant, and seeks to be rich, and to lay up treasure there, by
stealing and robbing his master of his possessions, he is presently
ruined, and his wealth perishes with him.

<span id="v.iv.x-p60"></span>Wherefore having these examples, I beseech
you, let us not regard our possessions, that we may regard ourselves:
nay, let us despise them, that we may obtain them. If we despise them,
He will take care of them; if we take care of them, God will despise
them. Let us labor in the concerns of God, not in our own, or rather
really in our own, for His are our own. I speak not of heaven, <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441) nor of earth, nor of the things of
this world: these are unworthy of Him. And they belong alike to the
faithful and the unbelievers. What then do I speak of as His? His glory
and His kingdom. These are His, and ours for His sake. How? “If we be
dead with Him,” He says, “we shall also live with Him. If we suffer, we
shall also reign with Him.” ([2 Tim. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.x-p61.1"></span>.) We
are become “joint heirs,” and are called His “brethren.” Why do we sink
below, when He is drawing us upward towards Himself? How long shall we
be poor, and beggarly? Heaven is set before us; and do we linger on
earth? Is His kingdom opened to us, and do we choose such poverty as is
here? Is life immortal offered us, and do we spend ourselves for lands,
for wood and stones? Be truly rich. I would wish thee to be so. Be
covetous and rapacious, I blame thee not for it. Here it is a fault not
to be covetous, here it is blameworthy not to be grasping. What then is
this? “The kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it
by force.” ([Matt. xi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.x-p61.2"></span>.) There be thou violent! be grasping! It is
not diminished by being seized upon. For neither is virtue divided, nor
piety lessened, nor the kingdom of Heaven. Virtue is increased when thou
seizest upon it, whilst temporal goods are lessened when they are seized
upon. And this appears from hence: Let there be ten thousand men in a
city; if all seize on virtue, it is multiplied, for they become
righteous in ten thousand things. <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442) If no one seizes upon it, it is
diminished, for it is nowhere to be found.

<span id="v.iv.x-p63"></span>Thou seest then that good things are
multiplied on being possessed by many, but earthly goods are rather
diminished by seizing. Let us not therefore sit down content with
poverty, but let us choose riches. God is then rich, when those who
enjoy His kingdom are many. “For He is rich,” it is said, “unto all that
call upon Him.” ([Rom. x. 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.x-p63.1"></span>.) Increase then His substance; and thou wilt
increase it by taking possession of it, by being covetous of it, by
violently seizing it. And truly there is need of violence. Wherefore?
Because there are so many impediments, as wives and children, cares and
worldly business; besides those demons, and him who is the ruler of
them, the devil. There is need then of violence, there is need of
fortitude. He who takes by violence is exposed to toils. How? He endures
all things, he contends against necessities. How? He almost attempts
impossibilities. If such are those who take by violence, and we shrink
from attempting even what is possible, how shall we ever win? or when
shall we enjoy the things for which we strive? “The violent,” it is
said, “take” the kingdom of heaven “by force.” Violence and rapacity are
needed. For it is not simply set before us, and ready to our hands. He
who seizes by violence, is ever sober and watchful, he is anxious and
thoughtful, that he may make his seizure at a seasonable time. Dost thou
not see that in war he who is about to make a seizure keeps watch and is
under arms the whole night? If then they who aim at seizing upon worldly
goods, watch and are armed all the night long, should we, who wish to
seize upon spiritual things, sleep and snore in the day, and continue
always naked and unarmed? For he who is engaged in sin is unarmed; as he
who practices righteousness is armed. We do not fortify ourselves with
almsgiving. We do not prepare for ourselves lamps that are burning, we
do not fence ourselves in spiritual armor. We do not learn the way that
leads thither. We are not sober and watchful, and therefore we can seize
no spoil.

<span id="v.iv.x-p64"></span>If a man wishes to make an attempt on a
kingdom, does he not set death before him in a thousand shapes? Is he
not armed at all points, does he not practice the art of war, does he
not do everything with this view, and so rush on to the attack? But we
do not act thus. We wish to take the spoil while we are sleeping, and
therefore we come off with empty hands. Dost thou not see plunderers,
how they flee, how <span id="page_518">p. 518</span> <span
id="v.iv.x-Page_518"></span>rapidly they move? how they force their way
through everything? And there is need of expedition here. The devil is
in pursuit of thee. He orders those before to detain thee. But if thou
art strong, if thou art watchful, thou wilt spurn one, and thrust aside
another, and escape from all, as a bird. Yea, if thou depart hence, if
thou escape from the market and the tumult, I mean this life, and arrive
at those higher regions beyond these, in the world to come. For there,
as in a solitude, there is no tumult, no one to disturb, or to stay thy
course.

<span id="v.iv.x-p65"></span>Hast thou seized? Yet a little exertion is
needed after the seizure, that what thou hast seized may not be taken
from thee. If we run on, if we look to none of those things that are set
before our eyes, if we consider nothing but how we may escape from those
who would hinder us, we shall be able to retain with all security what
we have seized. Hast thou seized on chastity? Tarry not; flee beyond the
reach of the devil. If he sees that he cannot overtake thee, he will
cease to pursue; as we, when we can no longer see those who have robbed
us, despair of the pursuit, and do not pursue, nor call on others to
stop thief, but suffer them to escape. So do thou run vigorously at the
beginning, and when thou art beyond the reach of the devil, he will not
afterwards attack thee, but thou wilt be in safety, securely enjoying
those unspeakable blessings, which God grant that we may all obtain
through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, and worship, now and for ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[513:1433](1130122.htm#fr_1432) <span
id="v.iv.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p10"></span> καθολικὰς.

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[513:1434](1130122.htm#fr_1433) <span
id="v.iv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p11"></span> He takes this to allude to the written
Gospel.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[513:1435](1130122.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="v.iv.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p16"></span> φελόνην. Some make it an ecclesiastical
vestment.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[515:1436](1130122.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="v.iv.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p38"></span> B. πρόσρησις, as had been before
conjectured.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[515:1437](1130122.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="v.iv.x-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p44"></span> This is, however, a strong presumption
that he did. See p. 476, note.

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[516:1438](1130122.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="v.iv.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p47"></span> i.e. the next. See Euseb. iii. 2, and note
in Reading’s Ed.; also Cave Hist. Lit. Linus is thought not to have
survived the persecution of Nero, and probably to have been bishop in
St. Peter’s lifetime, and supplied his place when absent.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[516:1439](1130122.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="v.iv.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p52"></span> i.e. the original Gift, without which he
had been but a carnal person.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[516:1440](1130122.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="v.iv.x-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p56"></span> See [Gen.
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#004),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.x-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[517:1441](1130122.htm#fr_1440) <span
id="v.iv.x-p58.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p59"></span> See [Acts
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013), [Acts
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.x-p59.1"></span>.
The power of our Lord, after He had received His kingdom, was exercised
through them.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[517:1442](1130122.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="v.iv.x-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p61"></span> i.e. the material heaven.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[517:1443](1130122.htm#fr_1442) <span
id="v.iv.x-p61.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.x-p62"></span> Lit. “they become righteous in ten
thousand”; but the true reading is perhaps ἐν γὰρ τοῖς μυρίοις γίνεται
δικαίοις, “for it is formed in ten thousand righteous men,” as has been
conjectured from an Old. Lat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homilies on Titus.](1130123)
