[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130087)  [Next](1130089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v-Page_393"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.vi.v-p2.2"></span>[2 Thessalonians iii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p3"></span>“ But the Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and guard you from the evil one. And we have confidence in
the Lord touching you that ye both do and will do the things which we
command you. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and
into the patience of Christ.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.v-p4.1"></span>Neither</span> ought we, having committed
everything to the prayers of the Saints, to be idle ourselves, and run
into wickedness, and to lay hold of nothing; nor again when working good
to despise that succor. For great indeed are the things which prayer for
us can effect, but it is when we ourselves also work. For this reason
Paul also, praying for them, and again giving them assurance from the
promise, says, “But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and
guard you from the evil one.” For if He has chosen you to salvation, He
does not deceive you, nor suffer you utterly to perish. But that he may
not by these means lead them to sloth, and lest they thinking the whole
to be of God should themselves sleep, see how he also demands
coöperation from them, saying, “And we have confidence in the Lord
touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command
you.” “The Lord” indeed, he says, “is faithful,” and having promised to
save will certainly save; but as He promised. And how did He promise? If
we be willing, and hear Him; not simply (hearing), nor like stocks and
stones, being inactive.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p5"></span>And he has well introduced the words, “We
have confidence in the Lord,” that is, we trust to His lovingkindness.
Again he brings them down, making everything depend thereupon. For if he
had said, We have confidence in you, the commendation indeed was great,
but it would not have taught them to make all things dependent upon God.
And if he had said, We have confidence in the Lord, that He will
preserve you, and had not added “as touching you,” and, “that ye do and
will do the things which we command you,” he would have made them more
slothful, by casting everything upon the power of God. For it becomes us
indeed to cast everything upon Him, yet working also ourselves, embarked
in the labors and the conflicts. And he shows that even if our virtue
alone were sufficient to save, yet nevertheless it ought to be
persevering, and to abide with us until we come to our latest breath.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p6"></span>“But the Lord,” he says, “direct your
hearts into the love of God, and the patience of Christ.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p7"></span>Again he commends them, and prays, showing
his concern for them. For when he is about to enter upon reproof, he
previously smooths down their minds, by saying, “I am confident that ye
will hear,” and by requesting prayers from them, and by again invoking
upon them infinite blessings.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p8"></span>“But the Lord,” he says, “direct your
hearts into the love of God.” For there are many things that turn us
aside from love, and there are many paths that draw us away from thence.
In the first place the path of Mammon, laying, as it were, certain
shameless hands upon our soul, and tenaciously holding it in its grasp,
draws and drags us thence even against our will. Then vainglory and
often afflictions and temptations, turn us aside. For this reason we
need, as a certain wind, the assistance of God, that our sail may be
impelled, as by some strong wind, to the love of God. For tell me not,
“I love Him, even more than myself.” These are words. Show it to me by
thy works, if thou lovest Him more than thyself. Love Him more than
money, and then I shall believe that thou lovest Him even more than
thyself. But thou who despisest not riches for the sake of God, how wilt
thou despise thyself? But why do I say riches? Thou who despisest not
covetousness, which thou oughtest to do even without the commandments of
God, how wilt thou despise thyself?

<span id="iv.vi.v-p9"></span>“And into the patience of Christ,” he says.
What is “into the patience”? That we should endure even as He endured,
or that we should do those things, or that with patience also we should
wait for Him, that is, that we should be prepared. For since He has
promised many things, and Himself is coming to judge the quick and the
dead, let us wait for Him, and let us be patient. But wherever he speaks
of patience, he of course implies affliction. For this is to love God;
to endure, and not to be troubled.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p10"></span>[2 Thess.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)<span id="iv.vi.v-p10.1"></span>.
“Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly
and not after the tradition which they received of us.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p11"></span>That is, it is not we that say these
things, but Christ, for that is the meaning of “in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ”; equivalent to “through Christ.” Showing the fearfulness
of the message, he says, through Christ. Christ <span id="page_394">p.
394</span> <span id="iv.vi.v-Page_394"></span>therefore commanded us in
no case to be idle. “That ye withdraw yourselves,” he says, “from every
brother.” Tell me not of the rich, tell me not of the poor, tell me not
of the holy. This is disorder. “That walketh,” he says, that is, liveth.
“And not after the tradition which they received from me.” Tradition, he
says, which is through works. And this he always calls properly <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) tradition.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p13"></span>[2 Thess.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008)<span id="iv.vi.v-p13.1"></span>.
“For yourselves know how ye ought to imitate us: for we behaved not
ourselves disorderly among you; neither did we eat bread for nought at
any man’s hand.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p14"></span>And yet even if they had eaten, it would
not have been for nought. “For the laborer,” he says, “is worthy of his
hire.” ([Luke x. 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.v-p15"></span>“But in labor and travail, working night
and day, that we might not burden any of you. Not because we have not
the right, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you that ye should
imitate us. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, If
any will not work, neither let him eat.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p16"></span>See how in the former Epistle indeed he
discourses somewhat more mildly concerning these things; as when he
says, “We beseech you, brethren,—that ye would abound more and more—and
that ye study” ([1 Thess. iv.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p16.1"></span>.)—and nowhere does he say, “we command,” nor
“in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,” which was fearful and implied
danger, but that “ye abound,” he says, and “study,” which are the words
of one exhorting to virtue; “that ye may walk honestly” (becomingly), he
says. ([1 Thess. iv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p16.2"></span>.) But here is nothing of this kind, but “if
any one will not work,” says he, “neither let him eat.” For if Paul, not
being under a necessity, and having a right to be idle, and having
undertaken so great a work, did nevertheless work, and not merely work,
but “night and day,” so that he was able even to assist others,—much
more ought others to do this.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p17"></span>[2 Thess.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi.v-p17.1"></span>.
“For we hear of some that walk among you disorderly, that work not at
all, but are busybodies.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p18"></span>This indeed he says here; but there, in
the first Epistle, he says, “that ye may walk honestly towards them that
are without.” On what account? Perhaps there was as yet no such thing.
For upon another occasion also admonishing, he says, “It is more blessed
to give than to receive.” ([Acts xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="iv.vi.v-p18.1"></span>.)
But the expression, “walk honestly” has no reference to disorder;
wherefore he added, “that ye may have need of nothing.” ([1 Thess. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi.v-p18.2"></span>.)
And here he sets down another necessity, for thus doing what was
honorable and good towards all. (For as he proceeds, he says, “be not
weary in well doing.”) For certainly he that is idle and yet able to
work must needs be a busybody. But alms are given to those only who are
not able to support themselves by the work of their own hands, or who
teach, and are wholly occupied in the business of teaching. “For thou
shalt not muzzle the ox,” he says, “when he treadeth out the corn.”
([Deut. xxv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p18.3"></span>.) “And the laborer is worthy of his hire.”
([1 Tim. 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018), [Luke
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi.v-p18.4"></span>.)
So that neither is he idle, but receives the reward of work and great
work too. But to pray and fast, being idle, <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078) is not the work of the hands. For
the work that he is here speaking of is the work of the hands. And that
you may not suspect any such thing, he has added,

<span id="iv.vi.v-p20"></span>“That work not at all, but are busybodies.
Now them that are such we command and exhort through our Lord Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p21"></span>Because he had touched them severely,
wishing to render his discourse more mild, he adds, “through the Lord,”
again what is authoritivate and fearful.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p22"></span>“That with quietness,” he says, “they
work, and eat their own bread.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p23"></span>For why has he not said, But if they are
not disorderly let them be maintained by you; but requires both, that
they be quiet, and that they work? “That they may eat their own bread,”
says he, not that of another.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p24"></span>[2 Thess.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi.v-p24.1"></span>.
“But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p25"></span>See how immediately the fatherly heart was
overcome. He was not able to carry out his reproof farther, but again
pitied them. And see with what discretion! He has not said, But pardon
them, until they are amended; but what? “But ye, be not weary in well
doing.” Withdraw yourselves, he says, from them, and reprove them; do
not, however, suffer them to perish with hunger. What then, he says, if
having abundance from us, he should remain idle? In that case, he says,
I have spoken of a mild remedy, that you withdraw yourselves from him,
that is, do not partake with him in free conversation; show that you are
angry. This is no little matter. For such is the reproof that is given
to a brother, if we wish really to amend him. We are not ignorant of the
methods of reproof. For tell me, if you had a brother in the flesh,
would you then overlook him pining with hunger? Truly I think not; but
perhaps you would even correct him.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p26"></span>[2 Thess.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)<span id="iv.vi.v-p26.1"></span>.
“And if any man obeyeth not our word by this Epistle.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p27"></span>He has not said, He that disobeys,
disobeys <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v-Page_395"></span>me, but “note that man.” This is no slight
chastisement. “Have no company with him.” Then again he says, “that he
may be ashamed.” And he does not permit them to proceed farther. For as
he had said, “if any does not work neither let him eat” fearing lest
they should perish by hunger, he has added, “But in doing good, be not
ye weary.” Thus having said, “Withdraw yourselves, and have no company
with him,” then fearing lest this very thing might cut him off from the
brotherhood—for he who gives himself up to despair will quickly be lost
if he is not admitted to freedom of conversation—he has added,

<span id="iv.vi.v-p28"></span>[2 Thess.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)<span id="iv.vi.v-p28.1"></span>.
“Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p29"></span>By this he shows that he has assigned a
heavy punishment against him, in depriving him of freedom of
conversation.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p30"></span>For if to be a receiver even with many
others is worthy of disgrace, when they even reprove whilst they offer
it, and withdraw themselves, how great is the reproach, quite sufficient
to sting the soul. For if only giving rather tardily, and with
murmuring, they inflame the receivers—for tell me not of impudent
beggars, but of the faithful—if they were to reprove whilst they give,
what would they not do? to what punishment would it not be equal? We do
not do so, but as if we had been greatly injured, we so insult and turn
away from those who beg of us. Thou dost not give, but why dost thou
also grieve him? “Admonish them,” he says, “as brethren,” do not insult
them as enemies. He who admonishes his brother, does it not publicly. He
does not make an open show of the insult, but he does it privately and
with much address, and grieving, as hurt, and weeping and lamenting. Let
us bestow therefore with the disposition of a brother, let us admonish
with the good will of a brother, not as if we grieved at giving, but as
if we grieved for his transgressing the commandment. Since what is the
advantage? For if, even after giving, you insult, you destroy the
pleasure of giving. But when you do not give and yet insult, what wrong
do you not do to that wretched and unfortunate man? He came to you, to
receive pity from you, but he goes away having received a deadly blow,
and weeps the more. For when by reason of his poverty he is compelled to
beg, and is insulted on account of his begging, think how great will be
the punishment of those who insult him. “He that dishonoreth the poor,”
it says, “provoketh his Maker.” ([Prov.
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#031)<span id="iv.vi.v-p30.1"></span>,
Sept.) For tell me, did He suffer him to be poor for thy sake, that thou
mightest be able to heal thyself—and dost thou insult him who for thy
sake is poor? What obstinacy is this! what an act of ingratitude is it!
“Admonish him as a brother,” he says, and after having given, he orders
you to admonish him. But if even without giving we insult him, what
excuse shall we have?

<span id="iv.vi.v-p31"></span>[2 Thess.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)<span id="iv.vi.v-p31.1"></span>.
“Now the Lord of peace Himself give you peace at all times in all ways.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p32"></span>See how, when he mentions the things that
are to be done, he sets his mark upon them by prayer, adding prayer and
supplication, like certain marks set upon things that are laid up. “Give
you peace,” he says, “at all times, in all ways.” For since it was
likely that contentions would arise from these things, those men
becoming exasperated, and the others not supplying such persons so
readily as formerly, he with good reason now offered this prayer for
them, saying, “Give you peace at all times.” For this is what is sought,
that they may ever have it. “In every way,” says he. What is, “in
every”? So that they may have no occasion of contention from any
quarter. For everywhere peace is a good thing, even towards those who
are without. For hear him elsewhere saying, “If it be possible, as much
as in you lieth, be at peace with all men.” ([Rom. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.v-p32.1"></span>.)
For nothing is so conducive to the right performance of the things which
we wish, as to be peaceable and undisturbed, and to be flee from all
hatred, and to have no enemy.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p33"></span>“The Lord be with you all.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p34"></span>[2 Thess.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.v-p34.1"></span>.
“The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
every Epistle: so I write. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p35"></span>This he says that he writes in every
Epistle, that no one may be able to counterfeit them, his subscription
being subjoined as a great token. And he calls the prayer a salutation,
showing that everything they then did was spiritual; even when it was
proper to offer salutation, the thing was attended with advantage; and
it was prayer, not merely a symbol of friendship. With this he began,
and with it he ended, guarding with strong walls what he had said
elsewhere, and laying safe foundations, he brought it also to a safe
end. “Grace be unto you and peace,” he says; and again, “The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.” This the Lord also
promised, saying to His disciples, “Lo, I am with you alway, even unto
the end of the world.” ([Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.vi.v-p35.1"></span>.)
But this takes place when we are willing. For He will not be altogether
with us, if we place ourselves at a distance. “I will be with you,” He
says, “always.” Let us not therefore drive away grace. He tells us to
withdraw from every brother that walketh disorderly. This was then a
great evil, to be separated from the whole body of the brethren. By this
indeed he punishes all, as elsewhere in his Epistle to the <span
id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v-Page_396"></span>Corinthians he said, “With such a one no,
not to eat.” ([1 Cor. v. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p35.2"></span>.) But now the majority do not think this a
great evil. But all things are confounded and corrupted. With
adulterers, with fornicators, with covetous persons, we mix freely, and
as a matter of course. If we ought to withdraw ourselves from one who
was only supported in idleness, how much more from the others. And that
you may know how fearful a thing it was to be separated from the company
of the brethren, and what advantage it produces to those who receive
reproof with a right mind, hear how that man, who was puffed up with
sin, who had proceeded to the extreme of wickedness, who had committed
such fornication as is not named even among the heathens, who was
insensible of his wound—for this is the excess of perversion—he after
all, though such an one, was so bent down and humbled that Paul said,
“Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the
many. Wherefore confirm your love toward him.” ([2 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#008)<span id="iv.vi.v-p35.3"></span>.)
For as a member separated from the rest of the body, so was he at that
time.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p36"></span>But the cause, and that from which this
was then so terrible, was, because even the being with them was thought
by them a great blessing. For like men who inhabit one house, and are
under one father, and partake of one table, so did they then dwell in
every Church. How great an evil therefore was it to fall from so great
love! But now it is not even thought to be a great evil, because neither
is it considered any great thing when we are united with one another.
What was then in the order of punishment, this, on account of the great
coldness of love, now takes place even apart from punishment, and we
withdraw from one another causelessly, and from coldness. For it is the
cause of all evils that there is no love. This has dissolved all ties,
and has disfigured all that was venerable and splendid in the Church, in
which we ought to have gloried.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p37"></span>Great is the confidence of the Teacher,
when from his own good actions he is entitled to reprove his disciples.
Wherefore also Paul said, “For yourselves know how ye ought to imitate
us.” ([2 Thess. iii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p37.1"></span>.) And he ought to be a Teacher more of life
than of the word. And let no one think that this is said from a spirit
of boasting. For it was as reduced to necessity that he spoke it, and
with a view to general advantage. “For we behaved not ourselves,” he
says, “disorderly among you.” From this do you not see his humility, in
that he calls it, “for nought,” and “disorderly behavior”? “We did not
behave ourselves disorderly among you,” he says, “neither did we eat any
man’s bread for nought.” Here he shows that perhaps also they were poor;
and tell me not, that they were poor. For he is discoursing concerning
the poor, and those who obtained their necessary subsistence from no
other source than from the work of their hands. For he has not said,
that they may have it from their fathers, but that by working they
should eat their own bread. For if I, he says, a herald of the word of
doctrine, was afraid to burden you, much more he who does you no
service. For this is truly a burden. And it is a burden too, when one
does not give with much alacrity; but this is not what he hints at, but
as if they were not able to do it easily. For why dost thou not work?
For God hath given thee hands for this purpose, not that thou shouldest
receive from others, but that thou shouldest impart to others.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p38"></span>But “the Lord,” he says, “be with you.”
This prayer also we may offer for ourselves, if we do the things of the
Lord. For hear Christ saying to His disciples, “Go ye and make disciples
of all the nations, baptizing them into the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the
end of the world.” ([Matt. 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.vi.v-p38.1"></span>.)
If ye do these things, assuredly. For that the promise is not made to
them only, but to those also who walk in their steps, is manifest from
His saying “to the end of the world.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p39"></span>What then does He say to those who are not
teachers? Each of you, if he will, is a teacher, although not of
another, yet of himself. Teach thyself first. If thou teachest to
observe all things whatsoever He commanded, even by this means thou wilt
have many emulating thee. For as a lamp, when it is shining, is able to
light ten thousand others, but being extinguished will not give light
even to itself, nor can it lighten other lamps; so also in the case of a
pure life, if the light that is in us be shining, we shall make both
disciples and teachers numberless, being set before them as a pattern to
copy. For neither will the words proceeding from me be able so to
benefit the hearers, as your life. For let a man, tell me, be dear to
God, and shining in virtue, and having a wife; (for it is possible for a
man having a wife and children and servants and friends to please God;)
will he not be able much more than I to benefit them all? For me they
will hear once or twice in a month, or not even once, and even though
they have kept what they have heard as far as the threshold of the
Church, they presently let it drop away from them: but seeing the life
of that man constantly, they receive great advantage. For when being
insulted he insults not again, does he not almost infix and engrave upon
the soul of the insulter the reverence of his meekness? And though he
does not immediately confess the <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v-Page_397"></span>benefit, being ashamed from anger, or put
to confusion, yet nevertheless he immediately is made sensible of it.
And it is impossible for a man that is insolent, though he be a very
beast, to associate with one who is patient of evil, without going away
much benefited. For although we do not what is good, we however all
praise it and admire it. Again, the wife, if she see her husband gentle,
being always with him receives great advantage, and the child also. It
is therefore in the power of every one to be a teacher. For he says,
“Build each other up, even as also ye do.” ([1 Thess. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi.v-p39.1"></span>.)
For tell me, has any loss befallen the family? The wife is disturbed, as
being weaker, and more extravagant, and fond of ornament; the man if he
be a philosopher, and a derider of loss, both consoles her, and
persuades her to bear it with fortitude. Tell me, then, will he not
benefit her much more than our words? For it is easy to talk, but to
act, when we are reduced to the necessity, is in every way difficult. On
this account human nature is wont rather to be regulated by deeds. And
such is the superiority of virtue, that even a slave often benefits a
whole family together with the master.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p40"></span>For not in vain, nor without reason, does
Paul constantly command them to practice virtue, and to be obedient to
their master, not so much regarding the service of their masters, as
that the word of God and the doctrine be not blasphemed. But when it is
not blasphemed, it will soon also be admired. And I know of many
families, that they have greatly benefited by the virtue of their
slaves. But if a servant placed under authority can improve his master,
much more can the master his servants. Divide then with me, I beseech
you, this ministry. I address all generally, do you each individual
privately and let each charge himself with the salvation of his
neighbors. For that it becomes one to preside over those of his
household in these matters, hear where Paul sends women for instruction;
“And if they would learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at
home” ([1 Cor. xiv. 35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035)<span
id="iv.vi.v-p40.1"></span>.); and he does not lead them to the Teacher.
For as in the schools of learning, there are teachers even among the
disciples, so also in the Church. For he wishes the Teacher not to be
troubled by all. Wherefore? Because then there will be great advantages,
not only that the labor will be light to the Teacher, but that each of
the disciples also, having taken pains, is soon able to become a
teacher, making this his concern.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p41"></span>For see how great a service the wife
contributes. She keeps the house, and takes care of all things in the
house, she presides over her handmaids, she clothes them with her own
hands, she causes thee to be called the father of children, she delivers
thee from brothels, she aids thee to live chastely, she puts a stop to
the strong desire of nature. And do thou also benefit her. How? In
spiritual things stretch forth thy hand. Whatever useful things thou
hast heard, these, like the swallows, bearing off in thy mouth, carry
away and place them in the mouth of the mother and the young ones. For
how is it not absurd, in other things to think thyself worthy of the
preeminence, and to occupy the place of the head, but in teaching to
quit thy station. The ruler ought not to excel the ruled in honors, so
much as in virtues. For this is the duty of a ruler, for the other is
the part of the ruled, but this is the achievement of the ruler himself.
If thou enjoyest much honor, it is nothing to thee, for thou receivedst
it from others. If thou shinest in much virtue, this is all thine own.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p42"></span>Thou art the head of the woman, let then
the head regulate the rest of the body. Dost thou not see that it is not
so much above the rest of the body in situation, as in forethought,
directing like a steersman the whole of it? For in the head are the eyes
both of the body, and of the soul. Hence flows to them both the faculty
of seeing, and the power of directing. And the rest of the body is
appointed for service, but this is set to command. All the senses have
thence their origin and their source. Thence are sent forth the organs
of speech, the power of seeing, and of smelling, and all touch. For
thence is derived the root of the nerves and of the bones. Seest thou
not that it is superior in forethought more than in honor? So let us
rule the women; let us surpass them, not by seeking greater honor from
them, but by their being more benefited by us.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p43"></span>I have shown that they afford us no little
benefit, but if we are willing to make them a return in spiritual
things, we surpass them. For it is not possible in bodily things to
offer an equivalent. For what? dost thou contribute much wealth? but it
is she who preserves it, and this care of hers is an equivalent, and
thus there is need of her, because many, who had great possessions, have
lost all because they had not one to take care of them. But as for the
children, you both communicate, and the benefit from each is equal. She
indeed in these things rather has the more laborious service, always
bearing the offspring, and being afflicted with the pains of childbirth;
so that in spiritual things only wilt thou be able to surpass her.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p44"></span>Let us not therefore regard how we shall
have wealth, but how we shall present with confidence to God the souls
with which we are entrusted. For by regulating them we shall also most
highly benefit ourselves. For he who teaches another, although he does
nothing else, yet in speaking is affected with compunction, when he sees
him<span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v-Page_398"></span>self responsible for those things, on
account of which he reproves others. Since therefore we benefit both
ourselves and them, and through them the household, and this is
preëminently pleasing to God; let us not be weary of taking care both of
our own souls and of those who minister to us, that for all we may
receive a recompense, and with much riches may arrive at the holy City
our mother, the Jerusalem that is above, from which God grant that we
may never fall, but that having shone in the most excellent course of
life, we may be thought worthy with much confidence to see our Lord
Jesus Christ; with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[394:1078](1130088.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="iv.vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p12"></span> Or “especially” (κυρίως).

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[394:1079](1130088.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="iv.vi.v-p18.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p19"></span> See on [1 Thess. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi.v-p19.1"></span>,
where he says nearly the same. On [1 Tim. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)<span id="iv.vi.v-p19.2"></span> he
praises the Monks near Antioch, but it appears that they were
industrious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homilies of St. John Chrysostom on Timothy, Titus, and
Philemon.](1130089)
