[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130119)  [Next](1130121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.viii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv.viii-p2.2"></span>[2 Timothy iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p3"></span>“This know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce-breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>If</span> any now takes offense at the
existence of heretics, let him remember that it was so from the
beginning, the devil always setting up error by the side of truth. God
from the beginning promised good, the devil came too with a promise. God
planted Paradise, the devil deceived, saying, “Ye shall be as gods.”
([Gen. iii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p4.2"></span>.) For as he could show nothing in actions,
he made the more promises in words. Such is the character of deceivers.
After this were Cain and Abel, then the sons of Seth and the daughters
of men; afterwards Ham and Japhet, Abraham and Pharaoh, Jacob and Esau;
and so it is even to the end, Moses and the magicians, the Prophets and
the false prophets, the Apostles and the false apostles, Christ and
Antichrist. Thus it was then, both before and at that time. Then there
was Theudas, then Simon, then were the Apostles, then too this party of
Hermogenes and Philetus. In short, there was no time when falsehood was
not set up in opposition to truth. Let us not therefore be distressed.
That it would be so, was foretold from the beginning. Therefore he says,
“Know that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection.”
The unthankful then is unholy, and this is natural, for what will he be
to others, who is not grateful to his benefactor? The unthankful man is
a truce-breaker, he is without natural affection.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="page_505">p. 505</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii-Page_505"></span>“False accusers,” that is, slanderers.
For those who are conscious that they have no good in themselves, whilst
they commit many sins and offenses, find consolation in defaming the
characters of others.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p6"></span>“Incontinent,” with respect both to their
tongue and their appetite, and everything else.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p7"></span>“Fierce,” hence their inhumanity and
cruelty, when any one is covetous, selfish, ungrateful, licentious.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p8"></span>“Despisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady.” “Traitors,” betrayers of friendship; “heady,” having
no steadiness; “high-minded,” filled with arrogance. “Lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p9"></span>[2 Tim.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>.
“Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p10"></span>In the Epistle to the Romans, he says
somewhat on this wise, “Having the form of knowledge and of the truth in
the law” ([Rom. ii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>.), where he speaks in commendation of it:
but here he speaks of this sin as an evil beyond all other defects. And
why is this? Because he does not use the words in the same
signification. For an image is often taken to signify a likeness; but
sometimes a thing without life, and worthless. Thus he says himself in
his Epistle to the Corinthians, “A man ought not to cover his head,
forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God.” ([1 Cor. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.viii-p10.2"></span>.)
But the Prophet says, “Man walketh in an image.” ([Ps. xxxix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.viii-p10.3"></span>,
Gr.) And the Scripture sometimes takes a lion to represent royalty, as,
“He couched as a lion, and as a lion’s whelp, who shall raise him up?”
([Gen. xlix. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p10.4"></span>, Gr.) And sometimes to signify rapacity,
as, “a ravening and a roaring lion.” ([Ps. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013)<span id="v.iv.viii-p10.5"></span>.)
And we ourselves do the same. For as things are compounded and varied in
themselves, they are fitly adduced for various images and examples. As
when we would express our admiration of a beautiful woman, we say, she
is like a picture; and when we admire a painting, we say that it speaks,
that it breathes. But we do not mean to express the same thing, but in
one case to mark likeness, in the other beauty. So here with respect to
form, in the one passage, it means a model, or representation, a
doctrine, or pattern of godliness; in the other, something that is
lifeless, a mere appearance, show, and hypocrisy. Faith therefore,
without works, is fitly called a mere form without the power. For as a
fair and florid body, when it has no strength, is like a painted figure,
so is a right faith apart from works. For let us suppose any one to be
“covetous, a traitor, heady,” and yet to believe aright; of what
advantage is it, if he wants all the qualities becoming a Christian, if
he does not the works that characterize godliness, but outdoes the
Greeks in impiety, when he is a mischief to those with whom he
associates, causes God to be blasphemed, and the doctrine to be
slandered by his evil deeds?

<span id="v.iv.viii-p11"></span>“From such turn away,” he says. But how
is this, if men are to be so “in the latter times”? There were probably
then such, in some degree at least, though not to the same excess. But,
in truth, through him he warns all to turn away from such characters.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p12"></span>[2 Tim.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>.
“For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lust.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p13"></span>[2 Tim.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>.
“Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p14"></span>Do you see them employing the artifice
of that old deceiver, the weapons which the devil used against Adam?
“Entering into houses,” he says. Observe how he shows their impudence by
this expression, <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) their
dishonorable ways, their deceitfulness. “Leading captive silly women,”
so that he who is easy to be deceived is a “silly woman,” and nothing
like a man: for to be deceived is the part of silly women. “Laden with
sins.” See whence arises their persuasion, from their sins, from their
being conscious to themselves of nothing good! And with great propriety
has he said “laden.” <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) For this
expression marks the multitude of their sins, and their state of
disorder and confusion; “led away with divers lusts.” He does not accuse
nature, for it is not women simply, but such women as these, that he
blames. And why “divers lusts”? by that are implied their various
faults, their luxury, their disorderly conduct, their wantonness.
“Divers lust,” he says, that is, of glory, of wealth, of pleasure, of
self-will, of honor: and perchance other vile desires are implied.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p17"></span>“Ever learning, and never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth.” He does not say thus to excuse, but to
threaten them severely; for their understanding was callous, because
they had weighed themselves down with lusts and sins.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p18"></span>[2 Tim.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>.
“Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p19"></span>Who are these? <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) The magicians in the time of Moses.
But how is it their names are nowhere else introduced? Either they were
handed down by tradition, or it is probable that Paul knew them by
inspiration.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p21"></span>“Men of corrupt minds,” he says,
“reprobate concerning the faith.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p22"></span>[2 Tim.
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>.
“But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifested
unto all men, as theirs also was.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p23"></span>“They shall proceed no further”; how
then <span id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii-Page_506"></span>does he say elsewhere, “They will
increase unto more ungodliness”? ([2 Tim. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>.)
He there means, that beginning to innovate and to deceive, they will not
pause in their error, but will always invent new deceits and corrupt
doctrines, for error is never stationary. But here he says, that they
shall not be able to deceive, nor carry men away with them, for however
at first they may seem to impose upon them, they will soon and easily be
detected. For that he is speaking to this effect appears from what
follows. “For their folly shall be manifest unto all.” Whence? Every
way—“as theirs also was.” For if errors flourish at first, they do not
continue to the end, for so it is with things that are not fair by
nature, but fair in appearance; they flourish for a time, and then are
detected, and come to nought. But not such are our doctrines, and of
these thou art a witness, for in our doctrines there is no deceit, for
who would choose to die for a deceit?

<span id="v.iv.viii-p24"></span>[2 Tim.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>. “But thou hast fully known <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) my doctrine.” Wherefore be strong;
for thou wert not merely present, but didst follow closely. Here he
seems to imply that the period had been long, in that he says, “Thou
hast followed up my doctrine”; this refers to his discourse. “Manner of
life”; this to his conduct. “Purpose”; this to his zeal, and the
firmness of his soul. I did not say these things, he says, and not do
them; nor was I a philosopher in words only. “Faith, longsuffering.” He
means, how none of these things troubled me. “Charity,” which those men
had not; “patience,” nor yet this. Towards the heretics, he means, I
show much longsuffering; “patience,” that under persecution.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p26"></span>[2 Tim.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>. “Persecutions, afflictions.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p27"></span>There are two things that disquiet a
teacher, the number of heretics, and men’s wanting fortitude to endure
sufferings. And yet he has <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411)
said much about these, that such always have been, and always will be,
and no age will be free from them, and that they will not be able to
injure us, and that in the world there are vessels of gold and of
silver. You see how he proceeds to discourse about his afflictions,
“which came upon me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p29"></span>Why has he selected these instances out
of many? Because the rest was known to Timothy, and these perhaps were
new events, and he does not mention the former ones, for he is not
enumerating them particularly, for he is not actuated by ambition or
vainglory, but he recounts them for the consolation of his disciple, not
from ostentation. And here he speaks of Antioch in Pisidia, and Lystra,
whence Timothy himself was. “What persecutions I endured.” There was
twofold matter of consolation, that I displayed a generous zeal, and
that I was not forsaken. It cannot be said, that God abandoned me, but
He rendered my crown more radiant.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p30"></span>“What persecutions I endured: but out of
them all the Lord delivered me.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p31"></span>[2 Tim.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>. “Yea, and all those that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p32"></span>But why, he says, should I speak only of
myself? Each one that will live godly will be persecuted. Here he calls
afflictions and sorrows, “persecutions,” for it is not possible that a
man pursuing the course of virtue should not be exposed to grief,
tribulation, and temptations. For how can he escape it who is treading
in the strait and narrow way, and who has heard, that “in the world ye
shall have tribulation”? ([John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="v.iv.viii-p32.1"></span>.)
If Job in his time said, “The life of man upon earth is a state of
trial” ([Job vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p32.2"></span>, Gr.); how much more was it so in those
days?

<span id="v.iv.viii-p33"></span>[2 Tim.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p33.1"></span>. “But evil men and seducers shall wax worse
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p34"></span>Let none of these things, he says,
disturb thee, if they are in prosperity, and thou in trials. Such is the
nature of the case. From my own instance thou mayest learn that it is
impossible for man, in his warfare with the wicked, not to be exposed to
tribulation. One cannot be in combat and live luxuriously, one cannot be
wrestling and feasting. Let none therefore of those who are contending
seek for ease or joyous living. Again, the present state is contest,
warfare, tribulation, straits, and trials, and the very scene of
conflicts. The season for rest is not now, this is the time for toil and
labor. No one who has just stripped and anointed himself thinks of ease.
If thou thinkest of ease, why didst thou strip, or prepare to fight?
“But do I not maintain the fight?” you say. What, when thou dost not
conquer thy desires, nor resist the evil bias of nature?

<span id="v.iv.viii-p35"></span>[2 Tim.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p35.1"></span>. “But continue thou in the things that thou
hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned
them; And that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation through the faith which in
Christ Jesus.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p36"></span>What is this? As the prophet David
exhorted, saying, “Be not thou envious against the workers of iniquity”
([Ps. xxxvii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>.), so Paul exhorts, “Continue thou in the
things which thou hast learned,” and not simply learned, but “hast been
assured of,” that is, hast believed. And what have I believed? That this
is the Life. And if thou seest things happening contrary to thy belief,
be not troubled. The same hap<span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii-Page_507"></span>pened to Abraham, yet he was not affected
at it. He had heard, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called” ([Gen. xxi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p36.2"></span>.); and he was commanded to sacrifice Isaac,
yet he was not troubled nor dismayed. Let no one be offended because of
the wicked. This the Scripture taught from the beginning.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p37"></span>What then, if the good be in prosperity,
and the wicked be punished? The one is likely to happen, the other not
so. For the wicked will possibly be punished, but the good cannot always
be rejoicing. No one was equal to Paul, yet he passed all his life in
afflictions, in tears and groanings night and day. “For the space of
three years,” he says, “I ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears.” ([Acts xx. 31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>.) And again: “That which cometh upon me
daily.” ([1 Cor. xi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p37.2"></span>.) He did not rejoice to-day, and grieve
to-morrow, but he ceased not daily to grieve. How then does he say,
“Evil men shall wax worse and worse”? He has not said, they shall find
rest, but “they shall wax worse and worse.” Their progress is for the
worse. He has not said, they shall be in prosperity. But if they are
punished, they are punished that thou mayest not suppose their sins are
unavenged. For since we are not deterred from wickedness by the fear of
hell, in very tenderness He rouses us from our insensibility, and
awakens us. If no wicked man was ever punished, no one would believe
that God presides over human affairs. If all were punished, no one would
expect a future resurrection, since all had received their due here. On
this account He both punishes, and forbears to punish. On this account
the righteous suffer tribulation here, because they are sojourners, and
strangers, and are in a foreign country. The just therefore endure these
things for the purpose of trial. For hear what God said to Job:
“Thinkest thou that I have warned thee otherwise, than that thou
mightest appear just?” <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412) ([Job
xl. 3](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#003)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p38.3"></span>, Gr.) But sinners when they endure any
affliction suffer but the punishment of their sins. Under all
circumstances, therefore, whether afflictive or otherwise, let us give
thanks to God. For both are beneficial. He does nothing in hatred or
enmity to us, but all things from care and consideration for us.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p39"></span>“Knowing that from a child thou hast
known the sacred writings.” The holy Scriptures he calls “sacred
writings.” In these thou wast nurtured, so that through them thy faith
ought to be firm and unshaken. For the root was laid deep, and nourished
by length of time, <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) nor will
anything subvert it.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p41"></span>And speaking of the holy Scriptures, he
has added, “Which are able to make thee wise,” that is, they will not
suffer thee to have any foolish feeling, such as most men have. For he
who knows the Scriptures as he ought, is not offended at anything that
happens; he endures all things manfully, referring them partly to faith,
and to the incomprehensible nature of the divine dispensation, and
partly knowing reasons for them, and finding examples in the Scriptures.
Since it is a great sign of knowledge not to be curious about
everything, nor to wish to know all things. And if you will allow me, I
will explain myself by an example. Let us suppose a river, or rather
rivers (I ask no allowance, I only speak of what rivers really are,) all
are not of the same depth. Some have a shallow bed, others one deep
enough to drown one unacquainted with it. In one part there are
whirlpools, and not in another. It is good therefore to forbear to make
trial of all, <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414) and it is no
small proof of knowledge not to wish to sound all the depths: whereas he
that would venture on every part of the river, is really most ignorant
of the peculiar nature of rivers, and will often be in danger of
perishing, from venturing into the deeper parts with the same boldness
with which he crossed the shallows. So it is in the things of God. He
that will know all things, and ventures to intrude into everything, he
it is that is most ignorant what God is. And of rivers indeed, the
greater part is safe, and the depths and whirlpools few, but with
respect to the things of God, the greater part is hidden, and it is not
possible to trace out His works. Why then art thou bent on drowning
thyself in those depths?

<span id="v.iv.viii-p43"></span>Know this, however, that God dispenses
all things, that He provides for all, that we are free agents, that some
things He works, and some things He permits; that He wills nothing evil
to be done; that all things are not done by His will, but some by ours
also; all evil things by ours alone, all good things by our will
conjointly with His influence; and that nothing is without His
knowledge. Therefore He worketh all things. <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) Thou then knowing this canst reckon
what things are good, what are evil, and what are indifferent. Thus
virtue is good, vice is evil; but riches and poverty, life and death,
are things indifferent. If thou knowest this, thou wilt know thereby,
that the righteous are afflicted that they may be crowned, the wicked,
that they may receive the punishment of their sins. But all sinners are
not punished here, lest the generality <span id="page_508">p. 508</span>
<span id="v.iv.viii-Page_508"></span>should disbelieve the Resurrection;
nor all the righteous afflicted, lest men should think that vice, and
not virtue, is approved. These are the rules and limits. Bring what you
will to the test of these, and you will not be perplexed with doubt. For
as there is among calculators the number of six thousand, to which all
things can be reduced, and everything can be divided and multiplied in
the scale of six thousand, and this is known to all who are acquainted
with arithmetic; <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) so he who
knows those rules, which I will briefly recapitulate, will never be
offended. And what are these? That virtue is a good, vice an evil; that
diseases, poverty, ill-treatment, false accusations, and the like, are
things indifferent; that the righteous are afflicted here, or if ever
they are in prosperity, it is that virtue may not appear odious; that
the wicked enjoy pleasure now that hereafter they may be punished, or if
they are sometimes visited, it is that vice may not seem to be approved,
nor their actions to go unpunished; that all are not punished, lest
there should be a disbelief of the time of resurrection; that even of
the good, some who have done bad actions are quit of them here; and of
the wicked, some have good ones, and are rewarded for them here, that
their wickedness may be punished hereafter ([Matt. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>.);
that the works of God are for the most part incomprehensible, and that
the difference between us and Him is greater than can be expressed. If
we reason on these grounds, nothing will be able to trouble or perplex
us. If we listen to the Scriptures continually, we shall find many such
examples.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p46"></span>“Which are able,” he says, “to make thee
wise unto salvation.”

<span id="v.iv.viii-p47"></span>For the Scriptures suggest to us what is
to be done, and what is not to be done. For hear this blessed one
elsewhere saying, “Thou art confident that thou thyself art a guide of
the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, an instructor of the
foolish, a teacher of babes.” ([Rom.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p47.1"></span>.) Thou seest that the Law is the light of
them which are in darkness; and if that which showeth the letter, the
letter which killeth, is light, what then is the Spirit which
quickeneth? If the Old Covenant is light, what is the New, which
contains so many, and so great revelations? where the difference is as
great, as if any one should open heaven to those who only know the
earth, and make all things there visible. There we learn concerning
hell, heaven, and judgment. Let us not believe in things irrational.
They are nothing but imposture. “What,” you say, “when what they
foretell comes to pass?” It is because you believe it, if it does come
to pass. The impostor has taken thee captive. Thy life is in his power,
he manages thee as he will. If a captain of robbers should have under
his power and disposal the son of a king, who had fled to him,
preferring the desert, and his lawless company, would he be able to
pronounce whether he would live or die? Assuredly he would, not because
he knows the future, but because he is the disposer of his life or
death, the youth having put himself in his power. For according to his
own pleasure, he may either kill him, or spare his life, as he is become
subject to him, and it is equally at his <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) disposal to say whether thou shalt
be rich or poor. The greater part of the world have delivered themselves
up into the hands of the devil.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p49"></span>And furthermore, it contributes much to
favor the pretenses of these deceivers, that a man has accustomed
himself to believe in them. For no one takes notice of their failures,
but their lucky conjectures are observed. But if these men have any
power of prognosticating, bring them to me, a believer. I say not this,
as magnifying myself, (for it is no great honor to be superior to these
things,) and indeed I am deep-laden with sins; but with respect to these
matters, I will not be humble-minded; by the grace of God I despise them
all. Bring me this pretender to magic; let him, if he has any power of
prognosticating, tell me what will happen to me to-morrow. But he will
not tell me. For I am under the power of the King, and he has no claim
to my allegiance or submission. I am far from his holes and caverns. I
war under the king. “But some one committed theft,” you say, “and this
man discovered it.” This is not always true, certainly, but for the most
part absurdities and falsehoods. For they know nothing. If indeed they
know anything, they ought rather to speak of their own concerns, how the
numerous offerings to their idols have been stolen, how so much of their
gold has been melted. Why have they not informed their Priests? Even for
the sake of money, they have not been able to give information when
their idol-temples have been burnt, and many have perished with
them. <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) Why do they not provide
for their own safety? But it is altogether a matter of chance, if they
have predicted anything. With us there are prophets, and they do not
fail. They do not speak truth in one instance and falsehood in another,
but always declare the truth; for this is the privilege of
foreknowledge.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p51"></span>Cease, then, from this madness, I
beseech <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii-Page_509"></span>you, if at least you believe in Christ;
and if you believe not, why do you expose yourselves? Why do you
deceive? “How long will ye halt on both your hips?” ([1 Kings xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.viii-p51.1"></span>,
Sept.) Why do you go to them? Why enquire of them? The instant you go to
them, the instant you enquire, you put yourself in slavery to them. For
you enquire, as if you believed. “No,” you say, “I do not enquire, as
believing, but making trial of them.” But to make trial, whether they
speak the truth, is the part not of one who believes that they are
false, but of one who still doubts. Wherefore then dost thou enquire
what will happen? For if they answered, “This will happen, but do so and
so, and thou wilt escape it”; even in that case thou oughtest by no
means to be an idolater; yet thy madness were not so great. But if they
foretell future events, <span id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) he
that listens to them will gain nothing more than unavailing sorrow. The
event does not happen, but he suffers the uneasiness, and
torments, <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) himself.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p54"></span>If it were for our good, God would not
have grudged us this foreknowledge. He who has revealed to us things in
heaven, would not have envied us. For, “All things,” He says, “that I
have heard of the Father I have made known unto you”; and, “I call you
not servants, but friends. Ye are my friends.” ([John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.viii-p54.1"></span>.)
Why then did He not make these things known unto us? Because He would
not have us concerned about them. And as a proof that He does not envy
us this knowledge, such things were revealed to the ancients, because
they were babes, even about an ass, <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) and the like. But to us, because He
would not have us concerned about such things, He has not cared to
reveal them. But what do we learn? Things which they never knew, for
little indeed were all those things of old. But what we are taught is
this, that we shall rise again, that we shall be immortal, and
incorruptible, that our life shall have no end, that all things will
pass away, that we shall be caught up in the clouds, that the wicked
shall suffer punishment, and numberless other things, and in all these
there is no falsehood. Is it not better to know these than to hear that
the ass that was lost is found? Lo, thou hast gotten thine ass! Lo, thou
hast found him! What is thy gain? Will he not soon be lost again some
other way? For if he leave thee not, at least thou wilt lose him in thy
death. But the things which I have mentioned, if we will but hold them
fast, we shall retain perpetually. These therefore let us pursue. To
these stable and enduring goods let us attach ourselves. Let us not give
heed to soothsayers, fortune-tellers, and jugglers, but to God who
knoweth all things certainly, whose knowledge is universal. Thus we
shall know all that it befits us to know, and shall obtain all good
things, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[505:1408](1130120.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p15"></span> Gr. “by saying *entering*, the word
implies *entering covertly*.”

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[505:1409](1130120.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p16"></span> Lit. “heaped.”

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[505:1410](1130120.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p20"></span> B. has this punctuation.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[506:1411](1130120.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p25"></span> Gr. “followed up.”

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[506:1412](1130120.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p28"></span> al. “I have.”

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[507:1413](1130120.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p38"></span> This corresponds to [Job xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.viii-p38.1"></span>,
in our version, which stands thus: “Wilt thou condemn Me, that thou
mayest be righteous?” Still he was approved, c. [Job
42.8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.viii-p38.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[507:1414](1130120.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p40"></span> B. has ἐν for οὐ, which must be right.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[507:1415](1130120.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p42"></span> Instead of “It is good,” &c., one <span
class="c16"><span id="v.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>ms</span>. has, “so also
of the questions concerning God, some are such as to present a solution
at once to the enquirer, but others so secret and hidden as even to
cause the destruction of those who are too curiously eager to get
knowledge.”

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[507:1416](1130120.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p44"></span> i.e. even what He permits is, to us,
His appointment.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[508:1417](1130120.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p45"></span> γράμματα, lit. letters. The
γραμματισταὶ taught reading, writing, and arithmetic. See Johannes a
Wower de Polymathia, c. vi. Græv. tom. ix. Hales suspects the number
6000, but it may refer to computations of money, as the talent contains
600 denarii, or 6000 asses.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[508:1418](1130120.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p48"></span> i.e. Satan’s.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[508:1419](1130120.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p50"></span> He may allude to the burning of Daphne,
lamented by Libanius, Or. 61, which is preserved by St. Chrysostom in
his work on St. Babylas, § 18, Ben. t. 2, p. 566, where he also mentions
this inability to discover the cause.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[509:1420](1130120.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p52"></span> Downes thinks it should be “events not
to come,” but the contrast is in the *form* of the prediction. The
aorist would justify, “the event *perchance* does not happen.”

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[509:1421](1130120.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p53"></span> Lit. “pickles.”

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[509:1422](1130120.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="v.iv.viii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p55"></span> Referring to [1 Sam. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.viii-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy 3:16,17](1130121)
