[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcwe06)  [Next](wcwe08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISAIM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Witch-Cult in Western Europe*, by Margaret Alice Murray, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VII. THE ORGANIZATION

THE cult was organized in as careful a manner as any other religious
community; each district however was independent, and therefore Mather
is justified in saying that the witches 'form themselves after the
manner of Congregational Churches'.\[1\]

## 1. The Officer

The Chief or supreme Head of each district was known to the recorders as
the 'Devil'. Below him in each district, one or more officers-according
to the size of the district-were appointed by the chief. The officers
might be either men or women; their duties were to arrange for meetings,
to send out notices, to keep the record of work done, to transact the
business of the community, and to present new members. Evidently these
persons also noted any likely convert, and either themselves entered
into negotiations or reported to the Chief, who then took action as
opportunity served. At the Esbats the officer appears to have taken
command in the absence of the Grand Master; at the Sabbaths the officers
were merely heads of their own Covens, and were known as Devils or
Spirits, though recognized as greatly inferior to the Chief. The
principal officer acted as clerk at the Sabbath and entered the witches'
reports in his book; if he were a priest or ordained minister, he often
performed part of the religious service; but the Devil himself always
celebrated the mass or sacrament. In the absence of all direct
information on the subject, it seems likely that the man who acted as
principal officer became Grand Master on the death of the previous Chief
Occasionally the Devil appointed a personal attendant for himself, who
waited upon him on all solemn occasions, but does not appear to have
held any official position in the community.

\[1. Cotton Mather, p. 160.\]

Estebene de Cambrue (1567) said that 'elle a veu au Sabbat vn Notaire
qu'elle nomme, lequel a accoustumé de leuer les defauts de celles qui
ont manqué de se trouuer au Sabbat.'\[1\] At the North Berwick meetings
(1590), there were several officers, of whom Fian was the chief

'Robert Griersoun being namit, they all ran hirdie-girdie and wer
angrie: for it wes promisit he sould be callit "Ro<sup>t</sup> the
Comptroller, alias Rob the Rowar," for expreming of his name.--Johnne
Fiene wes ewer nerrest to the Devill, att his left elbok; Gray Meill
kepit the dur.--The accusation of the saide Geillis Duncane aforesaide,
who confessed he \[Fian\] was their Regester, and that there was not one
man suffered to come to the Divels readinges but onelie hee.--\[Fian's
confession\] That at the generall meetinges of those witches, he was
always present; that he was clarke to all those that were in subiection
to the Divels service, bearing the name of witches; that alway hee did
take their oathes for their true service to the Divell; and that he
wrote for them such matters as the Divell still pleased to commaund
him.'\[2\]

Elizabeth Southerns, otherwise known as old Mother Demdike (1613), 'was
generall agent for the Deuill in all these partes'.\[3\] The 'eminent
warlok' Robert Grieve of Lauder (1649) 'was brought to a Confession of
his being the *Devils Officer* in that Countrey for warning all Satans
Vassals to come to the Meetings, where, and whensoever the Devil
required. . . . The Devil gave him that charge, to be his Officer to
warn all to the meetings; (as was said before,) in which charge he
continued for the space of eighteen years and more.'\[4\] The evidence
concerning Isobel Shyrie at Forfar (1661) is too long to quote, but it
is clear that she acted as the officer.\[5\] Isobel Gowdie (1662) says
definitely, 'Johne Young, in Mebestowne, is Officer to owr Coeven', and
remarks in another part of her confession that 'Johne Yownge in
Mebestowne, owr Officer, did drywe the plewghe'.\[6\] The only
indication of a change of personnel, is given by Janet Breadheid, of the
same Coven as Isobel Gowdie.

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 123.

2\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 219, 220, 239, 240.

3\. Potts, B 2.

4\. Sinclair, pp. 46, 47.

5\. Kinloch, pp. 124, 129.

6\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 605.\]

'Johne Taylor, my husband, was then Officer, bot Johne Young in
Mebestoune, is now Officer to my Coeven. Quhan I cam first ther, the
Divell called tham all be thair names, on the book; and my husband, than
called thame at the door. . . . Whan we haid Great Meittingis, Walter
Ledy, in Penick, my husband, and Alexander Elder, nixt to the Divell,
wer Ruleris; and quhan ther wold be but fewar, I my self, the deceassit
Jean Suthirland, Bessie Hay, Bessie Wilsone, and Janet Burnet wold rule
thaim.'\[1\]

In Somerset (1664) Anne Bishop appears to have been the chief personage
under the Devil, in other words the Officer.\[2\] At Paisley (1678)
Bessie Weir 'was Officer to their several meetings.--Bessie Weir did
intimate to him \[John Stewart\], that there was a meeting to be at his
house the next day: And that the Devil under the shape of a black man,
Margaret Jackson, Margery Craige, and the said Bessie Weir, were to be
present. And that the said Bessie Weir required the Declarant to be
there, which he promised.'\[3\] In New England (1692) it appears that
both Bridget Bishop and Martha Carrier held high rank, and were probably
Officers.

One duty seems to have been delegated to a particular individual, who
might perhaps hold no other office, or who might, on the other hand, be
the chief official; this was the manager, often the leader, of the
dance. As pace seems to have been an essential in the dance, the leader
was necessarily active and generally young. At North Berwick (1590)
'John Fein mussiled led the ring'.\[4\] In Aberdeen (1596) Thomas Leyis
was the chief person in the dance; 'thow the said Thomas was formest and
led the ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, becaus scho spillet
your dans, and ran nocht so fast about as the rest.'\[5\] Isobel Cockie
of the same Coven was next in importance; 'in the quhilk danse, thow was
the ringleader nixt Thomas Leyis.'\[6\] Mr. Gideon Penman (1678), who
had once been minister at Crighton, went to the Sabbaths, where the
Devil spoke of him as 'Mr. Gideon, my chaplain'.\[7\] The witches said
that 'ordinarily Mr. Gideon was

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 617.

2\. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139, 147, 148.

3\. Id., pt. ii, pp. 291, 293.

4\. Pitcairn, i, pt. iii, p. 246.

5\. *Spalding Club Misc*., pp. 97, 98.

6\. Ib., p. 115.

7\. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.\]

in the rear in all their dances, and beat up those that were slow'. This
Mr. Gideon seems to be the same person as the 'warlock who formerly had
been admitted to the ministrie in the Presbyterian times, and now he
turnes a preacher under the devill.--This villan was assisting to Satan
in this action' \[giving the sacrament\]' and in preaching."

The personal attendant of the Devil is rare. At Aberdeen (1596) Issobell
Richie was accused that 'at that tyme thow ressauit thy honours fra the
Dewyll, thy maister, and wer appoynted be him in all tymes thairefter,
his speciall domestick servand and furriour'.\[1\] John McWilliarn
Sclater (1656) was appointed cloak-bearer to the Devil.\[3\]

The Devil's piper was also an official appointment in Scotland, but does
not occur elsewhere. John Douglas of Tranent (1659) was the Devil's
piper\[4\] and so also was a man mentioned by Sinclair: 'A reverend
Minister told me, that one who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confest
to him, that at a Ball of dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy
song to sing and play.'\[5\]

The Queen of the Sabbath may perhaps be considered as an official during
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, though in early times she was
probably the chief personage in the cult, as Pearson has pointed
out.\[6\] It is not unlikely that she was originally the same as the
Queen of Elf hame; in Scotland, however, in the seventeenth century,
there is a Maiden of the Coven, which was an important position in the
Esbat but entirely distinct from the Queen of Faery, while in other
places a woman, not the Queen, is often the officer and holds the
highest place after the Grand Master.

Elizabeth Stile of Windsor (1579) said that 'mother Seidre dwelling in
the Almeshouse, was the maistres Witche of all the reste'.\[7\] Marion
Grant of Aberdeen (1597) confessed that 'the Devill thy maister causit
the dans sindrie tymes with him and with Our Ladye, quha, as thow sayes,
was a fine woman, cled in a quhyte walicot'.\[8\] In France (1609) the

\[1. Law p. 145.

2\. *Spalding Club. Misc*., i, p. 142.

3\. *Spottiswoode Misc*., ii, p. 67.

4\. Ib., ii, p. 68.

5\. Sinclair, p. 219.

6\. Pearson, ii, p. 26.

7\. *Rehearsall*, par. 26.

8\. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, p. 171.\]

custom seems to have been universal, 'en chasque village trouuer vne
Royne du Sabbat', who sat at the Devil's left hand during the
celebration of the mass and received the offerings of the faithful.\[1\]
The witches called her both the Grande Maîtresse and the Reine du
Sabbat.\[2\] Isobel Gowdie's confession (1662) shows that the Queen of
Elthame was not the same as the chief woman of the Coven, for she saw
the Queen only on going into the fairy-howe, while the Maiden of the
Coven was at each meeting. 'We doe no great mater without owr
Maiden.--Quhan we ar at meat, or in any vther place quhateuir, the
Maiden of each Coven sittis abow the rest, nixt the Divell.'\[3\] In New
England (1692) Deliverance Hobbs confessed that 'the said G.B. preached
to them, and such a woman was their Deacon'.\[4\]

## 2. The Covens

The word coven is a derivative of 'convene', and is variously spelt
*coven*, *coeven*, *covine*, *cuwing*, and even *covey*. The special
meaning of the word among the witches is a 'band' or 'company', who were
set apart for the practice of the rites of the religion and for the
performance of magical ceremonies; in short, a kind of priesthood.

The Coven was composed of men and women, belonging to one district,
though not necessarily all from one village, and was ruled by an officer
under the command of the Grand Master. The members of the Coven were
apparently bound to attend the weekly Esbat; and it was they who were
instructed in and practised magical arts, and who performed all the
rites and ceremonies of the cult. The rest of the villagers attended the
Esbats when they could or when they felt so inclined, but did not
necessarily work magic, and they attended the Sabbaths as a matter of
course. This view of the organization of the religion is borne out by
the common belief in modern France:

'Il est de croyance générale qu'il *faut un nombre fixe de sorciers et
de sorcières dans chaque canton*. Le nouvel initié reprend les *vieux
papiers* de l'ancien.--Les mauvaises

\[1. De Lancre, *L'Incredulité*, p. 36.

2\. Id., *Tableau*, p. 401.

3\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 610, 613.

4 Burr, p. 417.\]

gens forment une confrérie qui est dirigée par une sorcière. Celle-ci a
la *jarretière* comme marque de sa dignité. Elles se la transmettent
successivement par rang d'ancienneté. Il n'existe que cette différence
de rang entre les sorciers et les sorcières. Ceux-là se recrutent aussi
bien parmi les gens *mariés* que chez les *célibataires*.'\[1\]

The 'fixed number' among the witches of Great Britain seems to have been
thirteen: twelve witches and their officer. The actual numbers can be
obtained, as a rule, only when the full record of the trial is
available; for when several witches in one district are brought to trial
at the same time they will always be found to be members of a Coven, and
usually the other members of the Coven are implicated or at least
mentioned.

The earliest account of a Coven is in the trial of Bessie Dunlop (1567);
when Thom Reid was trying to induce her to join the society, he took her
'to the kill-end, quhair he forbaid her to speik or feir for onye thing
sche hard or saw; and quhene thai had gane ane lyfle pece fordwerd, sche
saw twelf persounes, aucht wemene and four men: The men wer cled in
gentilmennis clething, and the wemene had all plaiddis round about thame
and wer verrie semelie lyke to se; and Thom was with thame.'\[2\]
Clearly this was a Coven with Thom as the Officer, and he had brought
Bessie to see and be seen. The witches tried at St. Osyth in Essex in
1582 were thirteen in number.\[3\] At the meeting of the North Berwick
witches (1590) to consult on the means to compass the king's death, nine
witches stood 'in ane cumpany', and the rest 'to the nowmer of threttie
persons in ane vthir cumpany'; in other words, there were thirty-nine
persons, or three Covens, present.\[4\] At Aberdeen (1596-7) sixty-four
names of witches occur in the trials; of these, seven were merely
mentioned as being known to the accused, though not as taking part in
the ceremonies, and five were acquitted; thus leaving fifty-two persons,
or four Covens. Out of these fifty-two, one was

\[1. Lemoine, *La Tradition*, 1892, vi, pp. 108, 109. The italics are in
the original.

2\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 52.

3\. Witches taken at St. Oses.

4\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 245.\]

condemned and executed at the assize in 1596 and twelve in 1597, making
in all thirteen persons, or one Coven, who were put to death.\[1\] The
great trial of the Lancashire witches in 1613 gives a grand total of
fifty-two witches, or four Covens, whose names occur in the record. This
includes the three Salmesbury witches mentioned by Grace Sowerbuts,
whose evidence was discredited as being the outcome of a 'Popish plot'
to destroy the three women as converts to the Reformed Church; but as
the record shows that the other accused witches were tried on similar
charges and condemned, it may be concluded that other causes occasioned
the acquittal. Taking together, however, only those witches who are
mentioned, in these trials, as having actually taken part in the
ceremonies and practices of witchcraft in the neighbourhood of Pendle,
it will be found that there were thirty-nine persons, or three
Covens.\[2\] In Guernsey in 1617 Isabel Becquet confessed that--

'at the Sabbath the Devil used to summon the Wizards and Witches in
regular order (she remembered very well having heard him call the old
woman *Collette* the first, in these terms: *Madame the Old Woman
Becquette*): then the woman *Fallaise*; and afterwards the woman
*Hardie*. Item, he also called *Marie*, wife of *Massy*, and daughter of
the said *Collette*. Said that after them she herself was called by the
Devil: in these terms: *The Little Becquette*: she also heard him call
there *Collas Becquet*, son of the said old woman (who \[Collas\] held
her by the hand in dancing, and some one \[a woman\] whom she did not
know, held her by the other hand): there were about six others there she
did not know.'\[3\]

At Queensferry in 1644 thirteen women were tried and seven executed for
witchcraft.\[4\]

At Alloa (1658), though thirteen persons, or one Coven, were brought to
trial, the word is used to indicate a smaller number: 'Margret Duchall
lykewayis declared that ther was sex women mair besyd hir self that was
in thair cuwing' \[then follow the names of the six\].--'Jonet Blak
confessed severall meetings with the abowenamed cuwing.--Kathren Renny
being asked quhat meetingis scho

\[1. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, pp. 87 seq.

2\. Potts.

3\. Goldsmid, p. 13. Translated from the French record.

4\. Fyfe, p. 87.\]

had with the diwell, and the rest of hir cuwing, scho ansuered scho had
severall meitingis with all tham abowenamed.'\[1\] Little Jonet Howat of
Forfar (1661) said, 'Ther was thair present with the divell besyd
hirselfe, quhom he callit the prettie dauncer, the said Issobell Syrie,
Mairie Rynd, Hellen Alexander, Issobell Dorward, and utheris whoise
names shoe did not know, to the number of 13 of all.'\[2\] The trial of
Jonet Kerr and Issobell Ramsay at Edinburgh (1661) gives the names of
thirteen persons, or one Coven.\[3\] At Crook of Devon (1662) there
'were tried twelve women and one man, i.e. one Coven.\[4\] Isobel Gowdie
of Auldearne (1662) gives the most detail concerning the Covens: 'Jean
Mairten is Maiden of owr Coeven. Johne Younge is Officer to owr
Coeven.--Ther ar threttein persons in ilk Coeven.' Her evidence shows
that there were several Covens in the district:, The last tyme that owr
Coven met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill of Earlseat,
and befor that we ves beyond the Meikle-burne; and the vther Coven being
at the Downie-hillis, we went besyd them.--\[She and four others\] with
the Divell, wer onlie at the making of it \[a charm\], bot all the
multitude of all owr Coevens got notice of it, at the next meitting . .
. all my owin Coeven gott notice of it werie schortlie.' She also notes
that each member of her Coven 'has an Sprit to wait wpon ws, quhan ve
pleas to call wpon him'. Janet Breadheid, of the same Coven as Isobel
Gowdie, gives the names of thirty-nine persons, or three Covens, who
were present in the Kirk of Nairn when she was admitted into the
Society.\[5\] In Somerset (1664) the number of accused was twenty-six
persons, or two Covens.\[6\] At Newcastle-on-Tyne (1673) Ann Armstrong
stated that at the meeting at the 'rideing house in the close on the
common' she saw ten men and women whom she knew and 'thre more, whose
names she knowes not'. At another meeting 'at Rideing Millne bridg-end
she see the said Anne Forster, Anne Dryden, and

\[1. *Scottish Antiquary*, ix, pp. 50-2.

2\. Kinloch, p. 114.

3\. From the record of the trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.

4\. Burns Begg, pp. 219 seq.

5\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603-17.

6\. Glanvil. pt. ii; pp. 140 seq.\]

Luce Thompson, and tenne more, unknowne to her.--Att the house of John
Newton off the Riding, the said Lucy wished that a boyl'd capon with
silver scrues might come down to her and the rest, which were five
coveys consisting of thirteen person in every covey. At a large meeting
at Allensford, where a great many witches were present, 'every thirteen
of them had a divell with them in sundry shapes.' It is also noticeable
that Ann Armstrong mentions twenty-six persons by name as having been at
various meetings to her knowledge.\[1\] At Paisley (1692) thirteen
persons of high position brought an action for libel against six others
for saving that they, the thirteen, had drunk the Devil's health in the
house of one of them; the libellers were punished, but the number of
persons libelled suggests that the accusation' might have been true."'

## 3. Duties

An important part of the organization was the system of reporting to the
Grand Master everything which had happened since the previous Great
Assembly. The chief work of the Covens was the performance of magical
rites, either publicly at the Esbats or privately in the houses of the
witches and their neighbours. As these rites, especially when performed
privately, were more or less in the nature of experiments, the results
were reported and when successful were recorded in writing for future
use. The book in which the records were made remained in the hands of
the Devil, who in this way had always a store of well-tried magical
spells and recipes to kill or cure, from which he could instruct his
followers as occasion demanded.

The position of the Devil as the instructor of the witches is to be
found in most of the trials in Great Britain. Cooper states this
plainly: 'He *deliuers* unto his *Proselite*, and so to the rest, *the
Rules of his Art*, instructing them in the manner of hurting and
helping, and acquainting them with such *medicines* and *poysons* as are
vsuall herevnto.'\[3\]. Bessie Dunlop (1567) never attempted to cure any
disease without

\[1. *Surtees Soc*., xl, pp. 191, 192; *Denham Tracts*, ii, pp. 300-2,
304.

2\. Hector, i, pp. 51-6.

3\. Cooper, *Mystery*, pp. 90-2.\]

first consulting Thom Reid, 'quhen sundrie persounes cam to hir to seik
help for thair beist, thair kow or yow, or for ane barne that was tane
away with ane evill blast of wind, or elf-grippit, sche gait and sperit
at Thom, Quhat mycht help thame?--Sche culd do nathing, quhill sche had
first spokin with Thom.'\[1\] Alison Peirson (1588) learnt her craft
from Mr. William Simpson, her mother's brother's son, who lived among
the fairy folk; 'the saide Mr Williame tauld hir of ewerie seiknes and
quhat herbis scho sould tak to haill thame, and how scho sould vse
thame; and gewis hir his directioune att all tymes." Agnes Sampson, the
Wise Wife of Keith (1590), always asked the Devil's advice in serious
cases; ' she had a familiar spirit, who upon her call, did appear in a
visible form, and resolve her of any doubtful matter, especially
concerning the life or death of persons lying sick.'\[3\] Grissel
Gairdner of Newburgh (1610) was executed for consulting with the
\[Devil\], and seiking of responssis fra him, at all tymes this fourtene
or fyftene 3eir bygane, for effectuating of hir devillisch
intentiones'.\[4\] Elspeth Reoch in Orkney (1616) confessed that the
fairy man, whom she met, told her 'he wald lerne her to ken and sie ony
thing she wald desyre'.\[5\] Isobel Haldane of Perth (1623) also
obtained all her information as to life and death from the man with the
'grey beird' whom she met among the fairy folk.\[6\] Jonet Rendall,
another Orkney witch (1629), stated that 'the devill apperit to you,
Quhom ye called Walliman, claid in quhyt cloathis with ane quhyt head
and ane gray beard, And said to you He sould learne yow to win almiss be
healling of folk'.\[7\] Sandie Hunter was only moderately successful in
curing cattle till he covenanted with the Devil, who 'came to him in the
form of a Mediciner, and said, *Sandie, you have too long followed my
trade, and never acknowledged me for your Master. You must now take on
with me, and be my servant, and I will make you more perfect in your
Calling*. Whereupon the man gave up himself to the Devil. After this, he
grew

\[1. Pitcairn, ii, pp. 53, 54.

2\. Id., ii, p. 164.

3\. Id., ii, p. 230.

4\. Id., iii, p. 96.

5\. *County Folklore*, iii, p. 112; *Mait. Cl. Misc*., ii, p. 188.

6\. Pitcairn, ii, p. 537.

7\. *County Folklore*, iii, p. 103.\]

very famous throw the Countrey, for his Charming and cureing of diseases
in Men and Beasts.' ''Reginald Scot says that the witches were taught by
the Devil to make magical ointments, and that he 'supplied their want of
powders and roots to intoxicate withal'.\[2\] It was the Devil who
pointed out which graves were to be opened in order to obtain the
material for working magic; and when the bodies had been exhumed and
dismembered, he told the witches how to use the fragments.\[3\] It was
the Devil who made\[4\] or baptized\[5\] the wax and clay images, and
who stuck the first thorn or pin into them.\[6\] It was the Devil who
held the mock plough at Auldearne, and taught the witches of that place
all the charms they knew. 'We get all this power from the Divell', says
Isobell Gowdie.\[7\] It was the Devil who instigated and superintended
the wrecking of the bridge at Cortaquhie, concerning which Helen Guthrie
said, 'shee her selfe, Jonnet Stout, and others of them did thrust ther
shoulderis againest the bridge', and Isobel Smyth confessed, 'Wee all
rewed that meitting, for wee hurt our selves lifting.'\[8\]

The book in which the magical recipes were recorded must have been of
great value to its owner, and one which he would not willingly allow to
pass out of his hands. A volume of this kind was known to be extant till
the beginning of the last century; it was called the Red Book of Appin.
There are two stories as to how it was taken from the Devil, but both
stories agree that it was obtained by a trick. It was in manuscript and
contained charms for the cure of cattle, and was consulted when cows
were bewitched and refused to give milk. It was also supposed to confer
magical powers on the owner, who was said to know what the inquiry would
be before the inquirer opened his lips; and it was in itself so magical
that the owner had to wear a hoop of iron on his head when turning its
leaves.\[9\] Another Devil's-book was carried away, apparently as a
joke, by Mr. Williamson of

\[1. Sinclair, p. 122.

2\. Scot, Bk. III, p. 43.

3\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 211, 2-39, 245-6.

4\. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 293-5.

5\. Id., pt. ii, pp. 137-8.

6\. Id., pt. ii, pp. 293-5.

7\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 605 seq.

8\. Kinloch, pp. 122, 133.

9\. Campbell, pp. 293-4.\]

Cardrona, who took it from the witches as they danced on Minchmoor, but
they followed him and he returned it.'

The system of reporting everything to the Chief of the community makes
it certain that he was supplied with such current information as made
his knowledge of public and private affairs appear miraculous to the
uninitiated. Even those who supplied that information had firm faith in
his supernatural power to kill or cure, and believed with equal ardour
in the charms which he taught them to make and use.

In reviewing the evidence it seems clear that the witches of the Covens
were bound to exercise their powers in the intervals between the
meetings; they were bound to attend those meetings, unless absolutely
prevented, in order to learn new methods as well as to make their
reports; and they were bound to obey the Grand Master's orders and to
treat him with the deference and respect due to his exalted position.

## 4. Discipline

Discipline was maintained by a system of rewards and punishments,
enforced or relaxed according to the personal character of the Chief. As
a rule only the severer punishments are recorded, but occasionally there
are indications of minor chastisements.

The contemporary writers make the system of rewards and punishments very
clear:

'Satan calleth them togither into a Diuelish Sinagoge, and that he may
also vnderstand of them howe well and diligently they haue fulfilled
their office of intoxicating committed vnto them, and whõ they haue
slaine.'\[2\] 'Such as are absent, and have no care to be assoygned, are
amerced to this paenalty, so to be beaten on the palms of their feete,
to be whipt with iron rods, to be pincht and suckt by their Familiars
till their heart blood come, till they repent them of their sloath, and
promise more attendance and diligence for the future.'\[3\] '*Taking
account also of the proceedings* of his other Schollers, and so
approuing or condemning accordingly.'\[4\] Sometimes at their

\[1. *Berwickshire Naturalists Club*, xi, p. 265. Unfortunately the
author of the article gives neither her authority for the statement, nor
any indication of the date of the occurrence.

2\. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3\. Gaule, p, 65.

4\. Cooper, p. 91.\]

solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what wickedness he
hath committed, and according to the hainousness and detestableness of
it, he is honoured and respected with a general applause. Those on the
contrary, that have done no evil, are beaten and punished.'\[1\]

The usual punishment was beating, which was inflicted for various
offences, 'chiefly disrespect or neglect of duty. At Arras in 1460 Jean
Tacquet, a rich eschevin, 'had endeavoured to withdraw his allegiance
from Satan who had forced him to continue it by beating him cruelly with
a bull's pizzle.'\[2\] In Lorraine (1589) the Grand Master seems to have
been peculiarly brutal:

'Jana Gerardina, Catharina Russa, und Francisca Fellaea bezeugten, dass
sie mehr als einmal schwerlich mit harten Streichen hätten büssen
müssen, wenn sie keinen Schaden oder Unglück angestifft hätten. Und wie
Nicolaea Morelia sagt, hat er sie dermassen zerschlagen, dass ihr der
Athem davon ausgeblieben, und sie bey nahe gestorben wäre; Uber welches
sich dann nicht zu verwundern sey, sintemahl er eiserne Hände habe, mit
denen er ihnen so unbarmhertzig die Köpffe zerschlagen, dass sie deren
nicht mehr empfinden.'\[3\]

In the Lyons district (1598) 'les; Sorciers rendent conte à Satan de ce
qu'ils ont fait dés la derniere assemblée, estans ceux là les mieux
venus qui ont commis le plus de meschancetez. Les autres sont sifflez &
mocquez de tous; l'on les fait mettre à l'escart, & sont encor le plus
soutient battus & maltraitez de leur Maistre'.\[1\] According to Bodin,
'chacun Sorcier doit rendre compte du mal qu'il a faict sur peine
d'estre bien battu.'\[5\] De Lancre says, 'Les Sorciers le vont adorer
trois nuicts durant. Ceux qui par nonchalance, ou autre petit
empeschement ne s'y trouuent, sont foüettez & battus à l'outrance.'\[6\]
Alexander Hamilton (1630) stated that 'thair was ane new tryst appointed
be him to be keipit wt thame altogidder within xiii days thereftir upon
the cauldbit mure Quhilk meitting was nocht keipit be the said Alexr for
the quhilk caus and breking of that tryst the said Alexr was

\[1. *Pleasant Treatise*, pp. 6-7.

2\. Lea, iii, p. 525.

3\. Remigius, pt. i, cap. xiii. p. 59.

4\. Boguet, p. 139.

5\. Bodin, p. 189.

6\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 398.\]

maist rigorouslie strukin be the devill wt ane battoun at ane meitting
keipit betuix thame schortlie thereftir upone gairnetoune hillis'.\[1\]
In France (1652) two sisters were tried for witchcraft: 'Icelle confesse
n'avoir faict mourir qu'un vaulx et d'avoir été battu par le diable,
deux fois, parce qu'elle ne vouloit faire mourir aultres personnes et
bestiault.' The other sister was 'interrogée sy le diable ne luy avoit
conseillé de cracher la Sainte Hostie hors de sa bouche, ou bien ne la
point recepvoir, dist que non, mais bien que le diable l'at une fois
battue fort parce qu'elle l'avoit receu'.\[1\] The girls at Lille (1661)
informed Madame Bourignon that the witches 'are constrained to offer him
their Children, or else the Devil would Beat them'.\[3\] Isobel Gowdie's
account is, as usual, very full:

'Som tymis, among owr felwis, we wold be calling him "Blak Johne", or
the lyk, and he wold ken it, and heir ws weill aneughe; and he ewin then
com to ws, and say, "I ken weill aneughe what 3e wer sayeing of me!" And
then he vold beat and buffet ws werie sor. We wold be beattin if ve wer
absent any tyme, or neglect any thing that wold be appointit to be done.
Allexr Elder, in Earlseat, vold be werie often beattin. He is bot soft,
and cowld never defend him self in the leist, bot greitt and cry, quhan
he vold be scourging him. Bot Margret Wilson, in Auldearne, wold defend
hir selfe fynelie, and cast wp hir handis to keip the stroakis off from
hir; and Bessie Wilson would speak crustie with hir townge, and wold be
belling again to him stowtlie. He wold be beatting and scurgeing ws all
wp and downe with cardis \[cords\] and vther sharp scurges, like naked
gwhastis; and we wold still be cryeing, "Pittie! pittie! Mercie! mercie,
owr Lord!" Bot he vold haue neither pittie nor mercie. When he vold be
angrie at ws, he wold girne at ws lyk a dowge, as iff he wold swallow ws
wp.'\[4\]

The Swedish witches (1669) also had reason to complain of their
Grand-Master's cruelty: 'heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one
of their Children \[to the meeting\] or a strangers Child with them, but
now he did plague them and

\[1. From the record of the trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.

2 Van Elven, *La Tradition,* v (1891), p. 215. The names of the witches;
and the place are not given.

3\. Bourignon, *Vie*, p. 222 Hale, p. 37.

4\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.\]

whip them if they did not procure him Children.'\[1\] Among the
Northumberland witches (1673):

'All of them who had donne harme gave an accoant thereof to their
protector, who made most of them that did most harme, and beate those
who had donne no harme.--At the said meeting their particular divell
tooke them that did most evill, and danced with them first, and called
every of them to an account, and those that did most evill he maid most
of.--The devill, in the forme of a little black man and black cloaths,
calld of one Isabell Thompson, of Slealy, widdow, by name, and required
of her what service she had done him. She replyd she had gott power of
the body of one Margarett Teasdale. And after he had danced with her he
dismissed her and call'd of one Thomasine, wife of Edward Watson, of
Slealy.'\[2\]

Punishments for minor offences are rarely recorded. At North Berwick
(1590), when the witches returned after sinking a ship, 'seeing that
they tarried over long, hee at their comming enjoyned them all to a
pennance, which was, that they should kisse his buttockes, in sign of
duety to him.'\[3\] At Aberdeen (1597) Christen Mitchell confessed that
when the Devil asked her to join, 'thow ansuerit, I will enter in thy
band, bot I will nocht byd thairin; and thairefter that the Devill gawe
the a wisk, and thow fell on thy face one the dyk of that yaird.'\[4\]
Beigis Tod, who belonged to one of the North Berwick Covens but was not
tried till 1608, was late in arriving at a meeting, 'quhair the Deuill
appeirit to thame, and reprovet the said Beigis Tod verrie scherplie,
for hir long tayreing; to quhome scho maid this ansuer, "Sir, I could
wyn na soner."'\[5\] At Lille if any witch desired to leave the
religion, 'the Devil reproves them then more severely, and obligeth them
to new Promises.'\[6\] Occasionally the witches kept discipline among
themselves; this seems to have been the case only when the culprit
prevented the proper execution of magical performances. At Aberdeen
Thomas Leyis 'led the ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, becaus
scho spillit your dans, and ran nocht sa fast about as the rest.'\[7\]
At

\[1. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 318.

2\. *Surtees Soc*., xl, pp. 191, 195, 197.

3\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 217.

4\. *Spalding Club* Misc., i, p. 165.

5\. Pitcairn, ii, p. 542.

6\. Bourignon, *Vie*, p. 223 Hale, p. 38.

7\. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, p. 97.\]

Auldearne Isobel Gowdie described how the witches used flint
arrow-heads: 'I shot at the Laird of Park, as he ves crossing the Burn
of Boath; bot, thankis to God now, that he preserwit him. Bessie Hay gaw
me a great cuffe, becaus I missed him.'\[1\] The former minister of
Crighton, Mr. Gideon Penman, acted as the Devil's chaplain; 'ordinarily
Mr. Gideon was in the rear in all their dances, and beat up all those
that were slow.'\[2\] But a reasonable excuse for trifling misdemeanours
could be accepted: 'The devill asked at Kathrine Moore quhair hir
Husband was that he came not she answered there was a young bairne at
home and that they could not both come.'\[3\]

Capital punishment was reserved for traitors, actual and potential. It
must have been brought into use only after the cult had fallen upon evil
days, and then only when the Chief himself was in danger. Beating to
death, hanging, and poison were the usual means of execution.

The earliest instance occurred in 1450, when the Church had begun to use
its power systematically against the witches. 'The Inquisitor of Como,
Bartolomeo de Homate, the podestà Lorenzo da Carorezzo, and the notary
Giovanni da Fossato, either out of curiosity or because they doubted the
witches whom they were trying, went to a place of assembly at Mendrisio
and witnessed the scene from a hiding-place. The presiding demon
pretended not to know their presence, and in due course dismissed the
assembly, but suddenly recalled his followers and set them on the
officials, who were so beaten that they died within fifteen days.'\[4\]
Alesoun Peirson (1588) was burnt as a witch, having gained her knowledge
from the fairies, who threatened that 'gif scho wald speik and tell of
thame and thair doingis, thay sould martir hir'.\[5\] The Lorraine
witches (1589) took an oath of silence, 'welchen Eyd sie so hoch und
heilig halten, dass wenn sie Eydbrüchig werden, so darffir halten, also
ob sie ewig darumb musten verdampt und gestrafft seyn.'\[6\] Alice
Gooderidge, the Derbyshire witch (1597), was tried for witchcraft,

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, p, 615.

2\. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

3\. *Highland Papers*, iii, p. 26.

4\. Lea, iii, p. 501.

5\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 163.

6\. Remigius, ch. xviii, p. 83.\]

'she should haue bin executed, but that her spirit killed her in the
prison.'\[1\] Jeannette d'Abadie (1609) was more fortunate than most in
that she was not killed, 'elle a esté battue au sabbat reellement &
corporelleme\[n\]t par deux sorcieres qu'elle nomme, par ce qu'elle
auoit reuelé les mysteres du sabbat.'\[2\] John Stewart, the 'juglour'
of Irvine (1618)--

'for his better preferring to the day of the assys, was put in ane
lockfast buith, quhair no maner of persoun might haif access to him
quhil the dounsitting of the justice court, and for avoyding of putting
violent handis on himself, was verie strictly gairdit and flitherit be
the airms, as us is, and upon that same day of the assys, about half ane
hour befoir the doun sitting of the justice court, Mr. David Dickson,
minister at Irving; and Mr. George Dunbar, minister of Air, having went
to him to exhort him to call on his God for mercie for his bygane wicked
and evil lyf and that God wold of his infinite mercie, lowis him out of
the handis of the devil quhom he had servit thir mony years by gane. He
acquiescit to their prayer and godlie exhortation, and utterit thir
wordis--I am so straithe gairdit that it lyis not in my hand to tak off
my bonnett, nor to gett bread to my mouth. And immediately after the
departing of the two ministers from him, the Juglour being sent for at
the desyr of my Lord of Eglintoune, to be confrontit with ane woman of
the burgh of Air, callit Janet Bous, quha was apprehendit by the
Magistrates of the burghe of Air, for witchcraft, to the burghe of
Irvine, purposlie for that effer. He was fund be the burrow officers,
quha went about him stranglit and hangit be the cruik of the dur, with
ane tait of hemp (or a string maid of hemp, supposed to haif been his
garten, or string of his bonnet) not above the length of twa span long,
his kneyis not being from the grund half ane span, and was brocht out of
the hous, his lyf not being so layt expellit: but notwithstanding of
quhatsomever meines usit to the contrair for remeid of his lyf, he
revievit not, but so endit his lyf miserable by the help of the devill
his maister.'\[3\]

Rebecca West, a young Essex witch (1645), confessed to Matthew Hopkins
that 'if shee should discover any thing, they all told the said Rebecca,
shee should endure more torments on earth, then could be in hell: and
the said Rebecca

\[1. Alse Gooderidge, p. 43.

2\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 91.

3\. Trial of Isobel Inch, p. 11.\]

told this informant that shee promised to keepe all their secrets; and
moreover they all told her, that shee must never confesse any thing,
although the rope were about her necke, and shee ready to be hanged'.'
In Fifeshire (1640) 'ane Mistres Hendersone (sister to Fordell
Hendersone, in the presbytrey of Dumfermling), sometymes lady of
Pittahro, being delated by many to be a witch, was apprehended and
caried to Edenbroughe, wher she was keiped fast; and after her remaining
in prison for a tyme, being in health att night, vpon the morne was
founde dead. It was thought, and spoken by many, that she wronged her
selfe, either by strangling or by poyson.'\[2\] The Swedish children
(1670) were not spared: 'if the Children did at any time name the Names
of those that had carried them away, they were again carried by force
either to Blockula, or to the Cross way, and there miserably beaten,
insomuch that some of them died of it.'\[3\] Whether Deliverance Hobbs
(1692) was actually beaten, or whether her statement was made from the
knowledge of what might happen to her, cannot be certain without
reference to the records of the trial itself, as Mather's bias is apt to
distort the evidence: 'She now testifi'd, that this *Bishop* tempted her
to Sign the *Book* again, and to deny what she had confess'd. She
affirm'd, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, which whipped her with
Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto.'\[4\] Elizabeth Anderson in
Renfrewshire (1696) went with her father to a witch-meeting, 'severals
of them being affraid that the Declarant would Confess, and tell of them
as she done formerly on her Grand-mother, they threatened to tear her
all in pieces if she did so.'\[5\] John Reid of the same Coven--

'after his Confession had called out of his prison Window, desiring
Baily Scott to keep that old body Angus Forrester, who had been his
fellow prisoner, closs and secure; whereupon the company asked John when
they were leaving him on Friday night the 21th of May, whether he
desired company or

\[1. Howell, iv, 842.

2\. Lamont, p. 12. For further particulars of this lady, see Ross,
*Aberdour and Inchcolme*, p. 339.

3\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 319.

4\. Cotton Mather, p. 131.

5\. *Narr. Of the Sufferings of a Yong Girle*, p. xl.\]

would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of anything: So being left
till Saturday in the Forenoon, he was found in this posture, viz.
sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the Chimney, with his
feet on the floor and his Body straight upward, his shoulders touching
the lintel of the Chimney, but his Neck tyed with his own neck-cloath
(whereof the knot was behind) to a small stick thrust into a hole above
the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the Company, especially John
Campbel a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought at first in respect of his
being in an ordinary posture of sitting, and the neck-cloath not having
any drawn knot (or *run loup*) but an ordinary one which was not very
strait, and the sticke not having the strength to bear the weight of his
Body or the struggle, that he had not been quite dead; but finding it
otherways, and that he was in such a Situation that he could not have
been the Actor thereof himself, concluded that some extraordinary Agent
had done it, especially considering that the Door of the Room was
secured, and that there was a board set over the Window which was not
there the night before when they left him.'\[1\]

A similar fate befell the warlock Playfair in 1597. He was found
strangled in his prison at Dalkeith with the 'point' of his breeches
tied round his neck.\[2\]

\[1. *Narr. Of the Sufferings of a Yong Girle*, p. xliv; *Sadducismus
Debellatus*, pp. 43-4.

2\. Sharpe, P 46.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Familiars and Transformations](wcwe08.md)
