[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcweapp3)  [Next](wcweapp5) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISAIM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Witch-Cult in Western Europe*, by Margaret Alice Murray, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX IV

### JOAN OF ARC AND GILLES DE RAIS

THESE two personages-so closely connected in life and dying similar
deaths, yet as the poles asunder in character-have been minutely studied
from the historical and medical. points of view, and in the case of Joan
from the religious standpoint also. But hitherto the anthropological
aspect has been disregarded. This is largely due to the fact that these
intensive studies have been made of each person separately, whereas to
obtain the true perspective the two should be taken together. This
individual treatment is probably owing to the wide divergence of the two
characters; the simplicity and purity of the one is in marked contrast
with the repulsive attributes of the other. Yet anthropologically
speaking the tie between the two is as strongly marked as the contrast
of character.

The case of Joan is easily studied, as the documents are
accessible.\[1\] Anatole France has realized that behind Joan there lay
some unseen power, which Charles VII feared and from which he
unwillingly accepted help. M. France sees in this power a party in the
Church, and in his eyes the Church was a house divided against itself.
Though agreeing with the view that Joan was the rallying-point of a
great and powerful organization, I see in that organization the
underlying religion which permeated the lower orders of the people in
France as in England; that religion which I have set forth in the
foregoing chapters. The men-at-arms, drawn from the lower orders,
followed without hesitation one whom they believed to have been sent by
their God, while the whole army was commanded by Marshal Gilles de Rais,
who apparently tried to belong to both religions at once.

## 1. Joan of Arc

The questions asked by the judges at Joan's trial show that they were
well aware of an underlying organization of which they stood in some
dread. The judges were ecclesiastics, and the accusation against the
prisoner was on points of Christian faith and doctrine and
ecclesiastical observance. It was the first great trial of strength
between the old and the new religions, and the political conditions gave
the victory to the new, which was triumphant accordingly. 'We have
caught her now', said the Bishop of Beauvais, and she was burned without
even the formality of handing her over to the secular authorities. After
the execution, the judges and counsellors who had sat in judgement on
Joan received letters of indemnity from the Great Council; the
Chancellor of England sent letters to the Emperor, to the kings and
princes of Christendom, to all the nobles and towns of France,
explaining that King Henry and his Counsellors had put Joan to death
through zeal for the Christian Faith and the University of Paris sent
similar letters to the Pope, the Emperor, and

\[1. It is advisable to read the trial in the original Latin and French,
as the translations have often a Christian bias, e.g. 'the King of
Heaven' being rendered as 'our Lord' ' and 'my Lord' as 'our Saviour'.
This is not merely inaccurate but actually misleading.\]

the College of Cardinals. Such action can hardly be explained had Joan
been an ordinary heretic or an ordinary political prisoner. But if she
were in the eyes of the great mass of the population not merely a
religious leader but actually the incarnate God, then it was only
natural for the authorities who had compassed her death, to shelter
themselves behind the bulwark of their zeal for the Christian religion,
and to explain to the heads of that religion their reasons for the
execution. On the other hand, the belief that Joan was God Incarnate
will account, as nothing else can, for the extraordinary supineness of
the French, who never lifted a finger to ransom or rescue Joan from the
hands of either the Burgundians or the English. As God himself or his
voluntary substitute she was doomed to suffer as the sacrifice for the
people, and no one of those people could attempt to save her.

In comparing the facts elicited at the trial with the Dianic Cult as set
out in the previous chapters, the coincidences are too numerous to be
merely accidental. I do not propose to enter into a detailed discussion
of the trial, I only wish to draw attention to a few points in this
connexion.

The questions put to Joan on the subject of fairies appear to the modern
reader to be entirely irrelevant, though much importance was evidently
attached to her answers by the Court. She could not disprove, though she
denied, the popular rumour that 'Joan received her mission at the tree
of the Fairy-ladies' (Iohanna ceperat factum suum apud arborem Dominarum
Fatalium), and she was finally forced to admit that she had first met
the 'Voices' near that spot. Connexion with the fairies was as damning
in the eyes of the Bishop of Beauvais and his colleagues as it was later
in the eyes of the judges who tried John Walsh and Aleson Peirson.

The names of Christian saints, given to the persons whom Joan called her
'Voices', have misled modern writers; but the questions showered upon
her show that the judges had shrewd suspicions as to the identity of
these persons. That the 'Voices' were human beings is very clear from
Joan's own testimony: 'Those of my party know well that the Voice had
been sent to me from God, they have seen and known this Voice. My king
and many others have also heard and seen the Voices which came to me. .
. . I saw him \[St. Michael\] with my bodily eyes as well as I see you.'
She refused to describe I St. Michael'; and bearing in mind some of the
descriptions of the Devil in later trials, it is interesting to find
that when the judges put the direct question to her as to whether I St.
Michael' came to her naked, she did not give a direct answer. Later the
following dialogue took place If the devil were to put himself in the
form or likeness an angel, how would you know if it were a good or an
evil angel?' asked the judges. Again Joan's reply was not direct: 'I
should know quite well if it were St. Michael or a counterfeit.' She
then stated that she had seen him many times before she knew him to be
St. Michael; when a child she had seen him and had been afraid at first.
Pressed for a description, she said he came ' in the form of a true
honest man' \[tres vray preudomme, forma unius verissimi probi
hominis\].\[1\] The accounts of the trial prove that Joan continually
received advice from the 'saints'. The person whom she called 'St.
Katherine' was obviously in the castle and able to communicate with the
prisoner; this was not difficult, for the evidence shows that there was
a concealed opening between Joan's room and the next. It was in the
adjoining room, close to the opening, that the notaries sat to take down
Joan's words when the spy Loyseleur engaged her in conversation; and it
was evidently through this opening that 'St. Katherine' spoke when she
awoke Joan 'without touching her', and again when Joan could not hear
distinctly what she said 'on account of the noise in the castle'. A
remark of Joan's that 'she often saw them \[the Voices\] among the
Christians, they themselves unseen', is noteworthy for the use of the
word *Christian*, suggesting that the 'Voices' were of a different
religion. The remark should also be compared with the account given by
Bessie Dunlop as to her recognizing Thom Reid when those about him did
not know him; and with the statement by Danaeus that I among a great
company of men, the Sorcerer only knoweth Satan, that is present, when
other doo not know him, although they see another man, but who or what
he is they know not'.

The points of mortal sin, of which Joan finally stood accused, were the
following: 1, The attack on Paris on a feast day; 2, taking the Horse of
the Bishop of Senlis; 3, leaping from the tower of Beaurevoir; 4,
wearing male costume; 5, consenting to the death of Franquet d'Arras at
Lagny.

Of these the most surprising to modern ideas is the one referring to
costume, yet it was on this that the judges laid most stress. Even the
severest of sumptuary laws has never made the wearing of male dress by a
woman a capital crime; yet, though Joan had recanted and had been
received into the Church, the moment that she put on male attire she was
doomed on that account only. Whether she

\[1. Compare Bessie Dunlop's more homely description of Thom Reid. An
honest wele elderlie man.'\]

donned it by accident, by treachery, by force, or out of bravado, tile
extraordinary fact remains that the mere resuming of male garments was
the signal for her death without further trial. On the Sunday she wore
the dress, on the Monday she was condemned, on the Tuesday the sentence
was communicated to her, on the Wednesday she was burned, as an
'idolator, apostate, heretic, relapsed'. If, as I suppose, she were a
member of the Dianic Cult, the wearing of male attire must have been,
for her, an outward sign of that faith, and the resuming of it indicated
the relapse; the inscription on the high cap, which she wore at her
execution, shows that the judges at least held this opinion. Throughout
the trial questions were poured upon her as to her reasons for wearing
the dress, and she acknowledged that she wore it, not by the advice of a
human man \[per consilium hominis mundi\] . . . 'Totum quod feci est per
praeceptum Domimi, et si aliam praeciperet assumere ego assumerem,
postquam hoc esset per praeceptum Dei.' Asked if she thought she would
have been committing mortal sin by wearing women's clothes, she answered
that she did better in obeying and serving her supreme Lord, who is God.
She refused to wear women's dress except by command of God: 'I would
rather die than revoke what God has made me do.'

On her letters were placed sometimes the words Jhesus Maria or a cross.
'Sometimes I put a cross as a sign for those of my party to whom I wrote
so that they should not do as the letters said.' Though the mark was
merely a code-signal to the recipient of the letter, it seems hardly
probable that a Christian of that date would have used the symbol of the
Faith for such a purpose. She also consistently refused to take an oath
on the Gospels, and was with difficulty persuaded to do so on the
Missal. When she was asked whether she had ever blasphemed
\[blasphemaverit\] God, she replied that she had never cursed the Saints
\[maledixit Sanctum vel Sanctam\]. When pressed whether she had not
denied \[denegaverit\] God, she again refused a direct answer, saying
that she had not denied the Saints \[denegaverit Sanctum nec Sanctam\].

The general feeling towards her among the Christian priesthood is shown
by the action of Brother Richard. When he first entered her presence 'he
made the sign of the cross and sprinkled holy water, and I said to him,
Approach boldly, I shall not fly away.'

Another point to be noted is her answer that she learned the
Paternoster, Ave Maria, and Credo from her mother, thus proving that she
was not of a witch-family. According to Reginald Scot it was sufficient
evidence to condemn a woman to death as a witch if her mother had been a
witch before her. At the same time, however, Joan refused to say the
Paternoster except in confession, when the priest's lips would have been
sealed if she had proved herself not to be a Christian. She was very
urgent to confess to the Bishop of, Beauvais, but he was too wary to be
caught.

She first heard the 'Voices' at the age of thirteen, the usual time for
the Devil and the witch to make 'paction'. One of her followers,
Pierronne, was burnt as a witch, avowing to the last that she had spoken
with God as friend with friend, and describing the costume of her Deity
with a detail which shows the reality of the occurrence. If also there
is any weight to be attached to certain names--as seems likely after
studying the lists given above--then we have in this history four of the
chief witch-names; Joan, the daughter of Isabel, and the two saints
Katherine and Margaret. These coincidences may be small, but there are
too many of them to be ignored.

There is evidence from Joan's own words that she felt herself divine and
also that she knew her time was limited, but she never realized till the
last that th end meant death; this, however, the 'Voices' knew and it
was for this that they were preparing her. At the beginning of the
trial, 'she said she had come from God, and had nothing to do here,
asking to be sent back to God from whom she came \[dixit quod venit ex
parte Dei, et non habet quid negotiari quidquam, petens ut remitteretur
ad Deum a quo venerat\]. 'Many times she said to him \[the King\], I
shall live a year, barely longer. During that year let as much as
possible be done.' The 'Voices' told her she would be taken before the
feast of St. John, and that thus it must be, and that she must not be
troubled but accept willingly and God would help her. They also said it
was necessary for her to be captured: 'Receive all willingly, care not
for thy martyrdom, thou shalt come at last to the kingdom of paradise.'
On the fatal Tuesday when she learned her doom, flesh and spirit quailed
at the prospect of the agony to come, and she cried out that her
'Voices' had deceived her, for she had thought that in her imprisonment
she had already suffered the promised martyrdom. Yet within twenty-four
hours she went to the stake with courage unquenched, acknowledging that
her 'Voices' were from God. Like John Fian nearly two centuries later,
her spirit had sunk at first, and again like Fian she endured to the
end, dying a martyr to the God who had exploited her confidence and
simplicity and whom she had served so well. To her de Lancre's words
might well apply, 'The witches are so devoted to his service that
neither torture nor death can affright them, and they go to martyrdom
and to death for love of him as gaily as to a festival of pleasure and
public rejoicing.'

The ashes were collected and thrown into running water; a common rite,
in religions of the Lower Culture, after the sacrifice of the Incarnate
God. It is also worth noting that Rouen was one of the French cities in
which there was still a living tradition of human sacrifice.

## 2. Gilles de Rais

Like Joan of Arc, Gilles de Rais was tried and executed as a witch and
in the same way, much that is mysterious in this trial can also be
explained by the Dianic Cult.

On the mother's side he descended from Tiphaine de Champtocé, and on the
father's from Tiphaine de Husson; this latter was the niece of Bertrand
du Guesclin, and called after du Guesclin's wife, who was a fairy
woman.\[1\] The name Tiphaine appears to come from the same root as
Fein, Finn, and Fian, all of which meant 'fairy' in Great Britain, and
probably in Brittany as well. There is therefore a strong suggestion of
a strain of fairy blood, and with that blood there may also have
descended to Gilles many of the beliefs and customs of the dwarf race.

The bond between Gilles and Joan was a very close one. She obtained
permission from the King to choose whom she would for her escort; her
choice at once fell on Gilles, for she would naturally prefer those of
her own faith. He held already a high command in the relieving, force,
and added the protection of Joan as a special part of his duties. Later
on, even after he had reached the high position of Marshal of France, he
still continued those duties, remaining with her all day when she was
wounded at the assault on Paris. It is an interesting point also that
Charles VII granted permission to both these great leaders to bear the
royal arms on their escutcheons. It seems incredible that a soldier of
Gilles's character and standing should have made no move to rescue Joan
by ransom or by force, when she was captured. She was not only a
comrade, she was especially under his protection, and it is natural for
us to think that his honour was involved. But if he regarded her as the
destined victim, chosen and set apart for death, as required by the
religion to which both he and she belonged, he could do nothing but
remain inactive and let her fate be consummated. If this is so, then the
'Mystery of Orleans ', of which he was the author, would be a religious
play of the same class as the mystery-plays of the Christians.

The extraordinary prodigality and extravagance of Gilles may have been
due, as is usually suggested, to profligacy or to madness, but it may
equally well have been that he took seriously the belief that as the
Incarnate God--or at any rate as a candidate for that honour--he must
give to all who asked. He rode a black horse, as also did Joan and the
'Devils' of later centuries; and on two separate occasions he attempted
to enter into a compact with the 'Devil'. He could not decide to which
religion he would belong, the old or the new, and his life was one long
struggle. The old religion demanded human sacrifices and he gave them,
the new religion regarded murder as mortal sin and he tried to offer
expiation; openly he had Christian masses and prayers celebrated with
the utmost pomp, secretly he followed the ancient cult; when he was
about to remove the bodies of the human victims from the castle of
Champtocé, he swore his accomplices to secrecy by the binding oaths of
both religions; on the other hand members of the old faith, whom he
consulted when in trouble, warned him that as long as he professed
Christianity and practised its rites they could do nothing for him.

An infringement of the rights of the Church brought him under the
ecclesiastical law, and the Church was not slow to take advantage of the
position. Had he chosen to resist, his exalted position would have
protected him, but he preferred to yield, and like Joan he stood his
trial on the charge of heresy. The trial did not take long; he was
arrested on September 14, and executed on October 26. With him were
arrested eight others, of whom two were executed with him. Seeing that
thirteen was always the number of witches in a Coven, it is surely more
than an accidental coincidence that nine men and women, including
Gilles, were arrested, two saved themselves by flight, and two more who
had played a large part in the celebration of the rites of the old
religion were already dead. Thus even as early as the middle of the
fifteenth century the Coven of thirteen was in existence.

Gilles was charged with heresy before a Court composed of ecclesiastics
only, and like Joan he was willing to be tried for his faith. He
announced that he had always been a Christian, which may be taken to
mean that there was some doubt as to whether he was not a heathen. He
suddenly gave way to a curious outburst against the authority of the
Court, saying that he would rather be hanged by the neck with a lace
than submit to them as judges. This can only be understood by comparing
his reference to 'hanging with a lace' with the method by which Playfair
in 1597 (p. 204) John Stewart in 1618 (p. 202), and John Reid in 1697
(p. 203), met their deaths.

The sudden change of front in this haughty noble may be accounted for by
the excommunication which was decreed against him, but this explains
neither his passionate haste to confess all, and more than all, of which
he was accused, nor his earnest and eager desire to die. How much of his
confession was true cannot be determined now, but it is very evident
that he was resolved to make his own death certain. His action in this
may be compared with that of Major Weir in 1670, who also was executed
on his own voluntary confession of witchcraft and crime. Gilles's last
words, though couched in Christian phraseology, show that he had not
realized the enormity of the crimes which he confessed: 'We have sinned,
all three of us', he said to his two companions, 'but as soon as our
souls have left our bodies we shall all see God in His glory in
Paradise.' He was hanged on a gibbet above a pyre, but when the fire
burned through the rope the body was snatched from the flames by several
ladies of his family, who prepared it for burial with their own hands,
and it was then interred in the Carmelite church close by. His two
associates were also hanged, their bodies being burned and the ashes
scattered.

On the spot where Gilles was executed his daughter erected a monument,
to which came all nursing mothers to pray for an abundance of milk. Here
again is a strong suggestion that he was regarded as the Incarnate God
of fertility. Another suggestive fact is the length of time-nine
years-which elapsed between the death of Joan and the death of Gilles.
This is a usual interval when the Incarnate God is given a time-limit.

It required twenty-five years before an action of rehabilitation could
be taken for Joan. In the case of Gilles, two years after the execution
the King granted letters of rehabilitation for that 'the said Gilles,
unduly and without cause, was condemned and put to death'.

An intensive study of this period might reveal the witch organization at
the royal Court and possibly even the Grand-master to whom Joan owed
allegiance, the 'God' who sent her. Giac, the King's favourite, was
executed as a witch, and Joan's *beau duc*, the Duke d'Alençon, was also
of the fraternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix V. Flying Ointments](wcweapp5)
