[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](boeb01)  [Next](boeb03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="img_00700"></span> ![](img/00700.jpg)

# Introduction

Goethe, who saw so many things with such clearness of vision, brought
out the charm of the popular ballad for readers of a later day in his
remark that the value of these songs of the people is to be found in the
fact that their motives are drawn directly from nature; and he added,
that in the art of saying things compactly, uneducated men have greater
skill than those who are educated. It is certainly true that no kind of
verse is so completely out of the atmosphere of modern writing as the
popular ballad. No other form of verse has, therefore, in so great a
degree, the charm of fresh, ness. In material, treatment, and spirit,
these bat lads are set in sharp contrast with the poetry of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

the hour. They deal with historical events or incidents, with local
traditions, with personal adventure or achievement. They are, almost
without exception, entirely objective. Contemporary poetry is, on the
other hand, very largely subjective; and even when it deals with events
or incidents it invests them to such a degree with personal emotion and
imagination, it so modifies and colours them with temperamental effects,
that the resulting poem is much more a study of subjective conditions
than a picture or drama of objective realities. This projection of the
inward upon the outward world, in such a degree that the dividing line
between the two is lost, is strikingly illustrated in Maeterlinck's
plays. Nothing could be in sharper contrast, for instance, than the
famous ballad of "The Hunting of the Cheviot" and Maeterlinck's
"Princess Maleine." There is no atmosphere, in a strict use of the word,
in the spirited and compact account of the famous contention between the
Percies and the Douglases, of which Sir Philip Sidney said "that I found
not my heart moved more than with a Trumpet." It is a breathless,
rushing narrative of

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

a swift succession of events, told with the most straight-forward
simplicity. In the "Princess Maleine," on the other hand, the narrative
is so charged with subjective feeling, the world in which the action
takes place is so deeply tinged with lights that never rested on any
actual landscape, that all sense of reality is lost. The play depends
for its effect mainly upon atmosphere. Certain very definite impressions
are produced with singular power, but there is no clear, clean stamping
of occurrences on the mind. The imagination is skilfully awakened and
made to do the work of observation.

The note of the popular ballad is its objectivity; it not only takes us
out of doors, but it also takes us out of the individual consciousness.
The manner is entirely subordinated to the matter; the poet, if there
was a poet in the case, obliterates himself. What we get is a definite
report of events which have taken place, not a study of a man's mind nor
an account of a man's feelings. The true balladist is never
introspective; he is concerned not with himself but with his story.
There is no self-disclosure in his song. To the mood of Senancour and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Amiel he was a stranger. Neither he nor the men
to whom he recited or sang would have understood that mood. They were
primarily and unreflectively absorbed in the world outside of
themselves. They saw far more than they meditated; they recorded far
more than they moralized. The popular ballads are, as a rule, entirely
free from didacticism in any form; that is one of the main sources of
their unfailing charm. They show not only a childlike curiosity about
the doings of the day and the things that befall men, but a childlike
indifference to moral inference and justification. The bloodier the fray
the better for ballad purposes; no one feels the necessity of apology
either for ruthless aggression or for useless blood-letting; the scene
is reported as it was presented to the eye of the spectator, not to his
moralizing faculty. He is expected to see and to sing, not to scrutinize
and meditate. In those rare cases in which a moral inference is drawn,
it is always so obvious and elementary that it gives the impression of
having been fastened on at the end of the song, in deference to
ecclesiastical rather than popular feeling.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

The social and intellectual conditions which fostered
self-unconsciousness,--interest in things, incidents, and adventures
rather than in moods and inward experiences,--and the unmoral or non
moralizing attitude towards events, fostered also that delightful
*naïveté* which contributes greatly to the charm of many of the best
ballads; a *naïveté* which often heightens the pathos, and, at times,
softens it with touches of apparently unconscious humour; the *naïveté*
of the child which has in it something of the freshness of a wildflower,
and yet has also a wonderful instinct for making the heart of the matter
plain. This quality has almost entirely disappeared from contemporary
verse among cultivated races; one must go to the peasants of remote
parts of the Continent to discover even a trace of its presence. It has
a real, but short-lived charm, like the freshness which shines on meadow
and garden in the brief dawn which hastens on to day.

This frank, direct play of thought and feeling on an incident, or series
of incidents, compensates for the absence of a more perfect art in the
ballads; using the word "art" in its true sense as including

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

complete, adequate, and beautiful handling of subject-matter, and
masterly working out of its possibilities. These popular songs, so dear
to the hearts of the generations on whose lips they were fashioned, and
to all who care for the fresh note, the direct word, the unrestrained
emotion, rarely touch the highest points of poetic achievement. Their
charm lies, not in their perfection of form, but in their spontaneity,
sincerity, and graphic power. They are not rivers of song, wide, deep,
and swift; they are rather cool, clear springs among the hills. In the
reactions against sophisticated poetry which set in from lime to time,
the popular ballad--the true folk-song--has often been exalted at the
expense of other forms of verse. It is idle to attempt to arrange the
various forms of poetry in an order of absolute values; it is enough
that each has its own quality, and, therefore, its own value. The drama,
the epic, the ballad, the lyric, each strikes its note in the complete
expression of human emotion and experience. Each belongs to a particular
stage of development, and each has the authority and the enduring charm
which attach to every

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

authentic utterance of the spirit of man under the conditions of life.

In this wide range of human expression the ballad follows the epic as a
kind of aftermath; a second and scattered harvest, springing without
regularity or nurture out of a rich and unexhausted soil. The epic
fastens upon some event of such commanding importance that it marks a
main current of history; some story, historic, or mythologic; some
incident susceptible of extended narrative treatment. It is always, in
its popular form, a matter of growth it is direct, simple, free from
didacticism; representing, as Aristotle says, "a single action, entire
and complete." It subordinates character to action; it delights in
episode and dialogue; it is content to tell the story as a story, and
leave the moralization to hearers or readers. The popular ballad is so
closely related to the popular epic that it may be said to reproduce its
qualities and characteristics within a narrower compass, and on a
smaller scale. It also is a piece of the memory of the people, or a
creation of the imagination of the people; but the tradition or fact
which it preserves is of local, rather

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

than national importance. It is indifferent to nice distinctions and
delicate gradations or shadings; its power springs from its directness,
vigour, and simplicity. It is often entirely occupied with the narration
or description of a single episode; it has no room for dialogue, but it
often secures the effect of the dialogue by its unconventional freedom
of phrase, and sometimes by the introduction of brief and compact charge
and denial, question and reply. Sometimes the incidents upon which the
ballad makers fastened, have a unity or connection with each other which
hints at a complete story. The ballads which deal with Robin Hood are so
numerous and so closely related that they constantly suggest, not only
the possibility, but the probability of epic treatment. It is surprising
that the richness of the material, and its notable illustrative quality,
did not inspire some earlier Chaucer to combine the incidents in a
sustained narrative. But the epic poet did not appear, and the most
representative of English popular heroes remains the central figure in a
series of detached episodes and adventures, preserved in a long line of
disconnected ballads.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

This apparent arrest, in the ballad stage, of a story which seemed
destined to become an epic, naturally suggests the vexed question of the
author ship of the popular ballads. They are in a very real sense the
songs of the people; they make no claim to individual authorship; on the
contrary, the inference of what may be called community authorship is,
in many instances, irresistible. They are the product of a social
condition which, so to speak, holds song of this kind in solution; of an
age in which improvisation, singing, and dancing are the most natural
and familiar forms of expression. They deal almost without exception
with matters which belong to the community memory or imagination; they
constantly reappear with variations so noticeable as to indicate free
and common handling of themes of wide local interest. All this is true
of the popular ballad; but all this does not decisively settle the
question of authorship. What share did the community have in the making
of these songs, and what share fell to individual singers?

Herder, whose conception of the origin and function

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of literature was so vitalizing in the general aridity of thinking about
the middle of the last century, and who did even more for ballad verse
in Germany than Bishop Percy did in England, laid emphasis almost
exclusively on community authorship. His profound instinct for reality
in all forms of art, his deep feeling for life, and the immense
importance he attached to spontaneity and unconsciousness in the truest
productivity made community authorship not only attractive but
inevitable to him. In his pronounced reaction against the superficial
ideas of literature so widely held in the Germany of his time, he
espoused the conception of community authorship as the only possible
explanation of the epics, ballads, and other folk-songs. In nature and
popular life, or universal experience, he found the rich sources of the
poetry whose charm he felt so deeply, and whose power and beauty he did
so much to reveal to his contemporaries. Genius and nature are magical
words with him, because they suggested such depths of being under all
forms of expression; such unity of the whole being of a race in its
thought, its emotion, and its action; such

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

entire unconsciousness of self or of formulated aim, and such
spontaneity of spirit and speech. The language of those times, when
words had not yet been divided into nobles, middle-class, and plebeians,
was, he said, the richest for poetical purposes. "Our tongue, compared
with the idiom of the savage, seems adapted rather for reflection than
for the senses or imagination. The rhythm of popular verse is so
delicate, so rapid, so precise, that it is no easy matter to defect it
with our eyes; but do not imagine it to have been equally difficult for
those living populations who listened to, instead of reading it; who
were accustomed to the sound of it from their infancy; who themselves
sang it, and whose ear had been formed by its cadence." This conception
of poetry as arising in the hearts of the people and taking form on
their lips is still more definitely and strikingly expressed in two
sentences, which let us into, the heart of Herder's philosophy of
poetry: "Poetry in those happy days lived in the ears of the people, on
the lips and in the harps of living bards; it sang of history, of the
events of the day, of mysteries, miracles, and signs. It was the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

flower of a nation's character, language, and country; of its
occupations, its prejudices, its passions, its aspirations, and its
soul." In these words, at once comprehensive and vague, after the manner
of Herder, we find ourselves face to face with that conception not only
of popular song in all its forms, but with literature as a whole, which
has revolutionized literary study in this century, and revitalized it as
well. For Herder was a man of prophetic instinct; he sometimes felt more
clearly than he saw; he divined where he could not reach results by
analysis. He was often vague, fragmentary, and inconclusive, like all
men of his type; but he had a genius for getting at the heart of things.
His statements often need qualification, but he is almost always on the
tight track. When he says that the great traditions, in which both the
memory and the imagination of a race were engaged, and which were still
living in the mouths of the people, "of themselves took on poetic form,"
he is using language which is too general to convey a definite
impression of method, but he is probably suggesting the deepest truth
with regard to these popular

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

stories. They actually were of community origin; they actually were
common property; they were given a great variety of forms by a great
number of persons; the forms which have come down to us are very likely
the survivors of a kind of in formal competition, which went on for
years at the fireside and at the festivals of a whole country side.

Barger, whose "Lenore" is one of the most widely known of modern
ballads, held the same view of the origin of popular song, and was even
more definite in his confession of faith than Herder. He declared in the
most uncompromising terms that all real poetry must have a popular
origin; "can be and must be of the people, for that is the seal of its
perfection." And he comments on the delight with which he has listened,
in village street and home, to unwritten songs; the poetry which finds
its way in quiet rivulets to the remotest peasant home. In like manner,
Hélène Vacaresco overheard the songs of the Roumanian people; hiding in
the maize to catch the reaping songs; listening at spinning parties, at
festivals, at death-beds, at taverns; taking

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the songs down from the lips of peasant women, fortune-tellers, gypsies,
and all manner of humble folk who were the custodians of this vagrant
community verse. We have passed so entirely out of the song-making
period, and literature has become to us so exclusively the work of a
professional class, that we find it difficult to imagine the
intellectual and social conditions which fostered improvisation on a
great scale, and trained the ear of great populations to the music of
spoken poetry. It is almost impossible for us to disassociate literature
from writing. There is still, however, a considerable volume of
unwritten literature in the world in the form of stories, songs,
proverbs, and pithy phrases; a literature handed down in large part from
earlier times, but still receiving additions from contemporary men and
women.

This unwritten literature is to be found, it is hardly necessary to say,
almost exclusively among country people remote from towns, and whose
mental attitude and community feeling reproduce, in a way, the
conditions under which the English and Scotch ballads were originally
composed. The Roumanian

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

peasants sing their songs upon every occasion of domestic or local
interest; and sowing and harvesting, birth, christening, marriage, the
burial, these notable events in the life of the country side are all
celebrated by unknown poets; or, rather, by improvisers who give
definite form to sentiments, phrases, and words which are on many lips.
The Russian peasant tells his stories as they were told to him; those
heroic epics whose life is believed, in some cases, to date back at
least a thousand years. These great popular stories form a kind of
sacred inheritance bequeathed by one generation to another as a
possession of the memory, and are almost entirely unrelated to the
written literature of the country. Miss Hapgood tells a very interesting
story of a government official, stationed on the western shore of Lake
Onéga, who became so absorbed in the search for this literature of the
people that he followed singers and reciters from place to place, eager
to learn from their lips the most widely known of these folk tales. On
such an expedition of discovery he found himself, one stormy night, on
an island in the lake. The hut of refuge was already

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

full of stormbound peasants when he entered. Having made himself some
tea, and spread his blanket in a vacant place, he fell asleep. He was
presently awakened by a murmur of recurring sounds. Sit ting up, he
found the group of peasants hanging on the words of an old man, of
kindly face, expressive eyes, and melodious voice, from whose lips
flowed a marvellous song; grave and gay by turns, monotonous and
passionate in succession; but wonderfully fresh, picturesque, and
fascinating. The listener soon became aware that he was hearing, for the
first time, the famous story of "Sadkó, the Merchant of Nóvgorod." It
was like being present at the birth of a piece of literature!

The fact that unwritten songs and stories still exist in great numbers
among remote country-folk of our own time, and that additions are still
made to them, help us to understand the probable origin of our own
popular ballads, and what community authorship may really mean. To put
ourselves, even in thought, in touch with the ballad-making period in
English and Scotch history, we must dismiss from our minds all modern
ideas of authorship;

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

all notions of individual origination and ownership of any form of
words. Professor ten Brink tells us that in the ballad-making age there
was no production; there was only reproduction. There was a stock of
traditions, memories, experiences, held in common by large populations,
in constant use on the lips of numberless persons; told and retold in
many forms, with countless changes, variations, and modifications;
without conscious artistic purpose, with no sense of personal control or
possession, with no constructive aim either in plot or treatment; no
composition in the modern sense of the term. Such a mass of poetic
material in the possession of a large community was, in a sense, fluid,
and ran into a thousand forms almost without direction or premeditation.
Constant use of such rich material gave a poetic turn of thought and
speech to countless persons who, under other conditions, would have
given no sign of the possession of the faculty of imagination.

There was not only the stimulus to the faculty which sees events and
occurrences with the eyes of the imagination, but there was also
constant and

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

familiar use of the language of poetry. To speak metrically or
rhythmically is no difficult matter if one is in the atmosphere or habit
of verse-making; and there is nothing surprising either in the feats of
memory or of improvisation performed by the minstrels and balladists of
the old time. The faculty of improvising was easily developed and was
very generally used by people of all classes. This facility is still
possessed by rural populations, among whom songs are still composed as
they are sting, each member of the company contributing a new verse or a
variation, suggested by local conditions, of a well-known stanza. When
to the possession of a mass of traditions and stories and of facility of
improvisation is added the habit of singing and dancing, it is not
difficult to reconstruct in our own thought the conditions under which
popular poetry came into being, nor to understand in what sense a
community can make its own songs. In the brave days when ballads were
made, the rustic peoples were not mute, as they are to-day; nor sad, as
they have become in so many parts of England. They sang and they danced
by instinct and as an expression

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of social feeling. Originally the ballads were not only sung, but they
gave measure to the dance; they grew from mouth to mouth in the very act
of dancing; individual dancers adding verse to verse, and the frequent
refrain coming in as a kind of chorus. Gesture and, to a certain extent,
acting would naturally accompany so free and general an expression of
community feeling. There was no poet, because all were poets. To quote
Professor ten Brink once more:--

"Song and playing were cultivated by peasants, and even by freedmen and
serfs. At beer-feasts the harp went from hand to hand. Herein lies the
essential difference between that age and our own. The result of
poetical activity was not the property and was not the production of a
single person, but of the community. The work of the individual endured
only as long as its delivery lasted. He gained personal distinction only
as a virtuoso. The permanent elements of what he presented, the
material, the ideas, even the style and metre, already existed. 'The
work of the singer was only a ripple in the stream of national poetry.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Who can say how much the individual contributed
to it, or where in his poetical recitation memory ceased and creative
impulse began! In any case the work of the individual lived on only as
the ideal possession of the aggregate body of the people, and it soon
lost the stamp of originality. In view of such a development of poetry,
we must assume a time when the collective conscious ness of a people or
race is paramount in its unity; when the intellectual life of each is
nourished from the same treasury of views and associations, of myths and
sagas; when similar interests stir each breast; and the ethical judgment
of all applies itself to the same standard. In such an age the form of
poetical expression will also be common to all, necessarily solemn,
earnest, and simple."

When the conditions which produced the popular ballads become clear to
the imagination, their depth of rootage, not only in the community life
but in the community love, becomes also clear. We under stand the charm
which these old songs have for us of a later age, and the spell which
they cast upon

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

men and women who knew the secret of their birth; we understand why the
minstrels of the lime, when popular poetry was in its best estate, were
held in such honour, why Taillefer sang the song of Roland at the head
of the advancing Normans on the day of Hastings, and why good Bishop
Aldhelm, when he wanted to get the ears of his people, stood on the
bridge and sang a ballad! These old songs were the flowering of the
imagination of the people; they drew their life as directly from the
general experience, the common memory, the universal feelings, as did
the Greek dramas in those primitive times, when they were part of rustic
festivity and worship. The popular ballads have passed away with the
conditions which produced them. Modern poets have, in several instances,
written ballads of striking picturesqueness and power, but as unlike the
ballad of popular origin as the world of to-day is unlike the world in
which "Chevy Chase" was first sung. These modern ballads are not
necessarily better or worse than their predecessors; but they are
necessarily different. It is idle to exalt the wild flower at the
expense of the garden flower; each has

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

its fragrance, its beauty, its sentiment; and the world is wide!

In the selection of the ballads which appear in this volume, no attempt
has been made to follow a chronological order or to enforce a rigid
principle of selection of any kind. The aim has been to bring within
moderate compass a collection of these songs of the people which should
fairly represent the range, the descriptive felicity, the dramatic
power, and the genuine poetic feeling of a body of verse which is still,
it is to be feared, unfamiliar to a large number of those to whom it
would bring refreshment and delight.

HAMILTON WRIGHT MABIE

<span id="img_02800"></span> ![](img/02800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chevy Chace](boeb03.md)
