[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gft02)  [Next](gft04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

from the 1889 edition, omitted in later editions--JBH

MY DEAR CHILDREN,

Some of you have heard already of the old Greeks; and all of you, as you
grow up, will hear more and more of them. Those of you who are boys
will, perhaps, spend a great deal of time in reading Greek books; and
the girls, though they may not learn Greek, will be sure to come across
a great many stories taken from Greek history, and to see, I may say
every day, things which we should not have had if it had not been for
these old Greeks. You can hardly find a well-written book which has not
in it Greek names, and words, and proverbs; you cannot walk through a
great town without passing Greek buildings; you cannot go into a
well-furnished room without seeing Greek statues and ornaments, even
Greek patterns of furniture and paper; so strangely have these old
Greeks left their mark behind them upon this modern world in which we
now live. And as you grow up, and read more and more, you will find that
we owe to these old Greeks the beginners of all our mathematics and
geometry--that is, the science and knowledge of numbers, and of the
shapes of things, and of the forces which make things move and stand at
rest; and the beginnings of our geography and astronomy; and of our
laws, and freedom, and politics--that is, the science of how to rule a
country, and make it peaceful and strong. And we owe to them, too, the
beginning of our logic--that is, the study of words and of reasoning;
and of our metaphysics--that is, the study of our own thoughts and
souls. And last of all, they made their language so beautiful that
foreigners used to take to it instead of their own; and at last Greek
became the common language of educated people all over the old world,
from Persia and Egypt even to Spain and Britain. And therefore it was
that the New Testament was written in Greek, that it might be read and
understood by all the nations of the Roman empire; so that, next to the
Jews, and the Bible which the Jews handed down to us, we owe more to
these old Greeks than to any people upon earth.

Now you must remember one thing--that 'Greeks' was not their real name.
They called themselves always 'Hellens,' but the Romans miscalled them
Greeks; and we have taken that wrong name from the Romans--it would take
a long time to tell you why. They were made up of many tribes and many
small separate states; and when you hear in this book of Minuai, and
Athenians, and other such names, you must remember that they were all
different tribes and peoples of the one great Hellen race, who lived in
what we now call Greece, in the islands of the Archipelago, and along
the coast of Asia Minor (Ionia, as they call it), from the Hellespont to
Rhodes, and had afterwards colonies and cities in Sicily, and South
Italy (which was called Great Greece), and along the shores of the Black
Sea at Sinope, and Kertch, and at Sevastopol. And after that, again,
they spread under Alexander the Great, and conquered Egypt, and Syria,
and Persia, and the whole East. But that was many hundred years after my
stories; for then there were no Greeks on the Black Sea shores, nor in
Sicily, or Italy, or anywhere but in Greece and in Ionia. And if you are
puzzled by the names of places in this book, you must take the maps and
find them out. It will be a pleasanter way of learning geography than
out of a dull lesson-book.

Now, I love these old Hellens heartily; and I should be very ungrateful
to them if I did not, considering all that they have taught me; and they
seem to me like brothers, though they have all been dead and gone many
hundred years ago. So as you must learn about them, whether you choose
or not, I wish to be the first to introduce you to them, and to say,
'Come hither, children, at this blessed Christmas time, when all God's
creatures should rejoice together, and bless Him who redeemed them all.
Come and see old friends of mine, whom I knew long ere you were born.
They are come to visit us at Christmas, out of the world where all live
to God; and to tell you some of their old fairy tales, which they loved
when they were young like you.'

For nations begin at first by being children like you, though they are
made up of grown men. They are children at first like you--men and women
with children's hearts; frank, and affectionate, and full of trust, and
teachable, and loving to see and learn all the wonders round them; and
greedy also, too often, and passionate and silly, as children are.

Thus these old Greeks were teachable, and learnt from all the nations
round. From the Phœnicians they learnt shipbuilding, and some say
letters beside; and from the Assyrians they learnt painting, and
carving, and building in wood and stone; and from the Egyptians they
learnt astronomy, and many things which you would not understand. In
this they were like our own forefathers the Northmen, of whom you love
to hear, who, though they were wild and rough themselves, were humble,
and glad to learn from every one. Therefore God rewarded these Greeks,
as He rewarded our forefathers, and made them wiser than the people who
taught them in everything they learnt; for He loves to see men and
children open- hearted, and willing to be taught; and to him who uses
what he has got, He gives more and more day by day. So these Greeks grew
wise and powerful, and wrote poems which will live till the world's end,
which you must read for yourselves some day, in English at least, if not
in Greek. And they learnt to carve statues, and build temples, which are
still among the wonders of the world; and many another wondrous thing
God taught them, for which we are the wiser this day.

For you must not fancy, children, that because these old Greeks were
heathens, therefore God did not care for them, and taught them nothing.

The Bible tells us that it was not so, but that God's mercy is over all
His works, and that He understands the hearts of all people, and
fashions all their works. And St. Paul told these old Greeks in after
times, when they had grown wicked and fallen low, that they ought to
have known better, because they were God's offspring, as their own poets
had said; and that the good God had put them where they were, to seek
the Lord, and feel after Him, and find Him, though He was not far from
any one of them. And Clement of Alexandria, a great Father of the
Church, who was as wise as he was good, said that God had sent down
Philosophy to the Greeks from heaven, as He sent down the Gospel to the
Jews.

For Jesus Christ, remember, is the Light who lights every man who comes
into the world. And no one can think a right thought, or feel a right
feeling, or understand the real truth of anything in earth and heaven,
unless the good Lord Jesus teaches him by His Spirit, which gives man
understanding.

But these Greeks, as St. Paul told them, forgot what God had taught
them, and, though they were God's offspring, worshipped idols of wood
and stone, and fell at last into sin and shame, and then, of course,
into cowardice and slavery, till they perished out of that beautiful
land which God had given them for so many years.

For, like all nations who have left anything behind them, beside mere
mounds of earth, they believed at first in the One True God who made all
heaven and earth. But after a while, like all other nations, they began
to worship other gods, or rather angels and spirits, who (so they
fancied) lived about their land. Zeus, the Father of gods and men (who
was some dim remembrance of the blessed true God), and Hera his wife,
and Phœbus Apollo the Sun-god, and Pallas Athené who taught men wisdom
and useful arts, and Aphrodite the Queen of Beauty, and Poseidon the
Ruler of the Sea, and Hephaistos the King of the Fire, who taught men to
work in metals. And they honoured the Gods of the Rivers, and the
Nymph-maids, who they fancied lived in the caves, and the fountains, and
the glens of the forest, and all beautiful wild places. And they
honoured the Erinnues, the dreadful sisters, who, they thought, haunted
guilty men until their sins were purged away. And many other dreams they
had, which parted the One God into many; and they said, too, that these
gods did things which would be a shame and sin for any man to do. And
when their philosophers arose, and told them that God was One, they
would not listen, but loved their idols, and their wicked idol feasts,
till they all came to ruin. But we will talk of such sad things no more.

But, at the time of which this little book speaks, they had not fallen
as low as that. They worshipped no idols, as far as I can find; and they
still believed in the last six of the ten commandments, and knew well
what was right and what was wrong. And they believed (and that was what
gave them courage) that the gods loved men, and taught them, and that
without the gods men were sure to come to ruin. And in that they were
right enough, as we know--more right even than they thought; for without
God we can do nothing, and all wisdom comes from Him.

Now, you must not think of them in this book as learned men, living in
great cities, such as they were afterwards, when they wrought all their
beautiful works, but as country people, living in farms and walled
villages, in a simple, hard-working way; so that the greatest kings and
heroes cooked their own meals, and thought it no shame, and made their
own ships and weapons, and fed and harnessed their own horses; and the
queens worked with their maid-servants, and did all the business of the
house, and spun, and wove, and embroidered, and made their husbands'
clothes and their own. So that a man was honoured among them, not
because he happened to be rich, but according to his skill, and his
strength, and courage, and the number of things which he could do. For
they were but grown-up children, though they were right noble children
too; and it was with them as it is now at school--the strongest and
cleverest boy, though he be poor, leads all the rest.

Now, while they were young and simple they loved fairy tales, as you do
now. All nations do so when they are young: our old forefathers did, and
called their stories 'Sagas.' I will read you some of them some
day--some of the Eddas, and the Voluspa, and Beowulf, and the noble old
Romances. The old Arabs, again, had their tales, which we now call the
'Arabian Nights.' The old Romans had theirs, and they called them
'Fabulæ,' from which our word 'fable' comes; but the old Hellens called
theirs 'Muthoi,' from which our new word 'myth' is taken. But next to
those old Romances, which were written in the Christian middle age,
there are no fairy tales like these old Greek ones, for beauty, and
wisdom, and truth, and for making children love noble deeds, and trust
in God to help them through.

Now, why have I called this book 'The Heroes'? Because that was the name
which the Hellens gave to men who were brave and skilful, and dare do
more than other men. At first, I think, that was all it meant: but after
a time it came to mean something more; it came to mean men who helped
their country; men in those old times, when the country was half-wild,
who killed fierce beasts and evil men, and drained swamps, and founded
towns, and therefore after they were dead, were honoured, because they
had left their country better than they found it. And we call such a man
a hero in English to this day, and call it a 'heroic' thing to suffer
pain and grief, that we may do good to our fellow-men. We may all do
that, my children, boys and girls alike; and we ought to do it, for it
is easier now than ever, and safer, and the path more clear. But you
shall hear how the Hellens said their heroes worked, three thousand
years ago. The stories are not all true, of course, nor half of them;
you are not simple enough to fancy that; but the meaning of them is
true, and true for ever, and that is--"Do right, and God will help you."

FARLEY COURT,  
  *Advent*, 1855.

\[I owe an apology to the few scholars who may happen to read this hasty
*jeu d'esprit*, for the inconsistent method in which I have spelt Greek
names. The rule which I have tried to follow has been this: when the
word has been hopelessly Latinised, as 'Phœbus' has been, I have left it
as it usually stands; but in other cases I have tried to keep the plain
Greek spelling, except when it would have seemed pedantic, or when, as
in the word 'Tiphus,' I should have given an altogether wrong notion of
the sound of the word. It has been a choice of difficulties, which has
been forced on me by our strange habit of introducing boys to the Greek
myths, not in their original shape, but in a Roman disguise.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part One: How Perseus and His Mother Came to Seriphos](gft04.md)
