[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010260)  [Next](1010262.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—The Words, “In the
Beginning,” And, “The Heaven and the Earth,” Are Differently
Understood.</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p2"></span>38. But others, to whom these words
are no longer a nest, but shady fruit-bowers, see the fruits concealed
in them, fly around rejoicing, and chirpingly search and pluck them. For
they see when they read or hear these words, O God, that all times past
and future are surmounted by Thy eternal and stable abiding, and still
that there is no temporal creature which Thou hast not made. And by Thy
will, because it is that which Thou art, Thou hast made all things, not
by any changed will, nor by a will which before was not,—not out of
Thyself, in Thine own likeness, the form of all things, but out of
nothing, a formless unlikeness which should be formed by Thy likeness
(having recourse to Thee the One, after their settled capacity,
according as it has been given to each thing in his kind), and might all
be made very good; whether they remain around Thee, or, being by degrees
removed in time and place, make or undergo beautiful variations. These
things they see, and rejoice in the light of Thy truth, in the little
degree they here may.

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p3"></span>39. Again, another of these directs
his attention to that which is said, “In the beginning God made the
heaven and the earth,” and beholdeth Wisdom,—the Beginning, <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157.md) because It also speaketh unto
us. <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158.md) Another likewise directs
his attention to the same words, and by “beginning” understands the
commencement of things created; and receives it thus,—In the beginning
He made, as if it were said, He at first made. And among those who
understand “In the beginning” to mean, that “in Thy Wisdom Thou hast
created heaven and earth,” one believes the matter out of which the
heaven and earth were to be created to be there called “heaven and
earth;” another, that they are natures already formed and distinct;
another, one formed nature, and that a spiritual, under the name of
heaven, the other formless, of corporeal matter, under the name of
earth. But they who under the name of “heaven and earth” understand
matter as yet formless, out of which were to be formed heaven and earth,
do not themselves understand it in one manner; but one, that matter out
of which the intelligible and the sensible creature were to be
completed; another, that only out of which this sensible corporeal mass
was to come, holding in its vast bosom these visible and prepared
natures. Nor are they who believe that the creatures already set in
order and arranged are in this place called heaven and earth of one
accord; but the one, both the invisible and visible; the other, the
visible only, in which we admire the luminous heaven and darksome earth,
and the things that are therein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[187:1158](1010261.htm#fr_1157.md) <span
id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p4"></span> See p. 166, note 2.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[187:1159](1010261.htm#fr_1158.md) <span
id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p5"></span> [John
8.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.XII.XXVIII-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](1010262.md)
