[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010316)  [Next](1010318.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.X"></span>

<span id="vii.1.X-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.X-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.X-p2.1"></span>Letter X.</span>

<span id="vii.1.X-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.X-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.X-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.X-p4.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting,</span>

<span id="vii.1.X-p5"></span>1. No question of yours ever kept me so
disturbed while reflecting upon it, as the remark which I read in your
last letter, in which you chide me for being indifferent as to making
arrangements by which it may be possible for us to live together. A
grave charge, and one which, were it not unfounded, would be most
perilous. But since satisfactory reasons seem to prove that we can live
as we would wish to do better here than at Carthage, or even in the
country, I am wholly at a loss, my dear Nebridius, what to do with you.
Shall such a conveyance as may best suit your state of health be sent
from us to you? Our friend Lucinianus informs me that you can be carried
without injury in a palanquin. But I consider, on the other hand, how
your mother, who could not bear your absence from her when you were in
health, will be much less able to bear it when you are ill. Shall I
myself then come to you? This I cannot do, for there are some here who
cannot accompany me, and whom I would think it a crime for me to leave.
For you already can pass your time agreeably when left to the resources
of our own mind; but in their case the object of present efforts is that
they may attain to this. Shall I go and come frequently, and so be now
with you, now with them? But this is neither to live together, nor to
live as we would wish to do. For the journey is not a short one, but so
great at least that the attempt to perform it frequently would prevent
our gaining the wished-for leisure. To this is added the bodily weakness
through which, as you know, I cannot accomplish what I wish, unless I
cease wholly to wish what is beyond my strength.

<span id="vii.1.X-p6"></span>2. To occupy one’s thoughts throughout life
with journeyings which you cannot perform tranquilly and easily, is not
the part of a man whose thoughts are engaged with that last journey
which is called death, and which alone, as you understand, really
deserves serious consideration. God has indeed granted to some few men
whom He has ordained to bear rule over churches, the capacity of not
only awaiting calmly, but even desiring eagerly, that last journey,
while at the same time they can meet without disquietude the toils of
those other journeyings; but I do not believe that either to those who
are urged to accept such duties through desire for worldly honour, or to
those who, although occupying a private station, covet a busy life, so
great a boon is given as that amid bustle and agitating meetings, and
journeyings hither and thither, they should acquire that familiarity
with death which we seek: for both of these classes had it in their
power to seek edification <span id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459.md) in
retirement. Or if this be not true, I am, I shall not say the most
foolish of all men, but at least the most indolent, since I find it
impossible, without the aid of such an interval of relief from care and
toil, to taste and relish that only real good. Believe me, there is need
of much withdrawal of oneself from the tumult of the things which are
passing away, in order that there may be formed in man, not through
insensibility, not through presumption, not through vainglory, not
through superstitious blindness, the ability to say, “I fear nought.” By
this means also is attained that enduring joy with which no pleasurable
excitement found elsewhere is in any degree to be compared.

<span id="vii.1.X-p8"></span>3. But if such a life does not fall to the
lot of man, how is it that calmness of spirit is our occasional
experience? Wherefore is this experience more frequent, in proportion to
the devotion with which any one in his inmost soul worships God? Why
does this tranquillity for the most part abide with one in the business
of life, when he goes forth to its duties from that sanctuary? Why are
there times in which, speaking, we do not fear death, and, silent, even
desire it? I say to you—for I would not say it to every one—to you whose
visits to the upper world I know well, Will you, who have often felt how
sweetly the soul lives when it dies to all mere bodily affections, deny
that it is possible for the whole life of man to become at length so
exempt from fear, that he may be justly called wise? Or will you venture
to affirm that this state of mind, on which reason leans has ever been
your lot, except when you were shut up to commune with your own heart?
Since these things are so, you see that it remains only for you to share
with me the labour of devising how we may arrange to live together. You
know much better than I do what is to be done in regard to your mother,
whom your brother Victor, of course, does not leave alone. I will write
no more, lest I turn your mind away from considering this proposal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[228:1460](1010317.htm#fr_1459.md) <span
id="vii.1.X-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.X-p7"></span> Text, “*deificari*” for “*ædificari*” (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XI](1010318.md)
