[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010422)  [Next](1010424.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXII-p3.1"></span>To Volusianus, My Noble Lord and Most
Justly Distinguished Son, Bishop Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXII-p4"></span>In my desire for your welfare, both in
this world and in Christ, I am perhaps not even surpassed by the prayers
of your pious mother. Wherefore, in reciprocating your salutation with
the respect due to your worth, I beg to exhort you, as earnestly as I
can, not to grudge to devote attention to the study of the Writings
which are truly and unquestionably holy. For they are genuine and solid
truth, not winning their way to the mind by artificial eloquence, nor
giving forth with flattering voice a vain and uncertain sound. They
deeply interest the man who is hungering not for words but for things;
and they cause great alarm at first in him whom they are to render safe
from fear. I exhort you especially to read the writings of the apostles,
for from them you will receive a stimulus to acquaint yourself with the
prophets, whose testimonies the apostles use. If in your reading or
meditation on what you have read any question arises to the solution of
which I may appear necessary, write to me, that I may write in reply.
For, with the Lord helping me, I may perhaps be more able to serve you
in this way than by personally conversing with you on such subjects,
partly because, through the difference in our occupations, it does not
happen that you have leisure at the same times as I might have it, but
especially because of the irrepressible intrusion of those who are for
the most part not adapted to such discussions, and take more pleasure in
a war of words than in the clear light of knowledge; whereas, whatever
is written stands always at the service of the reader when he has
leisure, and there can be nothing burdensome in the society of that
which is taken up or laid aside at your own pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXIII](1010424.md)
