[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010417)  [Next](1010419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV"></span><span id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-Page_452"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p1.1"></span>Third Division.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p2.1"></span>Letters Which Were Written by Augustin
After The Time of The Conference With The Donatists And The Rise of The
Pelagian Heresy in Africa; i.e., During The Last Twenty Years of His
Life (A.D. 411–430).</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p4"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p4.1"></span>Letter CXXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p5"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 411.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p6"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p6.1"></span>To Albina, Pinianus, and
Melania</span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p6.2"></span>, <span
id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) *Honoured in the Lord, Beloved in
Holiness and Longed for in Brotherly Affection, Augustin Sends Greeting
in the Lord.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p8"></span>1. <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p8.1"></span>I Am</span>, whether through present
infirmity or by natural temperament, very susceptible of cold;
nevertheless, it would not be possible for me to suffer greater heat
than I have done throughout this exceptionally dreadful winter, having
been kept in a fever by distress because I have been unable, I do not
say to hasten, but to fly to you (to visit whom it would have been
fitting for me to fly across the seas), after you had been settled so
near to me, and had come from so remote a land to see me. It may be,
also, that you have supposed the rigorous weather of this winter to be
the only cause of my suffering this disappointment; I pray you, beloved,
give no place to this thought. For what inconvenience, hardship, or even
danger, can these heavy rains bring, which I would not have encountered
and endured in order to make my way to you, who are such comforters to
us in our great calamities, and who, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, are lights kindled into vehement flame by the
Supreme Light, raised aloft by lowliness of spirit, and deriving more
glorious lustre from the glory which you have despised? Moreover, I
would have enjoyed participation in the spiritual felicity vouchsafed to
my earthly birthplace, in that it has been permitted to have you
present, of whom when absent its citizens had heard much—so much,
indeed, that although giving charitable credence to the report of what
you were by nature and had become by grace, they feared, perchance, to
repeat it to others, lest it should be disbelieved.

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p9"></span>2. I shall therefore tell you the
reason why I have not come, and the trials by which I have been kept
back from so great a privilege, that I may obtain not only your
forgiveness, but also, through your prayers, the mercy of Him who so
works in you that ye live to Him. The congregation of Hippo, whom the
Lord has ordained me to serve, is in great measure, and almost wholly,
of a constitution so infirm, that the pressure of even a comparatively
light affliction might seriously endanger its well-being; at present,
however, it is smitten with tribulation so overwhelming, that, even were
it strong, it could scarcely survive the imposition of the burden.
Moreover, when I returned to it recently, I found it offended to a most
dangerous degree by my absence; and you, over whose spiritual strength
we rejoice in the Lord, can with healthful taste relish and approve the
saying of Paul: “Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I
burn not?” <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413) I feel this
especially because there are many here who by disparaging us attempt to
excite against us the minds of the others by whom we seem to be loved,
in order that they may make room in them for the devil. But when those
whose salvation is our care are angry with us, their strong
determination to take vengeance on us is only an unreasonable desire for
bringing death to themselves,—not the death of the body, but of the
soul, in which the fact of death discovers itself mysteriously by the
odour of corruption before it is possible for our care to foresee and
provide against it.

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p11"></span>Doubtless you will readily excuse this
anxiety on my part, especially because, if you were displeased and
wished to punish me, you could perhaps invent no severer pain than what
I already suffer in not seeing you at Thagaste. I trust, however, that,
assisted by your prayers, I may be permitted when the present hindrance
has been removed with all speed to come to you, in whatsoever part of
Africa you may be, if this town in which I labour is not worthy (and I
do not presume to pronounce it worthy) to be along with us made joyful
by your presence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[452:2413](1010418.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p7"></span> The name Melania, though now almost as
little known to the world at large as the fossil univalve molluscs to
which palæontologists have assigned the designation, was in the time of
Augustin highly esteemed throughout Christendom. The elder Melania, a
lady of rank and affluence, left Rome when it was threatened by Alaric,
and spent thirty-seven years in the East, returning to the city in 445
<span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p7.1"></span>A.D.</span> Her
daughter-in-law, Albina, and her grand-daughter, the younger Melania
(whose husband was the Pinianus mentioned here and in the two following
letters), left Rome with her in 408 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p7.2"></span> A.D.</span>, and after spending two years
in Sicily, passed over into Africa, and fixed their residence at
Thagaste, the native town of St. Augustin. A visit which they paid to
him at Hippo was the occasion of the extraordinary proceedings referred
to in Letters CXXV. and CXXVI.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[452:2414](1010418.htm#fr_2413) <span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXIV-p10"></span> [2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.CXXIV-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXV](1010419)
