[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010253)  [Next](1010255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XXI"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XXI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—Of the Explanation of the
Words, “The Earth Was Invisible.”</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXI-p2"></span>30. And as concerns the understanding of
<span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="vi.XII.XXI-Page_184"></span>the following words, out of all those
truths he selected one to himself, who saith, “But the earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep,”—that is,
“That corporeal thing, which God made, was as yet the formless matter of
corporeal things, without order, without light.” He taketh another, who
saith, “But the earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was
upon the deep,”—that is, “This whole, which is called heaven and earth,
was as yet formless and darksome matter, out of which the corporeal
heaven and the corporeal earth were to be made, with all things therein
which are known to our corporeal senses.” He, another, who saith, “But
the earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the
deep,”—that is, “This whole, which is called heaven and earth, was as
yet a formless and darksome matter, out of which were to be made that
intelligible heaven, which is otherwise called the heaven of heavens,
and the earth, namely, the whole corporeal nature, under which name may
also be comprised this corporeal heaven,—that is, from which every
invisible and visible creature would be created.” He, another, who
saith, “But the carth was invisible and without form, and darkness was
upon the deep,”—“The Scripture called not that formlessness by the name
of heaven and earth, but that formlessness itself,” saith he, “already
was, which he named the earth invisible and formless and the darksome
deep, of which he had said before, that God had made the heaven and the
earth, namely, the spiritual and corporeal creature.” He, another, who
saith, “But the earth was invisible and formless, and darkness was upon
the deep,”—that is, “There was already a formless matter, whereof the
Scripture before said, that God had made heaven and earth, namely, the
entire corporeal mass of the world, divided into two very great parts,
the superior and the inferior, with all those familiar and known
creatures which are in them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](1010255)
