[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010449)  [Next](1010451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXCI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p1.1"></span>Letter CXCI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 418.)

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p3.1"></span>To My Venerable Lord and Pious Brother and
Co-Presbyter Sixtus,</span>* <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884)
*<span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXCI-p4.2"></span>Worthy of Being
Received in the Love of Christ, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p5"></span>1. Since the arrival of the letter
which, in my absence, your Grace forwarded by our holy brother the
presbyter Firmus, and which I read on my return to Hippo, but not until
after the bearer had departed, the present is my first opportunity <span
id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span id="vii.1.CXCI-Page_555"></span>of
sending to you any reply, and it is with great pleasure that I entrust
it to our very dearly beloved son, the acolyte Albinus. Your letter,
addressed to Alypius and myself jointly, came at a time when we were not
together, and this is the reason why you will now receive a letter from
each of us, instead of one from both, in reply. For the bearer of this
letter has just gone, meanwhile, from me to visit my venerable brother
and co-bishop Alypius, who will write a reply for himself to your
Holiness, and he has carried with him your letter, which I had already
perused. As to the great joy with which that letter filled my heart, why
should a man attempt to say what it is impossible to express? Indeed, I
do not think that you yourself have any adequate idea of the amount of
good done by your sending that letter to us; but take our word for it,
for as you bear witness to your feelings, so do we bear witness to ours,
declaring how profoundly we have been moved by the perfectly transparent
soundness of the views declared in that letter. For if, when you sent a
very short letter on the same subject to the most blessed aged Aurelius,
by the acolyte Leo, we transcribed it with joyful alacrity, and read it
with enthusiastic interest to all who were within our reach, as an
exposition of your sentiments, both in regard to that most fatal dogma
\[of Pelagius\], and in regard to the grace of God freely given by Him
to small and great, to which that dogma is diametrically opposed; how
great, think you, is the joy with which we have read this more extended
statement in your writing, how great the zeal with which we take care
that it be read by all to whom we have been able already or may yet be
able to make it known! For what could be read or heard with greater
satisfaction than so clear a defence of the grace of God against its
enemies, from the mouth of one who was before this proudly claimed by
these enemies as a mighty supporter of their cause? <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885) Or is there anything for which we
ought to give more abundant thanksgivings to God, than that His grace is
so ably defended by those to whom it is given, against those to whom it
is not given, or by whom, when given, it is not accepted, because in the
secret and just judgment of God the disposition to accept it is not
given to them?

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p7"></span>2. Wherefore, my venerable lord, and
holy brother worthy of being received in the love of Christ, although
you render a most excellent service when you thus write on this subject
to brethren before whom the adversaries are wont to boast themselves of
your being their friend, nevertheless, there remains upon you the yet
greater duty of seeing not only that those be punished with wholesome
severity who dare to prate more openly their declaration of that error,
most dangerously hostile to the Christian name, but also that with
pastoral vigilance, on behalf of the weaker and simpler sheep of the
Lord, most strenuous precautions be used against those who more
covertly, indeed, and timidly, but perseveringly, and in whispers, as it
were, teach this error, “creeping into houses,” as the apostle says, and
doing with practised impiety all those other things which are mentioned
immediately afterwards in that passage. <span
id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886) Nor ought those to be overlooked
who under the restraint of fear hide their sentiments under the most
profound silence, yet have not ceased to cherish the same perverse
opinions as before. For some of their party might be known to you before
that pestilence was denounced by the most explicit condemnation of the
apostolic see, whom you perceive to have now become suddenly silent; nor
can it be ascertained whether they have been really cured of it,
otherwise than through their not only forbearing from the utterance of
these false dogmas, but also defending the truths which are opposed to
their former errors with the same zeal as they used to show on the other
side. These are, however, to be more gently dealt with; for what need is
there for causing further terror to those whom their silence itself
proves to be sufficiently terrified already? At the same time, though
they should not be frightened, they should be taught; and in my opinion
they may more easily, while their fear of severity assists the teacher
of the truth, be so taught that by the Lord’s help, after they have
learned to understand and love His grace, they may speak out as
antagonists of the error which meanwhile they dare not confess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[554:2885](1010450.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p4"></span> Sixtus, afterwards Sixtus III., Bishop
of Rome, the immediate successor of Cælestine, to whom the next letter
is addressed. His name is the forty-third in the list of Popes, and he
was in office from 432 to 440 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span> The 194th letter of Augustin was
addressed to the same Sixtus, and is a very elaborate dissertation on
Pelagianism. It is omitted from this selection as being rather a
theological treatise than a letter.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[555:2886](1010450.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p6"></span> Sixtus had been not without reason
reckoned as a sympathiser with Pelagius, until their views were finally
condemned in this year 418 by Zosimus.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[555:2887](1010450.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="vii.1.CXCI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p8"></span> [2 Tim.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006)<span id="vii.1.CXCI-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXCII](1010451)
