[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010228)  [Next](1010230.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XI.XXVIII"></span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XI.XXVIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—Time in the Human Mind,
Which Expects, Considers, and Remembers.</span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVIII-p2"></span>37. But how is that future diminished
or consumed which as yet is not? Or how doth the past, which is no
longer, increase, unless in the mind which enacteth this there are three
things done? For it both expects, and considers, and remembers, that
that which it expecteth, through that which it considereth, may pass
into that which it remembereth. Who, therefore, denieth that future
things as yet are not? But yet there is already in the mind the
expectation of things future. And who denies that past things are now no
longer? But, however, there is still in the mind the memory of things
past. And who denies that time present wants space, because it passeth
away in a moment? But yet our consideration endureth, through which that
which may be present may proceed to become absent. Future time, which is
not, is not therefore long; but a “long future” is “a long expectation
of the future.” Nor is time past, which is now no longer, long; but a
long past is “a long memory of the past.”

<span id="vi.XI.XXVIII-p3"></span><span id="page_174">p. 174</span>
<span id="vi.XI.XXVIII-Page_174"></span>38. I am about to repeat a psalm
that I know. Before I begin, my attention is extended to the whole; but
when I have begun, as much of it as becomes past by my saying it is
extended in my memory; and the life of this action of mine is divided
between my memory, on account of what I have repeated, and my
expectation, on account of what I am about to repeat; yet my
consideration is present with me, through which that which was future
may be carried over so that it may become past. Which the more it is
done and repeated, by so much (expectation being shortened) the memory
is enlarged, until the whole expectation be exhausted, when that whole
action being ended shall have passed into memory. And what takes place
in the entire psalm, takes place also in each individual part of it, and
in each individual syllable: this holds in the longer action, of which
that psalm is perchance a portion; the same holds in the whole life of
man, of which all the actions of man are parts; the same holds in the
whole age of the sons of men, of which all the lives of men are parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](1010230.md)
