[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010411)  [Next](1010413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXV-p1.1"></span>Letter CXV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 410.)

<span id="vii.1.CXV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXV-p3.1"></span>To Fortunatus, My Colleague in the
Priesthood, My Lord Most Blessed, and My Brother Beloved with Profound
Esteem, and to the Brethren Who are with Thee, Augustin Sends Greeting
in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXV-p4"></span>Your Holiness is well acquainted with
Faventius, a tenant on the estate of the Paratian forest. He,
apprehending some injury or other at the hands of the owner of that
estate, took refuge in the church at Hippo, and was there, as fugitives
are wont to do, waiting till he could get the matter settled through my
mediation. Becoming every day, as often happens, less and <span
id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span id="vii.1.CXV-Page_437"></span>less
alarmed, and in fact completely off his guard, as if his adversary had
desisted from his enmity, he was, when leaving the house of a friend
after supper, suddenly carried off by one Florentinus, an officer of the
Count, who used in this act of violence a band of armed men sufficient
for the purpose. When this was made known to me, and as yet it was
unknown by whose orders or by whose hands he had been carried off,
though suspicion naturally fell on the man from whose apprehended injury
he had claimed the protection of the Church, I at once communicated with
the tribune who is in command of the coast-guard. He sent out soldiers,
but no one could be found. But in the morning we learned in what house
he had passed the night, and also that he had left it after
cock-crowing, with the man who had him in custody. I sent also to the
place to which it was reported that he had been removed: there the
officer above-named was found, but refused to allow the presbyter whom I
had sent to have even a sight of his prisoner. On the following day I
sent a letter requesting that he should be allowed the privilege which
the Emperor appointed in cases such as his, namely, that persons
summoned to appear to be tried should in the municipal court be
interrogated whether they desired to spend thirty days under adequate
surveillance in the town, in order to arrange their affairs, or find
funds for the expense of their trial, my expectation being that within
that period of time we might perhaps bring his matters to some amicable
settlement. Already, however, he had gone farther under charge of the
officer Florentinus; but my fear is, lest perchance, if he be brought
before the tribunal of the magistrate, <span
id="fr_2393"></span>[2394](#fn_2393) he suffer some injustice. For
although the integrity of that judge is widely famed as incorruptible,
Faventius has for his adversary a man of very great wealth. To secure
that money may not prevail in that court, I beg your Holiness, my
beloved lord and venerable brother, to have the kindness to give the
accompanying letter to the honourable magistrate, a man very much
beloved by us, and to read this letter also to him; for I have not
thought it necessary to write twice the same statement of the case. I
trust that he will delay the hearing of the case, because I do not know
whether the man is innocent or guilty. I trust also that he will not
overlook the fact that the laws have been violated in his having been
suddenly carried off, without being brought, as was enacted by the
Emperor, before the municipal court, in order to his being asked whether
he wished to accept the benefit of the delay of thirty days, so that in
this way we may get the affair settled between him and his adversary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2393"></span>[437:2394](1010412.htm#fr_2393) <span
id="vii.1.CXV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXV-p5"></span> *Consularis.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXVI](1010413)
