[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010415)  [Next](1010417.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 410.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p3.1"></span>To His Well-Beloved Brethren the Clergy,
and to the Whole People \[of Hippo\], Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p4"></span>1. In the first place, I beseech you,
my friends, and implore you, for Christ’s sake, not to let my bodily
absence grieve you. For I suppose you do not imagine that I could by any
means be separated in spirit and in unfeigned love from you, although
perchance it is even a greater grief to me than to you that my weakness
unfits me for bearing all the cares which are laid on me by those
members of Christ to whose service both fear of Him and love to them
constrain me to devote myself. For you know this, <span id="page_451">p.
451</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXII-Page_451"></span>my beloved, that I
have never absented myself from you through self-indulgent taking of
ease, but only when compelled by such duties as have made it necessary
for some of my holy colleagues and brethren to endure, both on the sea
and in countries beyond the sea, labours from which I was exempted, not
because of reluctance of spirit, but by reason of imperfect bodily
health. Wherefore, my dearly-beloved brethren, act so that, as the
apostle says, “whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear
of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
striving together for the faith of the gospel.” <span
id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408.md) If any vexation pertaining to time
causes you distress, this itself ought the more to remind you how you
should occupy your thoughts with that life in which you may live without
any burden, escaping not the annoying hardships of this short life, but
the dread flames of eternal fire. For if ye strive with so much anxiety,
so much earnestness, and so much labour, to save yourselves from falling
into some transient sufferings in this world, how solicitous ought you
to be to escape everlasting misery! And if the death which puts an end
to the labours of time is so feared, how ought we to fear the death
which ushers men into eternal pain! And if the short-lived and sordid
pleasures of this world are so loved, with how much greater earnestness
ought we to seek the pure and infinite joys of the world to come!
Meditating upon these things, be not slothful in good works, that ye may
come in due season to reap what you have sown.

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p6"></span>2. It has been reported to me that you
have forgotten your custom of providing raiment for the poor, to which
work of charity I exhorted you when I was present with you; and I now
exhort you not to allow yourselves to be overcome and made slothful by
the tribulation of this world, which you see now visited with such
calamities as were foretold by our Lord and Redeemer, who cannot lie.
You ought in present circumstances not to be less diligent in works of
charity, but rather to be more abundant in these than you were wont to
be. For as men betake themselves in greater haste to a place of greater
security when they see in the shaking of their walls the ruin of their
house impending, so ought Christians, the more that they perceive, from
the increasing frequency of their afflictions, that the destruction of
this world is at hand, to be the more prompt and active in transferring
to the treasury of heaven the goods which they were proposing to store
up on earth, in order that, if any accident common to the lot of men
occur, he may rejoice who has escaped from a dwelling doomed to ruin;
and if, on the other hand, nothing of this kind happen, he may be exempt
from painful solicitude who, die when he may, has committed his
possessions to the keeping of the ever-living Lord, to whom he is about
to go. Wherefore, my dearly-beloved brethren, let every one of you,
according to his ability, of which he himself is the best judge, do with
a portion of his substance as ye were wont to do; do it also with a more
willing mind than ye were wont; and amid all the vexations of this life
bear in your hearts the apostolic exhortation: “The Lord is at hand: be
careful for nothing.” <span id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409.md) Let
such things be reported to me concerning you as may make me understand
that it is not through my presence with you, but from obedience to the
precept of God, who is never absent, that you follow that good practice
which for many years while I was with you, and for some time after my
departure, you observed.

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p8"></span>May the Lord preserve you in peace!
And, dearly-beloved brethren, pray for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[451:2409](1010416.htm#fr_2408.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p5"></span> [Phil.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[451:2410](1010416.htm#fr_2409.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p7"></span> [Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXII-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXIII](1010417.md)
