[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010084)  [Next](1010086.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Being Attacked by Fever, He is in
Great Danger.</span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p2"></span>16. And behold, there was I received by the
scourge of bodily sickness, and I was descending into hell burdened with
all the sins that I had committed, both against Thee, myself, and
others, many and grievous, over and above that bond of original sin
whereby we all die in Adam. <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397.md) For
none of these things hadst Thou <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="vi.V.IX-Page_85"></span>forgiven me in Christ, neither had He
“abolished” by His cross “the enmity” <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398.md) which, by my sins, I had incurred with
Thee. For how could He, by the crucifixion of a phantasm, <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399.md) which I supposed Him to be? As true,
then, was the death of my soul, as that of His flesh appeared to me to
be untrue; and as true the death of His flesh as the life of my soul,
which believed it not, was false. The fever increasing, I was now
passing away and perishing. For had I then gone hence, whither should I
have gone but into the fiery torments meet for my misdeeds, in the truth
of Thy ordinance? She was ignorant of this, yet, while absent, prayed
for me. But Thou, everywhere present, hearkened to her where she was,
and hadst pity upon me where I was, that I should regain my bodily
health, although still frenzied in my sacrilegious heart. For all that
peril did not make me wish to be baptized, and I was better when, as a
lad, I entreated it of my mother’s piety, as I have already related and
confessed. <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400.md) But I had grown up to
my own dishonour, and all the purposes of Thy medicine I madly
derided, <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md) who wouldst not suffer
me, though such a one, to die a double death. Had my mother’s heart been
smitten with this wound, it never could have been cured. For I cannot
sufficiently express the love she had for me, nor how she now travailed
for me in the spirit with a far keener anguish than when she bore me in
the flesh.

<span id="vi.V.IX-p8"></span>17. I cannot conceive, therefore, how she
could have been healed if such a death of mine had transfixed the bowels
of her love. Where then would have been her so earnest, frequent, and
unintermitted prayers to Thee alone? But couldst Thou, most merciful
God, despise the “contrite and humble heart” <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md) of that pure and prudent widow, so
constant in alms-deeds, so gracious and attentive to Thy saints, not
permitting one day to pass without oblation at Thy altar, twice a day,
at morning and even-tide, coming to Thy church without intermission—not
for vain gossiping, nor old wives’ “fables,” <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) but in order that she might listen to
Thee in Thy sermons, and Thou to her in her prayers? <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) Couldst Thou—Thou by whose gift she
was such—despise and disregard without succouring the tears of such a
one, wherewith she entreated Thee not for gold or silver, nor for any
changing or fleeting good, but for the salvation of the soul of her son?
By no means, Lord. Assuredly Thou wert near, and wert hearing and doing
in that method in which Thou hadst predetermined that it should be done.
Far be it from Thee that Thou shouldst delude her in those visions and
the answers she had from Thee,—some of which I have spoken of, <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) and others not, <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406.md) —which she kept <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407.md) in her faithful breast, and, always
petitioning, pressed upon Thee as Thine autograph. For Thou, “because
Thy mercy endureth for ever,” <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408.md)
condescendest to those whose debts Thou hast pardoned, to become
likewise a debtor by Thy promises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_397"></span>[84:398](1010085.htm#fr_397.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
15.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[85:399](1010085.htm#fr_398.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p4"></span> [Eph.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p4.1"></span>,
and [Col. 1.20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.V.IX-p4.2"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[85:400](1010085.htm#fr_399.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p5"></span> The Manichæan belief in regard to the
unreal nature of Christ’s body may be gathered from Augustin’s *Reply to
Faustus*: “You ask,” argues Faustus (xxvi. i.), “if Jesus was not born,
how did He die?…In return I ask you, how did Elias not die, though he
was a man? Could a mortal encroach upon the limits of immortality, and
could not Christ add to His immortality whatever experience of death was
required?…Accordingly, if it is a good argument that Jesus was a man
because He died, it is an equally good argument that Elias was not a man
because he did not die.…As, from the outset of His taking the likeness
of man, He underwent in appearance all the experiences of humanity, it
was quite consistent that He should complete the system by appearing to
die.” So that with him the whole life of Jesus was a “phantasm.” His
birth, circumcision, crucifixion, baptism, and temptation were (*ibid.*
xxxii. 7) the mere result of the interpolation of crafty men, or sprung
from the ignorance of the apostles, when as yet they had not reached
perfection in knowledge. It is noticeable that Augustin, referring to
[Eph. 2.15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.V.IX-p5.1"></span>, substitutes His cross for His flesh, he, as a
Manichæan, not believing in the real humanity of the Son of God. See
iii. sec. 9, note, above.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[85:401](1010085.htm#fr_400.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p6"></span> See i. sec. 10, above.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[85:402](1010085.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p7"></span> See also iv. sec. 8, above, where he
derides his friend’s baptism.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[85:403](1010085.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p9"></span> [Ps.
51.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[85:404](1010085.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p10"></span> [1 Tim.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[85:405](1010085.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p11"></span> Watts gives the following note
here:—“Oblations were those offerings of bread, meal, or wine, for
making of the Eucharist, or of alms besides for the poor, which the
primitive Christians every time they communicated brought to the church,
where it was received by the deacons, who presented them to the priest
or bishop. Here note: (1) They communicated daily; (2) they had service
morning and evening, and two sermons a day many times,” etc. An
interesting trace of an old use in this matter of oblations is found in
the Queen’s Coronation Service. After other oblations had been offered,
the Queen knelt before the Archbishop and presented to him “oblations”
of bread and wine *for* the Holy Communion. See also Palmer’s *Origines
Liturgicæ*, iv. 8, who demonstrates by reference to patristic writers
that the custom was universal in the primitive Church:—“But though all
the churches of the East and West agreed in this respect, they differed
in appointing the time and place at which the oblations of the people
were received.” It would appear from the following account of early
Christian worship, that in the time of Justin Martyr the oblations were
collected after the reception of the Lord’s Supper. In his *First
Apology* we read (c. lxvii.): “On the day called Sunday \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.V.IX-p11.1"></span>τοῦ ἡλίου λεγομένῃ
ἡμέρᾳ</span>\] all who live in cities or in the country gather together
to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the
prophets are read, as long as time permits them. When the reader has
ceased, the president \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.V.IX-p11.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.V.IX-p11.3"></span> προεστὼς</span>\] verbally instructs, and
exhorts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all rise together
and pray \[<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.V.IX-p11.4"></span>εὐχὰς
πέμπομεν</span>\], and, as we before said, when our prayer is ended,
bread and wine and water are brought, and the president in like manner
offers prayers and thanksgivings according to his ability \[Kaye renders
(p. 89) <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.V.IX-p11.5"></span> εὐχὰς
ὁμοίως καὶ εὐχαριστίας, ὅση δύναμις αὐτῷ, ἀναπέμπει</span>, “with his
utmost power”\], and the people assent, saying Amen; and there is a
distribution to each, and a participation of that over which thanks had
been given, and to those who are absent a portion is sent by the
deacons. And they who are well-to-do, and willing, give what each thinks
fit; and what is collected \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.V.IX-p11.6"></span>τὸ συλλεγόμενον</span>\] is deposited with the
president, who succours the orphans and widows, and those who, through
sickness or any other cause, are in want, and those who are in bonds,
and the stranger sojourning among us, and, in a word, takes care of all
who are in need.” The whole passage is given, as portions of it will be
found to have a bearing on other parts of the *Confessions*. Bishop
Kaye’s *Justin Martyr*, c. iv., may be referred to for his view of the
controverted points in the passage. See also Bingham’s *Antiquities*,
ii. 2–9; and notes to vi. sec. 2, and ix. secs. 6 and 27, below.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[85:406](1010085.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p11.7"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p12"></span> See above, iii. 11, 12.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[85:407](1010085.htm#fr_406.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p13"></span> *Ibid.* iii. 12.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[85:408](1010085.htm#fr_407.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p14"></span> [Luke
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#019.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[85:409](1010085.htm#fr_408.md) <span
id="vi.V.IX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.IX-p15"></span> [Ps.
118.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.V.IX-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010086.md)
