[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010473)  [Next](1010475.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCLIV"></span><span id="page_591">p. 591</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCLIV-Page_591"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCLIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCLIV-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCLIV-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCLIV-p2.1"></span>To Benenatus, My Most Blessed Lord, My
Esteemed and Amiable Brother and Partner in the Priestly Office, and to
the Brethren Who are with Him, Augustin and the Brethren Who are with
Him Send Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCLIV-p3"></span>The maiden <span
id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022.md) about whom your Holiness wrote to
me is at present disposed to think, that if she were of full age she
would refuse every proposal of marriage. She is, however, so young, that
even if she were disposed to marriage, she ought not yet to be either
given or betrothed to any one. Besides this, my lord Benenatus, brother
revered and beloved, it must be remembered that God takes her under
guardianship in His Church with the design of protecting her against
wicked men; placing her, therefore, under my care not so as that she can
be given by me to whomsoever I might choose, but so as that she cannot
be taken away against my will by any person who would be an unsuitable
partner. The proposal which you have been pleased to mention is one
which, if she were disposed and prepared to marry, would not displease
me; but whether she will marry any one,—although for my own part, I
would much prefer that she carried out what she now talks of,—I do not
in the meantime know, for she is at an age in which her declaration that
she wishes to be a nun is to be received rather as the flippant
utterance of one talking heedlessly, than as the deliberate promise of
one making a solemn vow. Moreover, she has an aunt by the mother’s side
married to our honourable brother Felix, with whom I have conferred in
regard to this matter,—for I neither could, nor indeed should have
avoided consulting him,—and he has not been reluctant to entertain the
proposal, but has, on the contrary, expressed his satisfaction; but he
expressed not unreasonably his regret that nothing had been written to
him on the subject, although his relationship entitled him to be
apprised of it. For, perhaps, the mother of the maiden will also come
forward, though in the meantime she does not make herself known, and to
a mother’s wishes in regard to the giving away of a daughter, nature
gives in my opinion the precedence above all others, unless the maiden
herself be already old enough to have legitimately a stronger claim to
choose for herself what she pleases. I wish your Honour also to
understand, that if the final and entire authority in the matter of her
marriage were committed to me, and she herself, being of age and willing
to marry, were to entrust herself to me under God as my Judge to give
her to whomsoever I thought best,—I declare, and I declare the truth, in
saying that the proposal which you mention pleases me meanwhile, but
because of God being my Judge I cannot pledge myself to reject on her
behalf a better offer if it were made; but whether any such proposal
shall at any future time be made is wholly uncertain. Your Holiness
perceives, therefore, how many important considerations concur to make
it impossible for her to be, in the meantime, definitely promised to any
one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[591:3023](1010474.htm#fr_3022.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCLIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCLIV-p4"></span> The maiden referred to was an orphan
whom a magistrate (*vir spectabilis*) had requested Augustin to bring up
as a ward of the Church. Four letters written by him concerning her have
been preserved, viz. the 252d, in which he intimates to Felix that he
can decide nothing in regard to her without consulting the friend by
whom she had been placed under his guardianship; the 253d, expressing to
Benenatus his surprise that he should propose for her a marriage which
would not strengthen the Church; the 254th, addressed also to Benenatus,
which we have translated as a specimen of the series; and the 255th, in
which, writing to Rusticus, a Pagan who had sought her hand for his son,
Augustin bluntly denies his request, referring him for the grounds of
the refusal to his correspondence with Benenatus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCLXIII](1010475.md)
