[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010436)  [Next](1010438.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CLVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 414.)

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Augustin, My Brother Partner in
the Sacerdotal Office, Most Sincerely Loved, with Profound Respect, and
to the Brethren Who are with Him, Evodius</span>* <span
id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653.md) *<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p4.2"></span>and the Brethren Who are with Him Send
Greeting in the Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p5"></span>1. I urgently beg you to send the
reply due to my last letter. Indeed, I would have preferred first to
learn what I then asked, and afterwards to put the questions which I now
submit to you. Give me your attention while I relate an event in which
you will kindly take an interest, and which has made me impatient to
lose no time in acquiring, if possible in this life, the knowledge which
I desired. I had a certain youth as a clerk, a son of presbyter Armenus
of Melonita, whom, by my humble instrumentality, God rescued when he was
becoming already immersed in secular affairs, for he was employed as a
shorthand writer by the proconsul’s solicitor. <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654.md) He was then, indeed, as boys
usually are, prompt and somewhat restless, but as he grew older (for his
death occurred in his twenty-second year) a gravity of deportment and
circumspect probity of life so adorned him that it is a pleasure to
dwell upon his memory. He was, moreover, a clever stenographer, <span
id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655.md) and indefatigable in writing: he
had begun also to be earnest in reading, so that he even urged me to do
more than my indolence would have chosen, in order to spend hours of the
night in reading, for he read aloud to me for a time every night after
all was still; and in reading, he would not pass over any sentence
unless he understood it, and would go over it a third or even a fourth
time, and not leave it until what he wished to know was made clear. I
had begun to regard him not as a mere boy and clerk, but as a
comparatively intimate and pleasant friend, for his conversation gave me
much delight.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p8"></span>2. He desired also to “depart and to
be with Christ,” <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656.md) a desire
which has been fulfilled. For he was ill for sixteen days in his
father’s house, and by strength of memory he continually repeated
portions of Scripture throughout almost the whole time of his illness.
But when he was very near to the end of his life, he sang <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657.md) so as to be heard by all, “My soul
longeth for and hastens unto the courts of the Lord,” <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658.md) after which he sang again, “Thou
hast anointed my head with oil, and beautiful is Thy cup, overpowering
my senses with delight!” <span id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659.md) In
these things he was wholly occupied; in the consolation yielded by them
he found satisfaction. At the last, when dissolution was just coming
upon him, he began to make the sign of the cross on his forehead, and in
finishing this his hand was moving down to his mouth, which also he
wished to mark with the same sign, but the inward man (which had been
truly renewed day by day) <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660.md)
had, ere this was done, forsaken the tabernacle of clay. To myself there
has been given so great an ecstasy of joy, that I think that after
leaving his own body he has entered into my spirit, and is there
imparting to me a certain fulness of light from his presence, for I am
conscious of a joy beyond all measure through his deliverance and
safety—indeed it is ineffable. For I felt no small anxiety on his <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-Page_510"></span>account, being afraid of the dangers
peculiar to his years. For I was at pains to inquire of himself whether
perchance he had been defiled by intercourse with woman; he solemnly
assured us that he was free from this stain, by which declaration our
joy was still more increased. So he died. We honored his memory by
suitable obsequies, such as were due to one so excellent, for we
continued during three days to praise the Lord with hymns at his grave,
and on the third day we offered the sacraments of redemption. <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p15"></span>3. Behold, however, two days
thereafter, a certain respectable widow from Figentes, an handmaid from
God, who said that she had been twelve years in widowhood, saw the
following vision in a dream. She saw a certain deacon, who had died four
years ago, preparing a palace, with the assistance of servants and
handmaids of God (virgins and widows). It was being so much adorned that
the place was refulgent with splendor, and appeared to be wholly made of
silver. On her inquiring eagerly for whom this palace was being
prepared, the deacon aforesaid answered, “For the young man, the son of
the presbyter, who was cut off yesterday.” There appeared in the same
palace an old man robed in white, who gave orders to two others, also
dressed in white, to go, and having raised the body from the grave, to
carry it up with them to heaven. And she added, that so soon as the body
had been taken up from the grave and carried to heaven, there sprang
from the same sepulchre branches of the rose, called from its folded
blossoms the virgin rose.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p16"></span>4. I have narrated the event: listen
now, if you please, to my question, and teach me what I ask, for the
departure of that young man’s soul forces such questions from me. While
we are in the body, we have an inward faculty of perception which is
alert in proportion to the activity of our attention, and is more
wakeful and eager the more earnestly attentive we become: and it seems
to us probable that even in its highest activity it is retarded by the
encumbrance of the body, for who can fully describe all that the mind
suffers through the body! In the midst of the perturbation and annoyance
which come from the suggestions, temptations, necessities, and varied
afflictions of which the body is the cause, the mind does not surrender
its strength, it resists and conquers. Sometimes it is defeated;
nevertheless, mindful of what is its own nature, it becomes, under the
stimulating influence of such labours, more active and more wary, and
breaks through the meshes of wickedness, and so makes its way to better
things. Your Holiness will kindly understand what I mean to say.
Therefore, while we are in this life, we are hindered by such
deficiencies, and are nevertheless, as it is written, “more than
conquerors through Him that loved us.” <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662.md) When we go forth from this body,
and escape from every burden, and from sin, with its incessant activity,
what are we?

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p18"></span>5. In the first place, I ask whether
there may not be some kind of body (formed, perchance, of one of the
four elements, either air or ether) which does not depart from the
incorporeal principle, that is, the substance properly called the soul,
when it forsakes this earthly body. For as the soul is in its nature
incorporeal, if it be absolutely disembodied by death there is now one
soul of all that have left this world. And in that case where would the
rich man, who was clothed in purple, and Lazarus, who was full of sores,
now be? How, moreover, could they be distinguished according to their
respective deserts, so that the one should have suffering and the other
have joy, if there were only a single soul made by the combination of
all disembodied souls, unless, of course, these things are to be
understood in a figurative sense? Be that as it may, there is no
question that souls which are held in definite places (as that rich man
was in the flame, and that poor man was in Abraham’s bosom) are held in
bodies. If there are distinct places, there are bodies, and in these
bodies the souls reside; and even although the punishments and rewards
are experienced in the conscience, the soul which experiences them is
nevertheless in a body. Whatever is the nature of that one soul made up
of many souls, it must be possible for it in its unbroken unity to be
both grieved and made glad at the same moment, if it is to approve
itself to be really a substance consisting of many souls gathered into
one. If, however, this soul is called one only in the same way as the
incorporeal mind is called one, although it has in it memory, and will,
and intellect, and if it be alleged that all these are separate
incorporeal causes or powers and have their several distinctive offices
and work without one impeding another in any way, I think this might be
in some measure answered by saying that it must be also possible for
some of the souls to be under punishment and some of the sours to enjoy
rewards simultaneously in this one substance consisting of many souls
gathered into One.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p19"></span>6. Or if this be not so \[that is, if
there be no such body remaining still in union with the incorporeal
principle after it quits this earthly body\], what is there to hinder
each soul from having, when separated from the solid body which it here
inhabits, another body, so that the soul always animates a body of some
kind? or in what body <span id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-Page_511"></span>does it pass to any region, if such
there be, to which necessity compels it to go? For the angels
themselves, if they were not numbered by bodies of some kind which they
have, could not be called many, as they are by the Truth Himself when He
said in the gospel, “I could pray the Father, and He will presently give
me twelve legions of angels.” <span id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663.md)
Again it is certain that Samuel was seen in the body when he was raised
at the request of Saul; <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664.md) and
as to Moses, whose body was buried, it is plain from the gospel
narrative that he came in the body to the Lord on the mountain to which
He and His disciples had retired. <span
id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665.md) In the Apocrypha, and in the
*Mysteries of Moses*, a writing which is wholly devoid of authority, it
is indeed said that, at the time when he ascended the mount to die,
through the power which his body possessed, there was one body which was
committed to the earth, and another which was joined to the angel who
accompanied him; but I do not feel myself called upon to give to a
sentence in apocryphal writings a preference over the definite
statements quoted above. We must therefore give attention to this, and
search out, by the help either of the authority of revelation or of the
light of reason, the matter about which we are inquiring. But it is
alleged that the future resurrection of the body is a proof that the
soul was after death absolutely without a body. This is not, however, an
unanswerable objection, for the angels, who are like our souls
invisible, have at times desired to appear in bodily forms and be seen,
and (whatever might be the form of body worthy to be assumed by these
spirits) they have appeared, for example, to Abraham <span
id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666.md) and to Tobias. <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667.md) Therefore it is quite possible that
the resurrection of the body may, as we assuredly believe, take place,
and yet that the soul may be reunited to it without its being found to
have been at any moment wholly devoid of some kind of body. Now the body
which the soul here occupies consists of the four elements, of which
one, namely heat, seems to depart from this body at the same moment as
the soul. For there remains after death that which is made of earth,
moisture also is not wanting to the body, nor is the element of cold
matter gone; heat alone has fled, which perhaps the soul takes along
with it if it migrates from place to place. This is all that I say
meanwhile concerning the body.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p25"></span>7. It seems to me also, that if the
soul while occupying the living body is capable, as I have said, of
strenuous mental application, how much more unencumbered, active,
vigorous, earnest, resolute, and persevering will it be, how much
enlarged in capacity and improved in character, if it has while in this
body learned to relish virtue! For after laying aside this body, or
rather, after having this cloud swept away, the soul will have come to
be free from all disturbing influences, enjoying tranquillity and exempt
from temptation, seeing whatever it has longed for, and embracing what
it has loved. Then, also, it will be capable of remembering and
recognising friends, both those who went before it from this world, and
those whom it left here below. Perhaps this may be true. I know not, but
I desire to learn. But it would greatly distress me to think that the
soul after death passes into a state of torpor, being as it were buried,
just as it is during sleep while it is in the body, living only in hope,
but having nothing and knowing nothing, especially if in its sleep it be
not even stirred by any dreams. This notion causes me very great horror,
and seems to indicate that the life of the soul is extinguished at
death.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p26"></span>8. This also I would ask: Supposing
that the soul be discovered to have such a body as we speak of, does
that body lack any of the senses? Of course, if there cannot be imposed
upon it any necessity for smelling, tasting, or touching, as I suppose
will be the case, these senses will be wanting; but I hesitate as to the
senses of sight and hearing. For are not devils said to hear (not,
indeed, in all the persons whom they harass, for in regard to these
there is a question), even when they appear in bodies of their own? And
as to the faculty of sight, how can they pass from one place to another
if they have a body but are void of the power of seeing, so as to guide
its motions? Do you think that this is not the case with human souls
when they go forth from the body,—that they have still a body of some
kind, and are not deprived of some at least of the senses proper to this
body? Else how can we explain the fact that very many dead persons have
been observed by day, or by persons awake and walking abroad during the
night, to pass into houses just as they were wont to do in their
lifetime? This I have heard not once, but often; and I have also heard
it said that in places in which dead bodies are interred, and especially
in churches, there are commotions and prayers which are heard for the
most part at a certain time of the night. This I remember hearing from
more than one: for a certain holy presbyter was an eye-witness of such
an apparition, having observed a multitude of such phantoms issuing from
the baptistery in bodies full of light, after which he heard their
prayers in the midst of the church itself. All such things are either
true, and therefore helpful to the inquiry which we are now making, or
are mere fables, in which case the fact of their invention <span
id="page_512">p. 512</span> <span id="vii.1.CLVIII-Page_512"></span>is
wonderful; nevertheless I would desire to get some information from the
fact that they come and visit men, and are seen otherwise than in
dreams.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p27"></span>9. These dreams suggest another
question. I do not at this moment concern myself about the mere
creations of fancy, which are formed by the emotions of the uneducated.
I speak of visitations in sleep, such as the apparition to Joseph <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668.md) in a dream, in the manner
experienced in most cases of the kind. In the same manner, therefore,
our own friends also who have departed this life before us sometimes
come and appear to us in dreams, and speak to us. For I myself remember
that Profuturus, and Privatus, and Servilius, holy men who within my
recollection were removed by death from our monastery, spoke to me, and
that the events of which they spoke came to pass according to their
words. Or if it be some other higher spirit that assumes their form and
visits our minds, I leave this to the all-seeing eye of Him before whom
everything from the highest to the lowest is uncovered. If, therefore,
the Lord be pleased to speak through reason to your Holiness on all
these questions, I beg you to be so kind as make me partaker of the
knowledge which you have received. There is another thing which I have
resolved not to omit mentioning, for perhaps it bears upon the matter
now under investigation:

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p29"></span>10. This same youth, in connection
with whom these questions are brought forward, departed this life after
having received what may be called a summons <span
id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669.md) at the time when he was dying. For
one who had been a companion of his as a student, and reader, and
shorthand writer to my dictation, who had died eight months before, was
seen by a person in a dream coming towards him. When he was asked by the
person who then distinctly saw him why he had come, he said, “I have
come to take this friend away;” and so it proved. For in the house
itself, also, there appeared to a certain old man, who was almost awake,
a man bearing in his hand a laurel branch on which something was
written. Nay, more, when this one was seen, it is further reported that
after the death of the young man, his father the presbyter had begun to
reside along with the aged Theasius in the monastery, in order to find
consolation there, but lo! on the third day after his death, the young
man is seen entering the monastery, and is asked by one of the brethren
in a dream of some kind whether he knew himself to be dead. He replied
that he knew he was. The other asked whether he had been welcomed by
God. This also he answered with great expressions of joy. And when
questioned as to the reason why he had come, he answered, “I have been
sent to summon my father.” The person to whom these things were shown
awakes, and relates what had passed. It comes to the ear of Bishop
Theasius. He, being alarmed, sharply admonished the person who told him,
lest the matter should come, as it might easily do, to the ear of the
presbyter himself, and he should be disturbed by such tidings. But why
prolong the narration? Within about four days from this visitation he
was saying (for he had suffered from a moderate feverishness) that he
was now out of danger, and that the physician had given up attending
him, having assured him that there was no cause whatever for anxiety;
but that very day this presbyter expired after he had lain down on his
couch. Nor should I forbear mentioning, that on the same day on which
the youth died, he asked his father three times to forgive him anything
in which he might have offended, and every time that he kissed his
father he said to him, “Let us give thanks to God, father,” and insisted
upon his father saying the words along with him, as if he were exhorting
one who was to be his companion in going forth from this world. And in
fact only seven days elapsed between the two deaths. What shall we say
of things so wonderful? Who shall be a thoroughly reliable teacher as to
these mysterious dispensations? To you in the hour of perplexity my
agitated heart unburdens itself. The divine appointment of the death of
the young man and of his father is beyond all doubt, for two sparrows
shall not fall to the ground without the will of our heavenly
Father. <span id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p32"></span>11. That the soul cannot exist in
absolute separation from a body of some kind is proved in my opinion by
the fact that to exist without body belongs to God alone. But I think
that the laying aside of so great a burden as the body, in the act of
passing from this world, proves that the soul will then be very much
more wakeful than it is meanwhile; for then the soul appears, as I
think, far more noble when no longer encumbered by so great a hindrance,
both in action and in knowledge, and that entire spiritual rest proves
it to be free from all causes of disturbance and error, but does not
make it languid, and as it were slow, torpid, and embarrassed, inasmuch
as it is enough for the soul to enjoy in its fulness the liberty to
which it has attained in being freed from the world and the body; for,
as you have wisely said, the intellect is satisfied with food, and
applies the lips of the spirit to the fountain of life in that condition
in which it is happy and blest in the undisputed lordship of its own
faculties. For before I quitted the monastery I saw brother Servilius in
<span id="page_513">p. 513</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-Page_513"></span>a dream after his decease, and he said
that we were labouring to attain by the exercise of reason to an
understanding of truth, whereas he and those who were in the same state
as he were always resting in the pure joy of contemplation.

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p33"></span>12. I also beg you to explain to me
in how many ways the word wisdom is used; as God is wisdom, and a wise
mind is wisdom (in which way it is said to be as light); as we read also
of the wisdom of Bezaleel, who made the tabernacle or the ointment, and
the wisdom of Solomon, or any other wisdom, if there be such, and
wherein they differ from each other; and whether the one eternal Wisdom
which is with the Father is to be understood as spoken of in these
different degrees, as they are called diverse gifts of the Holy Spirit,
who divideth to every one severally according as He will. Or, with the
exception of that Wisdom alone which was not created, were these
created, and have they a distinct existence of their own? or are they
effects, and have they received their name from the definition of their
work? I am asking a great many questions. May the Lord grant you grace
to discover the truth sought, and wisdom sufficient to commit it to
writing, and to communicate it without delay to me. I have written in
much ignorance, and in a homely style; but since you think it worth
while to know that about which I am inquiring, I beseech you in the name
of Christ the Lord to correct me where I am mistaken, and teach me what
you know that I am desirous to learn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[509:2654](1010437.htm#fr_2653.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p4"></span> Evodius, Bishop of Uzala, was one of
Augustin’s early friends. He was a native of the same town (Tagaste),
and joined Augustin and Alypius in seeking religious retirement after
their baptism, in 387 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span> He was also with them at Ostia
when Monica died. (Confessions, Book ix. ch. 8 and 12).

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[509:2655](1010437.htm#fr_2654.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p6"></span> *Nam scholastico proconsulis
excipiebat.*

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[509:2656](1010437.htm#fr_2655.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p7"></span> *Strenuus in notis.*

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[509:2657](1010437.htm#fr_2656.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p9"></span> *Dissolvi et esse cum Christo*.
[Phil. i. 23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[509:2658](1010437.htm#fr_2657.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p10"></span> *Psallebat.*

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[509:2659](1010437.htm#fr_2658.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p11"></span> [Ps.
84.2](../../../bib/sep/psa084.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p11.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[509:2660](1010437.htm#fr_2659.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p12"></span> [Ps.
23:5](../../../bib/sep/psa023.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/sep/psa023.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p12.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[509:2661](1010437.htm#fr_2660.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p13"></span> [2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[510:2662](1010437.htm#fr_2661.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p14"></span> *Redemptionis sacramenta obtulimus.*

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[510:2663](1010437.htm#fr_2662.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p17"></span> [Rom.
8.37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[511:2664](1010437.htm#fr_2663.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p20"></span> [Matt.
26.53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[511:2665](1010437.htm#fr_2664.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p21"></span> [1 Sam.
28.14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[511:2666](1010437.htm#fr_2665.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p22"></span> [Matt.
17.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[511:2667](1010437.htm#fr_2666.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p23"></span> [Gen.
18.6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[511:2668](1010437.htm#fr_2667.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p24"></span> [Tob.
12.16](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[512:2669](1010437.htm#fr_2668.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p28"></span> [Matt.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[512:2670](1010437.htm#fr_2669.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p30"></span> *Exhibitus quodammodo pergit.*

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[512:2671](1010437.htm#fr_2670.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLVIII-p31"></span> [Matt.
10.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLVIII-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLIX](1010438.md)
