[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010108)  [Next](1010110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.I"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.I-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.I-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—He Regarded Not God Indeed Under
the Form of a Human Body, But as a Corporeal Substance Diffused Through
Space.</span>

<span id="vi.VII.I-p2"></span>1. <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.VII.I-p2.1"></span>Dead</span> now was that evil and abominable
youth of mine, and I was passing into early manhood: as I increased in
years, the fouler became I in vanity, who could not conceive of any
substance but such as I saw with my own eyes. I thought not of Thee, O
God, under the form of a human body. Since the time I began to hear
something of wisdom, I always avoided this; and I rejoiced to have found
the same in the faith of our spiritual mother, Thy Catholic Church. But
what else to imagine Thee I knew not. And I, a man, and such a man,
sought to conceive of Thee, the sovereign and only true God; and I did
in my inmost heart believe that Thou wert incorruptible, and inviolable,
and unchangeable; because, not knowing whence or how, yet most plainly
did I see and feel sure that that which may be corrupted must be worse
than that which cannot, and what cannot be violated did I without
hesitation prefer before that which can, and deemed that which suffers
no change to be better than that which is changeable. Violently did my
heart cry out against all my phantasms, and with this one blow I
endeavoured to beat away from the eye of my mind all that unclean crowd
which fluttered around it. <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481.md) And
lo, being scarce put off, they, in the twinkling of an eye, pressed in
multitudes around me, dashed against my face, and beclouded it; so that,
though I thought not of Thee under the form of a human body, yet was I
constrained to image Thee to be something corporeal in space, either
infused into the world, or infinitely diffused beyond it,—even that
incorruptible, inviolable, and unchangeable, which I preferred to the
corruptible, and violable, and changeable; since whatsoever I conceived,
deprived of this space, appeared as nothing to me, yea, altogether
nothing, not even a void, as if a body were removed from its place and
the place should remain empty of any body at all, whether earthy,
terrestrial, watery, aerial, or celestial, but should remain a void
place—a spacious nothing, as it were.

<span id="vi.VII.I-p4"></span>2. I therefore being thus gross-hearted,
nor clear even to myself, whatsoever was not stretched over certain
spaces, nor diffused, nor crowded together, nor swelled out, or which
did not or could not receive some of these dimensions, I judged to be
altogether nothing. <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482.md) For over
such forms as my eyes are wont to range did my heart then range; nor did
I see that this same observation, by which I formed those same images,
was not of this kind, and yet it could not have formed them had not
itself been something great. In like manner did I conceive of Thee, Life
of my life, as vast through infinite spaces, on every side penetrating
the whole mass of the world, and beyond it, all ways, through
immeasurable and boundless spaces; so that the earth should have Thee,
the heaven have Thee, all things have Thee, and they bounded in Thee,
but Thou nowhere. For as the body of this air which is above the earth
preventeth not the light of the sun from passing through it, penetrating
it, not by bursting or by cutting, but by filling it entirely, so I
imagined the body, not of heaven, air, and sea only, but of the earth
also, to be pervious <span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="vi.VII.I-Page_103"></span>to Thee, and in all its greatest parts as
well as smallest penetrable to receive Thy presence, by a secret
inspiration, both inwardly and outwardly governing all things which Thou
hast created. So I conjectured, because I was unable to think of
anything else; for it was untrue. For in this way would a greater part
of the earth contain a greater portion of Thee, and the less a lesser;
and all things should so be full of Thee, as that the body of an
elephant should contain more of Thee than that of a sparrow by how much
larger it is, and occupies more room; and so shouldest Thou make the
portions of Thyself present unto the several portions of the world, in
pieces, great to the great, little to the little. But Thou art not such
a one; nor hadst Thou as yet enlightened my darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_481"></span>[102:482](1010109.htm#fr_481.md) <span
id="vi.VII.I-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.I-p3"></span> See iii. sec. 12, iv. secs. 3 and 12, and
v. sec. 19, above.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[102:483](1010109.htm#fr_482.md) <span
id="vi.VII.I-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.I-p5"></span> “For with what understanding can man
apprehend God, who does not yet apprehend that very understanding itself
of his own by which he desires to apprehend Him? And if he does already
apprehend this, let him carefully consider that there is nothing in his
own nature better than it: and let him see whether he can there see any
outlines of forms, or brightness of colours, or greatness of space, or
distance of parts, or extension of size, or any movements through
intervals of place, or any such thing at all. Certainly we find nothing
of all this in that, than which we find nothing better in our own
nature, that is, in our own intellect, by which we apprehend wisdom
according to our capacity. What, therefore, we do not find in that,
which is our own best, we ought not to seek in Him, who is far better
than that best of ours; that so we may understand God, if we are able,
and as much as we are able, as good without quality, great without
quantity, a Creator though He lack nothing, ruling but from no position,
sustaining all things without ‘having’ them, in His wholeness everywhere
yet without place, eternal without time, making things that are
changeable without change of Himself, and without passion. Whoso thus
thinks of God, although he cannot yet find out in all ways what He is,
yet piously takes heed, as much as he is able, to think nothing of Him
that He is not.”—*De Trin.* v. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](1010110.md)
