[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010171)  [Next](1010173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XV"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—In Memory There are Also Images of
Things Which are Absent.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XV-p2"></span>23. But whether by images or no, who can
well affirm? For I name a stone, I name the sun, and the things
themselves are not present to my senses, but their images are near to my
memory. I name some pain of the body, yet it is not present when there
is no pain; yet if its image were not in my memory, I should be ignorant
what to say concerning it, nor in arguing be able to distinguish it from
pleasure. I name bodily health when sound in body; the thing itself is
indeed present with me, but unless its image also were in my memory, I
could by no means call to mind what the sound of this name signified.
Nor would sick people know, when health was named, what was said, unless
the same image were retained by the power of memory, although the thing
itself were absent from the body. I name numbers whereby we enumerate;
and not their images, but they themselves are in my memory. I name the
image of the sun, and this, too, is in my memory. For I do not recall
the image of that image, but itself, for the image itself is present
when I remember it. I name memory, and I know what I name. But where do
I know it, except in the memory itself? Is it also present to itself by
its image, and not by itself?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](1010173.md)
