[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010331)  [Next](1010333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXV-p1.1"></span>Letter XXV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 394.)

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXV-p3.1"></span>To Augustin, Our Lord and Brother Beloved and
Venerable, from Paulinus and Therasia, Sinners.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p4"></span>1. The love of Christ which constrains
us, and which unites us, though separated by distance, in the bond of a
common faith, has itself emboldened me to dismiss my fear and address a
letter to you; and it has given you a place in my inmost heart by means
of your writings—so full of the stores of learning, so sweet with
celestial honey, the medicine and the nourishment of my soul. These I at
present have in five books, which, through the kindness of our blessed
and venerable Bishop Alypius, I received, not only as a means of my own
instruction, but for the use of the Church in many towns. These books I
am now reading: in them I take great delight: in them I find food, not
that which perisheth, but that which imparts the substance of eternal
life through our faith, whereby we are in our Lord Jesus Christ made
members of His body; for the writings and examples of the faithful do
greatly strengthen that faith which, not looking at things seen, longs
after things not seen with that love which accepts implicitly all things
which are according to the truth of the omnipotent God. O true salt of
the earth, by which our hearts are preserved from being corrupted by the
errors of the world! O light worthy of your place on the candlestick of
the Church, diffusing widely in the Catholic towns the brightness of a
flame fed by the oil of the seven-branched lamp of the upper sanctuary,
you also disperse even the thick mists of heresy, and rescue the light
of truth from the confusion of darkness by the beams of your luminous
demonstrations.

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p5"></span>2. You see, my brother beloved, esteemed,
and welcomed in Christ our Lord, with what intimacy I claim to know you,
with what amazement I admire and with what love I embrace you, seeing
that I enjoy daily converse with you by the medium of your writings, and
am fed by the breath of your mouth. For your mouth I may justly call a
pipe conveying living water, and a channel from the eternal fountain;
for Christ has become in you a fountain of “living water springing up
into eternal life.” <span id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501.md) Through
desire for this my soul thirsted within me, and my parched ground longed
to be flooded with the fulness of your river. Since, therefore, you have
armed me completely by this your Pentateuch against the Manichæans, if
you have prepared any treatises in defence of the Catholic faith against
other enemies (for our enemy, with his thousand pernicious stratagems,
must be defeated by weapons as various as the artifices by which he
assails us), I beg you to bring these forth from your armoury for me,
and not refuse to furnish me with the “armour of righteousness.” For I
am oppressed even now in my work with a heavy burden, being, as a
sinner, a veteran in the ranks of sinners, but an untrained recruit in
the service of the King eternal. The wisdom of this world I have
unhappily hitherto regarded with admiration, and, devoting myself to
literature which I now see to be unprofitable, and wisdom which I now
reject, I was in the sight of God foolish and dumb. When I had become
old in the fellowship of my enemies, and had laboured in vain in my
thoughts, I lifted mine eyes to the mountains, looking up to the
precepts of the law and to the gifts of grace, whence my help came from
the Lord, who, not requiting me according to mine iniquity, enlightened
my blindness, loosed my bonds, humbled me who had been sinfully exalted,
in order that He might exalt me when graciously humbled.

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p7"></span>3. Therefore I follow, with halting pace
indeed as yet, the great examples of the just, if I may through your
prayers apprehend that for which I have been apprehended by the
compassion of God. Guide, therefore, this infant creeping on the ground,
and by your steps teach him to walk. For I would not have you judge of
me by the age which began with my natural birth, but by that which began
with my spiritual new birth. For as to the natural life, my age is that
which the cripple, healed by the apostles by the power of their word at
the gate Beautiful, had attained. <span
id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502.md) But with respect to the birth of my
soul, mine is as yet the age of those infants <span id="page_246">p.
246</span> <span id="vii.1.XXV-Page_246"></span>who, being sacrificed by
the death-blows which were aimed at Christ, preceded with blood worthy
of such honour the offering of the Lamb, and were the harbingers of the
passion of the Lord. <span id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503.md)
Therefore, as I am but a babe in the word of God, and as to spiritual
age a sucking child, satisfy my vehement desire by nourishing me with
your words, the breasts of faith, and wisdom, and love. If you consider
only the office which we both hold, you are my brother; but if you
consider the ripeness of your understanding and other powers, you are,
though my junior in years, a father to me; because the possession of a
venerable wisdom has promoted you, though young, to a maturity of worth,
and to the honour which belongs to those who are old. Foster and
strengthen me, then, for I am, as I have said, but a child in the sacred
Scriptures and in spiritual studies; and seeing that, after long
contendings and frequent shipwreck, I have but little skill, and am even
now with difficulty rising above the waves of this world, do you, who
have already found firm footing on the shore, receive me into the safe
refuge of your bosom, that, if it please you, we may together sail
towards the harbour of salvation. Meanwhile, in my efforts to escape
from the dangers of this life and the abyss of sin, support me by your
prayers, as by a plank, that from this world I may escape as one does
from a shipwreck, leaving all behind.

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p10"></span>4. I have therefore been at pains to rid
myself of all baggage and garments which might impede my progress, in
order that, obedient to the command and sustained by the help of Christ,
I may swim, unhindered by any clothing for the flesh or care for the
morrow, across the sea of this present life, which, swelling with waves
and echoing with the barking of our sins, like the dogs of Scylla,
separates between us and God. I do not boast that I have accomplished
this: even if I might so boast, I would glory only in the Lord, whose it
is to accomplish what it is our part to desire; but my soul is in
earnest that the judgments of the Lord be her chief desire. You can
judge how far he is on the way to efficiently performing the will of
God, who is desirous that he may desire to perform it. Nevertheless, so
far as in me lies, I have loved the beauty of His sanctuary, and, if
left to myself, would have chosen to occupy the lowest place in the
Lord’s house. But to Him who was pleased to separate me from my mother’s
womb, and to draw me away from the friendship of flesh and blood to His
grace, it has seemed good to raise me from the earth and from the gulf
of misery, though destitute of all merit, and to take me from the mire
and from the dunghill, to set me among the princes of His people, and
appoint my place in the same rank with yourself; so that, although you
excel me in worth, I should be associated with you as your equal in
office.

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p11"></span>5. It is not therefore by my own
presumption, but in accordance with the pleasure and appointment of the
Lord, that I appropriate the honour of which I own myself unworthy,
claiming for myself the bond of brotherhood with you; for I am
persuaded, from the holiness of your character, that you are taught by
the truth “not to mind high things, but to condescend to men of low
estate.” Therefore I hope that you will readily and kindly accept the
assurance of the love which in humility we bear to you, and which, I
trust, you have already received through the most blessed priest
Alypius, whom (with his permission) we call our father. For he doubtless
has himself given you an example of loving us both while we are yet
strangers, and above our desert; for he has found it possible, in the
spirit of far-reaching and self-diffusing genuine love, to behold us by
affection, and to come in contact with us by writing, even when we were
unknown to him, and severed by a wide interval both of land and sea. He
has presented us with the first proofs of his affection to us, and
evidences of your love, in the above-mentioned gift of books. And as he
was greatly concerned that we should be constrained to ardent love for
you, when known to us, not by his testimony alone, but more fully by the
eloquence and the faith seen in your own writings; so do we believe that
he has taken care, with equal zeal, to bring you to imitate his example
in cherishing a very warm love towards us in return. O brother in
Christ, beloved, venerable, and ardently longed for, we desire that the
grace of God, as it is with you, may abide for ever. We salute, with the
utmost affection of cordial brotherhood, your whole household, and every
one who is in the Lord a companion and imitator of your holiness. We beg
you to bless, in accepting it, one loaf which we have sent to your
Charity, in token of our oneness of heart with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[245:1502](1010332.htm#fr_1501.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p6"></span> [John
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.1.XXV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[245:1503](1010332.htm#fr_1502.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p8"></span> [Acts
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#007.md), [Acts
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.1.XXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[246:1504](1010332.htm#fr_1503.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXV-p9"></span> [Matt.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.1.XXV-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXVI](1010333.md)
