[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010360)  [Next](1010362) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p1.1"></span>Letter LIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p2"></span>Styled also Book I. of Replies to
Questions of Januarius.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400.)

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p4.1"></span>To His Beloved Son Januarius, Augustin Sends
Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p5.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p6"></span>1. In regard to the questions which you
have asked me, I would like to have known what your own answers would
have been; for thus I might have made my reply in fewer words, and might
most easily confirm or correct your opinions, by approving or amending
the answers which you had given. This I would have greatly preferred.
But desiring to answer you at once, I think it better to write a long
letter than incur loss of time. I desire you therefore, in the first
place, to hold fast this as the fundamental principle in the present
discussion, that our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed to us a “light
yoke” and an “easy burden,” as He declares in the Gospel: <span
id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) in accordance with which He has
bound His people under the new dispensation together in fellowship by
sacraments, which are in number very few, in observance most easy, and
in significance most excellent, as baptism solemnized in the name of the
Trinity, the communion of His body and blood, and such other things as
are prescribed in the canonical Scriptures, with the exception of those
enactments which were a yoke of bondage to God’s ancient people, suited
to their state of heart and to the times of the prophets, and which are
found in the five books of Moses. As to those other things which we hold
on the authority, not of Scripture, but of tradition, and which are
observed throughout the whole world, it may be understood that they are
held as approved and instituted either by the apostles themselves, or by
plenary Councils, whose authority in the Church is most useful, *e.g.*
the annual commemoration, by special solemnities, of the Lord’s passion,
resurrection, and ascension, and of the descent of the Holy Spirit from
heaven, and whatever else is in like manner observed by the whole Church
wherever it has been established.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p8.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p9"></span>2. There are other things, however, which
are different in different places and countries: *e.g.*, some fast on
Saturday, others do not; some partake daily of the body and blood of
Christ, others receive it on stated days: in some places no day passes
without the sacrifice being offered; in others it is only on Saturday
and the Lord’s day, or it may be only on the Lord’s day. In regard to
these and all other variable observances which may be met anywhere, one
is at liberty to comply with them or not as he chooses; and there is no
better rule for the wise and serious Christian in this matter, than to
conform to the practice which he finds prevailing in the Church to which
it may be his lot to come. For such a custom, if it is clearly not
contrary to the faith nor to sound morality, is to be held as a thing
indifferent, and ought to be observed for the sake of fellowship with
those among whom we live.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p10"></span>3. I think you may have heard me relate
before, <span id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) what I will
nevertheless now mention. When my mother followed me to Milan, she found
the Church there not fasting on Saturday. She began to be troubled, and
to hesitate as to what she should do; upon which I, though not taking a
personal interest then in such things, applied on her behalf to Ambrose,
of most blessed memory, for his advice. He answered that he could not
teach me anything but what he himself practised, because if he knew any
better rule, he would observe it himself. When I supposed that he
intended, on the ground of his authority alone, and without supporting
it by <span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="vii.1.LIV-Page_301"></span>any argument, to recommend us to give up
fasting on Saturday, he followed me, and said: “When I visit Rome, I
fast on Saturday; when I am here, I do not fast. On the same principle,
do you observe the custom prevailing in whatever Church you come to, if
you desire neither to give offence by your conduct, nor to find cause of
offence in another’s.” When I reported this to my mother, she accepted
it gladly; and for myself, after frequently reconsidering his decision,
I have always esteemed it as if I had received it by an oracle from
heaven. For often have I perceived, with extreme sorrow, many
disquietudes caused to weak brethren by the contentious pertinacity or
superstitious vacillation of some who, in matters of this kind, which do
not admit of final decision by the authority of Holy Scripture, or by
the tradition of the universal Church or by their manifest good
influence on manners raise questions, it may be, from some crotchet of
their own, or from attachment to the custom followed in one’s own
country, or from preference for that which one has seen abroad,
supposing that wisdom is increased in proportion to the distance to
which men travel from home, and agitate these questions with such
keenness, that they think all is wrong except what they do themselves.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p12"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p12.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p13"></span>4. Some one may say, “The Eucharist
ought not to be taken every day.” You ask, “On what grounds?” He
answers, “Because, in order that a man may approach worthily to so great
a sacrament, he ought to choose those days upon which he lives in more
special purity and self-restraint; for ‘whosoever eateth and drinketh
unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself.’” <span
id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) Another answers, “Certainly; if the
wound inflicted by sin and the violence of the soul’s distemper be such
that the use of these remedies must be put off for a time, every man in
this case should be, by the authority of the bishop, forbidden to
approach the altar, and appointed to do penance, and should be
afterwards restored to privileges by the same authority; for this would
be partaking unworthily, if one should partake of it at a time when he
ought to be doing penance, <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721)
and it is not a matter to be left to one’s own judgment to withdraw
himself from the communion of the Church, or restore himself, as he
pleases. If, however, his sins are not so great as to bring him justly
under sentence of excommunication, he ought not to withdraw himself from
the daily use of the Lord’s body for the healing of his soul.” Perhaps a
third party interposes with a more just decision of the question,
reminding them that the principal thing is to remain united in the peace
of Christ, and that each should be free to do what, according to his
belief, he conscientiously regards as his duty. For neither of them
lightly esteems the body and blood of the Lord; on the contrary, both
are contending who shall most highly honour the sacrament fraught with
blessing. There was no controversy between those two mentioned in the
Gospel, Zacchæus and the Centurion; nor did either of them think himself
better than the other, though, whereas the former received the Lord
joyfully into his house, <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) the
latter said, “I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my
roof,” <span id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) —both honouring the
Saviour, though in ways diverse and, as it were, mutually opposed; both
miserable through sin, and both obtaining the mercy they required. We
may further borrow an illustration here, from the fact that the manna
given to the ancient people of God tasted in each man’s mouth as he
desired that it might. <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) It is
the same with this world-subduing sacrament in the heart of each
Christian. For he that dares not take it every day, and he who dares not
omit it any day, are both alike moved by a desire to do it honour. That
sacred food will not submit to be despised, as the manna could not be
loathed with impunity. Hence the apostle says that it was unworthily
partaken of by those who did not distinguish between this and all other
meats, by yielding to it the special veneration which was due; for to
the words quoted already, “eateth and drinketh judgment to himself,” he
has added these, “not discerning the Lord’s body;” and this is apparent
from the whole of that passage in the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
if it be carefully studied.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p19"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p19.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p20"></span>5. Suppose some foreigner visit a place
in which during Lent it is customary to abstain from the use of the
bath, and to continue fasting on Thursday. “I will not fast today,” he
says. The reason being asked, he says, “Such is not the custom in my own
country.” Is not he, by such conduct, attempting to assert the
superiority of his custom over theirs? For he cannot quote a decisive
passage on the subject from the Book of God; nor can he prove his
opinion to be right by the unanimous voice of the universal Church,
wherever spread abroad; nor can he demonstrate that they act contrary to
the faith, and he according to it, or that they are doing what is
prejudicial to sound morality, and he is defending its interests. Those
men injure their own tranquillity and peace by quarrelling on an
unnecessary question. I would rather recommend that, in matters of this
kind, each <span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span
id="vii.1.LIV-Page_302"></span>man should, when sojourning in a country
in which he finds a custom different from his own consent to do as
others do. If, on the other hand, a Christian, when travelling abroad in
some region where the people of God are more numerous, and more easily
assembled together, and more zealous in religion, has seen, *e.g.*, the
sacrifice twice offered, both morning and evening, on the Thursday of
the last week in Lent, and therefore, on his coming back to his own
country, where it is offered only at the close of the day, protests
against this as wrong and unlawful, because he has himself seen another
custom in another land, this would show a childish weakness of judgment
against which we should guard ourselves, and which we must bear with in
others, but correct in all who are under our influence.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p21"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p21.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p22"></span>6. Observe now to which of these three
classes the first question in your letter is to be referred. You ask,
“What ought to be done on the Thursday of the last week of Lent? Ought
we to offer the sacrifice in the morning, and again after supper, on
account of the words in the Gospel, ‘Likewise also . . . after
supper’? <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) Or ought we to fast
and offer the sacrifice only after supper? Or ought we to fast until the
offering has been made, and then take supper as we are accustomed to
do?” I answer, therefore, that if the authority of Scripture has decided
which of these methods is right, there is no room for doubting that we
should do according to that which is written; and our discussion must be
occupied with a question, not of duty, but of interpretation as to the
meaning of the divine institution. In like manner, if the universal
Church follows any one of these methods, there is no room for doubt as
to our duty; for it would be the height of arrogant madness to discuss
whether or not we should comply with it. But the question which you
propose is not decided either by Scripture or by universal practice. It
must therefore be referred to the third class—as pertaining, namely, to
things which are different in different places and countries. Let every
man, therefore, conform himself to the usage prevailing in the Church to
which he may come. For none of these methods is contrary to the
Christian faith or the interests of morality, as favoured by the
adoption of one custom more than the other. If this were the case, that
either the faith or sound morality were at stake, it would be necessary
either to change what was done amiss, or to appoint the doing of what
had been neglected. But mere change of custom, even though it may be of
advantage in some respects, unsettles men by reason of the novelty:
therefore, if it brings no advantage, it does much harm by unprofitably
disturbing the Church.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p24"></span>7. Let me add, that it would be a
mistake to suppose that the custom prevalent in many places, of offering
the sacrifice on that day after partaking of food, is to be traced to
the words, “Likewise after supper,” etc. For the Lord might give the
name of supper to what they had received, in already partaking of His
body, so that it was after this that they partook of the cup: as the
apostle says in another place, “When ye come together into one place,
this is not to *eat* <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) the
Lord’s Supper,” <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) giving to the
receiving of the Eucharist to that extent (*i.e.* the eating of the
bread) the name of the Lord’s Supper.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p27"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p27.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p28"></span>As to the question whether upon that day
it is right to partake of food before either offering or partaking of
the Eucharist, these words in the Gospel might go far to decide our
minds, “As they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed it;” taken in
connection with the words in the preceding context, “When the even was
come, He sat down with the twelve: and as they did eat, He said, Verily
I say unto you, that one of you shall betray Me.” For it was after that
that He instituted the sacrament; and it is clear that when the
disciples first received the body and blood of the Lord, they had not
been fasting.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p29"></span>8. Must we therefore censure the
universal Church because the sacrament is everywhere partaken of by
persons fasting? Nay, verily, for from that time it pleased the Holy
Spirit to appoint, for the honour of so great a sacrament, that the body
of the Lord should take the precedence of all other food entering the
mouth of a Christian; and it is for this reason that the custom referred
to is universally observed. For the fact that the Lord instituted the
sacrament after other food had been partaken of, does not prove that
brethren should come together to partake of that sacrament after having
dined or supped, or imitate those whom the apostle reproved and
corrected for not distinguishing between the Lord’s Supper and an
ordinary meal. The Saviour, indeed, in order to commend the depth of
that mystery more affectingly to His disciples, was pleased to impress
it on their hearts and memories by making its institution His last act
before going from them to His Passion. And therefore He did not
prescribe the order in which it was to be observed, reserving this to be
done by the apostles, through whom He intended to arrange all things
pertaining to the Churches. Had He appointed that the sacrament should
be always partaken of after other food, I believe that no one would have
departed from that practice. But when <span id="page_303">p. 303</span>
<span id="vii.1.LIV-Page_303"></span>the apostle, speaking of this
sacrament, says, “Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat,
tarry one for another: and if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that
ye come not together unto condemnation,” he immediately adds, “and the
rest will I set in order when I come.” <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) Whence we are given to understand
that, since it was too much for him to prescribe completely in an
epistle the method observed by the universal Church throughout the
world, it was one of the things set in order by him in person, for we
find its observance uniform amid all the variety of other customs.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p31"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIV-p31.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p32"></span>9. There are, indeed, some to whom it
has seemed right (and their view is not unreasonable), that it is lawful
for the body and blood of the Lord to be offered and received after
other food has been partaken of, on one fixed day of the year, the day
on which the Lord instituted the Supper, in order to give special
solemnity to the service on that anniversary. I think that, in this
case, it would be more seemly to have it celebrated at such an hour as
would leave it in the power of any who have fasted to attend the service
before <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) the repast which is
customary at the ninth hour. Wherefore we neither compel nor do we dare
to forbid any one to break his fast before the Lord’s Supper on that
day. I believe, however, that the real ground upon which this custom
rests is, that many, nay, almost all, are accustomed in most places to
use the bath on that day. And because some continue to fast, it is
offered in the morning, for those who take food, because they cannot
bear fasting and the use of the bath at the same time; and in the
evening, for those who have fasted all day.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p34"></span>10. If you ask me whence originated the
custom of using the bath on that day, nothing occurs to me, when I think
of it, as more likely than that it was to avoid the offence to decency
which must have been given at the baptismal font, if the bodies of those
to whom that rite was to be administered were not washed on some
preceding day from the uncleanness consequent upon their strict
abstinence from ablutions during Lent; and that this particular day was
chosen for the purpose because of its being the anniversary of the
institution of the Supper. And this being granted to those who were
about to receive baptism, many others desired to join them in the luxury
of a bath, and in relaxation of their fast.

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p35"></span>Having discussed these questions to the
best of my ability, I exhort you to observe, in so far as you may be
able, what I have laid down, as becomes a wise and peace-loving son of
the Church. The remainder of your questions I purpose, if the Lord will,
to answer at another time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[300:1719](1010361.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p7"></span> [Matt.
11.30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[300:1720](1010361.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p11"></span> Compare Letter XXXVI. sec. 32, p. 270.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[301:1721](1010361.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[301:1722](1010361.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p15"></span> *Agere pænitentiam.*

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[301:1723](1010361.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p16"></span> [Luke
19.6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[301:1724](1010361.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p17"></span> [Matt.
8.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="vii.1.LIV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[301:1725](1010361.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p18"></span> In his *Retractations*, b. ii. ch. xx.,
Augustin remarks on this statement: “I do not recollect any passage by
which it could be substantiated, except from the book of Wisdom ([Wisd.
16.21](../../../bib/apo/wis016.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p18.1"></span>), which the Jews do not admit to be of
canonical authority.” He says, in the same place, that this peculiarity
of the manna must have been enjoyed only by the pious in Israel, not by
the murmurers who said, “Our soul loatheth this light bread” ([Num.
21.5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p18.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[302:1726](1010361.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p23"></span> [Luke
22.20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[302:1727](1010361.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p25"></span> *Manducare.*

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[302:1728](1010361.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
11.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.LIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[303:1729](1010361.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p30"></span> [1 Cor.
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#034)<span id="vii.1.LIV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[303:1730](1010361.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="vii.1.LIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIV-p33"></span> “Ante” is the reading of seven <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LIV-p33.1"></span>Mss</span>. The Benedictine
edition gives “post” in the text. We think the former gives better
sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LV](1010362)
