[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010227)  [Next](1010229.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII"></span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XI.XXVII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Times are Measured in
Proportion as They Pass by.</span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p2"></span>34. Persevere, O my mind, and give
earnest heed. od is our helper; He made us, and not we ourselves. <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051.md) Give heed, where truth dawns. Lo,
suppose the voice of a body begins to sound, and does sound, and sounds
on, and lo! it ceases,—it is now silence, and that voice is past and is
no longer a voice. It was future before it sounded, and could not be
measured, because as yet it was not; and now it cannot, because it no
longer is. Then, therefore, while it was sounding, it might, because
there was then that which might be measured. But even then it did not
stand still, for it was going and passing away. Could it, then, on that
account be measured the more? For, while passing, it was being extended
into some space of time, in which it might be measured, since the
present hath no space. If, therefore, then it might be measured, lo!
suppose another voice hath begun to sound, and still soundeth, in a
continued tenor without any interruption, we can measure it while it is
sounding; for when it shall have ceased to sound, it will be already
past, and there will not be that which can be measured. Let us measure
it truly, and let us say how much it is. But as yet it sounds, nor can
it be measured, save from that instant in which it began to sound, even
to the end in which it left off. For the interval itself we measure from
<span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span
id="vi.XI.XXVII-Page_173"></span>some beginning unto some end. On which
account, a voice which is not yet ended cannot be measured, so that it
may be said how long or how short it may be; nor can it be said to be
equal to another, or single or double in respect of it, or the like. But
when it is ended, it no longer is. In what manner, therefore, may it be
measured? And yet we measure times; still not those which as yet are
not, nor those which no longer are, nor those which are protracted by
some delay, nor those which have no limits. We, therefore, measure
neither future times, nor past, nor present, nor those passing by; and
yet we do measure times.

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p4"></span>35. Deus Creator omnium; this verse of
eight syllables alternates between short and long syllables. The four
short, then, the first, third, fifth and seventh, are single in respect
of the four long, the second, fourth, sixth, and eighth. Each of these
hath a double time to every one of those. I pronounce them, report on
them, and thus it is, as is perceived by common sense. By common sense,
then, I measure a long by a short syllable, and I find that it has twice
as much. But when one sounds after another, if the former be short the
latter long, how shall I hold the short one, and how measuring shall I
apply it to the long, so that I may find out that this has twice as
much, when indeed the long does not begin to sound unless the short
leaves off sounding? That very long one I measure not as present, since
I measure it not save when ended. But its ending is its passing away.
What, then, is it that I can measure? Where is the short syllable by
which I measure? Where is the long one which I measure? Both have
sounded, have flown, have passed away, and are no longer; and still I
measure, and I confidently answer (so far as is trusted to a practised
sense), that as to space of time this syllable is single, that double.
Nor could I do this, unless because they have past, and are ended.
Therefore do I not measure themselves, which now are not, but something
in my memory, which remains fixed.

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p5"></span>36. In thee, O my mind, I measure
times. <span id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052.md) Do not overwhelm me
with thy clamour. That is, do not overwhelm thyself with the multitude
of thy impressions. In thee, I say, I measure times; the impression
which things as they pass by make on thee, and which, when they have
passed by, remains, that I measure as time present, not those things
which have passed by, that the impression should be made. This I measure
when I measure times. Either, then, these are times, or I do not measure
times. What when we measure silence, and say that this silence hath
lasted as long as that voice lasts? Do we not extend our thought to the
measure of a voice, as if it sounded, so that we may be able to declare
something concerning the intervals of silence in a given space of time?
For when both the voice and tongue are still, we go over in thought
poems and verses, and any discourse, or dimensions of motions; and
declare concerning the spaces of times, how much this may be in respect
of that, not otherwise than if uttering them we should pronounce them.
Should any one wish to utter a lengthened sound, and had with
forethought determined how long it should be, that man hath in silence
verily gone through a space of time, and, committing it to memory, he
begins to utter that speech, which sounds until it be extended to the
end proposed; truly it hath sounded, and will sound. For what of it is
already finished hath verily sounded, but what remains will sound; and
thus does it pass on, until the present intention carry over the future
into the past; the past increasing by the diminution of the future,
until, by the consumption of the future, all be past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[172:1052](1010228.htm#fr_1051.md) <span
id="vi.XI.XXVII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p3"></span> [Ps.
100.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.XI.XXVII-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[173:1053](1010228.htm#fr_1052.md) <span
id="vi.XI.XXVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXVII-p6"></span> With the argument in this and the
previous sections, compare Dr. Reid’s remarks in his *Intellectual
Powers*, iii. 5: “We may measure duration by the succession of thoughts
in the mind, as we measure length by inches or feet, but the notion or
idea of duration must be antecedent to the mensuration of it, as the
notion of length is antecedent to its being measured.…Reason, from the
contemplation of finite extended things, leads us necessarily to the
belief of an *immensity* that contains them. In like manner, memory
gives us the conception and belief of finite intervals of duration. From
the contemplation of these, reason leads us necessarily to the belief of
an *eternity*, which comprehends all things that have a beginning and an
end.” The student will with advantage examine a monograph on this
subject by C. Fortlage, entitled, *Aurelii Augustini doctrina de tempore
ex libro xi. Confessionum depromta, Aristotelicæ, Kantianæ, aliarumque
theoriarium recensione aucta, et congruis hodiernæ philosophiæ ideis
amplificata* (Heidelbergæ, 1836). He says that amongst all the
philosophers none have so nearly approached truth as Augustin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](1010229.md)
