[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010443)  [Next](1010445.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 415.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p3.1"></span>Bishop Augustin to Bishop Evodius.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p5"></span>1. If acquaintance with the treatises
which specially occupy me, and from which I am unwilling to be turned
aside to anything else, is so highly valued by your Holiness, let some
one be sent to copy them for you. For I have now finished several of
those which had been commenced by me this year before Easter, near the
beginning of Lent. For, to the three books on the *City of God*, in
opposition to its enemies, the worshippers of demons, I have added two
others, and in these five books I think enough has been said to answer
those who maintain that the \[heathen\] gods must be worshipped in order
to secure prosperity in this present life, and who are hostile to the
Christian name from an idea that that prosperity is hindered by us. In
the sequel I must, as I promised in the first book, <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783.md) answer those who think that the
worship of their gods is the only way to obtain that life after death
with a view to obtain which we are Christians. I have dictated also, in
volumes of considerable size, expositions of three Psalms, the 68th, the
72d, and the 78th. Commentaries on the other Psalms—not yet dictated,
nor even entered on—are eagerly expected and demanded from me. From
these studies I am unwilling to be called away and hindered by any
questions thrusting themselves upon me from another quarter; yea, so
unwilling, that I do not wish to turn at present even to the books on
the Trinity, which I have long had on hand and have not yet completed,
because they require a great amount of labour, and I believe that they
are of a nature to be understood only by few; on which account they
claim my attention less urgently than writings which may, I hope, be
useful to very many.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p7"></span>2. For the words, “He that is ignorant
shall be ignored,” <span id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784.md) were not
used by the apostle in reference to this subject, as your letter
affirms; as if this punishment were to be inflicted on the man who is
not able to discern by the exercise of his intellect the ineffable unity
of the Trinity, in the same way as the unity of memory, understanding,
and will in the soul of man is discerned. The apostle said these words
with a wholly different design. Consult the passage and you will see
that he was speaking of those things which might be for the edification
of the many in faith and holiness, not of those which might with
difficulty be comprehended by the few, and by them only in the small
degree in which the comprehension of so great a subject is attainable in
this life. The positions laid down by him were,—that prophesying was to
be preferred to speaking with tongues; that these gifts should not be
exercised in a disorderly manner, as if the spirit of prophecy compelled
them to speak even against their will; that women should keep silence in
the Church; and that all things should be done decently and in order.
While treating of these things he says: “If any man think himself to be
a prophet, or spiritual, let him know the things which I write to you,
for they are the commands of the Lord. If any man be ignorant, he shall
be ignored;” intending by these words to restrain and call to order
persons who were specially ready to cause disorder in the Church,
because they imagined themselves to excel in spiritual gifts, although
they were disturbing everything by their presumptions conduct. “If any
man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him know,” he says,
“the things which I write to you, for they are the commands of the
Lord.” If any man thinks himself to be, and in reality is not, a
prophet, for he who is a prophet undoubtedly knows and does not need
admonition and exhortation, because “he judgeth all things, and is
himself judged of no man.” <span id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785.md)
Those persons, therefore, caused confusion and trouble in the Church who
thought themselves to be in the Church what they were not. He teaches
these to know the commandments of the Lord, for he is not a “God of
confusion, but of peace.” <span id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786.md) But
“if any one is ignorant, he shall be ignored,” that is to say, he shall
be rejected; for God is not ignorant—so far as mere knowledge is
concerned—in regard to the persons to whom He shall one day say, “I know
you not,” <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787.md) but their rejection
is signified by this expression.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p12"></span>3. Moreover, since the Lord says,
“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,” <span
id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788.md) and that sight is promised to us as
the highest reward at the last, we have no reason to fear lest, if we
are now unable to see clearly those things which we believe concerning
the nature of God, <span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-Page_540"></span>this defective apprehension should
bring us under the sentence, “He that is ignorant shall be ignored.” For
when “in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save those who believed.” This
foolishness of preaching and “foolishness of God which is wiser than
man” <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789.md) draws many to salvation,
in such a way that not only those who are as yet incapable of perceiving
with clear intelligence the nature of God which in faith they hold, but
even those who have not yet so learned the nature of their own soul as
to distinguish between its incorporeal essence and the body as a whole
with the same certainty with which they perceive that they live,
understand, and will, are not on this account shut out from that
salvation which that foolishness of preaching bestows on believers.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p15"></span>4. For if Christ died for those only
who with clear intelligence can discern these things, our labour in the
Church is almost spent in vain. But if, as is the fact, crowds of common
people, possessing no great strength of intellect, run to the Physician
in the exercise of faith, with the result of being healed by Christ and
Him crucified, that “where sin has abounded, grace may much more
abound,” <span id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790.md) it comes in wondrous
ways to pass, through the depths of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God and His unsearchable judgments, that, on the one hand,
some who do discern between the material and the spiritual in their own
nature, while pluming themselves on this attainment, and despising that
foolishness of preaching by which those who believe are saved, wander
far from the only path which leads to eternal life; and, on the other
hand, because not one perishes for whom Christ died, <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791.md) many glorying in the cross of
Christ, and not withdrawing from that same path, attain, notwithstanding
their ignorance of those things which some with most profound subtlety
investigate, unto that eternity, truth, and love,—that is, unto that
enduring, clear, and full felicity,—in which to those who abide, and
see, and love, all things are plain.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p18"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p18.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p19"></span>5. Therefore let us with steadfast
piety believe in one God, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
let us at the same time believe that the Son is not \[the person\] who
is the Father, and the Father is not \[the person\] who is the Son, and
neither the Father nor the Son is \[the person\] who is the Spirit of
both the Father and the Son. Let it not be supposed that in this Trinity
there is any separation in respect of time or place, but that these
Three are equal and co-eternal, and absolutely of one nature: and that
the creatures have been made, not some by the Father, and some by the
Son, and some by the Holy Spirit, but that each and all that have been
or are now being created subsist in the Trinity as their Creator; and
that no one is saved by the Father without the Son and the Holy Spirit,
or by the Son without the Father and the Holy Spirit, or by the Holy
Spirit without the Father and the Son, but by the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, the only one, true, and truly immortal (that is,
absolutely unchangeable) God. At the same time, we believe that many
things are stated in Scripture separately concerning each of the Three,
in order to teach us that, though they are an inseparable Trinity, yet
they are a Trinity. For, just as when their names are pronounced in
human language they cannot be named simultaneously, although their
existence in inseparable union is at every moment simultaneous, even so
in some places of Scripture also, they are by certain created things
presented to us distinctively and in mutual relation to each other: for
example, \[at the baptism of Christ\] the Father is heard in the voice
which said, “Thou art my Son;” the Son is seen in the human nature
which, in being born of the Virgin, He assumed; the Holy Spirit is seen
in the bodily form of a dove, <span id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792.md)
—these things presenting the Three to our apprehension separately,
indeed, but in no wise separated.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p21"></span>6. To present this in a form which the
intellect may apprehend, we borrow an illustration from the Memory, the
Understanding, and the Will. For although we can speak of each of these
faculties severally in its own order, and at a separate time, we neither
exercise nor even mention any one of them without the other two. It must
not, however, be supposed, from our using this comparison between these
three faculties and the Trinity, that the things compared agree in every
particular, for where, in any process of reasoning, can we find an
illustration in which the correspondence between the things compared is
so exact that it admits of application in every point to that which it
is intended to illustrate? In the first place, therefore, the similarity
is found to be imperfect in this respect, that whereas memory,
understanding, and will are not the soul, but only exist in the soul,
the Trinity does not exist in God, but is God. In the Trinity,
therefore, there is manifested a singleness \[*simplicitas*\] commanding
our astonishment, because in this Trinity it is not one thing to exist,
and another thing to understand, or do anything else which is attributed
to the nature of God; but in the soul it is one thing that it exists,
and another thing that it understands, for even when it is not using the
understand<span id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-Page_541"></span>ing it still exists. In the second
place, who would dare to say that the Father does not understand by
Himself but by the Son, as memory does not understand by itself but by
the understanding, or, to speak more correctly, the soul in which these
faculties are understands by no other faculty than by the understanding,
as it remembers only by memory, and exercises volition only by the will?
The point, therefore, to which the illustration is intended to apply is
this,—that, whatever be the manner in which we understand, in regard to
these three faculties in the soul, that when the several names by which
they are severally represented are uttered, the utterance of each
separate name is nevertheless accomplished only in the combined
operation of all the three, since it is by an act of memory and of
understanding and of will that it is spoken,—it is in the same manner
that we understand, in regard to the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, that no created thing which may at any time be employed to
present only one of the Three to our minds is produced otherwise than by
the simultaneous, because essentially inseparable, operation of the
Trinity; and that, consequently, neither the voice of the Father, nor
the body and soul of the Son, nor the dove of the Holy Spirit, was
produced in any other way than by the combined operation of the Trinity.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p22"></span>7. Moreover, that sound of a voice was
certainly not made indissolubly one with the person of the Father, for
so soon as it was uttered it ceased to be. Neither was that form of a
dove made indissolubly one with the person of Holy Spirit, for it also,
like the bright cloud which covered the Saviour and His three disciples
on the mount, <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793.md) or rather like
the tongues of flame which once represented the same Holy Spirit, ceased
to exist as soon as it had served its purpose as a symbol. But it was
otherwise with the body and soul in which the Son of God was manifested:
seeing that the deliverance of men was the object for which all these
things were done, the human nature in which He appeared was, in a way
marvellous and unique, assumed into real union with the person of the
Word of God, that is, of the only Son of God,—the Word remaining
unchangeably in His own nature, wherein it is not conceivable that there
should be composite elements in union with which any mere semblance of a
human soul could subsist. We read, indeed, that “the Spirit of wisdom is
manifold;” <span id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794.md) but it is as
properly termed simple. Manifold it is, indeed, because there are many
things which it possesses; but simple, because it is not a different
thing from what it possesses, as the Son is said to have life in
Himself, and yet He is Himself that life. The human nature came to the
Word; the Word did not come, with susceptibility of change, into the
human nature; <span id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795.md) and therefore,
in His union to the human nature which He has assumed, He is still
properly called the Son of God; for which reason the same person is the
Son of God immutable and co-eternal with the Father, and the Son of God
who was laid in the grave,—the former being true of Him only as the
Word, the latter true of Him only as a man.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p26"></span>8. Wherefore it behoves us, in reading
any statements made concerning the Son of God, to observe in reference
to which of these two natures they are spoken. For by His assumption of
the soul and body of a man, no increase was made in the number of
Persons: the Trinity remained as before. For just as in every man, with
the exception of that one whom alone He assumed into personal union, the
soul and body constitute one person, so in Christ the Word and His human
soul and body constitute one person. And as the name philosopher, for
example, is given to a man certainly with reference only to his soul,
and yet it is nothing absurd, but only a most suitable and ordinary use
of language, for us to say the philosopher was killed, the philosopher
died, the philosopher was buried, although all these events befell him
in his body, not in that part of him in which he was a philosopher; in
like manner the name of God, or Son of God, or Lord of Glory, or any
other such name, is given to Christ as the Word, and it is,
nevertheless, correct to say that God was crucified, seeing that there
is no question that He suffered this death in his human nature, not in
that in which He is the Lord of Glory. <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p28"></span>9. As for the sound of the voice,
however, and the bodily form of a dove, and the cloven tongues which sat
upon each of them, these, like the terrible wonders wrought at
Sinai, <span id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797.md) and like the pillar of
cloud by day and of fire by night, <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798.md) were produced only as symbols, and
vanished when this purpose had been served. The thing which we must
especially guard against in connection with them is, lest any one should
believe that the nature of God—whether of the Father, or of the Son, or
of the Holy Spirit—is susceptible of change or transformation. And we
must not be disturbed by the fact that the sign sometimes receives the
name of the thing signified, as when the Holy Spirit is said to have
descended in a bodily form as a dove and abode upon Him; for in like
manner the smitten rock is called Christ, <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799.md) because it was a symbol of Christ.

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-Page_542"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p32"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p32.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p33"></span>10. I wonder, however, that, although
you believe it possible for the sound of the voice which said, “Thou art
my Son,” to have been produced through a divine act, without the
intermediate agency of a soul, by something the nature of which was
corporeal, you nevertheless do not believe that a bodily form and
movements exactly resembling those of any real living creature
whatsoever could be produced in the same way, namely, through a divine
act, without the intermediate agency of a spirit imparting life. For if
inanimate matter obeys God without the instrumentality of an animating
spirit, so as to emit sounds such as are wont to be emited by animated
bodies, in order to bring to the human ear words articulately spoken,
why should it not obey Him, so as to present to the human eye the figure
and motions of a bird, by the same power of the Creator without the
instrumentalist of any animating spirit? The objects of both sight and
hearing—the sound which strikes the ear and the appearance which meets
the eye, the articulations of the voice and the outlines of the members,
every audible and visible motion—are both alike produced from matter
contiguous to us; is it, then, granted to the sense of hearing, and not
to the sense of sight, to tell us regarding the body which is perceived
by this bodily sense, both that it is a true body, and that it is
nothing beyond what the bodily sense perceives it to be? For in every
living creature the soul is, of course, not perceived by any bodily
sense. We do not, therefore, need to inquire how the bodily form of the
dove appeared to the eye, just as we do not need to inquire how the
voice of a bodily form capable of speech was made to fall upon the ear.
For if it was possible to dispense with the intermediate agency of a
soul in the case in which a voice, not something like a voice, is said
to have been produced, how much more easily was it possible in the case
in which it is said that the Spirit descended “*like* a dove,” a phrase
which signifies that a mere bodily form was exhibited to the eye, and
does not affirm that a real living creature was seen! In like manner, it
is said that on the day of Pentecost, “suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a mighty rushing wind, and there appeared to them cloven
tongues like as of fire,” <span id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800.md) in
which something like wind and like fire, *i.e.* resembling these common
and familiar natural phenomena, is said to have been perceived, but it
does not seem to be indicated that these common and familiar natural
phenomena were actually produced.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p35"></span>11. If, however, more subtle reasoning
or more thorough investigation of the matter result in demonstrating
that that which is naturally destitute of motion both in time and in
space \[*i.e.* matter\] cannot be moved otherwise than through the
intermediate agency of that which is capable of motion only in time, not
in space \[*i.e.* spirit\], it will follow from this that all those
things must have been done by the instrumentality of a living creature,
as things are done by angels, on which subject a more elaborate
discussion would be tedious, and is not necessary. To this it must be
added, that there are visions which appear to the spirit as plainly as
to the senses of the body, not only in sleep or delirium, but also to
persons of sound mind in their waking hours,—visions which are due not
to the deceitfulness of devils mocking men, but to some spiritual
revelation accomplished by means of immaterial forms resembling bodies,
and which cannot by any means be distinguished from real objects, unless
they are by divine assistance more fully revealed and discriminated by
the mind’s intelligence, which is done sometimes (but with difficulty)
at the time, but for the most part after they have disappeared. This
being the case in regard to these visions which, whether their nature be
really material, or material only in appearance but really spiritual,
seem to manifest themselves to our spirit as if they were perceived by
the bodily senses, we ought not, when these things are recorded in
sacred Scripture, to conclude hastily to which of these two classes they
are to be referred, or whether, if they belong to the former, they are
produced by the intermediate agency of a spirit; while, at the same
time, as to the invisible and immutable nature of the Creator, that is,
of the supreme and ineffable Trinity, we either simply, without any
doubt, believe, or, in addition to this, with some degree of
intellectual apprehension, understand that it is wholly removed and
separated both from the senses of fleshly mortals, and from all
susceptibility of being changed either for the worse or for the better,
or to anything whatever of a variable nature.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p36"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p36.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p37"></span>12. These things I send you in
reference to two of your questions,—the one concerning the Trinity, and
the other concerning the dove in which the Holy Spirit, not in His own
nature, but in a symbolical form, was manifested, as also the Son of
God, not in His eternal Sonship (of which the Father said: “Before the
morning star I have begotten Thee” <span
id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801) .md), but in that human nature which
He assumed from the Virgin’s womb, was crucified by the Jews: observe
that to you who are at leisure I have been able, notwithstanding immense
pressure of business, to write so much. I have not, however, deemed it
necessary to discuss everything which you have brought forward in your
<span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-Page_543"></span>letter; but on these two questions
which you wished me to solve, I think I have written as much as is
exacted by Christian charity, though I may not have satisfied your
vehement desire.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p39"></span>13. Besides the two books added to the
first three in the *City of God*, and the exposition of three psalms, as
above mentioned, <span id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802.md) I have also
written a treatise to the holy presbyter Jerome concerning the origin of
the soul, <span id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803.md) asking him, in
regard to the opinion which, in writing to Marcellinus of pious memory,
he avowed as his own, that a new soul is made for each individual at
birth, how this can be maintained without overthrowing that most surely
established article of the Church’s faith, according to which we firmly
believe that all die in Adam, <span id="fr_2804"></span>[2805](#fn_2804.md)
and are brought down under condemnation unless they be delivered by the
grace of Christ, which, by means of His sacrament, works even in
infants. I have, moreover, written to the same person to inquire his
opinion as to the sense in which the words of James, “Whosoever shall
keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all,”
are to be understood. <span id="fr_2805"></span>[2806](#fn_2805.md) In this
letter I have also stated my own opinion: in the other, concerning the
origin of the soul, I have only asked what was his opinion, submitting
the matter to his judgment, and at the same time discussing it to some
extent. I wrote these to Jerome because I did not wish to lose an
opportunity of correspondence afforded by a certain very pious and
studious young presbyter, Orosius, who, prompted only by burning zeal in
regard to the Holy Scriptures, came to us from the remotest part of
Spain, namely, from the shore of the ocean, and whom I persuaded to go
on from us to Jerome. In answer to certain questions of the same
Orosius, as to things which troubled him in reference to the heresy of
the Priscillianists, and some opinions of Origen which the Church has
not accepted, I have written a treatise of moderate size with as much
brevity and clearness as was in my power. I have also written a
considerable book against the heresy of Pelagius, <span
id="fr_2806"></span>[2807](#fn_2806.md) being constrained to do this by
some brethren whom he had persuaded to adopt his fatal error, denying
the grace of Christ. If you wish to have all these, send some one to
copy them all for you. Allow me, however, to be free from distraction in
studying and dictating to my clerks those things which, being urgently
required by many, claim in my opinion precedence over your questions,
which are of interest to very few.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[539:2784](1010444.htm#fr_2783.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p6"></span> *De Civitate Dei*, lib. I. ch. xxxvi.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[539:2785](1010444.htm#fr_2784.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
14.38](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#038.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[539:2786](1010444.htm#fr_2785.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[539:2787](1010444.htm#fr_2786.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
14.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[539:2788](1010444.htm#fr_2787.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p11"></span> [Luke
13.27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[539:2789](1010444.htm#fr_2788.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p13"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[540:2790](1010444.htm#fr_2789.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[540:2791](1010444.htm#fr_2790.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p16"></span> [Rom.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[540:2792](1010444.htm#fr_2791.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p17"></span> [John
17.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[540:2793](1010444.htm#fr_2792.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p20"></span> [Luke
3.22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[541:2794](1010444.htm#fr_2793.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p23"></span> [Matt.
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[541:2795](1010444.htm#fr_2794.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p24"></span> [Wisd.
7.22](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#022.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[541:2796](1010444.htm#fr_2795.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p25"></span> Homo autem Verbo accessit, non Verbum
in hominem convertibiliter accesit.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[541:2797](1010444.htm#fr_2796.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p27"></span> [1 Cor.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[541:2798](1010444.htm#fr_2797.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p29"></span> [Ex.
19.18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[541:2799](1010444.htm#fr_2798.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p30"></span> [Ex.
13.21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[541:2800](1010444.htm#fr_2799.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[542:2801](1010444.htm#fr_2800.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p34"></span> [Acts
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[542:2802](1010444.htm#fr_2801.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p38"></span> [Ps.
110.3](../../../bib/sep/psa110.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p38.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[543:2803](1010444.htm#fr_2802.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p40"></span> Par. 1, p. 539.

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[543:2804](1010444.htm#fr_2803.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p41"></span> Letter CLXVI.

<span id="fn_2804"></span>[543:2805](1010444.htm#fr_2804.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p42"></span> [1 Cor.
15.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2805"></span>[543:2806](1010444.htm#fr_2805.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p43"></span> Letter CLXVII.

<span id="fn_2806"></span>[543:2807](1010444.htm#fr_2806.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIX-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIX-p44"></span> The work on *Nature and Grace*,
addressed to Timasius and Jacobus—translated in the fourth volume of
this series, *Antipelagian Writings,* i. 233.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXII](1010445.md)
