[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010388)  [Next](1010390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 405.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Alypius Most Blessed, My
Brother and Colleague, Beloved and Longed for</span>* <span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-Page_362"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p3.2"></span>With Sincere Veneration, and to the
Brethren that are with Him, Augustin and the Brethren with Him Send
Greeting in the Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p4"></span>1. The sorrow of the members of the
Church at Thiave prevents my heart from having any rest until I hear
that they have been brought again to be of the same mind towards you as
they formerly were; which must be accomplished without delay. For if the
apostle was concerned about one individual, “lest perhaps such an one
should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow,” adding in the same context
the words, “lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not
ignorant of his devices,” <span id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) how
much more does it become us to act with caution, lest we cause similar
grief to a whole flock, and especially one composed of persons who have
lately been reconciled to the Catholic Church, and whom I can upon no
account forsake! As, however, the short time at our disposal did not
permit us so to take counsel together as to arrive at a mature and
satisfactory decision, may it please your Holiness to accept in this
letter the finding which commended itself most to me when I had long
reflected upon the matter since we parted; and if you approve of it, let
the enclosed letter, <span id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) which I
have written to them in the name of both of us, be sent to them without
delay.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p7"></span>2. You proposed that they should have
the one half \[of the property left by Honoratus\], and that the other
half should be made up to them by me from such resources as might be at
my disposal. I think, however, that if the whole property had been taken
from them, men might reasonably have said that we had taken the great
pains in this matter which we have done, for the sake of justice, not
for pecuniary advantage. But when we concede to them one half, and in
that way settle with them by a compromise, it will be manifest that our
anxiety has been only about the money; and you see what harm must follow
from this. For, on the one hand, we shall be regarded by them as having
taken away one half of a property to which we had no claim; and, on the
other hand, they will be regarded by us as dishonourably and unjustly
consenting to accept aid from one half of a property of which the whole
belonged to the poor. For your remark, “We must beware lest, in our
efforts to obtain a right adjustment of a difficult question, we cause
more serious wounds,” applies with no less force if the half be conceded
to them. For those whose turning from the world to monastic life we
desire to secure, will, for the sake of this half of their private
estates, be disposed to find some excuse for putting off the sale of
these, in order that their case may be dealt with according to this
precedent. Moreover, would it not be strange, if, in a question like
this, where much may be said on both sides, a whole community should,
through our not avoiding the appearance of evil, be offended by the
impression that their bishops, whom they hold in high esteem, are
smitten with sordid avarice?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p8"></span>3. For when any one is turned to
adopt the life of a monk, if he is adopting it with a true heart, he
does not think of that which I have just mentioned, especially if he be
admonished of the sinfulness of such conduct. But if he be a deceiver,
and is seeking “his own things, not the things which are Jesus
Christ’s,” <span id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) he has not
charity; and without this, what does it profit him, “though he bestow
all his goods to feed the poor, and though he give his body to be
burned”? <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) Moreover, as we
agreed when conversing together, this may be henceforth avoided, and an
arrangement made with each individual who is disposed to enter a
monastery, if he cannot be admitted to the society of the brethren
before he has relieved himself of all these encumbrances, and comes as
one at leisure from all business, because the property which belonged to
him has ceased to be his. But there is no other way in which this
spiritual death of weak brethren, and grievous obstacle to the salvation
of those for whose reconciliation with the Catholic Church we so
earnestly labour, can be avoided, than by our giving them most clearly
to understand that we are by no means anxious about money in such cases
as this. And this they cannot be made to understand, unless we leave to
their use the estate which they always supposed to belong to their late
presbyter; because, even if it was not his, they ought to have known
this from the beginning.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p11"></span>4. It seems to me, therefore, that
in matters of this kind, the rule which ought to hold is, that whatever
belonged, according to the ordinary civil laws regarding property, to
him who is an ordained clergyman in any place, belongs after his death
to the Church over which he was ordained. Now, by civil law, the
property in question belonged to the presbyter Honoratus; so that not
only on account of his being ordained elsewhere, but even had he
remained in the monastery of Thagaste, if he had died without having
either sold his estate or handed it over by express deed of gift to any
one, the right of succession to it would belong only to his heirs: as
brother Æmilianus inherited those thirty shillings <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) left by the brother Privatus. This,
therefore, behoved to be considered and provided for <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-Page_363"></span>in
time; but if no provision was made for it, we must, in the disposal of
the estate, comply with the laws which have been appointed to regulate
in civil society the holding or not holding of property; that we may, so
far as is in our power, abstain not only from the reality, but also from
all appearance of evil, and preserve that good name which is so
necessary to our office as stewards. How truly this procedure has the
appearance of evil, I beseech your wisdom to observe. For having heard
of their sorrow, which we ourselves witnessed at Thiave, fearing lest,
as frequently happens, I should myself be mistaken through partiality
for my own opinion, I stated the facts of the case to our brother and
colleague Samsucius, without telling him at the time my present view of
the matter, but rather stating the view taken up by both of us when we
were resisting their demands. He was exceedingly shocked, and wondered
that we had entertained such a view; being moved by nothing else but the
ugly appearance of the transaction, as one wholly unworthy not only of
us, but of any man.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p13"></span>5. Wherefore I implore you to
subscribe and transmit without delay the letter which I have written to
them in name of both of us. And even if, perchance, you discern the
other course to be a just one in the matter, let not these brethren who
are weak be compelled to learn now what I myself cannot understand;
rather let this word of the Lord be remembered in dealing with them: “I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now.” <span id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) For He Himself, out of
condescension to such weakness, said on another occasion (it was in
reference to the payment of tribute), “Then are the children free;
notwithstanding lest we offend them,” etc.; and sent Peter to pay the
didrachmæ which were then exacted. <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) For He knew another law according
to which he was not bound to make any such payment; but He made the
payment which was imposed upon Him by that law according to which, as I
have said, succession to the estate of Honoratus behoved to be
regulated, if he died before either giving away or selling his property.
Nay, even in regard to the law of the Church, Paul showed forbearance
towards the weak, and did not insist upon his receiving the money due to
him, although fully persuaded in his conscience that he might with
perfect justice insist upon it; waiving his claim, however, only because
he thereby avoided a suspicion of his motives which would mar the sweet
savour of Christ among them, and abstained from the appearance of evil
in a region in which he knew that this was his duty, and probably even
before he had known by experience the sorrow which it would occasion.
Let us now, though we are somewhat behind-hand, and have been admonished
by experience, correct that which we ought to have foreseen.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p16"></span>6. I remember that you proposed when
we parted that the brethren at Thagaste should hold me responsible to
make up the half of the sum claimed; let me say in conclusion, that as I
fear everything which may make my attempt unsuccessful, if you clearly
perceive that proposal to be a just one, I do not refuse to comply with
it on this condition, however, that I am to pay the amount only when I
have it in my power, *i.e.* when something so considerable falls to our
monastery at Hippo that this can be done without unduly straitening
us,—the amount remaining after the subtraction of so large a sum being
still such as to provide for our monastery here an equal share in
proportion to the number of resident brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[362:2074](1010389.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p5"></span> [2 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[362:2075](1010389.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p6"></span> This letter has not been preserved.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[362:2076](1010389.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p9"></span> [Phil.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[362:2077](1010389.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[362:2078](1010389.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p12"></span> *Solidi.*

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[363:2079](1010389.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p14"></span> [John
16.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[363:2080](1010389.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p15"></span> [Matt.
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIII-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXIV](1010390)
