[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010312)  [Next](1010314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.VI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.VI-p1.1"></span>Letter VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.VI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VI-p3.1"></span>To Augustin Nebridius Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VI-p4"></span>1. Your letters I have great pleasure in
keeping as carefully as my own eyes. For they are great, not indeed in
length, but in the greatness of the subjects discussed in them, and in
the great ability with which the truth in regard to these subjects is
demonstrated. They shall bring to my ear the voice of Christ, and the
teaching of Plato and of Plotinus. To me, therefore, they shall ever be
pleasant to hear, because of their eloquent style; easy to read, because
of their brevity; and profitable to understand, because of the wisdom
which they contain. Be at pains, therefore, to teach me everything
which, to your judgment, commends itself as holy or good. As to this
letter in particular, answer it when you are ready to discuss a subtle
problem in regard to memory, and the images presented by the
imagination. <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451.md) My opinion is,
that although there can be such images independently of memory, there is
no exercise of memory independently of such images. <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452.md) You will say, What, then, takes
place when memory is exercised in recalling an act of understanding or
of thought? I answer this objection by saying, that such acts can be
recalled by memory for this reason, that in the supposed act of
understanding or of thought we gave birth to something conditioned by
space or by time, which is of such a nature that it can be reproduced by
the imagination: for either we connected the use of words with the
exercise of the understanding and with the thoughts, and words are
conditioned by time, and thus fall within the domain of the senses or of
the imaginative faculty; or if we did not join words with the mental
act, our intellect at all events experienced in the act of thinking
something which was of such a nature as could produce in the mind that
which, by the aid of the imaginative faculty, memory could recall. These
things I have stated, as usual, without much consideration, and in a
somewhat confused manner: do you examine them, and, rejecting what is
false, acquaint me by letter with what you hold as the truth on this
subject.

<span id="vii.1.VI-p7"></span>2. Listen also to this question: Why, I
should like to know, do we not affirm that the phantasy \[imaginative
faculty\] derives all its images from itself, rather than say that it
receives these from the senses? For it is possible that, as the
intellectual faculty of the soul is indebted to the senses, not for the
objects upon which the intellect is exercised, but rather for the
admonition arousing it to see these objects, in the same manner the
imaginative faculty may be indebted to the senses, not for the images
which are the objects upon which it is exercised, but rather for the
admonition arousing it to contemplate these images. And perhaps it is in
this way that we are to explain the fact that the imagination perceives
some objects which the senses never perceived, whereby it is shown that
it has all its images within itself, and from itself. You will answer me
what you think of this question also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[223:1452](1010313.htm#fr_1451.md) <span
id="vii.1.VI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VI-p5"></span> *Phantasia.*

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[223:1453](1010313.htm#fr_1452.md) <span
id="vii.1.VI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VI-p6"></span> *Quamvis non omnis phantasia cum memoria
sit, omnis tamen memoria, sine phantasia esse non possit.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter VII](1010314.md)
