[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010151)  [Next](1010153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IX.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IX.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—He Describes the Praiseworthy
Habits of His Mother; Her Kindness Towards Her Husband and Her
Sons.</span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p2"></span>19. Being thus modestly and soberly
trained, and rather made subject by Thee to her parents, than by her
parents to Thee, when she had arrived at a marriageable age, she was
given to a husband whom she served as her lord. And she busied herself
to gain him to Thee, preaching Thee unto him by her behaviour; by which
Thou madest her fair, and reverently amiable, and admirable unto her
husband. For she so bore the wronging of her bed as never to have any
dissension with her husband on account of it. For she waited for Thy
mercy upon him, that by believing in Thee he might become chaste. And
besides this, as he was earnest in friendship, so was he violent in
anger; but she had learned that an angry husband should not be resisted,
neither in deed, nor even in word. But so soon as he was grown calm and
tranquil, and she saw a fitting moment, she would give him a reason for
her conduct, should he have been excited without cause. In short, while
many matrons, whose husbands were more gentle, carried the marks of
blows on their dishonoured faces, and would in private conversation
blame the lives of their husbands, she would blame their tongues,
monishing them gravely, as if in jest: “That from the hour they heard
what are called the matrimonial tablets <span
id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768) read to them, they should think of
them as instruments whereby they were made servants; so, being always
mindful of their condition, they ought not to set themselves in
opposition to their lords.” And when they, knowing what a furious
husband she endured, marvelled that it had never been reported, nor
appeared by any indication, that Patricius had beaten his wife, or that
there had been any domestic strife between them, even for a day, and
asked her in confidence the reason of this, she taught them her rule,
which I have mentioned above. They who observed it experienced the
wisdom of it, and rejoiced; those who observed it not were kept in
subjection, and suffered.

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p4"></span>20. Her mother-in-law, also, being at
first prejudiced against her by the whisperings of evil-disposed
servants, she so conquered by submission, persevering in it with
patience and meekness, that she voluntarily disclosed to her son the
tongues of the meddling servants, whereby the domestic peace between
herself and her daughter-in-law had been agitated, begging him to punish
them for it. When, therefore, he had—in conformity with his mother’s
wish, and with a view to the discipline of his family, and to ensure the
future harmony of its members—corrected with stripes those discovered,
according to the will of her who had discovered them, she promised a
similar reward to any who, to please her, should say anything evil to
her of her daughter-in-law. And, none now daring to do so, they lived
together with a wonderful sweetness of mutual good-will.

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p5"></span>21. This great gift Thou bestowedst also,
my God, my mercy, upon that good handmaid of Thine, out of whose womb
Thou createdst me, <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="vi.IX.IX-Page_137"></span>even that, whenever she could, she showed
herself such a peacemaker between any differing and discordant spirits,
that when she had heard on both sides most bitter things, such as
swelling and undigested discord is wont to give vent to, when the
crudities of enmities are breathed out in bitter speeches to a present
friend against an absent enemy, she would disclose nothing about the one
unto the other, save what might avail to their reconcilement. A small
good this might seem to me, did I not know to my sorrow countless
persons, who, through some horrible and far-spreading infection of sin,
not only disclose to enemies mutually enraged the things said in passion
against each other, but add some things that were never spoken at all;
whereas, to a generous man, it ought to seem a small thing not to incite
or increase the enmities of men by ill-speaking, unless he endeavour
likewise by kind words to extinguish them. Such a one was she,—Thou, her
most intimate Instructor, teaching her in the school of her heart.

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p6"></span>22. Finally, her own husband, now towards
the end of his earthly existence, did she gain over unto Thee; and she
had not to complain of that in him, as one of the faithful, which,
before he became so, she had endured. She was also the servant of Thy
servants. Whosoever of them knew her, did in her much magnify, honour,
and love Thee; for that through the testimony of the fruits of a holy
conversation, they perceived Thee to be present in her heart. For she
had “been the wife of one man,” had requited her parents, had guided her
house piously, was “well-reported of for good works,” had “brought up
children,” <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) as often travailing
in birth of them <span id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770) as she saw them
swerving from Thee. Lastly, to all of us, O Lord (since of Thy favour
Thou sufferest Thy servants to speak), who, before her sleeping in
Thee, <span id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771) lived associated together,
having received the grace of Thy baptism, did she devote, care such as
she might if she had been mother of us all; served us as if she had been
child of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_768"></span>[136:769](1010152.htm#fr_768) <span
id="vi.IX.IX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p3"></span> That is, not only from the time of actual
marriage, but from the time of betrothal, when the contract was written
upon tablets (see note 10, p. 133), and signed by the contracting
parties. The future wife was then called *sponsa sperata* or *pacta.*
Augustin alludes to this above (vii. sec. 7), when he says, “It is also
the custom that the affianced bride (*pactæ sponsæ*) should not
immediately be given up, that the husband may not less esteem her whom,
as betrothed, he longed not for” (*non suspiraverit sponsus*). It should
be remembered, in reading this section, that women amongst the Romans
were not confined after the Eastern fashion of the Greeks to separate
apartments, but had charge of the domestic arrangements and the training
of the children.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[137:770](1010152.htm#fr_769) <span
id="vi.IX.IX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014)<span id="vi.IX.IX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[137:771](1010152.htm#fr_770) <span
id="vi.IX.IX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p8"></span> [Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="vi.IX.IX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[137:772](1010152.htm#fr_771) <span
id="vi.IX.IX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.IX-p9"></span> [1 Thess.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)<span id="vi.IX.IX-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010153)
