[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010162)  [Next](1010164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.VI"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.VI-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Love of God, in His Nature
Superior to All Creatures, is Acquired by the Knowledge of the Senses
and the Exercise of Reason.</span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p2"></span>8. Not with uncertain, but with assured
consciousness do I love Thee, O Lord. Thou hast stricken my heart with
Thy word, and I loved Thee. And also the heaven, and earth, and all that
is therein, behold, on every side they say that I should love Thee; nor
do they cease to speak unto all, “so that they are without
excuse.” <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) But more profoundly
wilt Thou have mercy on whom Thou wilt have mercy, and compassion on
whom Thou wilt have compassion, <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)
otherwise do both heaven and earth tell forth Thy praises to deaf ears.
But what is it that I love in loving Thee? Not corporeal beauty, nor the
splendour of time, nor the radiance of the light, so pleasant to our
eyes, nor the sweet melodies of songs of all kinds, nor the fragrant
smell of flowers, and ointments, and spices, not manna and honey, not
limbs pleasant to the embracements of flesh. I love not these things
when I love my God; and yet I love a certain kind of light, and sound,
and fragrance, and food, and embracement in loving my God, who is the
light, sound, fragrance, food, and embracement of my inner man—where
that light shineth unto my soul which no place can contain, where that
soundeth which time snatcheth not away, where there is a fragrance which
no breeze disperseth, where there is a food which no eating can
diminish, and where that clingeth which no satiety can sunder. This is
what I love, when I love my God.

<span id="vi.X.VI-p5"></span>9. And what is this? I asked the earth; and
it answered, “I am not He;” and whatsoever are therein made the same
confession. I asked the sea and the deeps, and the creeping things that
lived, and they replied, “We are not thy God, seek higher than we.” I
asked the breezy air, and the universal air with its inhabitants
answered, “Anaximenes <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) was
deceived, I am not God.” I asked the heavens, the sun, moon, and stars:
“Neither,” say they, “are we the God whom thou seekest.” And I answered
unto all these things which stand about the door of my flesh, “Ye have
told me concerning my God, that ye are not He; tell me something about
Him.” And with a loud voice they exclaimed, “He made us.” My questioning
was my observing of them; and their beauty was their reply. <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) And I directed my thoughts to myself,
and said, “Who art thou?” And I answered, “A man.” And lo, in me there
appear both body and soul, the one without, the other within. By which
of these should I seek my God, whom I had sought through the body from
earth to heaven, as far as I was able to send messengers—the beams of
mine eyes? But the better part is that which is inner; for to it, as
both president and judge, did all these my corporeal messengers render
the answers of heaven and earth and all things therein, who said, “We
are not God, but He made us.” These things was my inner man cognizant of
by the ministry of the outer; I, the inner man, knew all this—I, the
soul, through the senses of my body. I asked the vast bulk of the earth
of my God, and it answered me, “I am not He, but He made me.”

<span id="vi.X.VI-p8"></span>10. Is not this beauty visible to all whose
senses are unimpaired? Why then doth it not speak the same things unto
all? Animals, the <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="vi.X.VI-Page_145"></span>very small and the great, see it, but they
are unable to question it, because their senses are not endowed with
reason to enable them to judge on what they report. But men can question
it, so that “the invisible things of Him . . . are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made;” <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) but by loving them, they are brought
into subjection to them; and subjects are not able to judge. Neither do
the creatures reply to such as question them, unless they can judge; nor
will they alter their voice (that is, their beauty), <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) if so be one man only sees, another
both sees and questions, so as to appear one way to this man, and
another to that; but appearing the same way to both, it is mute to this,
it speaks to that—yea, verily, it speaks unto all but they only
understand it who compare that voice received from without with the
truth within. For the truth declareth unto me, “Neither heaven, nor
earth, nor any body is thy God.” This, their nature declareth unto him
that beholdeth them. “They are a mass; a mass is less in part than in
the whole.” Now, O my soul, thou art my better part, unto thee I speak;
for thou animatest the mass of thy body, giving it life, which no body
furnishes to a body but thy God is even unto thee the Life of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_843"></span>[144:844](1010163.htm#fr_843) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p3"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="vi.X.VI-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[144:845](1010163.htm#fr_844) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p4"></span> [Rom.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span id="vi.X.VI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[144:846](1010163.htm#fr_845) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p6"></span> Anaximenes of Miletus was born about 520
<span class="c9"><span id="vi.X.VI-p6.1"></span>B.C.</span> According to
his philosophy the air was animate, and from it, as from a first
principle, all things in heaven, earth, and sea sprung, first by
condensation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.X.VI-p6.2"></span>πύκνωσις</span>), and after that by a process
of rarefaction (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.X.VI-p6.3"></span>ἀραίωσις</span>). See *Ep.* cxviii. 23; and
Aristotle, *Phys*. iii. 4. Compare this theory and that of Epicurus (p.
100, above) with those of modern physicists; and see thereon *The Unseen
Universe*, arts. 85, etc., and 117, etc.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[144:847](1010163.htm#fr_846) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p7"></span> *In Ps.* cxliv. 13, the earth he describes
as “dumb,” but as speaking to us while we meditate upon its beauty—*Ipsa
inquisitio interrogatio est.*

<span id="fn_847"></span>[145:848](1010163.htm#fr_847) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p9"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="vi.X.VI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[145:849](1010163.htm#fr_848) <span
id="vi.X.VI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VI-p10"></span> See note 2 to previous section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](1010164)
