[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010393)  [Next](1010395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p3.1"></span>To Januarius,</span>* <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p4.1"></span>*the Catholic Clergy of the District of
Hippo* <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) *Send the
Following.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p6"></span>1. Your clergy and your
Circumcelliones are venting against us their rage in a persecution of a
new kind, and of unparalleled atrocity. Were we to render evil for evil,
we should be transgressing the law of Christ. But now, when all that has
been done, both on your side and on ours, is impartially considered, it
is found that we are suffering what is written, “They rewarded me evil
for good;” <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) and (in another
Psalm), “My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace. I am for
peace: but when I speak, they are for war.” <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) For, seeing that you have arrived
at so great age, we suppose you to know perfectly well that the party of
Donatus, which at first was called at Carthage the party of Majorinus,
did of their own accord accuse Cæcilianus, then bishop of Carthage,
before the famous Emperor Constantine. Lest, however, you should have
forgotten this, venerable sir, or should pretend not to know, or perhaps
(which we scarcely think possible) may never have known it, we insert
here a copy of the narrative of Anulinus, then proconsul, to whom the
party of Majorinus appealed, requesting that by him as proconsul a
statement of the charges which they brought against Cæcilianus should be
sent to the Emperor aforesaid:—

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p9"></span>2. *To Constantine Augustus, from
Anulinus, a man of consular rank, proconsul of Africa, these*: <span
id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p11"></span>The welcome and adored celestial
writing sent by your Majesty to Cæcilianus, and those over whom he
presides, who are called clergy, have been, by the care of your
Majesty’s most humble servant, engrossed in his Records; and he has
exhorted these parties that, heartily agreeing among themselves, since
they are seen to be exempted from all other burdens by your Majesty’s
clemency, they should, preserving Catholic unity, devote themselves to
their duties with the reverence due to the sanctity of law and to divine
things. After a few days, however, there arose some persons to whom a
crowd of people joined themselves, who thought that proceedings should
be taken against Cæcilianus, and presented to me <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) a sealed packet wrapped in leather,
and a small document without seal, and earnestly besought me to transmit
them to your Majesty’s sacred and venerable court, which your Majesty’s
most humble servant <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) has taken
care to do, Cæcilianus continuing meanwhile as he was. The Acts
pertaining to the case are subjoined, in order that your Majesty may be
able to arrive at a decision concerning the whole matter. The documents
sent are two: the one in a leathern envelope, with this title, “A
document of the Catholic Church containing charges against Cæcilianus,
and furnished by the party of Majori<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>
<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-Page_370"></span>nus;” the other attached
without a seal to the same leathern envelope.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p14"></span>Given on the 17th day before the
Calends of May, in the third consulship of our lord Constantine Augustus
\[*i.e.* April 15, <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 313\].

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p15"></span>3. After this report had been sent
to him, the Emperor summoned the parties before a tribunal of bishops to
be constituted at Rome. The ecclesiastical records show how the case was
there argued and decided, and Cæcilianus pronounced innocent. Surely
now, after the peacemaking decision of the tribunal of bishops, all the
pertinacity of strife and bitterness should have given way. Your
forefathers, however, appealed again to the Emperor, and complained that
the decision was not just, and that their case had not been fully heard.
Accordingly, he appointed a second tribunal of bishops to meet in Aries,
a town of Gaul, where, after sentence had been pronounced against your
worthless and diabolical schism, many of your party returned to a good
understanding with Cæcilianus; some, however, who were most obstinate
and contentious, appealed to the Emperor again. Afterwards, when,
yielding to their importunity, he personally interposed in this dispute,
which belonged properly to the bishops to decide, having heard the case,
he gave sentence against your party, and was the first to pass a law
that the properties of your congregations should be confiscated; of all
which things we could insert the documentary evidence here, if it were
not for making the letter too long. We must, however, by no means omit
the investigation and decision in open court of the case of Felix of
Aptunga, whom, in the Council of Carthage, under Secundus of Tigisis,
primate, your fathers affirmed to be the original cause of all these
evils. For the Emperor aforesaid, in a letter of which we annex a copy,
bears witness that in this trial your party were before him as accusers
and most strenuous prosecutors:—

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p16"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p17"></span>4. *The Emperors Flavius
Constantinus, Maximus Cæsar, and Valerius Licinius Cæsar, to Probianus,
proconsul of Africa*:

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p18"></span>Your predecessor Ælianus, who acted
as substitute for Verus, the superintendent of the prefects, when that
most excellent magistrate was by severe illness laid aside in that part
of Africa which is under our sway, considered it, and most justly, to be
his duty, amongst other things, to bring again under his investigation
and decision the matter of Cæcilianus, or rather the odium which seems
to have been stirred up against that bishop of the Catholic Church.
Wherefore, having ordered the compearance of Superius, centurion,
Cæcilianus, magistrate of Aptunga, and Saturninus, the ex-president of
police, and his successor in the office, Calibius the younger, and
Solon, an official belonging to Aptunga, he heard the testimony of these
witnesses; <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) the result of
which was, that whereas objection had been taken to Cæcilianus on the
ground of his ordination to the office of bishop by Felix, against whom
it seemed that the charge of surrendering and burning the sacred books
had been made, the innocence of Felix in this matter was clearly
established. Moreover, when Maximus affirmed that Ingentius, a decurion
of the town of Ziqua, had forged a letter of the ex-magistrate
Cæcilianus, we found, on examining the Acts which were before us, that
this same Ingentius had been put on the rack <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) for that offence, and that the
infliction of torture on him was not, as alleged, on the ground of his
affirming that he was a decurion of Ziqua. Wherefore we desire you to
send under a suitable guard to the court of Augustus Constantine the
said Ingentius, that in the presence and hearing of those who are now
pleading in this case, and who day after day persist in their
complaints, it may be made manifest and fully known that they labour in
vain to excite odium against the bishop Cæcilianus, and to clamour
violently against him. This, we hope, will bring the people to desist,
as they should do, from such contentions, and to devote themselves with
becoming reverence to their religious duties, undistracted by dissension
among themselves.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p21"></span>5. Since you see, therefore, that
these things are so, why do you provoke odium against us on the ground
of the imperial decrees which are in force against you, when you have
yourselves done all this before we followed your example? If emperors
ought not to use their authority in such cases, if care of these matters
lies beyond the province of Christian emperors, who urged your
forefathers to remit the case of Cæcilianus, by the proconsul, to the
Emperor, and a second time to bring before the Emperor accusations
against a bishop whom you had somehow condemned in absence, and on his
acquittal to invent and bring before the same Emperor other calumnies
against Felix, by whom the bishop aforesaid had been ordained? And now,
what other law is in force against your party than that decision of the
elder Constantine, to which your forefathers of their own choice
appealed, which they extorted from him by their importunate <span
id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-Page_371"></span>complaints, and which they preferred
to the decision of an episcopal tribunal? If you are dissatisfied with
the decrees of emperors, who were the first to compel the emperors to
set these in array against you? For you have no more reason for crying
out against the Catholic Church because of the decrees of emperors
against you, than those men would have had for crying out against
Daniel, who, after his deliverance, were thrown in to be devoured by the
same lions by which they first sought to have him destroyed; as it is
written: “The king’s wrath is as the roaring of a lion.” <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) These slanderous enemies insisted
that Daniel should be thrown into the den of lions: his innocence
prevailed over their malice; he was taken from the den unharmed and
they, being cast into it, perished. In like manner, your forefathers
cast Cæcilianus and his companions to be destroyed by the king’s wrath;
and when, by their innocence, they were delivered from this, you
yourselves now suffer from these kings what your party wished them to
suffer; as it is written: “Whoso diggeth a pit for his neighbour, shall
himself fall therein.” <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p24"></span>6. You have therefore no ground for
complaint against us: nay more, the clemency of the Catholic Church
would have led us to desist from even enforcing these decrees of the
emperors, had not your clergy and Circumcelliones, disturbing our peace,
and destroying us by their most monstrous crimes and furious deeds of
violence, compelled us to have these decrees revived and put in force
again. For before these more recent edicts of which you complain had
come into Africa, these desperadoes laid ambush for our bishops on their
journeys, abused our clergy with savage blows, and assaulted our laity
in the same most cruel manner, and set fire to their habitations. A
certain presbyter who had of his own free choice preferred the unity of
our Church, was for so doing dragged out of his own house, cruelly
beaten without form of law, rolled over and over in a miry pond, covered
with a matting of rushes, and exhibited as an object of pity to some and
of ridicule to others, while his persecutors gloried in their crime;
after which they carried him away where they pleased, and reluctantly
set him at liberty after twelve days. When Proculeianus <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) was challenged by our bishop
concerning this outrage, at a meeting of the municipal courts, he at
first endeavoured to evade inquiry into the matter by pretending that he
knew nothing of it; and when the demand was immediately repeated, he
publicly declared that he would say nothing more on the subject. And the
perpetrators of that outrage are at this day among your presbyters,
continuing moreover to keep us in terror, and to persecute us to the
utmost of their power.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p26"></span>7. Our bishop, however, did not
complain to the emperors of the wrongs and persecution which the
Catholic Church in our district suffered in those days. But when a
Council had been convened, <span id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) it
was agreed that you should be invited to meet our party peaceably, in
order that, if it were possible, you \[*i.e.* the bishops on both sides,
for the letter is written by the clergy of Hippo\] might have a
conference, and the error being taken out of the way, brotherly love
might rejoice in the bond of peace between us. You may learn from your
own records the answer which Proculeianus made at first on that
occasion, that you would call a Council together, and would there see
what you ought to answer; and how afterwards, when he was again publicly
reminded of his promise, he stated, as the Acts bear witness, that he
refused to have any conference with a view to peace. After this, when
the notorious atrocities of your clergy and Circumcelliones continued, a
case was brought to trial; <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110)
and Crispinus being condemned as a heretic, although he was through the
forbearance of the Catholics exempted from the fine which the imperial
edict imposed on heretics of ten pounds of gold, nevertheless thought
himself warranted in appealing to the emperors. As to the answer which
was made to that appeal, was it not extorted by the preceding wickedness
of your party and by his own appeal? And yet, even after that answer was
given, he was permitted to escape the infliction of that fine, through
the intercession of our bishops with the Emperor on his behalf. From
that Council, however, our bishops sent deputies to the court, who
obtained a decree that not all your bishops and clergy should be held
liable to this fine of ten pounds of gold, which the decree had imposed
on all heretics, but only those in whose districts the Catholic Church
suffered violence at the hands of your party. But by the time that the
deputation came to Rome, the wounds of the Catholic bishop of Bagæ, who
had just then been dreadfully injured, had moved the Emperor to send
such edicts as were actually sent. When these edicts came to Africa,
seeing especially that strong pressure had begun to be brought upon you,
not to any evil thing, but for your good, what should you have done but
invited our bishops to meet you, as they had invited yours to meet them,
that by a conference the truth might be brought to light?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p29"></span>8. Not only, however, have you
failed to do this, but your party go on inflicting yet greater <span
id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-Page_372"></span>injuries upon us. Not contented with
beating us with bludgeons and killing some with the sword, they even,
with incredible ingenuity in crime, throw lime mixed with acid \[?
vitriol\] into our people’s eyes to blind them. For pillaging our
houses, moreover, they have fashioned huge and formidable implements,
armed with which they wander here and there, breathing out threats of
slaughter, rapine, burning of houses and blinding of our eyes; by which
things we have been constrained in the first instance to complain to
you, venerable sir, begging you to consider how, under these so-called
terrible laws of Catholic emperors, many, nay all of you, who say that
you are the victims of persecution, are settled in peace in the
possessions which were your own, or which you have taken from others,
while we suffer such unheard-of wrongs at the hands of your party. You
say that you are persecuted, while we are killed with clubs and swords
by your armed men. You say that you are persecuted, while our houses are
pillaged by your armed robbers. You say that you are persecuted, while
many of us have our eyesight destroyed by the lime and acid with which
your men are armed for the purpose. Moreover, if their course of crime
brings some of them to death, they make out that these deaths are justly
the occasion of odium against us, and of glory to them. They take no
blame to themselves for the harm which they do to us, and they lay upon
us the blame of the harm which they bring upon themselves. They live as
robbers, they die as Circumcelliones, they are honoured as martyrs! Nay,
I do injustice to robbers in this comparison; for we have never heard of
robbers destroying the eyesight of those whom they have plundered: they
indeed take away those whom they kill from the light, but they do not
take away the light from those whom they leave in life.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p30"></span>9. On the other hand, if at any
time we get men of your party into our power, we keep them unharmed,
showing great love towards them; and we tell them everything by which
the error which has severed brother from brother is refuted. We do as
the Lord Himself commanded us, in the words of the prophet Isaiah: “Hear
the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at His word; say, Ye are our
brethren, to those who hate you, and who cast you out, that the name of
the Lord may be glorified, and that He may appear to them with joy; but
let them be put to shame.” <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111)
And thus some of them we persuade, through their considering the
evidences of the truth and the beauty of peace, not to be baptized anew
for this sign of allegiance to our king they have already received
(though they were as deserters), but to accept that faith, and love of
the Holy Spirit, and union to the body of Christ, which formerly they
had not. For it is written, “Purifying their hearts by faith;” <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) and again, “Charity covereth a
multitude of sins.” <span id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) If,
however, either through too great obduracy, or through shame making them
unable to bear the taunts of those with whom they were accustomed to
join so frequently in falsely reproaching us and contriving evil against
us, or perhaps more through fear lest they should come to share along
with us such injuries as they were formerly wont to inflict on us,—if, I
say, from any of these causes, they refuse to be reconciled to the unity
of Christ, they are allowed to depart, as they were detained, without
suffering any harm. We also exhort our laity as far as we can to detain
them without doing them any harm, and bring them to us for admonition
and instruction. Some of them obey us and do this, if it is in their
power: others deal with them as they would with robbers, because they
actually suffer from them such things as robbers are wont to do. Some of
them strike their assailants in protecting their own bodies from their
blows: while others apprehend them and bring them to the magistrates;
and though we intercede on their behalf, they do not let them off,
because they are very much afraid of their savage outrages. Yet all the
while, these men, though persisting in the practices of robbers, claim
to be honoured as martyrs when they receive the due reward of their
deeds!

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p34"></span>10. Accordingly our desire, which
we lay before you, venerable sir, by this letter and by the brethren
whom we have sent, is as follows. In the first place, if it be possible,
let a peaceable conference be held with our bishops, so that an end may
be put to the error itself, not to the men who embrace it, and men
corrected rather than punished; and as you formerly despised their
proposals for agreement, let them now proceed from your side. How much
better for you to have such a conference between your bishops and ours,
the proceedings of which may be written down and sent with signature of
the parties to the Emperor, than to confer with the civil magistrates,
who cannot do otherwise than administer the laws which have been passed
against you! For your colleagues who sailed from this country said that
they had come to have their case heard by the prefects. They also named
our holy father the Catholic bishop Valentinus, who was then at court,
saying that they wished to be heard along with him. This the judge could
not concede, as he was guided in his judicial functions by the laws
which were passed against you: the bishop, moreover, had not <span
id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-Page_373"></span>come on this footing, or with any
such instructions from his colleagues. How much better qualified
therefore will the Emperor himself be to decide regarding your case,
when the report of that conference has been read before him, seeing that
he is not bound by these laws, and has power to enact other laws instead
of them; although it may be said to be a case upon which final decision
was pronounced long ago! Yet, in wishing this conference with you, we
seek not to have a second final decision, but to have it made known as
already settled to those who meanwhile are not aware that it is so. If
your bishops be willing to do this, what do you thereby lose? Do you not
rather gain, inasmuch as your willingness for such conference will
become known, and the reproach, hitherto deserved, that you distrust
your own cause will be taken away? Do you, perchance, suppose that such
conference would be unlawful? Surely you are aware that Christ our Lord
spoke even to the devil concerning the law, <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) and that by the Apostle Paul
debates were held not only with Jews, but even with heathen philosophers
of the sect of the Stoics and of the Epicureans. <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) Is it, perchance, that the laws of
the Emperor do not permit you to meet our bishops? If so, assemble
together in the meantime your bishops in the region of Hippo, in which
we are suffering such wrongs from men of your party. For how much more
legitimate and open is the way of access to us for the writings which
you might send to us, than for the arms with which they assail us!

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p37"></span>11. Finally, we beg you to send
back such writings by our brethren whom we have sent to you. If,
however, you will not do this, at least hear us as well as those of your
own party, at whose hands we suffer such wrongs. Show us the truth for
which you allege that you suffer persecution, at the time when we are
suffering so great cruelties from your side. For if you convict us of
being in error, perhaps you will concede to us an exemption from being
rebaptized by you, because we were baptized by persons whom you have not
condemned; and you granted this exemption to those whom Felicianus of
Musti, and Prætextatus of Assuri, had baptized during the long period in
which you were attempting to cast them out of their churches by legal
interdicts, because they were in communion with Maximianus, along with
whom they were condemned explicitly and by name in the Council of Bagæ.
All which things we can prove by the judicial and municipal
transactions, in which you brought forward the decisions of this same
Council of yours, when you wished to show the judges that the persons
whom you were expelling from your ecclesiastical buildings were persons
by schism separated from you. Nevertheless, you who have by schism
severed yourselves from the seed of Abraham, in whom all the nations of
the earth are blessed, <span id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) refuse
to be expelled from our ecclesiastical buildings, when the decree to
this effect proceeds not from judges such as you employed in dealing
with schismatics from your sect, but from the kings of the earth
themselves, who worship Christ as the prophecy had foretold, and from
whose bar you retired vanquished when you brought accusation against
Cæcilianus.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p39"></span>12. If, however, you will neither
instruct us nor listen to us, come yourselves, or send into the district
of Hippo some of your party, with some of us as their guides, that they
may see your army equipped with their weapons; nay, more fully equipped
than ever army was before, for no soldier when fighting against
barbarians was ever known to add to his other weapons lime and acid to
destroy the eyes of his enemies. If you refuse this also, we beg you at
least to write to them to desist now from these things, and refrain from
murdering, plundering, and blinding our people. We will not say, condemn
them; for it is for yourselves to see how no contamination is brought to
you by the toleration within your communion of those whom we prove to be
robbers, while contamination is brought to us by our having members
against whom you have never been able to prove that they were traditors.
If, however, you treat all our remonstrances with contempt, we shall
never regret that we desired to act in a peaceful and orderly way. The
Lord will so plead for His Church, that you, on the other hand, shall
regret that you despised our humble attempt at conciliation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[369:2098](1010394.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p4"></span> Bishop of Casæ Nigræ in Numidia,
and at that time the Donatist primate, as the oldest of their bishops.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[369:2099](1010394.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p5"></span> *Hipponensium Regiorum*.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[369:2100](1010394.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p7"></span> [Ps.
35.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[369:2101](1010394.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p8"></span> [Ps.
120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[369:2102](1010394.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p10"></span> The actual heading of the Report
stands thus: “A. GGG. NNN. Anulinus VC. proconsul Africæ.” For the
interpretation we are indebted to the marginal note on the Codex
Gervasianus.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[369:2103](1010394.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p12"></span> *Dicationi meæ*.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[369:2104](1010394.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p13"></span> *Parvitas mea*.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[370:2105](1010394.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p19"></span> The value of the evidence of these
witnesses is apparent when we remember that they were all in a position
to speak from personal knowledge of the persecution in <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p19.1"></span> A.D.</span> 303
(under Diocletian and Maximian), and had in their public capacity some
share in enforcing the demand made in that persecution for the surrender
of the sacred books. These could tell whether Felix the Bishop of
Aptunga was guilty or not of the unfaithfulness to his religion with
which the faction of Majorinus reproached him.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[370:2106](1010394.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p20"></span> *Suspensum.*

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[371:2107](1010394.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p22"></span> [Prov.
19.12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[371:2108](1010394.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p23"></span> [Ecclus.
27.29](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p23.1"></span>, and [Prov.
26.27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[371:2109](1010394.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p25"></span> Donatist bishop of Hippo. See
Letter XXXIII. p. 260.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[371:2110](1010394.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p27"></span> At Carthage, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p27.1"></span>A.D.</span> 403.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[371:2111](1010394.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p28"></span> For a more detailed reference to
this case, see Letter CV. sec. 4. Crispinus was charged with an attempt
to kill Possidius the bishop of Calama. See also Aug. *Cont. Crescon*.
b. iii. c. 46, n. 50, and c. 47, n. 51.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[372:2112](1010394.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p31"></span> [Isa.
66.5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p31.1"></span>, as given by Augustin.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[372:2113](1010394.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p32"></span> [Acts
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[372:2114](1010394.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p33"></span> [1 Pet.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[373:2115](1010394.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p35"></span> [Matt.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[373:2116](1010394.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p36"></span> [Acts
17.18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[373:2117](1010394.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p38"></span> [Gen.
22.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXIX](1010395)
