[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010224)  [Next](1010226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XI.XXIV"></span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XI.XXIV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—That Time is Not a Motion of a
Body Which We Measure by Time.</span>

<span id="vi.XI.XXIV-p2"></span>31. Dost Thou command that I should
assent, if any one should say that time is “the motion of a body?” Thou
dost not command me. For I hear that no body is moved but in time. This
Thou sayest; but that the very motion of a body is time, I hear not;
Thou sayest it not. For when a body is moved, I by time measure how long
it may be moving from the time in which it began to be moved till it
left off. And if I saw not whence it began, and it continued to be
moved, so that I see not when it leaves off, I cannot measure unless,
perchance, from the time I began until I cease to see. But if I look
long, I only proclaim that the time is long, but not how long it may be
because when we say, “How long,” we speak by comparison, as, “This is as
long as that,” or, “This is double as long as that,” or any other thing
of the kind. But if we were able to note down the distances of places
whence and whither cometh the body <span id="page_172">p. 172</span>
<span id="vi.XI.XXIV-Page_172"></span>which is moved, or its parts, if
it moved as in a wheel, we can say in how much time the motion of the
body or its part, from this place unto that, was performed. Since, then,
the motion of a body is one thing, that by which we measure how long it
is another, who cannot see which of these is rather to be called time?
For, although a body be sometimes moved, sometimes stand still, we
measure not its motion only, but also its standing still, by time; and
we say, “It stood still as much as it moved;” or, “It stood still twice
or thrice as long as it moved;” and if any other space which our
measuring hath either determined or imagined, more or less, as we are
accustomed to say. Time, therefore, is not the motion of a body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](1010226)
