[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010424)  [Next](1010426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p3.1"></span>To Bishop Augustin, My Lord Truly Holy, and
Father Justly Revered, Volusianus Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p4"></span>1. O man who art a pattern of goodness
and uprightness, you ask me to apply to you for instruction in regard to
some of the obscure passages which occur in my reading. I accept at your
command the favour of this kindness, and willingly offer myself to be
taught by you, acknowledging the authority of the ancient proverb, “We
are never too old to learn.” With good reason the author of this proverb
has not restricted by any limits or end our pursuit of wisdom; for
truth, <span id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507) secluded in its
original principles, is never so disclosed to those who approach it as
to be wholly revealed to their knowledge. It seems to me, therefore, my
lord truly holy, and father justly revered, worth while to communicate
to you the substance of a conversation which recently took place among
us. I was present at a gathering of friends, and a great many opinions
were brought forward there, such as the disposition and studies of each
suggested. Our discourse was chiefly, however, on the department of
rhetoric which treats of proper arrangement. <span
id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508) I speak to one familiar with the
subject, for you were not long ago a teacher of these things. Upon this
followed a discussion <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-Page_472"></span>regarding “invention” in rhetoric, its
nature, what boldness it requires, how great the labour involved in
methodical arrangement, what is the charm of metaphors, and the beauty
of illustrations, and the power of applying epithets suitable to the
character and nature of the subject in hand. Others extolled with
partiality the poet’s art. This part also of eloquence is not left
unnoticed or unhonoured by you. We may appropriately apply to you that
line of the poet: “The ivy is intertwined with the laurels which reward
your victory.” <span id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) We spoke,
accordingly, of the embellishments which skilful arrangement adds to a
poem, of the beauty of metaphors, and of the sublimity of well-chosen
comparisons; then we spoke of smooth and flowing versification, and, if
I may use the expression, the harmonious variation of the pauses in the
lines. <span id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510) The conversation
turned next to a subject with which you are very familiar, namely, that
philosophy which you were wont yourself to cherish after the manner of
Aristotle and Isocrates. We asked what had been achieved by the
philosopher of the Lyceum, by the varied and incessant doubtings of the
Academy, by the debater of the Porch, by the discoveries of natural
philosophers, by the self-indulgence of the Epicureans; and what had
been the result of their boundless zeal in disputation with each other,
and how truth was more than ever unknown by them after they assumed that
its knowledge was attainable.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p9"></span>2. While our conversation continues on
these topics, one of the large company says: “Who among us is so
thoroughly acquainted with the wisdom taught by Christianity as to be
able to resolve the doubts by which I am entangled, and to give firmness
to my hesitating acceptance of its teaching by arguments in which truth
or probability may claim my belief?” We are all dumb with amazement.
Then, of his own accord, he breaks forth in these words: “I wonder
whether the Lord and Ruler of the world did indeed fill the womb of a
virgin;—did His mother endure the protracted fatigues of ten months,
and, being yet a virgin, in due season bring forth her child, and
continue even after that with her virginity intact?” To this he adds
other statements: “Within the small body of a crying infant He is
concealed whom the universe scarcely can contain; He bears the years of
childhood, He grows up, He is established in the rigour of manhood; this
Governor is so long an exile from His own dwelling-place, and the care
of the whole world is transferred to one body of insignificant
dimensions. Moreover, He falls asleep, takes food to support Him, is
subject to all the sensations of mortal men. Nor did the proofs of so
great majesty shine forth with adequate fulness of evidence; for the
casting out of devils, the curing of the sick, and the restoration of
the dead to life are, if you consider others who have wrought these
wonders, but small works for God to do.” We prevent him from continuing
such questions, and the meeting having broken up, we referred the matter
to the valuable decision of experience beyond our own, lest, by too
rashly intruding into hidden things, the error, innocent thus far,
should become blameworthy.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p10"></span>You have heard, O man worthy of all
honour, the confession of our ignorance; you perceive what is requested
at your hands. Your reputation is interested in our obtaining an answer
to these questions. Ignorance may, without harm to religion, be
tolerated in other priests; but when we come to Bishop Augustin,
whatever we find unknown to him is no part of the Christian system. May
the Supreme God protect your venerable Grace, my lord truly holy and
justly revered!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[471:2508](1010425.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p5"></span> We read here “*veritas*,” instead of
“*virtus*.”

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[471:2509](1010425.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p6"></span> “*Partitio*,” defined thus by
Quintilian vii. 1: “Sit igitur *divisio* rerum plurium in
singulas—*partitio*, singularum in partes discretas ordo et recta quædam
locatio.”

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[472:2510](1010425.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p7"></span> Virgil, *Bucol.* Ecl. 8, line 13.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[472:2511](1010425.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXV-p8"></span> *Cæsurarum modulata variatio.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXVI](1010426)
