[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010314)  [Next](1010316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.VIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.VIII-p1.1"></span>Letter VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.VIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VIII-p3.1"></span>To Augustin Nebridius Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VIII-p4"></span>1. As I am in haste to come to the
subject of my letter, I dispense with any preface or introduction. When
at any time it pleases higher (by which I mean heavenly) powers to
reveal anything to us by dreams in our sleep, how is this done, my dear
Augustin, or what is the method which they use? What, I say, is their
method, *i.e.* by what art or magic, by what agency or enchantments, do
they accomplish this? Do they by their thoughts influence our minds, so
that we also have the same images presented in our thoughts? Do they
bring before us, and exhibit as actually done in their own body or in
their own imagination, the things which we dream? But if they actually
do these things in their own body, it follows that, in order to our
seeing what they thus do, we must be endowed with other bodily eyes
beholding what passes within while we sleep. If, however, they are not
assisted by their bodies in producing the effects in question, but frame
such things in their own imaginative faculty, and thus impress our
imaginations, thereby giving visible form to what we dream; why is it, I
ask, that I cannot compel your imagination to reproduce those dreams
which I have myself first formed by my imagination? I have undoubtedly
the faculty of imagination, and it is capable of presenting to my own
mind the picture of whatever I please; and yet I do not thereby cause
any dream in you, although I see that even our bodies have the power of
originating dreams in us. For by means of the bond of sympathy uniting
it to the soul, the body compels us in strange ways to repeat or
reproduce by imagination anything which it has once experienced. Thus
often in sleep, if we are thirsty, we dream that we drink; and if we are
hungry, we seem to ourselves to be eating; and many other instances
there are in which, by some mode of exchange, so to speak, things are
transferred through the imagination from the body to the soul.

<span id="vii.1.VIII-p5"></span>Be not surprised at the want of elegance
and subtlety with which these questions are here stated to you; consider
the obscurity in which the subject is involved, and the inexperience of
the writer; be it yours to do your utmost to supply his deficiencies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter IX](1010316)
