[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010095)  [Next](1010097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.V"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.V-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Faith is the Basis of Human Life;
Man Cannot Discover that Truth Which Holy Scripture Has
Disclosed.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p2"></span>7. From this, however, being led to prefer
the Catholic doctrine, I felt that it was with more moderation and
honesty that it commanded things to be believed that were not
demonstrated <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="vi.VI.V-Page_93"></span>(whether it was that they could be
demonstrated, but not to any one, or could not be demonstrated at all),
than was the method of the Manichæans, where our credulity was mocked by
audacious promise of knowledge, and then so many most fabulous and
absurd things were forced upon belief because they were not capable of
demonstration. <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) After that, O
Lord, Thou, by little and little, with most gentle and most merciful
hand, drawing and calming my heart, didst persuade taking into
consideration what a multiplicity of things which I had never seen, nor
was present when they were enacted, like so many of the things in
secular history, and so many accounts of places and cities which I had
not seen; so many of friends, so many of physicians, so many now of
these men, now of those, which unless we should believe, we should do
nothing at all in this life; lastly, with how unalterable an assurance I
believed of what parents I was born, which it would have been impossible
for me to know otherwise than by hearsay,—taking into consideration all
this, Thou persuadest me that not they who believed Thy books (which,
with so great authority, Thou hast established among nearly all
nations), but those who believed them not were to be blamed; <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md) and that those men were not to be
listened unto who should say to me, “How dost thou know that those
Scriptures were imparted unto mankind by the Spirit of the one true and
most true God?” For it was the same thing that was most of all to be
believed, since no wranglings of blasphemous questions, whereof I had
read so many amongst the self-contradicting philosophers, could once
wring the belief from me that Thou art,—whatsoever Thou wert, though
what I knew not,—or that the government of human affairs belongs to
Thee.

<span id="vi.VI.V-p5"></span>8. Thus much I believed, at one time more
strongly than another, yet did I ever believe both that Thou wert, and
hadst a care of us, although I was ignorant both what was to be thought
of Thy substance, and what way led, or led back to Thee. Seeing, then,
that we were too weak by unaided reason to find out the truth, and for
this cause needed the authority of the holy writings, I had now begun to
believe that Thou wouldest by no means have given such excellency of
authority to those Scriptures throughout all lands, had it not been Thy
will thereby to be believed in, and thereby sought. For now those things
which heretofore appeared incongruous to me in the Scripture, and used
to offend me, having heard divers of them expounded reasonably, I
referred to the depth of the mysteries, and its authority seemed to me
all the more venerable and worthy of religious belief, in that, while it
was visible for all to read it, it reserved the majesty of its
secret <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) within its profound
significance, stooping to all in the great plainness of its language and
lowliness of its style, yet exercising the application of such as are
not light of heart; that it might receive all into its common bosom, and
through narrow passages waft over some few towards Thee, yet many more
than if it did not stand upon such a height of authority, nor allured
multitudes within its bosom by its holy humility. These things I
meditated upon, and Thou wert with me; I sighed, and Thou heardest me; I
vacillated, and Thou didst guide me; I roamed through the broad
way <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) of the world, and Thou didst
not desert me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[93:449](1010096.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="vi.VI.V-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p3"></span> He similarly exalts the claims of the
Christian Church over Manichæanism in his *Reply to Faustus* (xxxii.
19): “If you submit to receive a load of endless fictions at the bidding
of an obscure and irrational authority, so that you believe all those
things because they are written in the books which your misguided
judgment pronounces trustworthy, though there is no evidence of their
truth, why not rather submit to the evidence of the gospel, which is so
well-founded, so confirmed, so generally acknowledged and admired, and
which has an unbroken series of testimonies from the apostles down to
our own day, that so you may have an intelligent belief, and may come to
know that all your objections are the fruit of folly and perversity?”
And again, in his *Reply to Manichæus’ Fundamental* *Epistle* (sec. 18),
alluding to the credulity required in those who accept Manichæan
teaching on the mere authority of the teacher: “Whoever thoughtlessly
yields this becomes a Manichæan, not by knowing undoubted truth, but by
believing doubtful statements. Such were we when in our inexperienced
youth we were deceived.”

<span id="fn_449"></span>[93:450](1010096.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="vi.VI.V-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p4"></span> He has a like train of thought in another
place (*De Fide Rer. quæ non Vid.* sec. 4): “If, then (harmony being
destroyed), human society itself would not stand if we believe not that
we see not, how much more should we have faith in divine things, though
we see them not; which if we have it not, we do not violate the
friendship of a few men, but the profoundest religion—so as to have as
its consequence the profoundest misery.” Again, referring to belief in
Scripture, he argues (*Con. Faust.* xxxiii. 6) that, if we doubt its
evidence, we may equally doubt that of any book, and asks, “How do we
know the authorship of the works of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Varro, and
other similar writers, but by the unbroken chain of evidence?” And once
more he contends (*De Mor. Cath. Eccles.* xxix. 60) that, “The utter
overthrow of all literature will follow and there will be an end to all
books handed down from the past, if what is supported by such a strong
popular belief, and established by the uniform testimony of so many men
and so many times, is brought into such suspicion that it is not allowed
to have the credit and the authority of common history.”

<span id="fn_450"></span>[93:451](1010096.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="vi.VI.V-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p6"></span> See i. sec. 10, note, above.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[93:452](1010096.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="vi.VI.V-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.V-p7"></span> [Matt.
7.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.VI.V-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1010097.md)
