[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010357)  [Next](1010359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LI"></span><span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="vii.1.LI-Page_296"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LI-p1.1"></span>Letter LI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 399 or 400.)

<span id="vii.1.LI-p3"></span>An invitation to Crispinus, Donatist
bishop at Calama, to discuss the whole question of the Donatist schism.

<span id="vii.1.LI-p4"></span>(No salutation at the beginning of the
letter.)

<span id="vii.1.LI-p5"></span>1. I have adopted this plan in regard to
the heading of this letter, because your party are offended by the
humility which I have shown in the salutations prefixed to others. I
might be supposed to have done it as an insult to you, were it not that
I trust that you will do the same in your reply to me. Why should I say
much regarding your promise at Carthage, and my urgency to have it
fulfilled? Let the manner in which we then acted to each other be
forgotten with the past, lest it should obstruct future conference. Now,
unless I am mistaken, there is, by the Lord’s help, no obstacle in the
way: we are both in Numidia, and located at no great distance from each
other. I have heard it said that you are still willing to examine, in
debate with me, the question which separates us from communion with each
other. See how promptly all ambiguities may be cleared away: send me an
answer to this letter if you please, and perhaps that may be enough, not
only for us, but for those also who desire to hear us; or if it is not,
let us exchange letters again and again until the discussion is
exhausted. For what greater benefit could be secured to us by the
comparative nearness of the towns which we inhabit? I have resolved to
debate with you in no other way than by letters, in order both to
prevent anything that is said from escaping from our memory, and to
secure that others interested in the question, but unable to be present
at a debate, may not forfeit the instruction. You are accustomed, not
with any intention of falsehood, but by mistake, to reproach us with
charges such as may suit your purpose, concerning past transactions,
which we repudiate as untrue. Therefore, if you please, let us weigh the
question in the light of the present, and let the past alone. You are
doubtless aware that in the Jewish dispensation the sin of idolatry was
committed by the people, and once the book of the prophet of God was
burned by a defiant king; <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) the
punishment of the sin of schism would not have been more severe than
that with which these two were visited, had not the guilt of it been
greater. You remember, of course, how the earth opening swallowed up
alive the leaders of a schism, and fire from heaven breaking forth
destroyed their accomplices. <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699)
Neither the making and worshipping of an idol, nor the burning of the
Holy Book, was deemed worthy of such punishment.

<span id="vii.1.LI-p8"></span>2. You are wont to reproach us with a
crime, not proved against us, indeed, though proved beyond question
against some of your own party,—the crime, namely, of yielding up,
through fear of persecution, the Scriptures <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) to be burned. Let me ask,
therefore, why you have received back men whom you condemned for the
crime of schism by the “unerring voice of your plenary Council” (I quote
from the record), and replaced them in the same episcopal sees as they
were in at the time when you passed sentence against them? I refer to
Felicianus of Musti and Prætextatus of Assuri. <span
id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) These were not, as you would have
the ignorant believe, included among those to whom your Council
appointed and intimated a certain time, after the lapse of which, if
they had not returned to your communion, the sentence would become
final; but they were included among the others whom you condemned,
without delay, on the day on which you gave to some, as I have said, a
respite. I can prove this, if you deny it. Your own Council is witness.
We have also the proconsular Acts, in which you have not once, but
often, affirmed this. Provide, therefore, some other line of defence if
you can, lest, denying what I can prove, you cause loss of time. If,
then, Felicianus and Prætextatus were innocent, why were they thus
condemned? If they were guilty, why were they thus restored? If you
prove them to have been innocent, can you object to our believing that
it was possible for innocent men, falsely charged with being traditors,
to be condemned by a much smaller number of your predecessors, if it is
found possible for innocent men, falsely charged with being schismatics,
to be condemned by three hundred and ten of their successors, whose
decision is magniloquently described as proceeding from “the unerring
voice of a plenary Council”? If, however, you prove them to have been
justly condemned, what can you plead in defence of their being restored
to office in the same episcopal sees, unless, magnifying the importance
and benefit of peace, you maintain that even such things as these should
be tolerated in order to preserve unbroken the bond of unity? Would to
God that you would urge this plea, not with the lips only, but with the
whole heart! You could not fail then to perceive that no calumnies
whatever could justify the breaking up of the peace of Christ throughout
the world, if it is lawful in Africa for men, once condemned for impious
schism, to be restored to the same office which they held, rather than
break up the peace of Donatus and his party.

<span id="vii.1.LI-p11"></span><span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="vii.1.LI-Page_297"></span>3. Again, you are wont to reproach us with
persecuting you by the help of the civil power. In regard to this, I do
not draw an argument either from the demerit involved in the enormity of
so great an impiety, nor from the Christian meekness moderating the
severity of our measures. I take up this position: if this be a crime,
why have you harshly persecuted the Maximianists by the help of judges
appointed by those emperors whose spiritual birth by the gospel was due
to our Church? Why have you driven them, by the din of controversy, the
authority of edicts, and the violence of soldiery, from those buildings
for worship which they possessed, and in which they were when they
seceded from you? The wrongs endured by them in that struggle in every
place are attested by the existing traces of events so recent. Documents
declare the orders given. The deeds done are notorious throughout
regions in which also the sacred memory of your leader Optatus is
mentioned with honour.

<span id="vii.1.LI-p12"></span>4. Again, you are wont to say that we
have not the baptism of Christ, and that beyond your communion it is not
to be found. On this I would enter into a more lengthened argument; but
in dealing with you this is not necessary, seeing that, along with
Felicianus and Prætextatus, you admitted also the baptism of the
Maximianists as valid. For all whom these bishops baptized so long as
they were in communion with Maximianus, while you were doing your utmost
in a protracted contest in the civil courts to expel these very men
\[Felicianus and Prætextatus\] from their churches, as the Acts
testify,—all those, I say, whom they baptized during that time, they now
have in fellowship with them and with you; and though these were
baptized by them when excommunicated and in the guilt of schism, not
only in cases of extremity through dangerous sickness, but also at the
Easter services, in the large number of churches belonging to their
cities, and in these important cities themselves,—in the case of none of
them has the rite of baptism been repeated. And I wish you could prove
that those whom Felicianus and Prætextatus had baptized, as it were, in
vain, when they were excommunicated and in the guilt of schism, were
satisfactorily baptized again by them when they were restored. For if
the renewal of baptism was necessary for the people, the renewal of
ordination was not less necessary for the bishops. For they had
forfeited their episcopal office by leaving you, if they could not
baptize beyond your communion; because, if they had not forfeited their
episcopal office by leaving you, they could still baptize. But if they
had forfeited their episcopal office, they should have received
ordination when they returned, so that what they had lost might be
restored. Let not this, however, alarm you. As it is certain that they
returned with the same standing as bishops with which they had gone
forth from you, so is it also certain that they brought back with
themselves to your communion, without any repetition of their baptism,
all those whom they had baptized in the schism of Maximianus.

<span id="vii.1.LI-p13"></span>5. How can we weep enough when we see the
baptism of the Maximianists acknowledged by you, and the baptism of the
Church universal despised? Whether it was with or without hearing their
defence, whether it was justly or unjustly, that you condemned
Felicianus and Prætextatus, I do not ask; but tell me what bishop of the
Corinthian Church ever defended himself at your bar, or received
sentence from you? or what bishop of the Galatians has done so, or of
the Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, Thessalonians, or of any of the
other cities included in the promise: “All the kindreds of the nations
shall worship before Thee”? <span id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702)
Yet you accept the baptism of the former, while that of the latter is
despised; whereas baptism belongs neither to the one nor to the other,
but to Him of whom it was said: “This same is He that baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost.” <span id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) I do not,
however, dwell on this in the meantime: take notice of the things which
are beside us—behold what might make an impression even on the blind!
Where do we find the baptism which you acknowledge? With those,
forsooth, whom you have condemned, but not with those who were never
even tried at your bar!—with those who were denounced by name, and cast
forth from you for the crime of schism, but not with those who, unknown
to you, and dwelling in remote lands, never were accused or condemned by
you!—with those who are but a fraction of the inhabitants of a fragment
of Africa, but not with those from whose country the gospel first came
to Africa! Why should I add to your burden? Let me have an answer to
these things. Look to the charge made by your Council against the
Maximianists as guilty of impious schism: look to the persecutions by
the civil courts to which you appealed against them: look to the fact
that you restored some of them without re-ordination, and accepted their
baptism as valid: and answer, if you can, whether it is in your power to
hide, even from the ignorant, the question why you have separated
yourselves from the whole world, in a schism much more heinous than that
which you boast of having condemned in the Maximianists? May the peace
of Christ triumph in your heart! Then all shall be well. <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[296:1699](1010358.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p6"></span> [Jer.
36.23](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#023)<span id="vii.1.LI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[296:1700](1010358.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p7"></span> [Num.
16.31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.LI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[296:1701](1010358.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p9"></span> *Dominici libri.*

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[296:1702](1010358.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p10"></span> Felicianus and Prætextatus were two of
the twelve bishops by whom Maximianus was ordained. They were condemned
by the Donatist Council of Bagæ; but finding it impossible to eject them
from their sees, the Donatists yielded after a time, and restored them
to their office. See Letter LIII. p. 299.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[297:1703](1010358.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p14"></span> [Ps.
22.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.LI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[297:1704](1010358.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p15"></span> [John
1.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="vii.1.LI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[297:1705](1010358.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="vii.1.LI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LI-p16"></span> We conjecture this to be the meaning of
the elliptical expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.LI-p16.1"></span>ΕΥΤΥΧΩΣ</span> with which the letter ends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LII](1010359)
