[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010456)  [Next](1010458) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p1.1"></span>Letter CCIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 423.)

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p3.1"></span>To Cælestine,</span>* <span
id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) *<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p4.2"></span>My Lord Most Blessed, and Holy Father
Venerated with All Due Affection, Augustin Sends Greeting in The
Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p5"></span>1. First of all I congratulate you that
our Lord God has, as we have heard, established you in the illustrious
chair which you occupy without any division among His people. In the
next place, I lay before your Holiness the state of affairs with us,
that not only by your prayers, but with your council and aid you may
help us. For I write to you at this time under deep affliction, because,
while wishing to benefit certain members of Christ in our neighbourhood,
I brought on them a great calamity by my want of prudence and caution.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p6"></span>2. Bordering on the district of Hippo,
there is a small town, <span id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) named
Fussala: formerly there was no bishop there, but, along with the
contiguous district, it was included in the parish of Hippo. That part
of the country had few Catholics; the error of the Donatists held under
its miserable influence all the other congregations located in the midst
of a large population, so that in the town of Fussala itself there was
not one Catholic. In the mercy of God, all these places were brought to
attach themselves to the unity of the Church; with how much toil, and
how many dangers it would take long to tell,—how the presbyters
originally appointed by us to gather these people into the fold were
robbed, beaten, maimed, deprived of their eyesight, and even put to
death; whose sufferings, however, were not useless and unfruitful,
seeing that by them the re-establishment of unity was achieved. But as
Fussala is forty miles distant from Hippo, and I saw that in governing
its people, and gathering together the remnant, however small, of
persons of both sexes, who, not threatening others, but fleeing for
their own safety, were scattered here and there, my work would be
extended farther than it ought, and that I could not give the attention
which I clearly perceived to be necessary, I arranged that a bishop
should be ordained and appointed there.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p8"></span>3. With a view to the carrying out of
this, I sought for a person who might be suitable to the locality and
people, and at the same time acquainted with the Punic language; and I
had in my mind a presbyter fitted for the office. Having applied by
letter to the holy senior bishop who was then Primate of Numidia, I
obtained his consent to come from a great distance to ordain this
presbyter. After his coming, when all our minds were intent on an affair
of so great consequence, at the last moment, the person whom I believed
to be ready to be ordained disappointed us by absolutely refusing to
accept the office. Then I myself, who, as the event showed, ought rather
to have postponed than precipitated a matter so perilous, being
unwilling that the very venerable and holy old man, who had come with so
much fatigue to us, should return home without accomplishing the
business for which he had journeyed so far, offered to the people,
without their seeking him, a young man, Antonius, who was then with me.
He had been from childhood brought up in a monastery by us, but, beyond
officiating as a reader, he had no experience of the labours pertaining
to the various degrees of rank in the clerical office. The unhappy
people, not knowing what was to follow, submissively trusting me,
accepted him on my suggestion. What need I say more? The deed was done;
he entered on his office as their bishop.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p9"></span>4. What shall I do? I am unwilling to
accuse before your venerable Dignity one whom I brought into the fold,
and nourished with care; and I am unwilling to forsake those in seeking
whose ingathering to the Church I have travailed, amid fears and
anxieties; and how to do justice to both I cannot discover. The matter
has come to such a painful crisis, that those who, in compliance with my
wishes, had, in the belief that they were consulting their own
interests, chosen him for their bishop, are now bringing charges against
him before me. When the most serious of these, namely, charges of gross
immorality, which were brought forward not by those whose bishop he was,
but by certain other individuals, were found to be utterly unsupported
by evidence, and he seemed to us fully acquitted of the crimes laid most
ungenerously to his charge, he was on this account regarded, both by
ourselves and by others, with such sympathy that <span id="page_561">p.
561</span> <span id="vii.1.CCIX-Page_561"></span>the things complained
of by the people of Fussala and the surrounding district,—such as
intolerable tyranny and spoliation, and extortion, and oppression of
various kinds,—by no means seemed so grievous that for one, or for all
of them taken together, we should deem it necessary to deprive him of
the office of bishop; it seemed to us enough to insist that he should
restore what might be proved to have been taken away unjustly.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p10"></span>5. In fine, we so mixed clemency with
severity in our sentence, that while reserving to him his office of
bishop, we did not leave altogether unpunished offences which behoved
neither to be repeated again by himself, nor held forth to the imitation
of others. We therefore, in correcting him, reserved to the young man
the rank of his office unimpaired, but at the same time, as a
punishment, we took away his power, appointing that he should not any
longer rule over those with whom he had dealt in such a manner that with
just resentment they could not submit to his authority, and might
perhaps manifest their impatient indignation by breaking forth into some
deeds of violence fraught with danger both to themselves and to him.
That this was the state of feeling evidently appeared when the bishops
dealt with them concerning Antonius, although at present that
conspicuous man Celer, of whose powerful interference against him he
complained, possesses no power, either in Africa or elsewhere.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p11"></span>6. But why should I detain you with
further particulars? I beseech you to assist us in this laborious
matter, blessed lord and holy father, venerated for your piety, and
revered with due affection; and command all the documents which have
been forwarded to be read aloud to you. Observe in what manner Antonius
discharged his duties as bishop; how, when debarred from communion until
full restitution should be made to the men of Fussala, he submitted to
our sentence, and has now set apart a sum out of which to pay what may
after inquiry be deemed just for compensation, in order that the
privilege of communion might be restored to him; with what crafty
reasoning he prevailed on our aged primate, a most venerable man, to
believe all his statements, and to recommend him as altogether blameless
to the venerable Pope Boniface. But why should I rehearse all the rest,
seeing that the venerable old man, aforesaid must have reported the
entire matter to your Holiness?

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p12"></span>7. In the numerous minutes of procedure
in which our judgment regarding him is recorded, I should have feared
that we might appear to you to have passed a sentence less severe than
we ought to have done, did I not know that you are so prone to mercy
that you will deem it your duty to spare not us only, because we spared
him, but also the man himself. But what we did, whether in kindness or
laxity, he attempts to turn to account, and use as a legal objection to
our sentence. He boldly protests: “Either I ought to sit in my own
episcopal chair, or ought not to be a bishop at all,” as if he were now
sitting in any seat but his own. For, on this very account, those places
were set apart and assigned to him in which he had previously been
bishop, that he might not be said to be unlawfully translated to another
see, contrary to the statutes of the Fathers; <span
id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) or is it to be maintained that one
ought to be so rigid an advocate, either for severity or for lenity, as
to insist, either that no punishment be inflicted on those who seem not
to deserve deposition from the office of bishop, or that the sentence of
deposition be pronounced on all who seem to deserve any punishment?

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p14"></span>8. There are cases on record, in which
the Apostolic See, either pronouncing judgment or confirming the
judgment of others, sanctioned decisions by which persons, for certain
offences, were neither deposed from their episcopal office nor left
altogether unpunished. I shall not bring forward those which occurred at
a period very remote from our own time; I shall mention recent
instances. Let Priscus, a bishop of the province of Cæsarea, protest
boldly: “Either the office of primate should be open to me, as to other
bishops, or I ought not to remain a bishop.” Let Victor, another bishop
of the same province, with whom, when involved in the same sentence as
Priscus, no bishop beyond his own diocese holds communion, let him, I
say, protest with similar confidence: “Either I ought to have communion
everywhere, or I ought not to have it in my own district.” Let
Laurentius, a third bishop of the same province, speak, and in the
precise words of this man he may exclaim: “Either I ought to sit in the
chair to which I have been ordained, or I ought not to be a bishop.” But
who can find fault with these judgments, except one who does not
consider that, neither on the one hand ought all offences to be left
unpunished, nor on the other ought all to be punished in one way.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p15"></span>9. Since, then, the most blessed Pope
Boniface, speaking of Bishop Antonius, has in his epistle, with the
vigilant caution becoming a pastor, inserted in his judgment the
additional clause, “if he has faithfully narrated the facts of the case
to us,” receive now the facts of the case, which in his statement to you
he passed over in silence, and also the transactions which took place
after the letter of that man of blessed memory had been read in Africa,
and in the mercy of Christ extend your aid to men implor<span
id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span id="vii.1.CCIX-Page_562"></span>ing it
more earnestly than he does from whose turbulence they desire to be
freed. For either from himself, or at least from very frequent rumors,
threats are held out that the courts of justiciary, and the public
authorities, and the violence of the military, are to carry into force
the decision of the Apostolic See; the effect of which is that these
unhappy men, being now Catholic Christians, dread greater evils from a
Catholic bishop than those which, when they were heretics, they dreaded
from the laws of Catholic emperors. Do not permit these things to be
done, I implore you, by the blood of Christ, by the memory of the
Apostle Peter, who has warned those placed over Chistian people against
violently “lording it over their brethren.” <span
id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912) I commend to the gracious love of
your Holiness the Catholics of Fussala, my children in Christ, and also
Bishop Antonius, my son in Christ, for I love both, and I commend both
to you. I do not blame the people of Fussala for bringing to your ears
their just complaint against me for imposing on them a man whom I had
not proved, and who was in age at least not yet established, by whom
they have been so afflicted; nor do I wish any wrong done to Antonius,
whose evil covetousness I oppose with a determination proportioned to my
sincere affection for him. Let your compassion be extended to both,—to
them, so that they may not suffer evil; to him, so that he may not do
evil: to them, so that they may not hate the Catholic Church, if they
find no aid in defence against a Catholic bishop extended to them by
Catholic bishops, and especially by the Apostolic See itself; to him, on
the other hand, so that he may not involve himself in such grievous
wickedness as to alienate from Christ those whom against their will he
endeavours to make his own.

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p17"></span>10. As for myself, I must acknowledge
to your Holiness, that in the danger which threatens both, I am so
racked with anxiety and grief that I think of retiring from the
responsibilities of the episcopal office, and abandoning myself to
demonstrations of sorrow corresponding to the greatness of my error, if
I shall see (through the conduct of him in favour of whose election to
the bishopric I imprudently gave my vote) the Church of God laid waste,
and (which may God forbid) even perish, involving in its destruction the
man by whom it was laid waste. Recollecting what the apostle says: “If
we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.” <span
id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913) I will judge myself, that He may
spare me who is hereafter to judge the quick and the dead. If, however,
you succeed in restoring the members of Christ in that district from
their deadly fear and grief, and in comforting my old age by the
administration of justice tempered with mercy, He who brings deliverance
to us through you in this tribulation, and who has established you in
the seat which you occupy, shall recompense unto you good for good, both
in this life and in that which is to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[560:2910](1010457.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p4"></span> The successor of Boniface as Bishop of
Rome. See note to Letter CXCII. For a summary of the arguments which may
be used on both sides in regard to the genuineness of this letter, which
is found in only one <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p4.1"></span>Ms.</span>, see Dupin’s remarks upon it in
his *Ecclesiastical History*, 5th century.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[560:2911](1010457.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p7"></span> Castellum.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[561:2912](1010457.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p13"></span> Translations from one see to another,
now permitted, had been forbidden by the Councils of Nice, Sardis, and
Antioch.

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[562:2913](1010457.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p16"></span> [1 Pet.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[562:2914](1010457.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCIX-p18"></span> [1 Cor.
11.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.CCIX-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCX](1010458)
