[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010154)  [Next](1010156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IX.XII"></span><span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="vi.IX.XII-Page_139"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IX.XII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—How He Mourned His Dead
Mother.</span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p2"></span>29. I closed her eyes; and there flowed a
great sadness into my heart, and it was passing into tears, when mine
eyes at the same time, by the violent control of my mind, sucked back
the fountain dry, and woe was me in such a struggle! But, as soon as she
breathed her last the boy Adeodatus burst out into wailing, but, being
checked by us all, he became quiet. In like manner also my own childish
feeling, which was, through the youthful voice of my heart, finding
escape in tears, was restrained and silenced. For we did not consider it
fitting to celebrate that funeral with tearful plaints and
groanings; <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) for on such wise are
they who die unhappy, or are altogether dead, wont to be mourned. But
she neither died unhappy, nor did she altogether die. For of this were
we assured by the witness of her good conversation, her “faith
unfeigned,” <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) and other sufficient
grounds.

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p5"></span>3o. What, then, was that which did
grievously pain me within, but the newly-made wound, from having that
most sweet and dear habit of living together suddenly broken off? I was
full of joy indeed in her testimony, when, in that her last illness,
flattering my dutifulness, she called me “kind,” and recalled, with
great affection of love, that she had never heard any harsh or
reproachful sound come out of my mouth against her. But yet, O my God,
who madest us, how can the honour which I paid to her be compared with
her slavery for me? As, then, I was left destitute of so great comfort
in her, my soul was stricken, and that life torn apart as it were,
which, of hers and mine together, had been made but one.

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p6"></span>31. The boy then being restrained from
weeping, Evodius took up the Psalter, and began to sing—the whole house
responding—the Psalm, “I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto Thee, O
Lord.” <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) But when they heard what
we were doing, many brethren and religious women came together; and
whilst they whose office it was were, according to custom, making ready
for the funeral, I, in a part of the house where I conveniently could,
together with those who thought that I ought not to be left alone,
discoursed on what was suited to the occasion; and by this alleviation
of truth mitigated the anguish known unto Thee—they being unconscious of
it, listened intently, and thought me to be devoid of any sense of
sorrow. But in Thine ears, where none of them heard, did I blame the
softness of my feelings, and restrained the flow of my grief, which
yielded a little unto me; but the paroxysm returned again, though not so
as to burst forth into tears, nor to a change of countenance, though I
knew what I repressed in my heart. And as I was exceedingly annoyed that
these human things had such power over me, <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) which in the due order and destiny of
our natural condition must of necessity come to pass, with a new sorrow
I sorrowed for my sorrow, and was wasted by a twofold sadness.

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p9"></span>32. So, when the body was carried forth,
we both went and returned without tears. For neither in those prayers
which we poured forth unto Thee when the sacrifice of our
redemption <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) was offered up unto
Thee for her,—the dead body being now placed by the side of the grave,
as the custom there is, prior to its being laid therein,—neither in
their prayers did I shed tears; yet was I most grievously sad in secret
all the day, and with a troubled mind entreated Thee, as I was able, to
heal my sorrow, but Thou didst not; fixing, I believe, in my memory by
this one lesson the power of the bonds of all habit, even upon a mind
which now feeds not upon a fallacious word. It appeared to me also a
good thing to go and bathe, I having heard that the bath \[*balneum*\]
took its name from the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.IX.XII-p10.1"></span> βαλανεῖον</span>, because it drives trouble
from the mind. Lo, this also I confess unto Thy mercy, “Father of the
fatherless,” <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) that I bathed, and
felt the same as before I had done so. For the bitterness of my grief
exuded not from my heart. Then I slept, and on awaking found my grief
not a little mitigated; and as I lay alone upon my bed, there came <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="vi.IX.XII-Page_140"></span>into my
mind those true verses of Thy Ambrose, for Thou art—

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p12"></span>“Deus creator omnium,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p13"></span>Polique rector, vestiens

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p14"></span>Diem decora lumine,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p15"></span>Noctem sopora gratia;

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p16"></span>Artus solutos ut quies

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p17"></span>Reddat laboris usui,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p18"></span>Mentesque fessas allevet,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p19"></span>Luctusque solvat anxios.” <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788)

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p30"></span>33. And then little by little did I
bring back my former thoughts of Thine handmaid, her devout conversation
towards Thee, her holy tenderness and attentiveness towards us, which
was suddenly taken away from me; and it was pleasant to me to weep in
Thy sight, for her and for me, concerning her and concerning myself. And
I set free the tears which before I repressed, that they might flow at
their will, spreading them beneath my heart; and it rested in them, for
Thy ears were nigh me,—not those of man, who would have put a scornful
interpretation on my weeping. But now in writing I confess it unto Thee,
O Lord! Read it who will, and interpret how he will; and if he finds me
to have sinned in weeping for my mother during so small a part of an
hour,—that mother who was for a while dead to mine eyes, who had for
many years wept for me, that I might live in Thine eyes,—let him not
laugh at me, but rather, if he be a man of a noble charity, let him weep
for my sins against Thee, the Father of all the brethren of Thy Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_782"></span>[139:783](1010155.htm#fr_782) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p3"></span> For this would be to sorrow as those
that have no hope. Chrysostom accordingly frequently rebukes the Roman
custom of hiring persons to wail for the dead (see *e.g. Hom.* xxxii.
*in Matt.*); and Augustin in Serm. 2 of his *De Consol. Mor.* makes the
same objection, and also reproves those Christians who imitated the
Romans in wearing black as the sign of mourning. But still (as in his
own case on the death of his mother) he admits that there is a grief at
the departure of friends that is both natural and seemly. In a beautiful
passage in his *De Civ. Dei* (xix. 8), he says: “That he who will have
none of this sadness must, if possible, have no friendly
intercourse.…Let him burst with ruthless insensibility the bonds of
every human relationship;” and he continues: “Though the cure is
effected all the more easily and rapidly the better condition the soul
is in, we must not on this account suppose that there is nothing at all
to heal.” See p. 140, note 2, below.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[139:784](1010155.htm#fr_783) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p4"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="vi.IX.XII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[139:785](1010155.htm#fr_784) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p7"></span> [Ps.
101.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)<span
id="vi.IX.XII-p7.1"></span>. “I suppose they continued to the end of
[Psalm cii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#000)<span
id="vi.IX.XII-p7.2"></span> This was the primitive fashion; Nazianzen
says that his speechless sister Gorgonia’s lips muttered the fourth
Psalm: ‘I will lie down in peace and sleep.’ As St. Austen lay a dying,
the company prayed (Possid.). That they had prayers between the
departure and burial, see Tertull. *De* *Anima*, c. 51. They used to
sing both at the departure and burial. Nazianzen, *Orat.* 10, says, the
dead Cæsarius was carried from hymns to hymns. The priests were called
to sing (Chrysost. *Hom. 70, ad Antioch*). They sang the [Ps.
116](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#000)<span id="vi.IX.XII-p7.3"></span>
usually (see Chrysost. *Hom*. 4, *in* c. 2, *ad Hebræos*).”—W. W. See
also note 13, p. 141, below.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[139:786](1010155.htm#fr_785) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p7.4"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p8"></span> In addition to the remarks quoted in
note 1, see Augustin’s recognition of the naturalness and necessity of
exercising human affections, such as sorrow, in his *De Civ. Dei*, xiv.
9.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[139:787](1010155.htm#fr_786) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p10"></span> “Here my Popish translator says, that
the sacrifice of the mass was offered for the dead. That the ancients
had communion with their burials, I confess. But for what? (1) To
testify their dying in the communion of the Church. (2) To give thanks
for their departure. (3) To Pray God to give them place in His Paradise,
(4) and a part in the first resurrection; but not as a propitiatory
sacrifice to deliver them out of purgatory, which the mass is now only
meant for.”—W. W. See also note 13, p. 141.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[139:788](1010155.htm#fr_787) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p11"></span> [Ps.
68.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)<span
id="vi.IX.XII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[140:789](1010155.htm#fr_788) <span
id="vi.IX.XII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p20"></span> Rendered as follows in a translation of
the first ten books of the *Confessions*, described on the title-page as
“Printed by J. C., for John Crook, and are to be sold at the sign of the
‘Ship,’ in St. Paul’s Churchyard. 1660”:—

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p21"></span>“O God, the world’s great Architect,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p22"></span>Who dost heaven’s rowling orbs direct;

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p23"></span>Cloathing the day with beauteous light,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p24"></span>And with sweet slumbers silent night;

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p25"></span>When wearied limbs new vigour gain

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p26"></span>From rest, new labours to sustain,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p27"></span>When hearts oppressed do meet relief,

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p28"></span>And anxious minds forget their grief.”

<span id="vi.IX.XII-p29"></span>See x. sec. 52, below, where this hymn
is referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](1010156)
