[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010423)  [Next](1010425.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p3.1"></span>To Marcellinus,</span>* <span
id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499.md) <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p4.1"></span>*My Noble Lord, Justly Distinguished, My
Son Very Much Beloved, Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p5"></span>1. I have learned that the
Circumcelliones and clergy of the Donatist faction belonging to the
district of Hippo, whom the guardians of public order had brought to
trial for their deeds, have been examined by your Excellency, and that
the most of them have confessed their share in the violent death which
the presbyter Restitutus suffered at their hands, and in the beating of
Innocentius, another Catholic presbyter, as well as in digging out the
eye and cutting off the finger of the said Innocentius. This news has
plunged me into the deepest anxiety, lest perchance your Excellency
should judge them worthy, according to the laws, of punishment not less
severe than suffering in their own persons the same injuries as they
have inflicted on others. Wherefore I write this letter to implore you
by your faith in Christ, and by the mercy of Christ the Lord Himself, by
no means to do this or permit it to be done. For although we might
silently pass over the execution of criminals who may be regarded as
brought up for trial not upon an accusation of ours, but by an
indictment presented by those to whose vigilance the preservation of the
public peace is entrusted, we do not wish to have the sufferings of the
servants of God avenged by the infliction of precisely similar injuries
in the way of retaliation. Not, of course, that we object to the removal
from these wicked men of the liberty to perpetrate further crimes; but
our desire is rather that justice be satisfied without the taking of
their lives or the maiming of their bodies in any part, and that, by
such coercive measures as may be in accordance with the laws, they be
turned from their insane frenzy to the quietness of men in their sound
judgment, or compelled to give up mischievous violence and betake
themselves to some useful labour. This is indeed called a penal
sentence; but who does not see that when a restraint is put upon the
boldness of savage violence, and the remedies fitted to produce
repentance are not withdrawn, this discipline should be called a benefit
rather than vindictive punishment?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p6"></span>2. Fulfil, Christian judge, the duty
of an affectionate father; let your indignation against their crimes be
tempered by considerations of humanity; be not provoked by the atrocity
of their sinful deeds to gratify the passion of revenge, but rather be
moved by the wounds which these deeds have inflicted on their own souls
to exercise a desire to heal them. Do not lose now that fatherly care
which you maintained when prosecuting the examination, in doing which
you extracted the confession of such horrid crimes, <span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-Page_471"></span>not
by stretching them on the rack, not by furrowing their flesh with iron
claws, <span id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500.md) not by scorching them
with flames, but by beating them with rods, a mode of correction used by
schoolmasters, <span id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501.md) and by parents
themselves in chastising children, and often also by bishops in the
sentences awarded by them. Do not, therefore, now punish with extreme
severity the crimes which you searched out with lenity. The necessity
for harshness is greater in the investigation than in the infliction of
punishment; for even the gentlest men use diligence and stringency in
searching out a hidden crime, that they may find to whom they may show
mercy. Wherefore it is generally necessary to use more rigour in making
inquisition, so that when the crime has been brought to light, there may
be scope for displaying clemency. For all good works love to be set in
the light, not in order to obtain glory from men, but, as the Lord
saith, “that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father who is
in heaven.” <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502.md) And, for the same
reason, the apostle was not satisfied with merely exhorting us to
practise moderation, but also commands us to make it known: “Let your
moderation,” he says, “be known unto all men;” <span
id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503.md) and in another place, “Showing all
meekness unto all men.” <span id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504.md)
Hence, also, that most signal forbearance of the holy David, when he
mercifully spared his enemy when delivered into his hand, <span
id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505.md) would not have been so conspicuous
had not his power to act otherwise been manifest. Therefore let not the
power of executing vengeance inspire you with harshness, seeing that the
necessity of examining the criminals did not make you lay aside your
clemency. Do not call for the executioner now when the crime has been
found out, after having forborne from calling in the tormentor when you
were finding it out.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p13"></span>3. In fine, you have been sent
hither for the benefit of the Church. I solemnly declare that what I
recommend is expedient in the interests of the Catholic Church, or, that
I may not seem to pass beyond the boundaries of my own charge, I protest
that it is for the good of the Church belonging to the diocese of Hippo.
If you do not hearken to me asking this favour as a friend, hearken to
me offering this counsel as a bishop; although, indeed, it would not be
presumption for me to say—since I am addressing a Christian, and
especially in such a case as this—that it becomes you to hearken to me
as a bishop commanding with authority, my noble and justly distinguished
lord and much-loved son. I am aware that the principal charge of law
cases connected with the affairs of the Church has been devolved on your
Excellency, but as I believe that this particular case belongs to the
very illustrious and honourable proconsul, I have written a letter <span
id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506.md) to him also, which I beg you not to
refuse to give to him, or, if necessary, recommend to his attention; and
I entreat you both not to resent our intercession, or counsel, or
anxiety, as officious. And let not the sufferings of Catholic servants
of God, which ought to be useful in the spiritual upbuilding of the
weak, be sullied by the retaliation of injuries on those who did them
wrong, but rather, tempering the rigour of justice, let it be your care
as sons of the Church to commend both your own faith and your Mother’s
clemency.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p15"></span>May almighty God enrich your
Excellency with all good things, my noble and justly distinguished lord
and dearly beloved son!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[470:2500](1010424.htm#fr_2499.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p4"></span> Marcellinus was commissioned by the
Emperor Honorius to convene a conference of Catholic and Donatist
bishops, with a view to the final peaceful settlement of their
differences. He accordingly summoned both parties to a conference, held
in the summer of 411, in which he pronounced the Catholic party to have
completely gained their cause in argument. He proceeded to carry out
with considerable rigour the laws passed for the repression of the
Donatist schism, and thus becoming obnoxious to that faction, fell at
length a victim to their revenge when a turn of fortune favoured their
plots against his life. The honour of a place among the martyrs of the
early Church has been assigned to him. His character may be learned from
Letters CXXXVI., CXXXVIII., CXXXIX., and CXLIII., and particularly from
the beautiful tribute to his worth given in Letter CLI., in which the
circumstances of his death are recorded.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[471:2501](1010424.htm#fr_2500.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p7"></span> Compare “ungulis sulcantibus
latera.” *Codex Justin,*, ix. 18. 7.

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[471:2502](1010424.htm#fr_2501.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p8"></span> *Magistris artium liberalium;*
doubtless the name of Master of Arts was originally connected with the
office and work of teaching, instead of being a mere honorary title.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[471:2503](1010424.htm#fr_2502.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p9"></span> [Matt.
5.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[471:2504](1010424.htm#fr_2503.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p10"></span> [Phil.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[471:2505](1010424.htm#fr_2504.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p11"></span> [Titus
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[471:2506](1010424.htm#fr_2505.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p12"></span> [1 Sam.
24.7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[471:2507](1010424.htm#fr_2506.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIII-p14"></span> This letter, No. CXXXIV., is
addressed to Apringius, and in somewhat similar terms, but at greater
length, urges the same request.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXV](1010425.md)
