[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010014)  [Next](1010016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span><span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_33"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>The Opinion of St. Augustin</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>Concerning His

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>Confessions, as Embodied in His *Retractations,*
II. 6</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>1. “<span class="c9"><span
id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>The</span> Thirteen Books of my *Confessions*
whether they refer to my evil or good, praise the just and good God, and
stimulate the heart and mind of man to approach unto Him. And, as far as
pertaineth unto me, they wrought this in me when they were written, and
this they work when they are read. What some think of them they may have
seen, but that they have given much pleasure, and do give pleasure, to
many brethren I know. From the First to the Tenth they have been written
of myself; in the remaining three, of the Sacred Scriptures, from the
text, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,’ even to
the rest of the Sabbath ([Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p5.2"></span>, ii.
2).”

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>2. “In the Fourth Book, when I acknowledged
the distress of my mind at the death of a friend, saying, that our soul,
though one, had been in some manner made out of two; and therefore, I
say, perchance was I afraid to die lest he should die wholly whom I had
so much loved (chap. vi.);—this seems to me as if it were a light
declamation rather than a grave confession, although this folly may in
some sort be tempered by that ‘perchance’ which follows. And in the
Thirteenth Book (chap. xxxii.) what I said, viz.: that the ‘firmament
was made between the spiritual upper waters, and the corporeal lower
waters,’ was said without due consideration; but the thing is very
obscure.”

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>\[In *Ep. ad Darium, Ep.* ccxxxi. c. 6,
written <span class="c9"><span id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 429,
Augustin says: “Accept, my son, the books containing my *Confessions*
which you desired to have. In these behold me that you may not praise me
more than I deserve; there believe what is said of me, not by others,
but by myself; there mark me, and see what I have been in myself, by
myself; and if anything in me please you, join me in praising Him to
whom, and not to myself, I desired praise to be given. For ‘He hath made
us, and not we ourselves’ ([Ps. l.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p7.2"></span>).
Indeed, we had destroyed ourselves, but He who made us has made us anew
(*qui fecit, refecit*). When, however, you find me in these books, pray
for me that I may not fail, but be perfected (*ne deficiam, sed
perficiar*). Pray, my son, pray. I feel what I say; I know what I
ask.”—P. S.\]

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>\[*De Dono Perseverantiæ*, c. 20 (53): “Which
of my smaller works could be more widely known or give greater pleasure
than my *Confessions*? And although I published them before the Pelagian
heresy had come into existence, certainly in them I said to my God, and
said it frequently, ‘Give what Thou commandest, and command what Thou
willest’ (Conf. x. 19, 31, 37). Which words of mine, Pelagius at Rome,
when they were mentioned in his presence by a certain brother and
fellow-bishop of mine, could not bear.…Moreover in those same books…I
showed that I was granted to the faithful and daily tears of my mother,
that I should not perish. There certainly I declared that God by His
grace converted the will of men to the true faith, not only when they
had been turned away from it, but even when they were opposed to it.”—P.
S.\]

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](1010016)
