[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010054)  [Next](1010056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.III.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.III.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.III.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—That the Judgment of God and Men
as to Human Acts of Violence, is Different.</span>

<span id="vi.III.IX-p2"></span>17. But amidst these offences of infamy
and violence, and so many iniquities, are the sins of men who are, on
the whole, making progress; which, by those who judge rightly, and after
the rule of perfection, are censured, yet commended withal, upon the
hope of bearing fruit, like as in the green blade of the growing corn.
And there are some which resemble offences of infamy or violence, and
yet are not sins, because they neither offend Thee, our Lord God, nor
social custom: when, for example, things suitable for the times are
provided for the use of life, and we are uncertain whether it be out of
a lust of having; or when acts are punished by constituted authority for
the sake of correction, and we are uncertain whether it be out of a lust
of hurting. Many a deed, then, which in the sight of men is disapproved,
is approved by Thy testimony; and many a one who is praised by men is,
Thou being witness, condemned; because frequently the view of the deed,
and the mind of the doer, and the hidden exigency of the period,
severally vary. But when Thou unexpectedly commandest an unusual and
unthought-of thing—yea, even if Thou hast formerly forbidden it, and
still for the time keepest secret the reason of Thy command, and it even
be contrary to the ordinance of some society of men, who doubts but it
is to be done, inasmuch as that society is righteous which serves
Thee? <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md) But blessed are they who
know Thy commands! For all things were done by them who served Thee
either to exhibit something necessary at the time, or to foreshow things
to come. <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[66:256](1010055.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="vi.III.IX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.IX-p3"></span> The Manichæans, like the deistical
writers of the last century, attacked the spoiling of the Egyptians, the
slaughter of the Canaanites, and such episodes. Referring to the former,
Augustin says (*Con. Faust*. xxii. 71), “Then, as for Faustus’ objection
to the spoiling of the Egyptians, he knows not what he says. In this
Moses not only did not sin, but it would have been sin not to do it. It
was by the command of God, who, from His knowledge both of the actions
and of the hearts of men, can decide upon what every one should be made
to suffer, and through whose agency. The people at that time were still
carnal, and engrossed with earthly affection; while the Egyptians were
in open rebellion against God, for they used the gold, God’s creature,
in the service of idols, to the dishonour of the Creator, and they had
grievously oppressed strangers by making them work without pay. Thus the
Egyptians deserved the punishment, and the Israelites were suitably
employed in inflicting it.” For an exhaustive vindication of the conduct
of the children of Israel as the agents of God in punishing the
Canaanites, see *Graves on the Pentateuch*, Part iii. lecture I. See
also *De Civ. Dei*, i. 26; and *Quæst. in Jos*. 8, 16, etc.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[66:257](1010055.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="vi.III.IX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.IX-p4"></span> See note on sec. 14, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010056.md)
