[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010116)  [Next](1010118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—He Compares the Doctrine of the
Platonists Concerning the</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p1.2"></span> Λόγος</span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p1.3"></span>With the Much More Excellent Doctrine of
Christianity.</span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p2"></span>13. And Thou, willing first to show me
how Thou “resistest the proud, but givest grace unto the humble” <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) and by how great art act of mercy Thou
hadst pointed out to men the path of humility, in that Thy “Word was
made flesh” and dwelt among men,—Thou procuredst for me, by the
instrumentality of one inflated with most monstrous pride, certain books
of the Platonists, <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) translated
from Greek into Latin. <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) And
therein I read, not indeed in the same words, but to the selfsame
effect, <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) enforced by many and
divers reasons, <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="vi.VII.IX-Page_108"></span>that, “In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by Him; and without Him was not
any thing made that was made.” That which was made by Him is “life; and
the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and
the darkness comprehendeth it not.” <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) And that the soul of man, though it
“bears witness of the light,” <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501)
yet itself “is not that light; <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502)
but the Word of God, being God, is that true light that lighteth every
man that cometh into the world.” <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503)
And that “He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the
world knew Him not.” <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) But that
“He came unto His own, and His own received Him not. <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) But as many as received Him, to them
gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
His name.” <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) This I did not read
there.

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p14"></span>14. In like manner, I read there that
God the Word was born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of
man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God. But that “the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us,” <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507)
I read not there. For I discovered in those books that it was in many
and divers ways said, that the Son was in the form of the Father, and
“thought it not robbery to be equal with God,” for that naturally He was
the same substance. But that He emptied Himself, “and took upon Him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found
in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him”
from the dead, “and given Him a name above every name; that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father;” <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) those books have not. For that before
all times, and above all times, Thy only-begotten Son remaineth
unchangeably co-eternal with Thee; and that of “His fulness” souls
receive, <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) that they may be
blessed; and that by participation of the wisdom remaining in them they
are renewed, that they may be wise, is there. But that “in due time
Christ died for the ungodly,” <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)
and that Thou sparedst not Thine only Son, but deliveredst Him up for us
all, <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) is not there. “Because Thou
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes;” <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) that they “that
labour and are heavy laden” might “come” unto Him and He might refresh
them, <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) because He is “meek and
lowly in heart.” <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) “The meek will
He guide in judgment; and the meek will He teach His way;” <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) looking upon our humility and our
distress, and forgiving all our sins. <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) But such as are puffed up with the
elation of would-be sublimer learning, do not hear Him saying, “Learn of
Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your
souls.” <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) “Because that, when they
knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; but
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.” <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518)

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p27"></span>15. And therefore also did I read there,
that they had changed the glory of Thy incorruptible nature into idols
and divers forms,—“into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things,” <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) namely, into that Egyptian food <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) for which Esau lost his
birthright; <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) for that Thy
first-born people worshipped the head of a four-footed beast instead of
Thee, turning back in heart towards Egypt, and prostrating Thy
image—their own soul—before the image “of <span id="page_109">p.
109</span> <span id="vi.VII.IX-Page_109"></span>an ox that eateth
grass.” <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) These things found I
there; but I fed not on them. For it pleased Thee, O Lord, to take away
the reproach of diminution from Jacob, that the elder should serve the
younger; <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) and Thou hast called
the Gentiles into Thine inheritance. And I had come unto Thee from among
the Gentiles, and I strained after that gold which Thou willedst Thy
people to take from Egypt, seeing that wheresoever it was it was
Thine. <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) And to the Athenians Thou
saidst by Thy apostle, that in Thee “we live, and move, and have our
being;” as one of their own poets has said. <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) And verily these books came from
thence. But I set not my mind on the idols of Egypt, whom they
ministered to with Thy gold, <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526)
“who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator.” <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_496"></span>[107:497](1010117.htm#fr_496) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p3"></span> [Jas.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p3.1"></span>,
and [1 Pet. 5.5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[107:498](1010117.htm#fr_497) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p4"></span> “This,”says Watts, “was likely to be the
book of Amelius the Platonist, who hath indeed this beginning of St.
John’s Gospel, calling the apostle a barbarian.” This Amelius was a
disciple of Plotinus, who was the first to develope and formulate the
Neo-Platonic doctrines, and of whom it is said that he would not have
his likeness taken, nor be reminded of his birthday, because it would
recall the existence of the body he so much despised. A popular account
of the theories of Plotinus, and their connection with the doctrines of
Plato and of Christianity respectively, will be found in Archer Butler’s
*Lectures on Ancient Philosophy*, vol. ii. pp. 348–358. For a more
systematic view of his writings, see Ueberweg’s *History of Philosophy*,
sec. 68. Augustin alludes again in his *De Vita Beata* (sec. 4) to the
influence the Platonic writings had on him at this time; and it is
interesting to note how in God’s providence they were drawing him to
seek a fuller knowledge of Him, just as in his nineteenth year (book
iii. sec. 7, above) the *Hortensius* of Cicero stimulated him to the
pursuit of wisdom. Thus in his experience was exemplified the truth
embodied in the saying of Clemens Alexandrinus,—“Philosophy led the
Greeks to Christ, as the law did the Jews.” Archbishop Trench, in his
*Hulsean Lectures* (lecs. 1 and 3, 1846, “Christ the Desire of all
Nations”), enters with interesting detail into this question, specially
as it relates to the heathen world. “None,” he says in lecture 3, “can
thoughtfully read the early history of the Church without marking how
hard the Jewish Christians found it to make their own the true idea of a
Son of God, as indeed is witnessed by the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews—how comparatively easy the Gentile converts; how the Hebrew
Christians were continually in danger of sinking down into Ebionite
heresies, making Christ but a man as other men, refusing to go on unto
perfection, or to realize the truth of His higher nature; while, on the
other hand, the genial promptness is as remarkable with which the
Gentile Church welcomed and embraced the offered truth, ‘God manifest in
the flesh.’ We feel that there must have been effectual preparations in
the latter, which wrought its greater readiness for receiving and
heartily embracing this truth when it arrived.” The passage from Amelius
the Platonist, referred to at the beginning of this note, is examined in
Burton’s *Bampton Lectures*, note 90. It has been adverted to by
Eusebius, Theodoret, and perhaps by Augustin in the *De Civ. Dei*, x.
29, quoted in note 2, sec. 25, below. See Kayes’ *Clement*, pp. 116–124.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[107:499](1010117.htm#fr_498) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p5"></span> See i. sec. 23, note, above, and also
his *Life*, in the last vol. of the Benedictine edition of his works,
for a very fair estimate of his knowledge of Greek.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[107:500](1010117.htm#fr_499) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p6"></span> The Neo-Platonic ideas as to the “Word”
or <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.VII.IX-p6.1"></span>Λόγος</span>,
which Augustin (1) contrasts during the remainder of this book with the
doctrine of the gospel, had its germ in the writings of Plato. The Greek
term expresses both *reason* and the *expression of reason* in speech;
and the Fathers frequently illustrate, by reference to this connection
between ideas and uttered words, the fact that the “Word” that was *with
God* had an incarnate existence in the world as the “Word” *made flesh*.
By the <span class="c75"><span id="vi.VII.IX-p6.2"></span>Logos</span>
of the Alexandrian school something very different was meant from the
Christian doctrine as to the incarnation, of which the above can only be
taken as a dim illustration. It has been questioned, indeed, whether the
philosophers, from Plotinus to the Gnostics of the time of St. John,
believed the *<span class="c75"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p6.3"></span>Logos</span>* and the supreme God to have in
any sense separate “personalities.” Dr. Burton, in his *Bampton
Lectures*, concludes that they did not (lect. vii. p. 215, and note 93;
compare Dorner, *Person of Christ*, i. 27, Clark); and quotes Origen
when he points out to Celsus, that “while the heathen use the reason of
God as another term for God Himself, the Christians use the term *<span
class="c75"><span id="vi.VII.IX-p6.4"></span>Logos</span>* for the Son
of God.” Another point of difference which appears in Augustin’s review
of Platonism above, is found in the Platonist’s discarding the idea of
the *<span class="c75"><span id="vi.VII.IX-p6.5"></span>Logos</span>*
becoming man. This the very genius of their philosophy forbade them to
hold, since they looked on matter as impure. (2) It has been charged
against Christianity by Gibbon and other sceptical writers, that it has
borrowed largely from the doctrines of Plato; and it has been said that
this doctrine of the *<span class="c75"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p6.6"></span>Logos</span>* was taken from them by Justin
Martyr. This charge, says Burton (*ibid*. p. 194), “has laid open in its
supporters more inconsistencies and more misstatements than any other
which ever has been advanced.” We have alluded in the note to book iii.
sec. 8, above, to Justin Martyr’s search after truth. He endeavoured to
find it successively in the Stoical, the Peripatetic, the Pythagorean,
and the Platonic schools; and he appears to have thought as highly of
Plato’s philosophy as did Augustin. He does not, however, fail to
criticise his doctrine when inconsistent with Christianity (see Burton,
*ibid*. notes 18 and 86). Justin Martyr has apparently been chosen for
attack as being the earliest of the post-apostolic Fathers. Burton,
however, shows that Ignatius, who knew St. John, and was bishop of
Antioch thirty years before his death, used precisely the same
expression as applied to Christ (*ibid*. p. 204). This would appear to
be a conclusive answer to this objection. (3) It may be well to note
here Burton’s general conclusions as to the employment of this term
*<span class="c75"><span id="vi.VII.IX-p6.7"></span>Logos</span>* in St.
John, since it occurs frequently in this part of the *Confessions*.
Every one must have observed St. John’s use of the term is peculiar as
compared with the other apostles, but it is not always borne in mind
that a generation probably elapsed between the date of his gospel and
that of the other apostolic writings. In this interval the Gnostic
heresy had made great advances; and it would appear that John, finding
this term *<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p6.8"></span>Logos</span>* prevalent when he wrote,
infused into it a nobler meaning, and pointed out to those being led
away by this heresy that there was indeed One who might be called “the
Word”—One who was not, indeed, God’s mind, or as the word that comes
from the mouth and passes away, but One who, while He had been “made
flesh” like unto us, was yet co-eternal with God. “You will perceive,”
says Archer Butler (*Ancient Philosophy*, vol. ii. p. 10), “how natural,
or rather how necessary, is such a process, when you remember that this
is exactly what every teacher must do who speaks of God to a heathen; he
adopts the term, but he refines and exalts its meaning. Nor, indeed, is
the procedure different in any use whatever of language in sacred senses
and for sacred purposes. It has been justly remarked, by (I think) Isaac
Casaubon, that the principle of all these adaptations is expressed in
the sentence of St. Paul, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.IX-p6.9"></span>Ὀν ἀγνοοῦντες εὐσεβεῖτε, τοῦτον ἐγὼ
καταγγέλλω ὑμῖν</span>.” On the charge against Christianity of having
borrowed from heathenism, reference may be made to Trench’s *Hulsean
Lectures*, lect. i. (1846); and for the sources of Gnosticism, and St.
John’s treatment of heresies as to the “Word,” lects. ii. and v. in
Mansel’s *Gnostic Heresies* will be consulted with profit.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[108:501](1010117.htm#fr_500) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p6.10"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p7"></span> [John
1.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[108:502](1010117.htm#fr_501) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p8"></span> [John
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#008)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[108:503](1010117.htm#fr_502) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p9"></span> See note, sec. 23, below.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[108:504](1010117.htm#fr_503) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p10"></span> [John
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[108:505](1010117.htm#fr_504) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p11"></span> [John
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[108:506](1010117.htm#fr_505) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p12"></span> [John
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[108:507](1010117.htm#fr_506) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p13"></span> [John
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[108:508](1010117.htm#fr_507) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p15"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[108:509](1010117.htm#fr_508) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p16"></span> [Phil.
2.6-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[108:510](1010117.htm#fr_509) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p17"></span> [John
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[108:511](1010117.htm#fr_510) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p18"></span> [Rom.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[108:512](1010117.htm#fr_511) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p19"></span> [Rom.
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[108:513](1010117.htm#fr_512) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p20"></span> [Matt.
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[108:514](1010117.htm#fr_513) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p21"></span> [Matt.
11.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[108:515](1010117.htm#fr_514) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p22"></span> [Matt.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[108:516](1010117.htm#fr_515) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p23"></span> [Ps.
25.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[108:517](1010117.htm#fr_516) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p24"></span> [Ps.
25.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[108:518](1010117.htm#fr_517) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p25"></span> [Matt.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[108:519](1010117.htm#fr_518) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p26"></span> [Rom.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[108:520](1010117.htm#fr_519) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p28"></span> [Rom.
1.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[108:521](1010117.htm#fr_520) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p29"></span> In the Benedictine edition we have
reference to Augustin’s *in Ps.* xlvi. 6, where he says: “We find the
lentile is an Egyptian food, for it abounds in Egypt, whence the
Alexandrian lentile is esteemed so as to be brought to our country, as
if it grew not here. Esau, by desiring Egyptian food, lost his
birthright; and so the Jewish people, of whom it is said they turned
back in heart to Egypt, in a manner craved for lentiles, and lost their
birthright.” See [Ex. 16.3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p29.1"></span>; [Num.
11.5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p29.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[108:522](1010117.htm#fr_521) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p30"></span> [Gen.
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[109:523](1010117.htm#fr_522) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p31"></span> [Ps.
106.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p31.1"></span>; [Ex.
32.1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p31.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[109:524](1010117.htm#fr_523) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p32"></span> [Rom.
9.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[109:525](1010117.htm#fr_524) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p33"></span> Similarly, as to all truth being God’s,
Justin Martyr says: “Whatever things were rightly said among all men are
the property of us Christians” (*Apol.* ii. 13). In this he parallels
what Augustin claims in another place (*De Doctr. Christ.* ii. 28): “Let
every good and true Christian understand that wherever truth may be
found, it belongs to his Master.” Origen has a similar allusion to that
of Augustin above (*Ep. ad Gregor*. vol. i. 30), but echoes the
experience of our erring nature, when he says that the gold of Egypt
more frequently becomes transformed into an idol, than into an ornament
for the tabernacle of God. Augustin gives us at length his views on this
matter in his *De Doctr. Christ.* ii. 60, 61: “If those who are called
philosophers, and especially the Platonists, have said aught that is
true and in harmony with our faith, we are not only not to shrink from
it, but to claim it for our own use from those who have unlawful
possession of it. For, as the Egyptians had not only the idols and heavy
burdens which the people of Israel hated and fled from, but also vessels
and ornaments of gold and silver, and garments, which the same people
when going out of Egypt appropriated to themselves, designing them for a
better use,—not doing this on their own authority, but by the command of
God, the Egyptians themselves, in their ignorance, providing them with
things which they themselves were not making a good use of ([Exod.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022), [Exod.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p33.1"></span>); in the same way all branches of heathen
learning have not only false and superstitious fancies and heavy burdens
of unnecessary toil, which every one of us, when going out under the
leadership of Christ from the fellowship of the heathen ought to abhor
and avoid, but they contain also liberal instruction which is better
adapted to the use of the truth, and some most excellent precepts of
morality; and some truths in regard even to the worship of the One God
are found among them. Now these are, so to speak, their gold and silver,
which they did not create themselves, but dug out of the mines of God’s
providence which are everywhere scattered abroad, and are perversely and
unlawfully prostituting to the worship of devils. These, therefore, the
Christian, when he separates himself in spirit from the miserable
fellowship of these men, ought to take away from them, and to devote to
their proper use in preaching the gospel. Their garments, also,—that is,
human institutions such as are adapted to that intercourse with men
which is indispensable in this life,—we must take and turn to a
Christian use. And what else have many good and faithful men among our
brethren done? Do we not see with what quantity of gold and silver, and
garments, Cyprian, that most persuasive teacher and most blessed martyr,
was loaded when he came out of Egypt? How much Lactantius brought with
him! And Victorinus, and Optatus, and Hilary, not to speak of living
men! How much Greeks out of number have borrowed! And, prior to all
these, that most faithful servant of God, Moses, had done the same
thing; for of him it is written that he was learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians ([Acts 7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p33.2"></span>).…For what was done at the time of the
exodus was no doubt a type prefiguring what happens now.”

<span id="fn_525"></span>[109:526](1010117.htm#fr_525) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p33.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p34"></span> [Acts
17.28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[109:527](1010117.htm#fr_526) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p35"></span> [Hos.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008)<span id="vi.VII.IX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[109:528](1010117.htm#fr_527) <span
id="vi.VII.IX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.IX-p36"></span> [Rom.
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="vi.VII.IX-p36.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010118)
