[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010409)  [Next](1010411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p1.1"></span>Letter CIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 409.)

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p3.1"></span>To Nectarius, My Noble Lord and Brother,
Justly Worthy of All Honour and Esteem, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p5"></span>1. I have read the letter which you
kindly sent in answer to mine. Your reply comes at a very long interval
after the time when I despatched my letter to you. For I had written an
answer to you <span id="fr_2371"></span>[2372](#fn_2371) when my holy
brother and colleague Possidius was still with us, before he had entered
on his voyage; but the letter which you have been pleased to entrust to
him for me I received on March 27th, about eight months after I had
written to you. The reason why my communication was so late in reaching
you, or yours so late in being sent to me, I do not know. Perhaps your
prudence has only now dictated the reply which your pride formerly
disdained. If this be the explanation, I wonder what has occasioned the
change. Have you perchance heard some report, which is as yet unknown to
us, that my brother Possidius had obtained authority for proceedings of
greater severity against your citizens, whom—you must excuse me for
saying this—he loves in a way more likely to promote their welfare than
you do yourself? For your letter shows that you apprehended something of
this kind when you charge me to set before my eyes “the appearance
presented by a town from which men doomed to torture are dragged forth,”
and to “think of the lamentations of mothers and wives, of sons and of
fathers; of the shame felt by those who may return, set at liberty
indeed, but having undergone the torture; and of the sorrow and groaning
which the sight of their wounds and scars must renew.” <span
id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372) Far be it from us to demand the
infliction, either by ourselves or by any one, of such hardships upon
any of our enemies! But, as I have said, if report has brought any such
measures of severity to your ears, give us a more clear and particular
account of the things reported, that we may know either what to do in
order to prevent these things from being done, or what answer we must
make in order to disabuse the minds of those who believe the rumour.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p8"></span>2. Examine more carefully my letter, to
which you have so reluctantly sent a reply, for I have in it made my
views sufficiently plain; but through not remembering, as I suppose,
what I had written, you have in your reply made reference to sentiments
widely differing from mine, and wholly unlike them. For, as if quoting
from memory what I had written, you have inserted in your letter what I
never said at all in mine. You say that the concluding sentence of my
letter was, “that neither capital punishment nor bloodshed is demanded
in order to compensate for the wrong done to the Church, but that the
offenders must be deprived of that which they most fear to lose;” and
then, in showing how great a calamity this imports, you add and connect
with my words that you “deliberately judge—though you may perhaps be
mistaken—that it is a more grievous thing to be deprived of one’s
possessions than to be deprived of life.” And in order to expound more
clearly the kind of possessions to which you refer, you go on to say
that. it must be known to me, “as an observation frequently recurring in
the whole range of literature, that death terminates the experience of
all evils, but that a life of indigence only confers upon us an eternity
of wretchedness.” From which you have drawn the conclusion that it is
“worse to live miserably than to put an end to our miseries by death.”

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p9"></span>3. Now I for my part do not recollect
reading anywhere—either in our \[Christian\] literature, to which I
confess that I was later of applying my mind than I could now wish that
I had been, or in your \[Pagan\] literature, which I studied from my
childhood—that “a life of indigence only confers upon us an eternity of
wretchedness.” For the poverty of the industrious is never in itself a
crime; nay, it is to some extent a means of withdrawing and restraining
men from sin. And therefore the circumstance that a man has lived in
poverty here is no ground for apprehending that this shall procure for
him after this brief life “an eternity of wretchedness;” and in this
life which we spend on earth it is utterly impossible for any misery to
be eternal, seeing that this life cannot be eternal, nay, is not of long
duration even in those who attain to the most advanced old age. In the
writings referred to, I for my part have read, not that in this life—as
you think, and as you allege that these writ<span id="page_428">p.
428</span> <span id="vii.1.CIV-Page_428"></span>ings frequently
affirm—there can be an eternity of wretchedness, but rather that this
life itself which we here enjoy is short. Some, indeed but not all, of
your authors have said that death is the end of all evils: that is
indeed the opinion of the Epicureans, and of such others as believe the
soul to be mortal. But those philosophers whom Cicero designates
“consulates” in a certain sense, because he attaches great weight to
their authority, are of opinion that when our last hour on earth comes
the soul is not annihilated, but removes from its tenement, and
continues in existence for a state of blessedness or of misery,
according to that which a man’s actions, whether good or bad, claim as
their due recompense. This agrees with the teaching of our sacred
writings, with which I wish that I were more fully conversant. Death is
therefore the end of all evils—but only in the case of those whose life
is, pure, religious, upright, and blameless; not in the case of those
who, inflamed with passionate desire for the trifles and vanities of
time, are proved to be miserable by the utter perversion of their
desires, though meanwhile they esteem themselves happy, and are after
death compelled not only to accept as their lot, but to realize in their
experience far greater miseries.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p10"></span>4. These sentiments, therefore, being
frequently expressed both in some of your own authors, whom you deem
worthy of greater esteem, and in all our Scriptures, be it yours, O
worthy lover of the country which is on earth your fatherland, to dread
on behalf of your countrymen a life of luxurious indulgence rather than
a life of indigence; or if you fear a life of indigence, warn them that
the poverty which is to be more studiously shunned is that of the man
who, though surrounded with abundance of worldly possessions, is,
through the insatiable eagerness wherewith he covets these, kept always
in a state of want, which, to use the words of your own authors, neither
plenty nor scarcity can relieve. In the letter, however, to which you
reply, I did not say that those of your citizens who are enemies to the
Church were to be corrected by being reduced to that extremity of
indigence in which the necessaries of life are wanting, and to which
succour is brought by that compassion of which you have thought it
incumbent on you to point out to me that it is professed by us in the
whole plan of those labours wherein we “support the poor, minister
healing to the diseased, and apply remedies to the bodies of those who
are in pain;” albeit, even such extremity of want as this would be more
profitable than abundance of all things, if abused to the gratification
of evil passions. But far be it from me to think that those about whom
we are treating should be reduced to such destitution by the measures of
coercion proposed.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p12"></span>5. Though you did not consider it worth
while to read my letter over when it was to be answered, perhaps you
have at least so far esteemed it as to preserve it, in order to its
being brought to you when you at any time might desire it and call for
it; if this be the case, look over it again, and mark carefully my
words: you will assuredly find in it one thing to which, in my opinion,
you must admit that you have made no reply. For in that letter occur the
words which I now quote: “We do not desire to gratify our anger by
vindictive retribution for the past, but we are concerned to make
provision in a truly merciful spirit for the future. Now wicked men have
something in respect to which they may be punished, and that by
Christians, in a merciful way, and so as to promote their own profit and
well-being. For they have these three things—life and health of the
body, the means of supporting that life, and the means and opportunities
of living a wicked life. Let the two former remain untouched in the
possession of those who repent of their crime; this we desire, and this
we spare no pains to secure. But as to the third, if it please God to
deal with it as a decaying or diseased part, which must be removed with
the pruning-knife, He will in such punishment prove the greatness of his
compassion.” <span id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) If you had read
over these words of mine again, when you were pleased to write your
reply, you would have looked upon it rather as an unkind insinuation
than as a necessary duty to address to me a petition not only for
deliverance from death, but also for exemption from torture, on behalf
of those regarding whom I said that we wished to leave unimpaired their
possession of bodily life and health. Neither was there any ground for
your apprehending our inflicting a life of indigence and of dependence
upon others for daily bread on those regarding whom I had said that we
desired to secure to them the second of the possessions named above,
viz. the means of supporting life. But as to their third possession,
viz. the means and opportunities of living wickedly, that is to
say—passing over other things—their silver with which they constructed
those images of their false gods, in whose protection or adoration or
unhallowed worship an attempt was made even to destroy the church of God
by fire, and the provision made for relieving the poverty of very pious
persons was given up to become the spoil of a wretched mob, and blood
was freely shed—why, I ask, does your patriotic heart dread the stroke
which shall cut this away, in order to prevent a fatal boldness from
being in everything fostered and confirmed by impunity? This I beg you
to discuss fully, and to show me in well-considered <span
id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="vii.1.CIV-Page_429"></span>arguments what wrong there is in this;
mark carefully what I say, lest under the form of a petition in regard
to what I am saying you appear to bring against us an indirect
accusation.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p14"></span>6. Let your countrymen be well reported
of for their virtuous manners, not for their superfluous wealth; we do
not wish them to be reduced through coercive measures on our account to
the plough of Quintius \[Cincinnatus\], or to the hearth of Fabricius.
Yet by such extreme poverty these statesmen of the Roman republic not
only did not incur the contempt of their fellow-citizens, but were on
that very account peculiarly dear to them, and esteemed the more
qualified to administer the resources of their country. We neither
desire nor endeavour to reduce the estates of your rich men, so that in
their possession should remain no more than ten pounds of silver, as was
the case with Ruffinus, who twice held the consulship, which amount the
stern censorship of that time laudably required to be still further
reduced as culpably large. So much are we influenced by the prevailing
sentiments of a degenerate age in dealing more tenderly with minds that
are very feeble, that to Christian clemency the measure which seemed
just to the censors of that time appears unduly severe; yet you see how
great is the difference between the two cases, the question being in the
one, whether the mere fact of possessing ten pounds of silver should be
dealt with as a punishable crime, and in the other, whether any one,
after committing other very great crimes, should be permitted to retain
the sum aforesaid in his possession; we only ask that what in those days
was itself a crime be in our days made the punishment of crime. There
is, however, one thing which can be done, and ought to be done, in order
that, on the one hand, severity may not be pushed even so far as I have
mentioned, and that, on the other, men may not, presuming on impunity,
run into excess of exultation and rioting, and thus furnish to other
unhappy men an example by following which they would become liable to
the severest and most unheard of punishments. Let this at least be
granted by you, that those who attempt with fire and sword to destroy
what are necessaries to us be made afraid of losing those luxuries of
which they have a pernicious abundance. Permit us also to confer upon
our enemies this benefit, that we prevent them, by their fears about
that which it would do them no harm to forfeit, from attempting to that
which would bring harm to themselves. For this is to be termed prudent
prevention, not punishment of crime; this is not to impose penalties,
but to protect men from becoming liable to penalties.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p15"></span>7. When any one uses measures involving
the infliction of some pain, in order to prevent an inconsiderate person
from incurring the most dreadful punishments by becoming accustomed to
crimes which yield him no advantage, he is like one who pulls a boy’s
hair in order to prevent him from provoking serpents by clapping his
hands at them; in both cases, while the acting of love is vexatious to
its object, no member of the body is injured, whereas safety and life
are endangered by that from which the person is deterred. We confer a
benefit upon others, not in every case in which we do what is requested,
but when we do that which is not hurtful to our petitioners. For in most
cases we serve others best by not giving, and would injure them by
giving, what they desire. Hence the proverb, “Do not put a sword in a
child’s hand.” “Nay,” says Cicero, “refuse it even to your only son. For
the more we love any one, the more are we bound to avoid entrusting to
him things which are the occasion of very dangerous faults.” He was
referring to riches, if I am not mistaken, when he made these
observations. Wherefore it is for the most part an advantage to
themselves when certain things are removed from persons in whose keeping
it is hazardous to leave them, lest they abuse them. When surgeons see
that a gangrene must be cut away or cauterized, they often, out of
compassion, turn a deaf ear to many cries. If we had been indulgently
forgiven by our parents and teachers in our tender years on every
occasion on which, being found in a fault, we begged to be let off,
which of us would not have grown up intolerable? which of us would have
learned any useful thing? Such punishments are administered by wise
care, not by wanton cruelty. Do not, I beseech you, in this matter think
only how to accomplish that which you are requested by your countrymen
to do, but carefully consider the matter in all its bearings. If you
overlook the past, which cannot now be undone, consider the future;
wisely give heed, not to the desire, but to the real interests of the
petitioners who have applied to you. We are convicted of unfaithfulness
towards those whom we profess to love, if our only care is lest, by
refusing to do what they ask of us, their love towards us be diminished.
And what becomes of that virtue which even your own literature commends,
in the ruler of his country who studies not so much the wishes as the
welfare of his people?

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p16"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p16.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p17"></span>8. You say “it is of no importance what
the quality of the fault may be in any case in which forgiveness is
craved.” In this you would state the truth if the matter in question
were the punishment and not the correction of men. Far be it from a
Christian heart to be carried away by the lust of revenge to inflict
punishment on any one. Far be it from a Christian, when forgiving any
one his <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="vii.1.CIV-Page_430"></span>fault, to do otherwise than either
anticipate or at least promptly answer the petition of him who asks
forgiveness; but let his purpose in doing this be, that he may overcome
the temptation to hate the man who has offended him, and to render evil
for evil, and to be inflamed with rage prompting him, if not to do an
injury, at least to desire to see the infliction of the penalties
appointed by law; let it not be that he may relieve himself from
considering the offender’s interest, exercising foresight on his behalf,
and restraining him from evil actions. For it is possible, on the one
hand, that, moved by more vehement hostility, one may neglect the
correction of a man whom he hates bitterly, and, on the other hand, that
by correction involving the infliction of some pain one may secure the
improvement of another whom he dearly loves.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p18"></span>9. I grant that, as you write,
“penitence procures forgiveness, and blots out the offence,” but it is
that penitence which is practised under the influence of the true
religion, and which has regard to the future judgment of God; not that
penitence which is for the time professed or pretended before men, not
to secure the cleansing of the soul for ever from the fault, but only to
deliver from present apprehension of pain the life which is so soon to
perish. This is the reason why in the case of some Christians who
confessed their fault, and asked forgiveness for having been involved in
the guilt of that crime,—either by their not protecting the church when
in danger of being burned, or by their appropriating a portion of the
property which the miscreants carried off,—we believed that the pain of
repentance had borne fruit, and considered it sufficient for their
correction, because in their hearts is found that faith by which they
could realize what they ought to fear from the judgment of God for their
sin. But how can there be any healing virtue in the repentance of those
who not only fail to acknowledge, but even persist in mocking and
blaspheming Him who is the fountain of forgiveness? At the same time,
towards these men we do not cherish any feeling of enmity in our hearts,
which are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him whose judgment both in
this life and in the life to come we dread, and in whose help we place
our hope. But we think that we are even taking measures for the benefit
of these men, if, seeing that they do not fear God, we inspire fear in
them by doing something whereby their folly is chastened, while their
real interests suffer no wrong. We thus prevent that God whom they
despise from being more grievously provoked by their greater crimes, to
which they would be emboldened by a disastrous assurance of impunity,
and we prevent their assurance of impunity from being set forth with
even more mischievous effect as an encouragement to others to imitate
their example. In fine, on behalf of those for whom you make
intercession to us, we intercede before God, beseeching Him to turn them
to Himself, and to teach them the exercise of genuine and salutary
repentance, purifying their hearts by faith.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p19"></span>10. Behold, then, how we love those men
against whom you suppose us to be full of anger,—loving them, you must
permit me to say, with a love more prudent and profitable than you
yourself cherish towards them; for we plead on their behalf that they
may escape much greater afflictions, and obtain much greater blessings.
If you also loved these men, not in the mere earthly affections of men,
but with that love which is the heavenly gift of God, and if you were
sincere in writing to me that you gave ear with pleasure to me when I
was recommending to you the worship and religion of the Supreme God, you
would not only wish for your countrymen the blessings which we seek on
their behalf, but you would yourself by your example lead them to their
possession. Thus would the whole business of your interceding with us be
concluded with abundant and most reasonable joy. Thus would your title
to that heavenly fatherland, in regard to which you say that you
welcomed my counsel that you should fix your eye upon it, be earned by a
true and pious exercise of your love for the country which gave you
birth, when seeking to make sure to your fellow-citizens, not the vain
dream of temporal happiness, nor a most perilous exemption from the due
punishment of their faults, but the gracious gift of eternal
blessedness.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p20"></span>11. You have here a frank avowal of the
thoughts and desires of my heart in this matter. As to what lies
concealed in the counsels of God, I confess it is unknown to me; I am
but a man; but whatever it be, His counsel stands most sure, and
incomparably excels in equity and in wisdom all that can be conceived by
the minds of men. With truth is it said in our books, “There are many
devices in a man’s heart; but the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand.” <span id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) Wherefore, as to what
time may bring forth, as to what may arise to simplify or complicate our
procedure, in short, as to what desire may suddenly be awakened by the
fear of losing or the hope of retaining present possessions; whether God
shall show Himself so displeased by what they have done that they shall
be punished with the more weighty and severe sentence of a disastrous
impunity, or shall appoint that they shall be compassionately corrected
in the manner which we propose, or shall avert whatever terrible doom
was being prepared for them, and convert it into <span id="page_431">p.
431</span> <span id="vii.1.CIV-Page_431"></span>joy by some more stern
but more salutary correction, leading to their turning unfeignedly to
seek mercy not from men but from Himself,—all this He knoweth; we know
not. Why, then, should your Excellency and I be spending toil in vain
over this matter before the time? Let us for a little while lay aside a
care the hour of which has not yet come, and, if you please, let us
occupy ourselves with that which is always pressing. For there is no
time at which it is not both suitable and necessary for us to consider
in what way we can please God; because for a man to attain completely in
this life to such perfection that no sin whatever shall remain in him is
either impossible or (if perchance any attain to it) extremely
difficult: wherefore without delay we ought to flee at once to the grace
of Him to whom we may address with perfect truth the words which were
addressed to some illustrious man by a poet, who declared that he had
borrowed the lines from a Cumæan oracle, or ode of prophetic
inspiration: “With thee as our leader, the obliteration of all remaining
traces of our sin shall deliver the earth from perpetual alarm.” <span
id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) For with Him as our leader, all
sins are blotted out and forgiven; and by His way we are brought to that
heavenly fatherland, the thought of which as a dwelling-place pleased
you greatly when I was to the utmost of my power commending it to your
affection and desire.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p23"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CIV-p23.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p24"></span>12. But since you said that all
religions by diverse roads and pathways aspire to that one
dwelling-place, I fear lest, perchance, while supposing that the way in
which you are now found tends thither, you should be somewhat reluctant
to embrace the way which alone leads men to heaven. Observing, however,
more carefully the word which you used, I think that it is not
presumptuous for me to expound its meaning somewhat differently; for you
did not say that all religions by diverse roads and pathways reach
heaven, or reveal, or find, or enter, or secure that blessed land, but
by saying in a phrase deliberately weighed and chosen that all religions
aspire to it, you have indicated, not the fruition, but the desire of
heaven as common to all religions. You have in these words neither shut
out the one religion which is true, nor admitted other religions which
are false; for certainly the way which brings us to the goal aspires
thitherward, but not every way which aspires thitherward brings us to
the place wherein all who are brought thither are unquestionably blest.
Now we all wish, that is, we aspire, to be blest; but we cannot all
achieve what we wish, that is, we do not all obtain what we aspire to.
That man, therefore, obtains heaven who walks in the way which not only
aspires thitherward, but actually brings him thither, separating himself
from others who keep to the ways which aspire heavenward without finally
reaching heaven. For there would be no wandering if men were content to
aspire to nothing, or if the truth which men aspire to were obtained.
If, however, in using the expression “diverse ways,” you meant me not to
understand contrary ways, but different ways, in the sense in which we
speak of diverse precepts, which all tend to build up a holy life,—one
enjoining chastity, another patience or faith or mercy, and the like,—in
roads and pathways which are only in this sense diverse, that country is
not only aspired unto but actually found. For in Holy Scripture we read
both of ways and of a way,—of ways, *e.g.* in the words, “I will teach
transgressors Thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto Thee;” <span
id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376) of a way, *e.g.* in the prayer,
“Teach me Thy way, O Lord; I will walk in Thy truth.” <span
id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377) Those ways and this way are not
different; but in one way are comprehended all those of which in another
place the Holy Scripture saith, “All the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth.” <span id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378) The careful study of
these ways furnishes theme for a long discourse, and for most delightful
meditation; but this I shall defer to another time if it be required.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p28"></span>13. In the meantime, however,—and this,
I think, may suffice in the present reply to your Excellency,—seeing
that Christ has said, “I am the way,” <span
id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379) it is in Him that mercy and truth
are to be sought: if we seek these in any other way, we must go astray,
following a path which aspires to the true goal, but does not lead men
thither. For example, if we resolved to follow the way indicated in the
maxim which you mentioned, “All sins are alike,” <span
id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380) would it not lead us into hopeless
exile from that fatherland of truth and blessedness? For could anything
more absurd and senseless be said, than that the man who has laughed too
rudely, and the man who has furiously set his city on fire, should be
judged as having committed equal crimes? This opinion, which is not one
of many diverse ways leading to the heavenly dwelling-place, but a
perverse way leading inevitably to most fatal error, you have judged it
necessary to quote from certain philosophers, not because you concurred
in the sentiment, but because it might help your plea for your
fellow-citizens—that we might forgive those whose rage set our church in
flames on the same terms as we would forgive those who may have assailed
us with some insolent reproach.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p31"></span>14. But reconsider with me the reasoning
by which you supported your position. You say, <span id="page_432">p.
432</span> <span id="vii.1.CIV-Page_432"></span>“If, as is the opinion
of some philosophers, all faults are alike, pardon ought to be bestowed
upon all without distinction.” Thereafter, labouring apparently to prove
that all faults are alike, you go on to say, “One of our citizens may
have spoken somewhat rudely: this was a fault; another may have
perpetrated an insult or an injury: this was equally a fault.” This is
not teaching truth, but advancing, without any evidence in its support,
a perversion of truth. For to your statement, “this was equally a
fault,” we at once give direct contradiction. You demand, perhaps,
proof; but I reply, What proof have you given of your statement? Are we
to hear as evidence your next sentence, “Another may have violently
taken away what was not his own: this is reckoned a misdemeanour”? Here
you own yourself to be ashamed of the maxim which you quoted; you had
not the assurance to say that this was equally a fault, but you say “it
is reckoned a misdemeanour.” But the question here is not whether this
also is reckoned a misdemeanour, but whether this offence and the others
which you mentioned are faults equal in demerit, unless, of course, they
are to be pronounced equal because they are both offences; in which case
the mouse and the elephant must be pronounced equal because they are
both animals, and the fly and the eagle because they both have wings.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p32"></span>15. You go still further, and make this
proposition: “Another may have attacked buildings devoted to secular or
to sacred purposes: he ought not for this crime to be placed beyond the
reach of pardon.” In this sentence you have indeed come to the most
flagrant crime of your fellow-citizens, in speaking of injury done to
sacred buildings; but even you have not affirmed that this is a crime
equal only to the utterance of an insolent word. You have contented
yourself with asking, on behalf of those who were guilty of this, that
forgiveness which is rightly asked from Christians on the ground of
their overflowing compassion, not on the ground of an alleged equality
of all offences. I have already quoted a sentence of Scripture, “All the
ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.” They shall therefore find mercy
if they do not hate truth. This mercy is granted, not as if it were due
on the ground of the faults of all being only equal to the fault of
those who have uttered rude words, but because the law of Christ claims
pardon for those who are penitent, however inhuman and impious their
crime may have been. I beg you, esteemed sir, not to propound these
paradoxes of the Stoics as rules of conduct for your son Paradoxus, whom
we wish to see grow up in piety and in prosperity, to your satisfaction.
For what could be worse for himself, yea, what more dangerous for
yourself, than that your ingenuous boy should imbibe an error which
would make the guilt, I shall not say of parricide, but of insolence to
his father, equal only to that of some rude word inconsiderately spoken
to a stranger?

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p33"></span>16. You are wise, therefore, to insist,
when pleading with us for your countrymen on the compassion of
Christians, not on the stern doctrines of the Stoical philosophy, which
in no wise help, but much rather hinder, the cause which you have
undertaken to support. For a merciful disposition, which we must have if
it be possible for us to be moved either by your intercession or by
their entreaties, is pronounced by the Stoics to be an unworthy
weakness, and they expel it utterly from the mind of the wise man, whose
perfection, in their opinion, is to be as impassive and inflexible as
iron. With more reason, therefore, might it have occurred to you to
quote from your own Cicero that sentence in which, praising Cæsar, he
says, “Of all your virtues, none is more worthy of admiration, none more
graceful, than your clemency.” <span
id="fr_2381"></span>[2382](#fn_2381) How much more ought this merciful
disposition to prevail in the churches which follow Him who said, “I am
the way,” and which learn from His word, “All the ways of the Lord are
mercy and truth”! Fear not, then, that we will try to bring innocent
persons to death, when in truth we do not even wish the guilty to
experience the punishment which they deserve, being moved by that mercy
which, joined with truth, we love in Christ. But the man who, from fear
of painfully crossing the will of the guilty, spares and indulges vices
which must thereby gather more strength, is less merciful than the man
who, lest he should hear his little boy crying, will not take from him a
dangerous knife, and is unmoved by fear of the wounds or death which he
may have to bewail as the consequence of his weakness. Reserve,
therefore, until the proper time the work of interceding with us for
those men, in loving whom (excuse my saying so) you not only do not go
beyond us, but are even hitherto refusing to follow our steps; and write
rather in your reply what influences you to shun the way which we
follow, and in which we beseech you to go along with us towards that
fatherland above, in which we rejoice to know that you take great
delight.

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p35"></span>17. As to those who are by birth your
fellow-citizens, you have said indeed that some of them, though not all,
were innocent; but, as you must see if you read over again my other
letter, you have not made out a defence for them. When, in answer to
your remark that you wished to leave your country flourishing, I said
that we had felt thorns rather than found flowers in your countrymen,
you thought that I wrote in jest. As if, forsooth, in the midst of evils
of such <span id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span
id="vii.1.CIV-Page_433"></span>magnitude we were in a mood for mirth.
Certainly not. While the smoke was ascending from the ruins of our
church consumed by fire, were we likely to joke on the subject?
Although, indeed, none in your city appeared in my opinion innocent, but
those who were absent, or were sufferers, or were destitute both of
strength and of authority to prevent the tumult, I nevertheless
distinguished in my reply those whose guilt was greater from those who
were less to blame, and stated that there was a difference between the
cases of those who were moved by fear of offending powerful enemies of
the Church, and of those who desired these outrages to be committed;
also between those who committed them and those who instigated others to
their commission; resolving, however, not to institute inquiry in regard
to the instigators, because these, perhaps, could not be ascertained
without recourse to the use of tortures, from which we shrink with
abhorrence, as utterly inconsistent with our aims. Your friends the
Stoics, who hold that all faults are alike, must, however, if they were
the judges, pronounce them all equally guilty; and if to this opinion
they join that inflexible sternness wherewith they disparage clemency as
a vice, their sentence would necessarily be, not that all should be
pardoned alike, but that all should be punished alike. Dismiss,
therefore, these philosophers altogether from the position of advocates
in this case, and rather desire that we may act as Christians, so that,
as we desire, we may gain in Christ those whom we forgive, and may not
spare them by such indulgence as would be ruinous to themselves. May
God, whose ways are mercy and truth, be pleased to enrich you with true
felicity!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2371"></span>[427:2372](1010410.htm#fr_2371) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p6"></span> Letter XCI. p. 376.

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[427:2373](1010410.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p7"></span> Letter CIII. p. 426.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[428:2374](1010410.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p13"></span> Letter CXI. 9. p. 379.

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[430:2375](1010410.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p21"></span> [Prov.
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.CIV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[431:2376](1010410.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p22"></span> Virgil. *Ecl.* iv. 5.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[431:2377](1010410.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p25"></span> [Ps.
51.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.CIV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[431:2378](1010410.htm#fr_2377) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p26"></span> [Ps.
86.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.CIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[431:2379](1010410.htm#fr_2378) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p27"></span> [Ps.
25.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.CIV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[431:2380](1010410.htm#fr_2379) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p29"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.CIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[431:2381](1010410.htm#fr_2380) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p30"></span> Letter CIII. § 3. p. 426.

<span id="fn_2381"></span>[432:2382](1010410.htm#fr_2381) <span
id="vii.1.CIV-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CIV-p34"></span> *Oratio pro Q. Ligario.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXI](1010411)
