[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010427)  [Next](1010429.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p3.1"></span>To Marcellinus, My Noble and Justly
Famous Lord, My Son Most Beloved and Longed For, Augustin Sends Greeting
in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p5"></span>1. In writing to the illustrious and
most eloquent Volusianus, whom we both sincerely love, I thought it
right to confine myself to answering the questions which he thought
proper himself to state; but as to the questions which you have
submitted to me in your letter for discussion and solution, as suggested
or proposed either by Volusianus himself or by others, it is fitting
that such reply to these as I may be able to give should be addressed to
you. I shall attempt this, not in the manner in which it would require
to be done in a formal treatise, but in the manner which is suitable to
the conversational familiarity of a letter, in order that, if you, who
know their state of mind by daily discussions, think it expedient, this
letter also may be read to your friends. But if this communication be
not adapted to them, because of their not being prepared by the piety of
faith to give ear to it, let what you consider adapted to them be in the
first place prepared between ourselves, and afterwards let what may have
been thus prepared be communicated to them. For there are many things
from which their minds may in the meantime shrink and recoil, which they
may perhaps by and by be persuaded to accept as true, either by the use
of more copious and skilful arguments, or by an appeal to authority
which, in their opinion, may not without impropriety be resisted.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p6"></span>2. In your letter you state that
some are perplexed by the question, “Why this God, who is proved to be
the God also of the Old Testament, is pleased with new sacrifices after
having rejected the ancient ones. For they allege that nothing can be
corrected but that which is proved to have been previously not rightly
done, or that what has once been done rightly ought not to be altered in
the very least: that which has been rightly done, they say, cannot be
changed without wrong.” <span id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535.md) I
quote these words from your letter. Were I disposed to give a copious
reply to this objection, time would fail me long before I had exhausted
the instances in which the processes of nature itself and the works of
men undergo changes according to the circumstances of the time, while,
at the same time, there is nothing mutable in the plan or principle by
which these changes are regulated. Of these I may mention a few, that,
stimulated by them, your wakeful observation may run, as it were, from
them to many more of the same kind. Does not summer follow winter, the
temperature gradually increasing in warmth? Do not night and day in turn
succeed each other? How often do our own lives experience changes!
Boyhood departing, never to return, gives place to youth; manhood,
destined itself to continue only for a season, takes in turn the place
of youth; and old age, closing the term of manhood, is itself closed by
death. <span id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536.md) All these things are
changed, but the plan of Divine Providence <span id="page_482">p.
482</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_482"></span>which appoints
these successive changes is not changed. I suppose, also, that the
principles of agriculture are not changed when the farmer appoints a
different work to be done in summer from that which he had ordered in
winter. He who rises in the morning, after resting by night, is not
supposed to have changed the plan of his life. The schoolmaster gives to
the adult different tasks from those which he was accustomed to
prescribe to the scholar in his boyhoo; his teaching, consistent
throughout, changes the instruction when the lesson is changed, without
itself being changed.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p9"></span>3. The eminent physician of our own
times, Vindicianus, being consulted by an invalid, prescribed for his
disease what seemed to him a suitable remedy at that time; health was
restored by its use. Some years afterwards, finding himself troubled
again with the same disorder, the patient supposed that the same remedy
should be applied; but its application made his illness worse. In
astonishment, he again returns to the physician, and tells him what had
happened; whereupon he, being a man of very quick penetration, answered:
“The reason of your having been harmed by this application is, that I
did not order it;” upon which all who heard the remark and did not know
the man supposed that he was trusting not in the art of medicine, but in
some forbidden supernatural power. When he was afterwards questioned by
some who were amazed at his words, he explained what they had not
understood, namely, that he would not have prescribed the same remedy to
the patient at the age which he had now attained. While, therefore, the
principle and methods of art remain unchanged, the change which, in
accordance with them, may be made necessary by the difference of times
is very great.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p10"></span>4. To say then, that what has once
been done rightly must in no respect whatever be changed, is to affirm
what is not true. For if the circumstances of time which occasioned
anything be changed, true reason in almost all cases demands that what
had been in the former circumstances rightly done, be now so altered
that, although they say that it is not rightly done if it be changed,
truth, on the contrary, protests that it is not rightly done unless it
be changed; because, at both times, it will be rightly done if the
difference be regulated according to the difference in the times. For
just as in the cases of different persons it may happen that, at the
same moment, one man may do with impunity what another man may not,
because of a difference not in the thing done but in the person who does
it, so in the case of one and the same person at different times, that
which was duty formerly is not duty now, not because the person is
different from his former self, but because the time at which he does it
is different.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p11"></span>5. The wide range opened up by this
question may be seen by any one who is competent and careful to observe
the contrast between the beautiful and the suitable, examples of which
are scattered, we may say, throughout the universe. For the beautiful,
to which the ugly and deformed is opposed, is estimated and praised
according to what it is in itself. But the suitable, to which the
incongruous is opposed, depends on something else to which it is bound,
and is estimated not according to what it is in itself, but according to
that with which it is connected: the contrast, also, between becoming
and unbecoming is either the same, or at least regarded as the same. Now
apply what we have said to the subject in hand. The divine institution
of sacrifice was suitable in the former dispensation, but is not
suitable now. For the change suitable to the present age has been
enjoined by God, who knows infinitely better than man what is fitting
for every age, and who is, whether He give or add, abolish or curtail,
increase or diminish, the unchangeable Governor as He is the
unchangeable Creator of mutable things, ordering all events in His
providence until the beauty of the completed course of time, the
component parts of which are the dispensations adapted to each
successive age, shall be finished, like the grand melody of some
ineffably wise master of song, and those pass into the eternal immediate
contemplation of God who here, though it is a time of faith, not of
sight, are acceptably worshipping Him.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p12"></span>6. They are mistaken, moreover, who
think that God appoints these ordinances for His own advantage or
pleasure; and no wonder that, being thus mistaken, they are perplexed,
as if it was from a changing mood that He ordered one thing to be
offered to Him in a former age, and something else now. But this is not
the case. God enjoins nothing for His own advantage, but for the benefit
of those to whom the injunction is given. Therefore He is truly Lord,
for He does not need His servants, but His servants stand in need of
Him. In those same Old Testament Scriptures, and in the age in which
sacrifices were still being offered that are now abrogated, it is said:
“I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God, for Thou dost not need my good
things.” <span id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537.md) Wherefore God did
not stand in need of those sacrifices, nor does He ever need anything;
but there are certain acts, symbolical of these divine gifts, whereby
the soul receives either present grace or eternal glory, in the
celebration and practice of which, pious exercises, serviceable not to
God but to ourselves, are performed.

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_483"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p14"></span>7. It would, however, take too long
to discuss with adequate fulness the differences between the symbolical
actions of former and present times, which, because of their pertaining
to divine things, are called sacraments. <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538.md) For as the man is not fickle who
does one thing in the morning and another in the evening, one thing this
month and another in the next, one thing this year and another next
year, so there is no variableness with God, though in the former period
of the world’s history He enjoined one kind of offerings, and in the
latter period another, therein ordering the symbolical actions
pertaining to the blessed doctrine of true religion in harmony with the
changes of successive epochs without any change in Himself. For in order
to let those whom these things perplex understand that the change was
already in the divine counsel, and that, when the new ordinances were
appointed, it was not because the old had suddenly lost the divine
approbation through inconstancy in His will, but that this had been
already fixed and determined by the wisdom of that God to whom, in
reference to much greater changes, these words are spoken in Scripture:
Thou shalt change them, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the
same,” <span id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539.md) —it is necessary to
convince them that this exchange of the sacraments of the Old Testament
for those of the New had been predicted by the voices of the prophets.
For thus they will see, if they can see anything, that what is new in
time is not new in relation to Him who has appointed the times, and who
possesses, without succession of time, all those things which He assigns
according to their variety to the several ages. For in the psalm from
which I have quoted above the words: “I said unto the Lord, Thou art my
God, for Thou dost not need my good things,” in proof that God does not
need our sacrifices, it is added shortly after by the Psalmist in
Christ’s name: “I will not gather their assemblies of blood;” <span
id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540.md) that is, for the offering of
animals from their flocks, for which the Jewish assemblies were wont to
be gathered together; and in another place he says: “I will take no
bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat from thy folds;” <span
id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541.md) and another prophet says: “Behold,
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: not according to the
covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt.” <span
id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542.md) There are, besides these, many
other testimonies on this subject in which it was foretold that God
would do as He has done; but it would take too long to mention them.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p20"></span>8. If it is now established that
that which was for one age rightly ordained may be in another age
rightly changed,—the alteration indicating a change in the work, not in
the plan, of Him who makes the change, the plan being framed by His
reasoning faculty, to which, unconditioned by succession in time, those
things are simultaneously present which cannot be actually done at the
same time because the ages succeed each other,—one might perhaps at this
point expect to hear from me the causes of the change in question. You
know how long it would take to discuss these fully. The matter may be
stated summarily, but sufficiently for a man of shrewd judgment, in
these words: It was fitting that Christ’s future coming should be
foretold by some sacraments, and that after His coming other sacraments
should proclaim this; just as the difference in the facts has compelled
us to change the words used by us in speaking of the advent as future or
past: to be foretold is one thing, to be proclaimed is another, and to
be about to come is one thing, to have come is another.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p21"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p21.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p22"></span>9. Let us now observe in the second
place, what follows in your letter. <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543.md) You have added that they said that
the Christian doctrine and preaching were in no way consistent with the
duties and rights of citizens, because among its precepts we find:
“Recompense to no man evil for evil,” <span
id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544.md) and, “Whosoever shall smite thee on
one cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any man take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also; and whosoever will compel thee to go
a mile with him, go with him twain,” <span
id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545.md) —all which are affirmed to be
contrary to the duties and rights of citizens; for who would submit to
have anything taken from him by an enemy, or forbear from retaliating
the evils of war upon an invader who ravaged a Roman province? To these
and similar statements of persons speaking slightingly, or perhaps I
should rather say speaking as inquirers regarding the truth, I might
have given a more elaborate answer, were it not that the persons with
whom the discussion is carried on are men of liberal education. In
addressing such, why should we prolong the debate, and not rather begin
by inquiring for ourselves how it was possible that the Republic of Rome
was governed and aggrandized from insignificance and poverty to
greatness and opulence by men who, when they had suffered wrong, would
rather pardon than punish the offender; <span
id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546.md) <span id="page_484">p. 484</span>
<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_484"></span>or how Cicero, addressing
Cæsar, the greatest statesman of his time, said, in praising his
character, that he was wont to forget nothing but the wrongs which were
done to him? <span id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547.md) For in this
Cicero spoke either praise or flattery: if he spoke praise, it was
because he knew Cæsar to be such as he affirmed; if he spoke flattery,
he showed that the chief magistrate of a commonwealth ought to do such
things as he falsely commended in Cæsar. But what is “not rendering evil
for evil,” but refraining from the passion of revenge—in other words,
choosing, when one has suffered wrong, to pardon rather than to punish
the offender, and to forget nothing but the wrongs done to us?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p28"></span>10. When these things are read in
their own authors, they are received with loud applause; they are
regarded as the record and recommendation of virtues in the practice of
which the Republic deserved to hold sway over so many nations, because
its citizens preferred to pardon rather than punish those who wronged
them. But when the precept, “Render to no man evil for evil,” is read as
given by divine authority, and when, from the pulpits in our churches,
this wholesome counsel is published in the midst of our congregations,
or, as we might say, in places of instruction open to all, of both sexes
and of all ages and ranks, our religion is accused as an enemy to the
Republic! Yet, were our religion listened to as it deserves, it would
establish, consecrate, strengthen, and enlarge the commonwealth in a way
beyond all that Romulus, Numa, Brutus, and all the other men of renown
in Roman history achieved. For what is a republic but a commonwealth?
Therefore its interests are common to all; they are the interests of the
State. Now what is a State but a multitude of men bound together by some
bond of concord? In one of their own authors we read: “What was a
scattered and unsettled multitude had by concord become in a short time
a State.” But what exhortations to concord have they ever appointed to
be read in their temples? So far from this, they were unhappily
compelled to devise how they might worship without giving offence to any
of their gods, who were all at such variance among themselves, that, had
their worshippers imitated their quarrelling, the State must have fallen
to pieces for want of the bond of concord, as it soon afterwards began
to do through civil wars, when the morals of the people were changed and
corrupted.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p29"></span>11. But who, even though he be a
stranger to our religion, is so deaf as not to know how many precepts
enjoining concord, not invented by the discussions of men, but written
with the authority of God, are continually read in the churches of
Christ? For this is the tendency even of those precepts which they are
much more willing to debate than to follow: “That to him who smites us
on one cheek we should offer the other to be smitten; to him who would
take away our coat we should give our cloak also; and that with him who
compels us to go one mile we should go twain.” For these things are done
only that a wicked man may be overcome by kindness, or rather that the
evil which is in the wicked man may be overcome by good, and that the
man may be delivered from the evil—not from any evil that is external
and foreign to himself, but from that which is within and is his own,
under which he suffers loss more severe and fatal than could be
inflicted by the cruelty of any enemy from without. He, therefore, who
is overcoming evil by good, submits patiently to the loss of temporal
advantages, that he may show how those things, through excessive love of
which the other is made wicked, deserve to be despised when compared
with faith and righteousness; in order that so the injurious person may
learn from him whom he wronged what is the true nature of the things for
the sake of which he committed the wrong, and may be won back with
sorrow for his sin to that concord, than which nothing is more
serviceable to the State, being overcome not by the strength of one
passionately resenting, but by the good-nature of one patiently bearing
wrong. For then it is rightly done when it seems that it will benefit
him for whose sake it is done, by producing in him amendment of his ways
and concord with others. At all events, it is to be done with this
intention, even though the result may be different from what was
expected, and the man, with a view to whose correction and conciliation
this healing and salutary medicine, so to speak, was employed, refuses
to be corrected and reconciled.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p30"></span>12. Moreover, if we pay attention
to the words of the precept, and consider ourselves under bondage to the
literal interpretation, the right cheek is not to be presented by us if
the left has been smitten. “Whosoever,” it is said, “shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also;” <span
id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548.md) but the left cheek is more liable
to be smitten, because it is easier for the right hand of the assailant
to smite it than the other. But the words are commonly understood as if
our Lord had said: If any one has acted injuriously to thee in respect
of the higher possessions which thou hast, offer to him also the
inferior possessions, lest, being more concerned about revenge than
about forbearance, thou shouldst despise eternal things in comparison
with temporal things, whereas temporal things <span id="page_485">p.
485</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_485"></span>ought to be
despised in comparison with eternal things, as the left is in comparison
with the right. This has been always the aim of the holy martyrs; for
final vengeance is righteously demanded only when there remains no room
for amendment, namely, in the last great judgment. But meanwhile we must
be on our guard, lest, through desire for revenge, we lose patience
itself,—a virtue which is of more value than all which an enemy can, in
spite of our resistance, take away from us. For another evangelist, in
recording the same precept, makes no mention of the right cheek, but
names merely the one and the other; <span
id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549.md) so that, while the duty may be
somewhat more distinctly learned from Matthew’s gospel, he simply
commends the same exercise of patience. Wherefore a righteous and pious
man ought to be prepared to endure with patience injury from those whom
he desires to make good, so that the number of good men may be
increased, instead of himself being added, by retaliation of injury, to
the number of wicked men.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p33"></span>13. In fine, that these precepts
pertain rather to the inward disposition of the heart than to the
actions which are done in the sight of men, requiring us, in the inmost
heart, to cherish patience along with benevolence, but in the outward
action to do that which seems most likely to benefit those whose good we
ought to seek, is manifest from the fact that our Lord Jesus Himself,
our perfect example of patience, when He was smitten on the face,
answered: “If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if not,
why smitest thou me?” <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550.md) If we
look only to the words, He did not in this obey His own precept, for He
did not present the other side of his face to him who had smitten Him
but, on the contrary, prevented him who had done the wrong from adding
thereto; and yet He had come prepared not only to be smitten on the
face, but even to be slain upon the cross for those at whose hands He
suffered crucifixion, and for whom, when hanging on the cross, He
prayed, “Father, forgive them, they know not what they do!” <span
id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551.md) In like manner, the Apostle Paul
seems to have failed to obey the precept of his Lord and Master, when
he, being smitten on the face as He had been, said to the chief priest:
“God shall smite thee, thou whited wall, for sittest thou to judge me
after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?” And
when it was said by them that stood near, “Revilest thou God’s high
priest?” he took pains sarcastically to indicate what his words meant,
that those of them who were discerning might understand that now the
whited wall, *i.e.* the hypocrisy of the Jewish priesthood, was
appointed to be thrown down by the coming of Christ; for He said: “I
wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest, for it is written, Thou
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people;” <span
id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552.md) although it is perfectly certain
that he who had grown up in that nation and had been in that place
trained in the law, could not but know that his judge was the chief
priest, and could not, by professing ignorance on this point, impose
upon those to whom he was so well known.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p37"></span>14. These precepts concerning
patience ought to be always retained in the habitual discipline of the
heart, and the benevolence which prevents the recompensing of evil for
evil must be always fully cherished in the disposition. At the same
time, many things must be done in correcting with a certain benevolent
severity, even against their own wishes, men whose welfare rather than
their wishes it is our duty to consult and the Christian Scriptures have
most unambiguously commended this virtue in a magistrate. For in the
correction of a son, even with some sternness, there is assuredly no
diminution of a father’s love; yet, in the correction, that is done
which is received with reluctance and pain by one whom it seems
necessary to heal by pain. And on this principle, if the commonwealth
observe the precepts of the Christian religion, even its wars themselves
will not be carried on without the benevolent design that, after the
resisting nations have been conquered, provision may be more easily made
for enjoying in peace the mutual bond of piety and justice. For the
person from whom is taken away the freedom which he abuses in doing
wrong is vanquished with benefit to himself; since nothing is more truly
a misfortune than that good fortune of offenders, by which pernicious
impunity is maintained, and the evil disposition, like an enemy within
the man, is strengthened. But the perverse and froward hearts of men
think human affairs are prosperous when men are concerned about
magnificent mansions, and indifferent to the ruin of souls; when mighty
theatres are built up, and the foundations of virtue are undermined;
when the madness of extravagance is highly esteemed, and works of mercy
are scorned; when, out of the wealth and affluence of rich men,
luxurious provision is made for actors, and the poor are grudged the
necessaries of life; when that God who, by the public declarations of
His doctrine, protests against public vice, is blasphemed by impious
communities, which demand gods of such character that even those
theatrical representations which bring disgrace to both body <span
id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_486"></span>and soul are fitly performed in
honour of them. If God permit these things to prevail, He is in that
permission showing more grievous displeasure: if He leave these crimes
unpunished, such impunity is a more terrible judgment. When, on the
other hand, He overthrows the props of vice, and reduces to poverty
those lusts which were nursed by plenty, He afflicts in mercy. And in
mercy, also, if such a thing were possible, even wars might be waged by
the good, in order that, by bringing under the yoke the unbridled lusts
of men, those vices might be abolished which ought, under a just
government, to be either extirpated or suppressed.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p38"></span>15. For if the Christian religion
condemned wars of every kind, the command given in the gospel to
soldiers asking counsel as to salvation would rather be to cast away
their arms, and withdraw themselves wholly from military service;
whereas the word spoken to such was, “Do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages,” <span
id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553.md) —the command to be content with
their wages manifestly implying no prohibition to continue in the
service. Wherefore, let those who say that the doctrine of Christ is
incompatible with the State’s well-being, give us an army composed of
soldiers such as the doctrine of Christ requires them to be; let them
give us such subjects, such husbands and wives, such parents and
children, such masters and servants, such kings, such judges—in fine,
even such taxpayers and tax-gatherers, as the Christian religion has
taught that men should be, and then let them dare to say that it is
adverse to the State’s well-being; yea, rather, let them no longer
hesitate to confess that this doctrine, if it were obeyed, would be the
salvation of the commonwealth.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p40"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p40.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p41"></span>16. But what am I to answer to the
assertion made that many calamities have befallen the Roman Empire
through some Christian emperors? This sweeping accusation is a calumny.
For if they would more clearly quote some indisputable facts in support
of it from the history of past emperors, I also could mention similar,
perhaps even greater calamities in the reigns of other emperors who were
not Christians; so that men may understand that these were either faults
in the men, not in their religion, or were due not to the emperors
themselves, but to others without whom emperors can do nothing. As to
the date of the commencement of the downfall of the Roman Republic,
there is ample evidence; their own literature speaks plainly as to this.
Long before the name of Christ had shone abroad on the earth, this was
said of Rome: “O venal city, and doomed to perish speedily, if only it
could find a purchaser!” <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554.md) In
his book on the Catilinarian conspiracy, which was before the coming of
Christ, the same most illustrious Roman historian declares plainly the
time when the army of the Roman people began to be wanton and drunken;
to set a high value on statues, paintings, and embossed vases; to take
these by violence both from individuals and from the State; to rob
temples and pollute everything, sacred and profane. When, therefore, the
avarice and grasping violence of the corrupt and abandoned manners of
the time spared neither men nor those whom they esteemed as gods, the
famous honour and safety of the commonwealth began to decline. What
progress the worst vices made from that time forward, and with how great
mischief to the interests of mankind the wickedness of the Empire went
on, it would take too long to rehearse. Let them hear their own satirist
speaking playfully yet truly thus:—

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p43"></span>“Once poor, and therefore chaste,
in former times

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p44"></span>Our matrons were; no luxury found
room

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p45"></span>In low-roofed houses and bare walls
of loam;

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p46"></span>Their hands with labour burdened
while ’tis light,

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p47"></span>A frugal sleep supplied the quiet
night;

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p48"></span>While, pinched with want, their
hunger held them strait,

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p49"></span>When Hannibal was hovering at the
gate;

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p50"></span>But wanton now, and lolling at our
ease,

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p51"></span>We suffer all the inveterate ills
of peace

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p52"></span>And wasteful riot, whose
destructive charms

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p53"></span>Revenge the vanquished world of our
victorious arms.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p54"></span>No crime, no lustful postures are
unknown,

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p55"></span>Since poverty, our guardian-god, is
gone.” <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p57"></span>Why, then, do you expect me to
multiply examples of the evils which were brought in by wickedness
uplifted by prosperity, seeing that among themselves, those who observed
events with somewhat closer attention discerned that Rome had more
reason to regret the departure of its poverty than of its opulence;
because in its poverty the integrity of its virtue was secured, but
through its opulence, dire corruption, more terrible than any invader,
had taken violent possession not of the walls of the city, but of the
mind of the State?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p58"></span>17. Thanks be unto the Lord our
God, who has sent unto us unprecedented help in resisting these evils.
For whither might not men have been carried away by that flood of the
appalling wickedness of the human race, whom would it have spared, and
in what depths would it not have engulfed its victims, had not the cross
of Christ, resting on such a solid rock of authority (so to speak), been
planted too high and too strong for the flood to sweep it away? so that
by laying hold of its strength we may become stedfast, and not be
carried off our feet and overwhelmed in the mighty whirlpool of the
<span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_487"></span>evil counsels and evil impulses of
this world. For when the empire was sinking in the vile abyss of utterly
depraved manners, and of the effete ancient religion, it was signally
important that heavenly authority should come to the rescue, persuading
men to the practice of voluntary poverty, continence, benevolence,
justice, and concord among themselves, as well as true piety towards
God, and all the other bright and sterling virtues of life,—not only
with a view to the spending of this present life in the most honourable
way, nor only with a view to secure the most perfect bond of concord in
the earthly commonwealth, but also in order to the obtaining of eternal
salvation, and a place in the divine and celestial republic of a people
which shall endure for ever—a republic to the citizenship of which
faith, hope, and charity admit us; so that, while absent from it on our
pilgrimage here, we may patiently tolerate, if we cannot correct, those
who desire, by leaving vices unpunished, to give stability to that
republic which the early Romans founded and enlarged by their virtues,
when, though they had not the true piety towards the true God which
could bring them, by a religion of saving power, to the commonwealth
which is eternal, they did nevertheless observe a certain integrity of
its own kind, which might suffice for founding, enlarging, and
preserving an earthly commonwealth. For in the most opulent and
illustrious Empire of Rome, God has shown how great is the influence of
even civil virtues without true religion, in order that it might be
understood that, when this is added to such virtues, men are made
citizens of another commonwealth, of which the king is Truth, the law is
Love, and the duration is Eternity.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p59"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p59.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p60"></span>18. Who can help feeling that there
is something simply ridiculous in their attempt to compare with Christ,
or rather to put in a higher place, Apollonius and Apuleius, and others
who were most skilful in magical arts? Yet this is to be tolerated with
less impatience, because they bring into comparison with Him these men
rather than their own gods; for Apollonius was, as we must admit, a much
worthier character than that author and perpetrator of innumerable gross
acts of immorality whom they call Jupiter. “These legends about our
gods,” they reply, “are fables.” Why, then, do they go on praising that
luxurious, licentious, and manifestly profane prosperity of the
Republic, which invented these infamous crimes of the gods, and not only
left them to reach the ears of men as fables, but also exhibited them to
the eyes of men in the theatres; in which, more numerous than their
deities were the crimes which the gods themselves were well pleased to
see openly perpetrated in their honour, whereas they should have
punished their worshippers for even tolerating such spectacles? “But,”
they reply, “those are not the gods themselves whose worship is
celebrated according to the lying invention of such fables.” Who, then,
are they who are propitiated by the practising in worship of such
abominations? Because, forsooth, Christianity has exposed the perversity
and chicanery of those devils, by whose power also magical arts deceive
the minds of men, and because it has made this patent to the world, and,
having brought out the distinction between the holy angels and these
malignant adversaries, has warned men to be on their guard against them,
showing them also how this may be done,—it is called an enemy to the
Republic, as if, even though temporal prosperity could be secured by
their aid, any amount of adversity would not be preferable to the
prosperity obtained through such means. And yet it pleased God to
prevent men from being perplexed in this matter; for in the age of the
comparative darkness of the Old Testament, in which is the covering of
the New Testament, He distinguished the first nation which worshiped the
true God and despised false gods by such remarkable prosperity in this
world, that any one may perceive from their case that prosperity is not
at the disposal of devils, but only of Him whom angels serve and devils
fear.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p61"></span>19. Apuleius (of whom I choose
rather to speak, because, as our own countryman, he is better known to
us Africans), though born in a place of some note, <span
id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556.md) and a man of superior education and
great eloquence, never succeeded, with all his magical arts, in
reaching, I do not say the supreme power, but even any subordinate
office as a magistrate in the Empire. Does it seem probable that he, as
a philosopher, voluntarily despised these things, who, being the priest
of a province, was so ambitious of greatness that he gave spectacles of
gladiatorial combats, provided the dresses worn by those who fought with
wild beasts in the circus, and, in order to get a statue of himself
erected in the town of Coea, the birthplace of his wife, appealed to law
against the opposition made by some of the citizens to the proposal, and
then, to prevent this from being forgotten by posterity, published the
speech delivered by him on that occasion? So far, therefore, as concerns
worldly prosperity, that magician did his utmost in order to success;
whence it is manifest that he failed not because he was not wishful, but
because he was not able to do more. At the same time we admit that he
defended himself with brilliant eloquence against some who imputed to
him the crime of practising magical arts; which makes me wonder <span
id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-Page_488"></span>at
his panegyrists, who, in affirming that by these arts he wrought some
miracles, attempt to bring evidence contradicting his own defence of
himself from the charge. Let them, however, examine whether, indeed,
they are bringing true testimony, and he was guilty of pleading what he
knew to be false. Those who pursue magical arts only with a view to
worldly prosperity or from an accursed curiosity, and those also who,
though innocent of such arts, nevertheless praise them with a dangerous
admiration, I would exhort to give heed, if they be wise, and to observe
how, without any such arts, the position of a shepherd was exchanged for
the dignity of the kingly office by David, of whom Scripture has
faithfully recorded both the sinful and the meritorious actions, in
order that we might know both how to avoid offending God, and how, when
He has been offended, His wrath may be appeased.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p63"></span>20. As to those miracles, however,
which are performed in order to excite the wonder of men, they do
greatly err who compare heathen magicians with the holy prophets, who
completely eclipse them by the fame of their great miracles. How much
more do they err if they compare them with Christ, of whom the prophets,
so incomparably superior to magicians of every name, foretold that He
would come both in the human nature, which he took in being born of the
Virgin, and in the divine nature, in which He is never separated from
the Father!

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p64"></span>I see that I have written a very
long letter, and yet have not said all concerning Christ which might
meet the case either of those who from sluggishness of intellect are
unable to comprehend divine things, or of those who, though endowed with
acuteness, are kept back from discerning truth through their love of
contradiction and the prepossession of their minds in favour of
long-cherished error. Howbeit, take note of anything which influences
them against our doctrine, and write to me again, so that, if the Lord
help us, we may, by letters or by treatises, furnish an answer to all
their objections. May you, by the grace and mercy of the Lord, be happy
in Him, my noble and justly distinguished lord, my son dearly beloved
and longed for!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[481:2536](1010428.htm#fr_2535.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p7"></span> Letter CXXXVI. sec. 2, p. 473.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[481:2537](1010428.htm#fr_2536.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p8"></span> Augustin’s four stages of human
life are: *Pueritia, adolescentia, juventus, senectus.*

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[482:2538](1010428.htm#fr_2537.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p13"></span> [Ps.
16.2](../../../bib/sep/psa016.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p13.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p13.2"></span> ὅτι τῶν ἀγαθῶν μου οὐ χρείαν
ἔχεις</span>, LXX; *quoniam bonorum meorum non eges*, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p13.3"></span>Aug</span>.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[483:2539](1010428.htm#fr_2538.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p15"></span> Observe Augustin’s definition of
the word *sacramentum* as used by him: “cum ad res divinas pertinent
sacramenta appelantur.”

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[483:2540](1010428.htm#fr_2539.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p16"></span> [Ps.
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[483:2541](1010428.htm#fr_2540.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p17"></span> [Ps.
16.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p17.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p17.2"></span> οὐ μὴ συναγάγω τὰς συναγωγὰς αὐτων ἐξ
αἰμάτων</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[483:2542](1010428.htm#fr_2541.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p18"></span> [Ps.
50.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[483:2543](1010428.htm#fr_2542.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p19"></span> [Jer.
31.32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[483:2544](1010428.htm#fr_2543.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p23"></span> Letter CXXXVI. sec. 2, p. 473.

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[483:2545](1010428.htm#fr_2544.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p24"></span> [Rom.
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[483:2546](1010428.htm#fr_2545.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p25"></span> [Matt.
5.39-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[483:2547](1010428.htm#fr_2546.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p26"></span> “Accepta injuria ignoscere quam
persequi malebant.”—Sallust, *Catilina,* c. 9.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[484:2548](1010428.htm#fr_2547.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p27"></span> “Oblivisci soles nihil nisi
injurias.”—Cicero, *pro Ligario,* c. 12.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[484:2549](1010428.htm#fr_2548.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p31"></span> [Matt.
5.39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[485:2550](1010428.htm#fr_2549.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p32"></span> [Luke
6.29](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#029.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[485:2551](1010428.htm#fr_2550.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p34"></span> [John
18.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[485:2552](1010428.htm#fr_2551.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p35"></span> [Luke
23.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[485:2553](1010428.htm#fr_2552.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p36"></span> [Acts
23.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[486:2554](1010428.htm#fr_2553.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p39"></span> [Luke
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[486:2555](1010428.htm#fr_2554.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p42"></span> Sallust, *Bell. Tugurth.*

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[486:2556](1010428.htm#fr_2555.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p56"></span> Juvenal, vi. 277–295 (Dryden’s
translation).

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[487:2557](1010428.htm#fr_2556.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVIII-p62"></span> Madaura.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXIX](1010429.md)
