[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010085)  [Next](1010087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.X"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.X-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—When He Had Left the Manichæans, He
Retained His Depraved Opinions Concerning Sin and the Origin of the
Saviour.</span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p2"></span>18. Thou restoredst me then from that
illness, and made sound the son of Thy hand-maid meanwhile in body, that
he might live for Thee, to endow him with a higher and <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="vi.V.X-Page_86"></span>more enduring
health. And even then at Rome I joined those deluding and deluded
“saints;” not their “hearers” only,—of the number of whom was he in
whose house I had fallen ill, and had recovered,—but those also whom
they designate “The Elect.” <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md) For
it still seemed to me “that it was not we that sin, but that I know not
what other nature sinned in us.” <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md)
And it gratified my pride to be free from blame and, after I had
committed any fault, not to acknowledge that I had done any,—“that Thou
mightest heal my soul because it had sinned against Thee;” <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md) but I loved to excuse it, and to
accuse something else (I wot not what) which was with me, but was not I.
But assuredly it was wholly I, and my impiety had divided me against
myself; and that sin was all the more incurable in that I did not deem
myself a sinner. And execrable iniquity it was, O God omnipotent, that I
would rather have Thee to be overcome in me to my destruction, than
myself of Thee to salvation! Not yet, therefore, hadst Thou set a watch
before my mouth, and kept the door of my lips, that my heart might not
incline to wicked speeches, to make excuses of sins, with men that work
iniquity <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md) —and, therefore, was I
still united with their “Elect.”

<span id="vi.V.X-p7"></span>19. But now, hopeless of making proficiency
in that false doctrine, even those things with which I had decided upon
contenting myself, providing that I could find nothing better, I now
held more loosely and negligently. For I was half inclined to believe
that those philosophers whom they call “Academics” <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) were more sagacious than the rest, in
that they held that we ought to doubt everything, and ruled that man had
not the power of comprehending any truth; for so, not yet realizing
their meaning, I also was fully persuaded that they thought just as they
are commonly held to do. And I did not fail frankly to restrain in my
host that assurance which I observed him to have in those fictions of
which the works of Manichæus are full. Notwithstanding, I was on terms
of more intimate friendship with them than with others who were not of
this heresy. Nor did I defend it with my former ardour; still my
familiarity with that sect (many of them being concealed in Rome) made
me slower <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) to seek any other
way,—particularly since I was hopeless of finding the truth, from which
in Thy Church, O Lord of heaven and earth, Creator of all things visible
and invisible, they had turned me aside,—and it seemed to me most
unbecoming to believe Thee to have the form of human flesh, and to be
bounded by the bodily lineaments of our members. And because, when I
desired to meditate on my God, I knew not what to think of but a mass of
bodies <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md) (for what was not such
did not seem to me to be), this was the greatest and almost sole cause
of my inevitable error.

<span id="vi.V.X-p11"></span>20. For hence I also believed evil to be a
similar sort of substance, and to be possessed of its own foul and
misshapen mass—whether dense, which they denominated earth, or thin and
subtle, as is the body of the air, which they fancy some malignant
spirit crawling through that earth. And because a piety—such as it
was—compelled me to believe that the good God never created any evil
nature, I conceived two masses, the one opposed to the other, both
infinite, but the evil the more contracted, the good the more expansive.
And from this mischievous commencement the other profanities followed on
me. For when my mind tried to revert to the Catholic faith, I was cast
back, since what I had held to be the Catholic faith was not so. And it
appeared to me more de<span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="vi.V.X-Page_87"></span>vout to look upon Thee, my God,—to whom I
make confession of Thy mercies,—as infinite, at least, on other sides,
although on that side where the mass of evil was in opposition to
Thee <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416.md) I was compelled to confess
Thee finite, that if on every side I should conceive Thee to be confined
by the form of a human body. And better did it seem to me to believe
that no evil had been created by Thee—which to me in my ignorance
appeared not only some substance, but a bodily one, because I had no
conception of the mind excepting as a subtle body, and that diffused in
local spaces—than to believe that anything could emanate from Thee of
such a kind as I considered the nature of evil to be. And our very
Saviour Himself, also, Thine only-begotten, <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) I believed to have been reached forth,
as it were, for our salvation out of the lump of Thy most effulgent
mass, so as to believe nothing of Him but what I was able to imagine in
my vanity. Such a nature, then, I thought could not be born of the
Virgin Mary without being mingled with the flesh; and how that which I
had thus figured to myself could be mingled without being contaminated,
I saw not. I was afraid, therefore, to believe Him to be born in the
flesh, lest I should be compelled to believe Him contaminated by the
flesh. <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md) Now will Thy spiritual
ones blandly and lovingly smile at me if they shall read these my
confessions; yet such was I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_409"></span>[86:410](1010086.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p3"></span> See iv. sec. 1, note, above.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[86:411](1010086.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p4"></span> See iv. sec. 26, note 2, above.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[86:412](1010086.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p5"></span> [Ps.
41.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.V.X-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[86:413](1010086.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p6"></span> [Ps.
141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.V.X-p6.1"></span>, *Old
Vers*. See also Augustin’s *Commentary on the Psalms*, where, using his
Septuagint version, he applies this passage to the Manichæans.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[86:414](1010086.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p8"></span> “Amongst these philosophers,” *i.e.* those
who have founded their systems on denial, “some are satisfied with
denying certainty, admitting at the same time probability, and these are
the New Academics; the others, who are the Pyrrhonists, have denied even
this probability, and have maintained that all things are equally
certain and uncertain” (*Port. Roy. Log*. iv. 1). There are, according
to the usual divisions, three Academies, the old, the middle, and the
new; and some subdivide the middle and the new each into two schools,
making five schools of thought in all. These begin with Plato, the
founder (387 <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.V.X-p8.1"></span>B.C.</span>), and continue to the fifth school,
founded by Antiochus (83 <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.V.X-p8.2"></span>B.C.</span>), who, by combining his teachings
with that of Aristotle and Zeno, prepared the way for Neo-Platonism and
its development of the dogmatic side of Plato’s teaching. In the second
Academic school, founded by Arcesilas,—of whom Aristo, the Stoic,
parodying the line in the *Iliad* (vi. 181), <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.V.X-p8.3"></span>Πρόσθε λέων, ὄπιθεν δὲ δράκων, μέσσῃ δὲ
χίμαιρα</span>, said sarcastically he was “Plato in front, Pyrrho
behind, and Diodorus in the middle,”—the “sceptical” tendency in
Platonism began to develope itself, which, under Carneades, was expanded
into the doctrine of the third Academic school. Arcesilas had been a
pupil of Polemo when he was head of the old Academy. Zeno also,
dissatisfied with the cynical philosophy of Crates, had learnt Platonic
doctrine from Polemo, and was, as Cicero tells us (*De Fin*. iv. 16),
greatly influenced by his teaching. Zeno, however, soon founded his own
school of Stoical philosophy, which was violently opposed by Arcesilas
(Cicero, *Acad. Post*. i. 12). Arcesilas, according to Cicero (*ibid.*),
taught his pupils that we cannot know anything, not even that we are
unable to know. It is exceedingly probable, however, that he taught
esoterically the doctrines of Plato to those of his pupils he thought
able to receive them, keeping them back from the multitude because of
the prevalence of the new doctrine. This appears to have been Augustin’s
view when he had arrived at a fuller knowledge of their doctrines than
that he possessed at the time referred to in his *Confessions*. In his
treatises against the Academicians (iii. 17) he maintains the wisdom of
Arcesilas in this matter. He says: “As the multitude are prone to rush
into false opinions, and, from being accustomed to bodies, readily, but
to their hurt, believe everything to be corporeal, this most acute and
learned man determined rather to unteach those who had suffered from bad
teaching, than to teach those whom he did not think teachable.” Again,
in the first of his *Letters*, alluding to these treatises, he says: “It
seems to me to be suitable enough to the times in which they flourished,
that whatever issued pure from the fountain-head of Platonic philosophy
should be rather conducted into dark and thorny thickets for the
refreshment of a very few *men*, than left to flow in open meadow-land,
where it would be impossible to keep it clear and pure from the inroads
of the vulgar herd. I use the word ‘herd’ advisedly, for what is more
brutish than the opinion that the soul is material?” and more to the
same purpose. In his *De Civ. Dei*, xix 18, he contrasts the uncertainty
ascribed to the doctrines of these teachers with the certainty of the
Christian faith. See Burton’s *Bampton Lectures*, note 33, and Archer
Butler’s *Ancient Philosophy*, ii. 313, 348, etc. See also vii. sec. 13,
note, below.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[86:415](1010086.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p9"></span> See iii. sec. 21, above.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[86:416](1010086.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p10"></span> See iv. secs. 3, 12, and 31, above.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[87:417](1010086.htm#fr_416.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p12"></span> See iv. 26, note 2, above.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[87:418](1010086.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p13"></span> See above, sec. 12, note.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[87:419](1010086.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="vi.V.X-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.X-p14"></span> The dualistic belief of the Manichæan ever
led him to contend that Christ only appeared in a resemblance of flesh,
and did not touch its substance so as to be defiled. Hence Faustus
characteristically speaks of the Incarnation (*Con. Faust.* xxxii. 7) as
“the shameful birth of Jesus from a woman,” and when pressed (*ibid.*
xi. 1) with such passages as, Christ was “born of the seed of David
according to the flesh” ([Rom.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="vi.V.X-p14.1"></span>.md),
he would fall back upon what in these days we are familiar with as that
“higher criticism,” which rejects such parts of Scripture as it is
inconvenient to receive. Paul, he said, then only “spoke as a child” ([1
Cor. 13.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.V.X-p14.2"></span>), but when he became a man in doctrine, he put
away childish things, and then declared, “Though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more.” See above,
sec. 16, note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1010087.md)
