[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010276)  [Next](1010278) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XIII.XI"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—That the Symbols of the Trinity
in Man, to Be, to Know, and to Will, are Never Thoroughly
Examined.</span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XI-p2"></span>12. Which of us understandeth the
Almighty Trinity? <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203) And yet
which speaketh not of It, if indeed it be It? Rare is that soul which,
while it speaketh of It, knows what it speaketh of. And they contend and
strive, but no one without peace seeth that vision. I could wish that
men would consider these three things that are in themselves. These
three are far other than the Trinity; but I speak of things in which
they may exercise and prove themselves, and feel how far other they
be. <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) But the three things I
speak of are, To Be, to Know, and to Will. For I Am, and I Know, and I
Will; I Am Knowing and Willing; and I Know myself to Be and to Will; and
I Will to Be and to Know. In these three, therefore, let him who can see
how inseparable a life there is,—even one life, one mind, and one
essence; finally, how inseparable is the distinction, and yet a
distinction. Surely a man hath it before him; let him look into himself,
and see, and tell me. But <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="vi.XIII.XI-Page_194"></span>when he discovers and can say anything
of these, let him not then think that he has discovered that which is
above these Unchangeable, which Is unchangeably, and Knows unchangeably,
and Wills unchangeably. And whether on account of these three there is
also, where they are, a Trinity; or whether these three be in Each, so
that the three belong to Each; or whether both ways at once, wondrously,
simply, and vet diversely, in Itself a limit unto Itself, yet
illimitable; whereby It is, and is known unto Itself, and sufficeth to
Itself, unchangeably the Self-same, by the abundant magnitude of its
Unity,—who can readily conceive? Who in any wise express it? Who in any
way rashly pronounce thereon?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[193:1204](1010277.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XI-p3"></span> As Augustin constantly urges of God,
“Cujus nulla scientia est in anima, nisi scire quomodo eum nesciat” (*De
Ord.* ii. 18), so we may say of the Trinity. The objectors to the
doctrine sometimes speak as if it were irrational (Mansel’s *Bampton
Lectures*, lect. vi., notes 9, 10). But while the doctrine is *above*
reason, it is not *contrary* thereto; and, as Dr. Newman observes in his
*Grammar of Assent*, v. 2 (a book which the student should remember has
been written since his union with the Roman Church), though the doctrine
be mysterious, and, when taken as a whole, transcends all our
experience, there is that on which the spiritual life of the Christian
can repose in its “propositions taken one by one, and that not in the
case of intellectual and thoughtful minds only, but of all religious
minds whatever, in the case of a child or a peasant as well as of a
philosopher.” With the above compare the words of Leibnitz in his
“Discours de la Conformité de la Foi avec la Raison,” sec. 56: “<span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.1"></span>Il en est de même des autres mystères, où
les esprits modérés trouveront toujours une explication suffisante pour
croire, et jamais autant qu’il en faut pour comprendre. Il nous suffit
d’un certain *ce que c’est* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.2"></span>τί ἐστι</span><span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.3"></span>); mais le *comment* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.4"></span>πῶς</span><span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.5"></span>) nous passe, et ne nous est point
nécessaire” (*Euvres de Locke et Leibnitz*). See also p. 175, note 1,
above, on the “incomprehensibility” of eternity.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[193:1205](1010277.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="vi.XIII.XI-p3.6"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XI-p4"></span> While giving illustrations of the
Trinity like the above, he would not have a man think “that he has
discovered that which is above these, Unchangeable.” (See also *De
Trin.* xv. 5, end.) He is very fond of such illustrations. In his *De
Civ. Dei*, xi. 26, 27, for example, we have a parallel to this in our
text, in the union of existence, knowledge, and love in man; in his *De
Trin.* ix. 4, 17, 18, we have mind, knowledge, and love; *ibid.* x. 19,
memory, understanding, and will; and *ibid.* xi. 16, memory, thought,
and will. In his *De Lib. Arb.* ii. 7, again, we have the doctrine
illustrated by the union of being, life, and knowledge in man. He also
finds illustrations of the doctrine in other created things, as in their
measure, weight, and number (*De Trin.* xi. 18), and their existence,
figure, and order (*De Vera Relig.* xiii.). The nature of these
illustrations would at first sight seem to involve him in the Sabellian
heresy, which denied the fulness of the Godhead to each of the three
Persons of the Trinity; but this is only in appearance. He does not use
these illustrations as presenting anything *analogous* to the union of
the three Persons in the Godhead, but as dimly illustrative of it. He
declares his belief in the Athanasian doctrine, which, as Dr. Newman
observes (*Grammar of Assent*, v. 2), “may be said to be summed up in
this very formula on which St. Augustin lays so much stress,—‘Tres et
Unus,’ not merely ‘Unum.’ ” Nothing can be clearer than his words in his
*De Civ. Dei*, xi. 24: “When we inquire regarding each singly, it is
said that each is God and Almighty; and when we speak of all together,
it is said that there are not three Gods, nor three Almighties, but one
God Almighty.” Compare with this his *De Trin.* vii., end of ch. 11,
where the language is equally emphatic. See also Mansel, as above, lect.
vi. and notes 11 and 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1010278)
