[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010007)  [Next](1010009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.2"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.2-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER II.—*A Sketch of the Life of St.
Augustin*.</span>

<span id="iv.2-p3"></span>It is a venturesome and delicate undertaking
to write one’s own life, even though that life be a masterpiece of
nature and the grace of God, and therefore most worthy to be described.
Of all autobiographies none has so happily avoided the reef of vanity
and self-praise, and none has won so much esteem and love through its
honesty and humility as that of St. Augustin.

<span id="iv.2-p4"></span>The “Confessions,” which he wrote in the
forty-fourth year of his life, still burning in the ardor of his first
love, are full of the fire and unction of the Holy Spirit. They are a
sublime composition, in which Augustin, like David in the fifty-first
Psalm, confesses to God, in view of his own and of succeeding
generations, without reserve the sins of his youth; and they are at the
same time a hymn of praise to the grace of God, which led him out of
darkness into light, and called him to service in the kingdom of
Christ. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Here we see the great church
teacher of all times “prostrate in the dust, conversing with God,
basking in his love; his readers hovering before him only as a shadow.”
He puts away from himself all honor, all greatness, all merit, and lays
them gratefully at the feet of the All-merciful. The reader feels on
every hand that Christianity is no dream nor illusion, but truth and
life, and he is carried along in adoration of the wonderful grace of
God.

<span id="iv.2-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.2-p6.1"></span>Aurelius Augustinus</span>, born on the 13th of
November, 354, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) at Tagaste, an
unimportant village of the fertile province of Numidia in North Africa,
not far from Hippo Regius, inherited from his heathen father,
Patricius, <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) a passionate sensibility,
from his Christian mother, Monnica (one of the noblest women in the
history of Christianity, of a highly intellectual and spiritual cast, of
fervent piety, most tender affection, and all-conquering love), the deep
yearning towards God so grandly expressed in his sentence: “Thou hast
made us for Thyself, and our heart is restless till it rests in
Thee.” <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) This yearning, and his
reverence for the sweet and holy name of Jesus, though crowded into the
background, attended him in his studies at the schools of Madaura and
Carthage, on his journeys to Rome and Milan, and on his tedious
wanderings through the labyrinth of carnal pleasures, Manichæan
mock-wisdom, Academic skepticism, and Platonic idealism; till at last
the prayers of his mother, the sermons of Ambrose, the biography <span
id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="iv.2-Page_4"></span>of St. Anthony,
and above all, the Epistles of Paul, as so many instruments in the hand
of the Holy Spirit, wrought in the man of three and thirty years that
wonderful change which made him an incalculable blessing to the whole
Christian world, and brought even the sins and errors of his youth into
the service of the truth. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="iv.2-p11"></span>A son of so many prayers and tears could not
be lost, and the faithful mother who travailed with him in spirit with
greater pain than her body had in bringing him into the world, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) was permitted, for the encouragement of
future mothers, to receive shortly before her death an answer to her
prayers and expectations, and was able to leave this world with joy
without revisiting her earthly home. For Monnica died on a homeward
journey, in Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber, in her fifty-sixth year, in
the arms of her son, after enjoying with him a glorious conversation
that soared above the confines of space and time, and was a foretaste of
the eternal Sabbath-rest of the saints. If those moments, he says, could
be prolonged for ever, they would more than suffice for his happiness in
heaven. She regretted not to die in a foreign land, because she was not
far from God, who would raise her up at the last day. “Bury my body
anywhere, “was her last request, “and trouble not yourselves for it;
only this one thing I ask, that you remember me at the altar of my God,
wherever you may be.” <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Augustin, in his
*Confessions*, has erected to Monnica a noble monument that can never
perish.

<span id="iv.2-p14"></span>If ever there was a thorough and fruitful
conversion, next to that of Paul on the way to Damascus, it was that of
Augustin, when, in a garden of the Villa Cassiciacum, not far from
Milan, in September of the year 386, amidst the most violent struggles
of mind and heart—the birth-throes of the new life—he heard that divine
voice of a child: “Take, read!” and he “put on the Lord Jesus Christ”
([Rom. xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.2-p14.1"></span>). It is a touching lamentation of his: “I have
loved Thee late, Thou Beauty, so old and so new; I have loved Thee late!
And lo! Thou wast within, but I was without, and was seeking Thee there.
And into Thy fair creation I plunged myself in my ugliness; for Thou was
with me, and I was not with Thee! Those things kept me away from Thee,
which had not been, except they had been in Thee! Thou didst call, and
didst cry aloud, and break through my deafness. Thou didst glimmer, Thou
didst shine, and didst drive away my blindness. Thou didst breathe, and
I drew breath, and breathed in Thee. I tasted Thee, and I hunger and
thirst. Thou didst touch me, and I burn for Thy peace. If I, with all
that is within me, may once live in Thee, then shall pain and trouble
forsake me; entirely filled with Thee, all shall be life to me.”

<span id="iv.2-p15"></span>He received baptism from Ambrose in Milan on
Easter Sunday, 387, in company with his friend and fellow-convert
Alypius, and his natural son Adeodatus (*given by God*). It impressed
the divine seal upon the inward transformation. He broke radically with
the world; abandoned the brilliant and lucrative vocation of a teacher
of rhetoric, which he had followed in Rome and Milan; sold his goods for
the benefit of the poor; and thenceforth devoted his rare gifts
exclusively to the service of Christ, and to that service he continued
faithful to his latest breath. After the death of his mother, whom he
revered and loved with the most tender affection, he went a second time
to Rome for several months, and wrote books in defence of true
Christianity against false philosophy and against the Manichæan heresy.
Returning to Africa, he spent three years, with his friends Alypius and
Evodius, on an estate in his native Tagaste, in contemplative and
literary retirement.

<span id="iv.2-p16"></span>Then, in 391, he was chosen presbyter against
his will, by the voice of the people, which, as <span id="page_5">p.
5</span> <span id="iv.2-Page_5"></span>in the similar cases of Cyprian
and Ambrose, proved to be the voice of God, in the Numidian maritime
city of Hippo Regius (now Bona); and in 395 he was elected bishop in the
same city. For eight and thirty years, until his death, he labored in
this place, and made it the intellectual centre of Western
Christendom. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="iv.2-p18"></span>His outward mode of life was extremely
simple, and mildly ascetic. He lived with his clergy in one house in an
apostolic community of goods, and made this house a seminary of
theology, out of which ten bishops and many lower clergy went forth.
Females, even his sister, were excluded from his house, and could see
him only in the presence of others. But he founded religious societies
of women; and over one of these his sister, a saintly widow,
presided. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) He once said in a sermon,
that he had nowhere found better men, and he had nowhere found worse,
than in monasteries. Combining, as he did, the clerical life with the
monastic, he became unwittingly the founder of the Augustinian order,
which gave the reformer Luther to the world. He wore the black dress of
the Easter cœnobites, with a cowl and a leathern girdle. He lived almost
entirely on vegetables, and seasoned the common meal with reading or
free conversation, in which it was a rule that the character of an
absent person should never be touched. He had this couplet engraved on
the table:

<span id="iv.2-p20"></span>“Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,

<span id="iv.2-p21"></span>Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.”

<span id="iv.2-p22"></span>He often preached five days in succession,
sometimes twice a day, and set it as the object of his preaching, that
all might live with him, and he with all, in Christ. Wherever he went in
Africa, he was begged to preach the world of salvation. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) He faithfully administered the external
affairs connected with his office, though he found his chief delight in
contemplation. He was specially devoted to the poor, and, like Ambrose,
upon exigency, caused the church vessels to be melted down to redeem
prisoners. But he refused legacies by which injustice was done to
natural heirs, and commended the bishop Aurelius of Carthage for giving
back unasked some property which a man has bequeathed to the church,
when his wife unexpectedly bore him children.

<span id="iv.2-p24"></span>Augustin’s labors extended far beyond his
little diocese. He was the intellectual head of the North African and
the entire Western church of his time. He took active interest in all
theological and ecclesiastical questions. He was the champion of the
orthodox doctrine against Manichæan, Donatist, and Pelagian. In him was
concentrated the whole polemic power of the catholic church of the time
against heresy and schism; and in him it won the victory over them.

<span id="iv.2-p25"></span>In his last years he took a critical review
of his literary productions, and gave them a thorough sifting in his
Retractations. His latest controversial works, against the
Semi-Pelagians, written in a gentle spirit, date from the same period.
He bore the duties of his office alone till his seventy-second year,
when his people unanimously elected his friend Heraclius to be his
assistant.

<span id="iv.2-p26"></span>The evening of his life was troubled by
increasing infirmities of body and by the unspeakable wretchedness which
the barbarian Vandals spread over his country in their victorious
invasion, <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iv.2-Page_6"></span>destroying cities, villages, and churches,
without mercy, and even besieging the fortified city of Hippo. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) Yet he faithfully persevered in his work.
The last ten days of his life he spent in close retirement, in prayers
and tears and repeated reading of the penitential Psalms, which he can
caused to be written on the wall over his bed, that he might have them
always before his eyes. Thus with an act of penitence he closed his
life. In the midst of the terrors of the siege and the despair of his
people he could not suspect what abundant seed he had sown for the
future.

<span id="iv.2-p28"></span>In the third month of the siege of Hippo, on
the 28th of August, 430, in the seventy-sixth year of his age, in full
possession of his faculties, and in the presence of many friends and
pupils, he past gently and peacefully into that eternity to which he had
so long aspired. “O how wonderful,” wrote he in his *Meditations*, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) “how beautiful and lovely are the
dwellings of Thy house, Almighty God! I burn with longing to behold Thy
beauty in Thy bridal-chamber.…O Jerusalem, holy city of God, dear bride
of Christ, my heart loves thee, my soul has already long sighed for thy
beauty!…The King of kings Himself is in the midst of thee, and His
children are within thy walls. There are the hymning choirs of angels,
the fellowship of heavenly citizens. There is the wedding-feast of all
who from this sad earthly pilgrimage have reached thy joys. There is the
far-seeing choir of the prophets; there the company of the twelve
apostles; there the triumphant army of innumerable martyrs and holy
confessors. Full and perfect love there reigns, for God is all in all.
They love and praise, they praise and love Him evermore.…Blessed,
perfectly and forever blessed, shall I too be, if, when my poor body
shall be dissolved,… I may stand before my King and God, and see Him in
His glory, as He Himself hath deigned to promise: ‘Father, I will that
they also whom Thou hast given Me be with Me where I am; that they may
behold My glory which I had with Thee before the world was.’” This
aspiration after the heavenly Jerusalem found grand expression in the
hymn *De gloria et gaudiis Paradisi:*

<span id="iv.2-p30"></span>“Ad perennis vitæ fontem mens sativit arida.”

<span id="iv.2-p31"></span>It is incorporated in the *Meditations* of
Augustin, and the ideas originated in part with him, but were not
brought into poetical form till long afterwards by Peter Damiani. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

<span id="iv.2-p33"></span>He left no will, for in his voluntary poverty
he had no earthly property to dispose of, except his library; this he
bequeathed to the church, and it was fortunately preserved from the
depredations of the Arian barbarians. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="iv.2-p35"></span>Soon after his death Hippo was taken and
destroyed by the Vandals. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) Africa
was lost to the Romans. A few decades later the whole West-Roman empire
fell in ruins. The culmination of the African church was the beginning
of its decline. But the work of Augustin could not perish. His ideas
fell like living seed into the soil of Europe, and produced abundant
fruits in nations and countries of which he had never heard. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](1010008.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iv.2-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p5"></span> Augustin himself says of his *Confessions*:
“*Confessionum mearum libri tredecim et de malis et de bonis meis Deum
laudant justum et bonum, atque in eum excitant humanum intellectum et
affectum*.” *Retract*. 1. ii. c. 6. He refers to his *Confessions* also
in his *Epistola ad Darium*, *Ep*. CCXXXI. cap. 5; and in his *De dono
perseverantiæ*, cap. 20 (53).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:2](1010008.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iv.2-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p7"></span> He died, according to the Chronicle of his
friend and pupil Prosper Aquitanus, the 28th of August, 430 (in the
third month of the siege of Hippo by the Vandals); according to his
biographer Possidius he lived seventy-six years. The day of his birth
Augustin states himself, *De vita beata*, § 6 (tom. i. 300): “*Idibus
Novemoris mihi natalis dies erat.*”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:3](1010008.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iv.2-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p8"></span> He received baptism shortly before his death.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:4](1010008.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iv.2-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p9"></span> Conf. i. 1: “*Fecisti nos ad Te, et inquietum
est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in Te.*” In all his aberrations, which
we would hardly know, if it were not from his own free confession, he
never sunk to anything mean, but remained, like Paul in his Jewish
fanaticism, a noble intellect and an honorable character, with burning
love for the true and the good.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:5](1010008.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iv.2-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p10"></span> For particulars respecting the course of
Augustin’s life, see my work above cited, and other monographs. Comp.
also the fine remarks of Dr. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.2-p10.1"></span>Baur</span> in his posthumous *Lectures on
Doctrine-History* (1866), vol. i. Part ii. p. 26 sqq. He compares the
development of Augustin with the course of Christianity from the
beginning to his time, and draws a parallel between Augustin and Origen.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:6](1010008.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iv.2-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p12"></span> Conf. ix. c. 8: “*Quæ me parturivit et
carne, ut in hanc temporalem, et carde, ut in æternam lucem nascerer*.”
L. v. 9: “*Non enim satis eloquor, quid erga me habebat anima, et quanto
majore sollicitudine nie partur iebat spiritu, quam carne pepererat*.”
In *De dono persev*. c. 20, he ascribes his conversion under God “to the
faithful and daily tears” of his mother.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:7](1010008.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iv.2-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p13"></span> Conf. l. ix. c. 11: “*Tantum illud vos rogo,
ut ad Domini altare memineritis mei, ubs fuertis.*” This must be
explained from the already prevailing custom of offering prayers for the
dead, which, however, had rather the form of thanksgiving for the mercy
of God shown to them, than the later form of intercession for them.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:8](1010008.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iv.2-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p17"></span> He is still known among the inhabitants of
the place as “the great Christian” (Rumi Kebir). <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.2-p17.1"></span> Gibbon</span> (ch. xxxiii. ad ann. 430) thus
describes the place which became so famous through Augustin: “The
maritime colony of *Hippo*, about two hundred miles westward of
Carthage, had formerly acquired the distinguishing epithet of *Regius*,
from the residence of the Numidian kings; and some remains of trade and
populousness still adhere to the modern city, which is known in Europe
by the corrupted name of Bona.” Sallust mentions Hippo once in his
history of the Jugurthine War. A part of the wealth with which Sallust
built and beautified his splendid mansion and gardens in Rome, was
extorted from this and other towns of North Africa while governor of
Numidia. Since the French conquest of Algiers Hippo Regius was rebuilt
under the name of Bona and is now one of the finest towns in North
Africa, numbering over 10,000 inhabitants, French, Moors, and Jews.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:9](1010008.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iv.2-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p19"></span> He mentions a sister, “*soror mea, sancta
proposita*” \[*monasterii*\], without naming her, *Epist*. 211, n. 4
(ed. Bened.), alias *Ep*. 109. He also had a brother by the name of
Navigius.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[5:10](1010008.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iv.2-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p23"></span> Possidius says, in his *Vita Aug*.:
“*Cæterum episcopatu suscepto multo instantius ac ferventius, majore
auctoritate, non in una tantum regione, sed ubicunque rogatus venisset,
verbum satutis alacriter, ac suaviter pullulante atque crescente Domini
ecclesia, prædicavit*.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:11](1010008.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iv.2-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p27"></span> Possidius, c. 28, gives a vivid picture of
the ravages of the Vandals, which have become proverbial. Comp. also
Gibbon, ch. xxxiii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:12](1010008.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iv.2-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p29"></span> I freely combine several passages.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:13](1010008.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iv.2-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p32"></span> Comp. *Opera*, tom. vi. p. 117 (Append.);
Daniel: *Thesaurus hymnol*. i. 116 sqq., and iv. 203 sq., and Mone:
*Lat. Hymner*, i. 422 sqq. Mone ascribes the poem to an unknown writer
of the sixth century, but Trench (*Sacred Latin Poetry*, 2d ed., 315)
and others attribute it to Cardinal Peter Damiani, the friend of Pope
Hildebrand (d. 1072). Augustin wrote his poetry in prose.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](1010008.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.2-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p34"></span> Possidius says, *Vita*, c. 31: “*Testamentum
nullum fecit, guia unde faceret, pauper Dei non habuit. Ecclesiæ
bibliothecam omnesgue codices diligenter posteris custodiendos semper
jubebat.*”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](1010008.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.2-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p36"></span> The inhabitants escaped to the sea. There
appears no bishop of Hippo after Augustin. In the seventh century the
old city was utterly destroyed by the Arabians, but two miles from it
Bona was built of its ruins. Comp. Tillemont, xiii. 945, and Gibbon, ch.
xxxiii. Gibbon says, that Bona, “in the sixteenth century, contained
about three hundred families of industrious, but turbulent
manufacturers. The adjacent territory is renowned for a pure air, a
fertile soil, and plenty of exquisite fruits.” Since the French conquest
of Algiers, Bona was rebuilt in 1832, and is gradually assuming a French
aspect. It is now one of the finest towns in Algeria, the key to the
province of Constantine, has a public garden, several schools,
considerable commerce, and a population of over ten thousand of French,
Moors, and Jews, the great majority of whom are foreigners. The relics
of St. Augustin have been recently transferred from Pavia to Bona. See
the letters of <span id="iv.2-p36.1"></span>abbé Sibour to Poujoulat
*<span id="iv.2-p36.2"></span>sur la translation de ia relique de saint
Augustin de Pavie à Hippone*, in <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.2-p36.3"></span> Poujoulat’s</span> *<span
id="iv.2-p36.4"></span>Histoire de saint Augustin*, tom. i. p. 413 sqq.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:16](1010008.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.2-p36.5"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p37"></span> Even in Africa Augustin’s spirit reappeared
from time to time notwithstanding the barbarian confusion, as a light in
darkness, first in <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.2-p37.1"></span>Vigilius</span>, bishop of Thapsus, who, at the
close of the fifth century, ably defended the orthodox doctrine of the
Trinity and the person of Christ, and to whom the authorship of the
so-called Athanasian Creed has sometimes been ascribed; in <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.2-p37.2"></span>Fulgentius</span>, bishop of
Ruspe, one of the chief opponents of Semi-Pelagianism, and the later
Arianism, who with sixty catholic bishops of Africa was banished for
several years by the Arian Vandals to the island of Sardinia, and who
was called the Augustin of the sixth century (died 533); and in <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.2-p37.3"></span>Facundus of Hermiane</span>
(died 570), and <span class="c9"><span id="iv.2-p37.4"></span>Fulgentius
Ferrandus</span>, and <span class="c9"><span id="iv.2-p37.5"></span>
Liberatus</span>, two deacons of Carthage, who took a prominent part in
the Three

<span id="iv.2-p38"></span>Chapter controversy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1010009)
