[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010136)  [Next](1010138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VIII.VII"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VIII.VII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—He Deplores His Wretchedness,
that Having Been Born Thirty-Two Years, He Had Not Yet Found Out the
Truth.</span>

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p2"></span>16. Such was the story of Pontitianus.
But Thou, O Lord, whilst he was speaking, didst turn me towards myself,
taking me from behind my back, where I had placed myself while unwilling
to exercise self-scrutiny; and Thou didst set me face to face with
myself, that I might behold how foul I was, and how crooked and sordid,
bespotted and ulcerous. And I beheld and loathed myself; and whither to
fly from myself I discovered not. And if I sought to turn my gaze away
from myself, he continued his narrative, and Thou again opposedst me
unto myself, and thrustedst me before my own eyes, that I might discover
my iniquity, and hate it. <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) I had
known it, but acted as though I knew it not,—winked at it, and forgot
it.

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p4"></span>17. But now, the more ardently I loved
those whose healthful affections I heard tell of, that they had given up
themselves wholly to Thee to be cured, the more did I abhor myself when
compared with them. For many of my years (perhaps twelve) had passed
away since my nineteenth, when, on the reading of Cicero’s
*Hortensius*, <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) I was roused to a
desire for wisdom; and still I was delaying to reject mere worldly
happiness, and to devote myself to search out that whereof not the
finding alone, but the bare search, <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) ought to have been pre<span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="vi.VIII.VII-Page_124"></span>ferred before the treasures and
kingdoms of this world, though already found, and before the pleasures
of the body, though encompassing me at my will. But I, miserable young
man, supremely miserable even in the very outset of my youth, had
entreated chastity of Thee, and said, “Grant me chastity and continency,
but not yet.” For I was afraid lest Thou shouldest hear me soon, and
soon deliver me from the disease of concupiscence, which I desired to
have satisfied rather than extinguished. And I had wandered through
perverse ways in a sacrilegious superstition; not indeed assured
thereof, but preferring that to the others, which I did not seek
religiously, but opposed maliciously.

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p7"></span>18. And I had thought that I delayed
from day to day to reject worldly hopes and follow Thee only, because
there did not appear anything certain whereunto to direct my course. And
now had the day arrived in which I was to be laid bare to myself, and my
conscience was to chide me. “Where art thou, O my tongue? Thou saidst,
verily, that for an uncertain truth thou wert not willing to cast off
the baggage of vanity. Behold, now it is certain, and yet doth that
burden still oppress thee; whereas they who neither have so worn
themselves out with searching after it, nor yet have spent ten years and
more in thinking thereon, have had their shoulders unburdened, and
gotten wings to fly away.” Thus was I inwardly consumed and mightily
confounded with an horrible shame, while Pontitianus was relating these
things. And he, having finished his story, and the business he came for,
went his way. And unto myself, what said I not within myself? With what
scourges of rebuke lashed I not my soul to make it follow me, struggling
to go after Thee! Yet it drew back; it refused, and exercised not
itself. All its arguments were exhausted and confuted. There remained a
silent trembling; and it feared, as it would death, to be restrained
from the flow of that custom whereby it was wasting away even to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_658"></span>[123:659](1010137.htm#fr_658) <span
id="vi.VIII.VII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p3"></span> [Ps.
36.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002)<span
id="vi.VIII.VII-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[123:660](1010137.htm#fr_659) <span
id="vi.VIII.VII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p5"></span> See iii. sec. 7, above.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[123:661](1010137.htm#fr_660) <span
id="vi.VIII.VII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.VII-p6"></span> It is interesting to compare with this
passage the views contained in Augustin’s three books, *Con.
Academicos*,—the earliest of his extant works, and written about this
time. Licentius there maintains that the “bare search” for truth renders
a man happy, while Trygetius contends that the “finding alone” can
produce happiness. Augustin does not agree with the doctrine of the
former, and points out that while the Academics held the probable to be
attainable, it could not be so without the true, by which the probable
is measured and known. And, in his *De Vita Beata*, he contends that he
who seeks truth and finds it not, has not attained happiness, and that
though the grace of God be indeed guiding him, he must not expect
complete happiness (*Retractations*, i. 2) till after death. Perhaps no
sounder philosophy can be found than that evidenced in the life of
Victor Hugo’s good Bishop Myriel, who rested in the practice of love,
and was content to look for perfect happiness, and a full unfolding of
God’s mysteries, to the future life:—“Aimez-vous les uns les autres, il
declarait cela complet, ne souhaitait rien de plus et c’était là toute
sa doctrine. Un jour, cet homme qui se croyait ‘philosophe,’ ce
senateur, déjà nommé, dit à l’évêque: ‘Mais voyez donc le spectacle du
monde; guerre de tous contre tous; le plus fort a le plus d’ésprit.
Votre aimez-vous les uns les autres est une bêtise.’—‘Eh bien,’ répondit
Monseigneur Bienvenu, sans disputer, ‘si c’est une bêtise, l’âme doit
s’y enfermer comme la perle dans l’huitre.’ Il s’y enfermait donc, il y
vivait, il s’en satisfaisait absolument, laissant de côté les questions
prodigieuses qui attirent et qui épouvantent, les perspectives
insoudables de l’abstraction, les précipices de la métaphysique, toutes
ces profondeurs convergentes, pour l’apôtre, à Dieu, pour l’athée, au
néant: la destinée, le bien et le mal, la guerre de l’être contre
l’être, la conscience de l’homme, le somnambulisme pensif de l’animal,
la transformation par la mort, la récapitulation d’existences qui
contient le tombeau, la greffe incompréhensible des amours successifs
sur le moi persistant, l’essence, la substance, le Nil et l’Ens, l’âme,
la nature, la liberté, la nécessité; problèmes à pic, épaisseurs
sinistres, où se penchent les gigantesques archanges de l’ésprit humain;
formidables abimes que Lucrèce, Manon, Saint Paul, et Dante contemplent
avec cet œil fulgurant qui semble, en regardant fixement l’infini, y
faire eclore les étoiles. Monseigneur Bienvenu était simplement un homme
qui constatait du dehors les questions mystérieuses sans les scruter,
sans les agiter, et sans en troubler son propre ésprit; et qui avait
dans l’âme le grave respect de l’ombre.”—*Les Mis*é*rables*, c. xiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](1010138)
