[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010038)  [Next](1010040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.II_1.IV"></span>

<span id="vi.II_1.IV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.II_1.IV-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—He Commits Theft with His
Companions, Not Urged on by Poverty, But from a Certain Distaste of
Well-Doing.</span>

<span id="vi.II_1.IV-p2"></span>9. Theft is punished by Thy law, O Lord,
and by the law written in men’s hearts, which iniquity itself cannot
blot out. For what thief will suffer a thief? Even a rich thief will not
suffer him who is driven to it by want. Yet had I a desire to commit
robbery, and did so, compelled neither by hunger, nor poverty through a
distaste for well-doing, and a lustiness of iniquity. For I pilfered
that of which I had already sufficient, and much better. Nor did I
desire to enjoy what I pilfered, but the theft and sin itself. There was
a pear-tree close to our vineyard, heavily laden with fruit, which was
tempting neither for its colour nor its flavour. To shake and rob this
some of us wanton young fellows went, late one night (having, according
to our disgraceful habit, prolonged our games in the streets until
then), and carried away great loads, not to eat ourselves, but to fling
to the very swine, having only eaten some of them; and to do this
pleased us all the more because it was not permitted. Behold my heart, O
my God; behold my heart, which Thou hadst pity upon when in the
bottomless pit. Behold, now, let my heart tell Thee what it was seeking
there, that I should be gratuitously wanton, having no inducement to
evil but the evil itself. It was foul, and I loved it. I loved to
perish. I loved my own error—not that for which I erred, but the error
itself. Base soul, falling from Thy firmament to utter destruction—not
seeking aught through the shame but the shame itself!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1010040.md)
