[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010028)  [Next](1010030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p2.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—He Delighted in Latin Studies
and the Empty Fables of the Poets, But Hated the Elements of Literature
and the Greek Language.</span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p3"></span>20. But what was the cause of my
dislike of Greek literature, which I studied from my boyhood, I cannot
even now understand. For the Latin I loved exceedingly—not what our
first masters, but what the grammarians teach; for those primary lessons
of reading, writing, and ciphering, I considered no less of a burden and
a punishment than Greek. Yet whence was this unless from the sin and
vanity of this life? for I was “but flesh, a wind that passeth away and
cometh not again.” <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) For those
primary lessons were better, assuredly, because more certain; seeing
that by their agency I acquired, and still retain, the power of reading
what I find written, and writing myself what I will; whilst in the
others I was compelled to learn about the wanderings of a certain Æneas,
oblivious of my own, and to weep for Biab dead, because she slew herself
for love; while at the same time I brooked with dry eyes my wretched
self dying far from Thee, in the midst of those things, O God, my life.

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p5"></span>21. For what can be more wretched than
the wretch who pities not himself shedding tears over the death of Dido
for love of Æneas, but shedding no tears over his own death in not
loving Thee, O God, light of my heart, and bread of the inner mouth of
my soul, and the power that weddest my mind with my innermost thoughts?
I did not love Thee, and committed fornication against Thee; and those
around me thus sinning cried, “Well done! Well done!” For the friendship
of this world is fornication against Thee; <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) and “Well done! Well done!” is cried
until one feels ashamed not to be such a man. And for this I shed no
tears, though I wept for Dido, who sought death at the sword’s
point, <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) myself the while seeking
the lowest of Thy creatures—having forsaken Thee—earth tending to the
earth; and if forbidden to read these things, how grieved would I feel
that I was not permitted to read what grieved me. This sort of madness
is considered a more honourable and more fruitful learning than that by
which I learned to read and write.

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p8"></span>22. But now, O my God, cry unto my
soul; and let Thy Truth say unto me, “It is not so; it is not so; better
much was that first teaching.” For behold, I would rather forget the
wanderings of Æneas, and all such things, than how to write and read.
But it is true that over the entrance of the grammar school there hangs
a vail; <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) but this is not so much
a sign of the majesty of the mystery, as of a covering for error. Let
not them exclaim against me of whom I am no longer in fear, whilst I
confess to Thee, my God, that which my soul desires, and acquiesce in
reprehending my evil ways, that I may love Thy good ways. Neither let
those cry out against me who buy or sell grammar-learning. For if I ask
them whether it be true, as the poet says, that Æneas once came to
Carthage, the unlearned will reply that they do not know, the learned
will deny it to be true. But if I ask with what letters the name Æneas
is written, all who have learnt this will answer truly, in accordance
with the conventional understanding men have arrived at as to these
signs. Again, if I should ask which, if forgotten, would cause the
greatest inconvenience in our life, reading and writing, or these
poetical fictions, who does not see what every one would answer who had
not entirely forgotten himself? I erred, then, when as a boy I preferred
those vain studies to those more profitable ones, or rather loved the
one and hated the other. “One and one are two, two and two are four,”
this was then in truth a hateful song to me; while the wooden horse full
of armed men, and the burning of Troy, and the “spectral image” of
Creusa <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) were a most pleasant
spectacle of vanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[51:166](1010029.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p4"></span> [Ps.
78.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p4.1"></span>, and [Jas.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014)<span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[51:167](1010029.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p6"></span> [Jas.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)<span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[51:168](1010029.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p7"></span> *Æneìd*, vi. 457.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[51:169](1010029.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p9"></span> “The ‘vail’ was an emblem of honour,
used in places of worship, and subsequently in courts of law, emperors’
palaces, and even private house. See Du Fresne and Hoffman *sub v.* That
between the vestibule, or proscholium, and the school itself, besides
being a mark of dignity, may, as St. Augustin perhaps implies, have been
intended to denote the hidden mysteries taught therein, and that the
mass of mankind were not fit hearers of truth.”—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[51:170](1010029.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIII-p10"></span> *Æneìd*, ii. 772.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](1010030)
