[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010048)  [Next](1010050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.III.III"></span>

<span id="vi.III.III-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.III.III-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—Not Even When at Church Does He
Suppress His Desires. In the School of Rhetoric He Abhors the Acts of
the Subverters.</span>

<span id="vi.III.III-p2"></span>5. And Thy faithful mercy hovered over
me afar. Upon what unseemly iniquities did I wear myself out, following
a sacrilegious curiosity, that, having deserted Thee, it might drag me
into the treacherous abyss, and to the beguiling obedience of devils,
unto whom I immolated my wicked deeds, and in all which Thou didst
scourge me! I dared, even while Thy solemn rites were being celebrated
within the walls of Thy church, to desire, and to plan a business
sufficient to procure me the fruits of death; for which Thou chastisedst
me with grievous punishments, but nothing in comparison with my fault, O
Thou my greatest mercy, my God, my refuge from those terrible hurts,
among which I wandered with presumptuous neck, receding farther from
Thee, loving my own ways, and not Thine—loving a vagrant liberty.

<span id="vi.III.III-p3"></span>6. Those studies, also, which were
accounted honourable, were directed towards the courts of law; to excel
in which, the more crafty I was, the more I should be praised. Such is
the blindness of men, that they even glory in their blindness. And now I
was head in the School of Rhetoric, whereat I rejoiced proudly, and
became inflated with arrogance, though more sedate, O Lord, as Thou
knowest, and altogether removed from the subvertings of those
“subverters” <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) (for this stupid
and diabolical name was held to be the very brand of gallantry) amongst
whom I lived, with an impudent shamefacedness that I was not even as
they were. And with them I was, and at times I was delighted with their
friendship whose acts I ever abhorred, that is, their “subverting,”
wherewith they insolently attacked the modesty of strangers, which they
disturbed by uncalled for jeers, gratifying thereby their mischievous
mirth. Nothing can more nearly resemble the actions of devils than
these. By what name, therefore, could they be more truly called than
“subverters”?—being themselves subverted first, and altogether
perverted—being secretly mocked at and seduced by the deceiving spirits,
in what they themselves delight to jeer at and deceive others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[61:223](1010049.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="vi.III.III-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.III-p4"></span> *Eversores.* “These for their boldness
were like our ‘Roarers,’ and for their jeering like the worser sort of
those that would be called ‘The Wits.’”—W. W. “This appears to have been
a name which a pestilent and savage set of persons gave themselves,
licentious alike in speech and action. Augustin names them again, *De
Vera Relig*. c. 40; Ep. 185<span id="vi.III.III-p4.1"></span> *ad
Bonifac*. c. 4; and below, v. c. 12; whence they seemed to have
consisted mainly of Carthaginian students, whose savage life is
mentioned again, *ib*. c. 8.”—E. B. P.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](1010050.md)
