[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010420)  [Next](1010422.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p3.1"></span>To Proba,</span>* <span
id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419.md) <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p4.3"></span>*a Devoted Handmaid of God, Bishop Augustin,
a Servant of Christ and of Christ’s Servants, Sends Greeting in the Name
of the Lord of Lords.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p5.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p6"></span>1. Recollecting your request and my
promise, that as soon as time and opportunity should be given by Him to
whom we pray, I would write you something on the sub<span
id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_460"></span>ject
of prayer to God, I feel it my duty now to discharge this debt, and in
the love of Christ to minister to the satisfaction of your pious desire.
I cannot express in words how greatly I rejoiced because of the request,
in which I perceived how great is your solicitude about this supremely
important matter. For what could be more suitably the business of your
widowhood than to continue in supplications night and day, according to
the apostle’s admonition, “She that is a widow indeed, and desolate,
trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications night and day”? <span
id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420.md) It might, indeed, appear wonderful
that solicitude about prayer should occupy your heart and claim the
first place in it, when you are, so far as this world is concerned,
noble and wealthy, and the mother of such an illustrious family, and,
although a widow, not desolate, were it not that you wisely understand
that in this world and in this life the soul has no sure portion.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p8"></span>2. Wherefore He who inspired you with
this thought is assuredly doing what He promised to His disciples when
they were grieved, not for themselves, but for the whole human family,
and were despairing of the salvation of any one, after they heard from
Him that it was easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. He gave them
this marvellous and merciful reply: “The things which are impossible
with men are possible with God.” <span
id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421.md) He, therefore, with whom it is
possible to make even the rich enter into the kingdom of heaven,
inspired you with that devout anxiety which makes you think it necessary
to ask my counsel on the question how you ought to pray. For while He
was yet on earth, He brought Zaccheus, <span
id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422.md) though rich, into the kingdom of
heaven, and, after being glorified in His resurrection and ascension, He
made many who were rich to despise this present world, and made them
more truly rich by extinguishing their desire for riches through His
imparting to them His Holy Spirit. For how could you desire so much to
pray to God if you did not trust in Him? And how could you trust in Him
if you were fixing your trust in uncertain riches, and neglecting the
wholesome exhortation of the apostle: “Charge them that are rich in this
world that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy; that they
do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation,
that they may lay hold on eternal life”? <span
id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p12"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p12.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p13"></span>3. It becomes you, therefore, out of
love to this true life, to account yourself “desolate” in this world,
however great the prosperity of your lot may be. For as that is the true
life, in comparison with which the present life, which is much loved, is
not worthy to be called life, however happy and prolonged it be, so is
it also the true consolation promised by the Lord in the words of
Isaiah, “I will give him the true consolation, peace upon peace,” <span
id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424.md) without which consolation men find
themselves, in the midst of every mere earthly solace, rather desolate
than comforted. For as for riches and high rank, and all other things in
which men who are strangers to true felicity imagine that happiness
exists, what comfort do they bring, seeing that it is better to be
independent of such things than to enjoy abundance of them, because,
when possessed, they occasion, through our fear of losing them, more
vexation than was caused by the strength of desire with which their
possession was coveted? Men are not made good by possessing these
so-called good things, but, if men have become good otherwise, they make
these things to be really good by using them well. Therefore true
comfort is to be found not in them, but rather in those things in which
true life is found. For a man can be made blessed only by the same power
by which he is made good.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p15"></span>4. It is true, indeed, that good men
are seen to be the sources of no small comfort to others in this world.
For if we be harassed by poverty, or saddened by bereavement, or
disquieted by bodily pain, or pining in exile, or vexed by any kind of
calamity, let good men visit us, men who can not only rejoice with them
that rejoice, but also weep with them that weep, <span
id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425.md) and who know how to give profitable
counsel, and win us to express our feelings in conversation: the effect
is, that rough things become smooth, heavy burdens are lightened, and
difficulties vanquished most wonderfully. But this is done in and
through them by Him who has made them good by His Spirit. On the other
hand, although riches may abound, and no bereavement befal us, and
health of body be enjoyed, and we live in our own country in peace and
safety, if, at the same time, we have as our neighbours wicked men,
among whom there is not one who can be trusted, not one from whom we do
not apprehend and experience treachery, deceit, outbursts of anger,
dissensions, and snares, in such a case are not all these other things
made bitter and vexatious, so that nothing sweet or pleasant is left in
them? Whatever, therefore, be our circumstances in this world, there is
nothing truly enjoyable without a friend. But how <span id="page_461">p.
461</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_461"></span>rarely is one found in
this life about whose spirit and behaviour as a true friend there may be
perfect confidence! For no one is known to another so intimately as he
is known to himself, and yet no one is so well known even to himself
that he can be sure as to his own conduct on the morrow; wherefore,
although many are known by their fruits, and some gladden their
neighhours by their good lives, while others grieve their neighbours by
their evil lives, yet the minds of men are so unknown and so unstable,
that there is the highest wisdom in the exhortation of the apostle:
“Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who both will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of
God.” <span id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p18"></span>5. In the darkness, then, of this
world, in which we are pilgrims absent from the Lord as long as “we walk
by faith and not by sight,” <span id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427.md)
the Christian soul ought to feel itself desolate, and continue in
prayer, and learn to fix the eye of faith on the word of the divine
sacred Scriptures, as “on a light shining in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day-star arise in our hearts.” <span
id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428.md) For the ineffable source from which
this lamp borrows its light is the Light which shineth in darkness, but
the darkness comprehendeth it not—the Light, in order to seeing which
our hearts must be purified by faith; for “blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God;” <span
id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429.md) and “we know that when He shall
appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.” <span
id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430.md) Then after death shall come the
true life, and after desolation the true consolation, that life shall
deliver our “souls from death” that consolation shall deliver our “eyes
from tears,” and, as follows in the psalm, our feet shall be delivered
from falling; for there shall be no temptation there. <span
id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431.md) Moreover, if there be no
temptation, there will be no prayer; for there we shall not be waiting
for promised blessings, but contemplating the blessings actually
bestowed; wherefore he adds, “I will walk before the Lord in the land of
the living,” <span id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432.md) where we shall
then be—not in the wilderness of the dead, where we now are: “For ye are
dead,” says the apostle, “and your life is hid with Christ in God; when
Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
Him in glory.” <span id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433.md) For that is
the true life on which the rich are exhorted to lay hold by being rich
in good works; and in it is the true consolation, for want of which,
meanwhile, a widow is “desolate” indeed, even though she has sons and
grandchildren, and conducts her household piously, entreating all dear
to her to put their hope in God: and in the midst of all this, she says
in her prayer, “My soul thirsteth for Thee; my flesh longeth in a dry
and thirsty land, where no water is;” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434.md) and this dying life is nothing else
than such a land, however numerous our mortal comforts, however pleasant
our companions in the pilgrimage, and however great the abundance of our
possessions. You know how uncertain all these things are; and even if
they were not uncertain, what would they be in comparison with the
felicity which is promised in the life to come!

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p27"></span>6. In saying these things to you, who,
being a widow, rich and noble, and the mother of an illustrious family,
have asked from me a discourse on prayer, my aim has been to make you
feel that, even while your family are spared to you, and live as you
would desire, you are desolate so long as you have not attained to that
life in which is the true and abiding consolation, in which shall be
fulfilled what is spoken in prophecy: “We are satisfied in the morning
with Thy mercy, we rejoice and are glad all our days; we are made glad
according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us, and the years
wherein we have seen evil.” <span id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p29"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p29.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p30"></span>7. Wherefore, until that consolation
come, remember, in order to your “continuing in prayers and
supplications night and day,” that, however great the temporal
prosperity may be which flows around you, you are desolate. For the
apostle does not ascribe this gift to every widow, but to her who, being
a widow indeed, and desolate, “trusteth in God, and continueth in
supplication night and day.” Observe, however, most vigilantly the
warning which follows: “But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while
she liveth;” <span id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436.md) for a person
lives in those things which he loves, which he greatly desires, and in
which he believes himself to be blessed. Wherefore, what Scripture has
said of riches: “If riches increase, set not your heart upon
them,” <span id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437.md) I say to you
concerning pleasures: “If pleasures increase, set not your heart upon
them.” Do not, therefore, think highly of yourself because these things
are not wanting, but are yours abundantly, flowing, as it were, from a
most copious fountain of earthly felicity. By all means look upon your
possession of these things with indifference and contempt, and seek
nothing from them beyond health of body. For this is a blessing not to
be despised, because of its being necessary to the work of life until
“this mortal <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_462"></span>shall have put on immortality” <span
id="fr_2438"></span>[2439](#fn_2438.md) in other words, the true, perfect,
and everlasting health, which is neither reduced by earthly infirmities
nor repaired by corruptible gratification, but, enduring with celestial
rigour, is animated with a life eternally incorruptible. For the apostle
himself says, “Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts
thereof,” <span id="fr_2439"></span>[2440](#fn_2439.md) because we must
take care of the flesh, but only in so far as is necessary for health;
“For no man ever yet hated his own flesh,” <span
id="fr_2440"></span>[2441](#fn_2440.md) as he himself likewise says. Hence,
also, he admonished Timothy, who was, as it appears, too severe upon his
body, that he should “use a little wine for his stomach’s sake, and for
his often infirmities.” <span id="fr_2441"></span>[2442](#fn_2441.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p37"></span>8. Many holy men and women, using every
precaution against those pleasures in which she that liveth, cleaving to
them, and dwelling in them as her heart’s delight, is dead while she
liveth, have cast from them that which is as it were the mother of
pleasures, by distributing their wealth among the poor, and so have
stored it in the safer keeping of the treasury of heaven. If you are
*hindered* from doing this by some consideration of duty to your family,
you know yourself what account you can give to God of your use of
riches. For no one knoweth what passeth within a man, “but the spirit of
the man which is in him.” <span id="fr_2442"></span>[2443](#fn_2442.md) We
ought not to judge anything “before the time until the Lord come who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have
praise of God.” <span id="fr_2443"></span>[2444](#fn_2443.md) It pertains,
therefore, to your care as a widow, to see to it that if pleasures
increase you do not set your heart upon them, lest that which ought to
rise that it may live, die through contact with their corrupting
influence. Reckon yourself to be one of those of whom it is written,
“Their hearts shall live for ever.” <span
id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p41"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p41.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p42"></span>9. You have now heard what manner of
person you should be if you would pray; hear, in the next place, what
you ought to pray for. This is the subject on which you have thought it
most necessary to ask my opinion, because you were disturbed by the
words of the apostle: “We know not what we should pray for as we
ought;” <span id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445.md) and you became
alarmed lest it should do you more harm to pray otherwise than you
ought, than to desist from praying altogether. A short solution of your
difficulty may be given thus: “Pray for a happy life.” This all men wish
to have; for even those whose lives are worst and most abandoned would
by no means live thus, unless they thought that in this way they either
were made or might be made truly happy. Now what else ought we to pray
for than that which both bad and good desire, but which only the good
obtain?

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p44"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p44.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p45"></span>10. You ask, perchance, What is this
happy life? On this question the talents and leisure of many
philosophers have been wasted, who, nevertheless, failed in their
researches after it just in proportion as they failed to honour Him from
whom it proceeds, and were unthankful to Him. In the first place, then,
consider whether we should accept the opinion of those philosophers who
pronounce that man happy who lives according to his own will. Far be it,
surely, from us to believe this; for what if a man’s will inclines him
to live in wickedness? Is he not proved to be a miserable man in
proportion to the facility with which his depraved will is carried out?
Even philosophers who were strangers to the worship of God have rejected
this sentiment with deserved abhorrence. One of them, a man of the
greatest eloquence, says: “Behold, however, others, not philosophers
indeed, but men of ready power in disputation, who affirm that all men
are happy who live according to their own will. But this is certainly
untrue, for to wish that which is unbecoming is itself a most miserable
thing; nor is it so miserable a thing to fail in obtaining what you wish
as to wish to obtain what you ought not to desire.” <span
id="fr_2446"></span>[2447](#fn_2446.md) What is your opinion? Are not these
words, by whomsoever they are spoken, derived from the Truth itself? We
may therefore here say what the apostle said of a certain Cretan
poet <span id="fr_2447"></span>[2448](#fn_2447.md) whose sentiment had
pleased him: “This witness is true.” <span
id="fr_2448"></span>[2449](#fn_2448.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p49"></span>11. He, therefore, is truly happy who
has all that he wishes to have, and wishes to have nothing which he
ought not to wish. This being understood, let us now observe what things
men may without impropriety wish to have. One desires marriage; another,
having become a widower, chooses thereafter to live a life of
continence; a third chooses to practise continence though he is married.
And although of these three conditions one may be found better than
another, we cannot say that any one of the three persons is wishing what
he ought not: the same is true of the desire for children as the fruit
of marriage, and for life and health to be enjoyed by the children who
have been received,—of which desires the latter is one with which widows
remaining unmarried are for the most part occupied; for although,
refusing a second marriage, they do not now wish to have children, they
wish that the children that they have may live in <span id="page_463">p.
463</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_463"></span>health. From all such
care those who preserve their virginity intact are free. Nevertheless,
all have some dear to them whose temporal welfare they do without
impropriety desire. But when men have obtained this health for
themselves, and for those whom they love, are we at liberty to say that
they are now happy? They have, it is true, something which it is quite
becoming to desire; but if they have not other things which are greater,
better, and more full both of utility and beauty, they are still far
short of possessing a happy life.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p50"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p50.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p51"></span>12. Shall we then say, that in addition
to this health of body men may desire for themselves and for those dear
to them honour and power? By all means, if they desire these in order
that by obtaining them they may promote the interest of those who may be
their dependants. If they seek these things not for the sake of the
things themselves, but for some good thing which may through this means
be accomplished, the wish is a proper one; but if it be merely for the
empty gratification of pride, and arrogance, and for a superfluous and
pernicious triumph of vanity, the wish is improper. Wherefore, men do
nothing wrong in desiring for themselves and for their kindred the
competent portion of necessary things, of which the apostle speaks when
he says: “Godliness with a competency \[contentment in English version\]
is great gain; for we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out: and having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and
a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition; for the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith,
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” <span
id="fr_2449"></span>[2450](#fn_2449.md) This competent portion he desires
without impropriety who desires it and nothing beyond it; for if his
desires go beyond it, he is not desiring it, and therefore his desire is
improper. This was desired, and was prayed for by him who said: “Give me
neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me: lest I
be full, and deny Thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain.” <span
id="fr_2450"></span>[2451](#fn_2450.md) You see assuredly that this
competency is desired not for its own sake, but to secure the health of
the body, and such provision of house and clothing as is befitting the
man’s circumstances, that he may appear as he ought to do among those
amongst whom he has to live, so as to retain their respect and discharge
the duties of his position.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p54"></span>13. Among all these things, our own
welfare and the benefits which friendship bids us ask for others are
things to be desired on their own account; but a competency of the
necessaries of life is usually sought, if it be sought in the proper
way, not on its own account, but for the sake of the two higher
benefits. Welfare consists in the possession of life itself, and health
and soundness of mind and body. The claims of friendship, moreover, are
not to be confined within *too* narrow range, for it embraces all to
whom love and kindly affection are due, although the heart goes out to
some of these more freely, to others more cautiously; yea, it even
extends to our enemies, for whom also we are commanded to pray. There is
accordingly no one in the whole human family to whom kindly affection is
not due by reason of the bond of a common humanity, although it may not
be due on the ground of reciprocal love;

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p55"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p55.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>—but in those by whom we
are requited with a holy and pure love, we find great and reasonable
pleasure.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p56"></span>For these things, therefore, it becomes
us to pray: if we have them, that we may keep them; if we have them not,
that we may get them.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p57"></span>14. Is this all? Are these the benefits
in which exclusively the happy life is found? Or does truth teach us
that something else is to be preferred to them all? We know that both
the competency of things necessary, and the well-being of ourselves and
of our friends, so long as these concern this present world alone, are
to be cast aside as dross in comparison with the obtaining of eternal
life; for although the body may be in health, the mind cannot be
regarded as sound which does not prefer eternal to temporal things; yea,
the life which we live in time is wasted, if it be not spent in
obtaining that by which we may be worthy of eternal life. Therefore all
things which are the objects of useful and becoming desire are
unquestionably to be viewed with reference to that one life which is
lived with God, and is derived from Him. In so doing, we love ourselves
if we love God; and we truly love our neighbours as ourselves, according
to the second great commandment, if, so far as is in our power, we
persuade them to a similar love of God. We love God, therefore, for what
He is in Himself, and ourselves and our neighbours for His sake. Even
when living thus, let us not think that we are securely established in
that happy life, as if there was nothing more for which we should still
pray. For how could we be said to live a happy life now, while that
which alone is the object of a well-directed life is still wanting to
us?

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p58"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p58.1"></span>Chap. VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p59"></span>15. Why, then, are our desires
scattered over many things, and why, through fear of not praying as we
ought, do we ask what we should pray for, and not rather say <span
id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_464"></span>with
the Psalmist: “One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in His
temple”? <span id="fr_2451"></span>[2452](#fn_2451.md) For in the house of
the Lord “all the days of life” are not days distinguished by their
successively coming and passing away: the beginning of one day is not
the end of another; but they are all alike unending in that place where
the life which is made up of them has itself no end. In order to our
obtaining this true blessed life, He who is Himself the True Blessed
Life has taught us to pray, not with much speaking, as if our being
heard depended upon the fluency with which we express ourselves, seeing
that we are praying to One who, as the Lord tells us, “knoweth what
things we have need of before we ask Him.” <span
id="fr_2452"></span>[2453](#fn_2452.md) Whence it may seem surprising that,
although He has forbidden “much speaking,” He who knoweth before we ask
Him what things we need has nevertheless given us exhortation to prayer
in such words as these: “Men ought always to pray and not to faint;”
setting before us the case of a widow, who, desiring to have justice
done to her against her adversary, did by her persevering entreaties
persuade an unjust judge to listen to her, not moved by a regard either
to justice or to mercy, but overcome by her wearisome importunity; in
order that we might be admonished how much more certainly the Lord God,
who is merciful and just, gives ear to us praying continually to Him,
when this widow, by her unremitting supplication, prevailed over the
indifference of an unjust and wicked judge, and how willingly and
benignantly He fulfils the good desires of those whom He knows to have
forgiven others their trespasses, when this suppliant, though seeking
vengeance upon her adversary, obtained her desire. <span
id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453.md) A similar lesson the Lord gives in
the parable of the man to whom a friend in his journey had come, and
who, having nothing to set before him, desired to borrow from another
friend three loaves (in which, perhaps, there is a figure of the Trinity
of persons of one substance), and finding him already along with his
household asleep, succeeded by very urgent and importunate entreaties in
rousing him up, so that he gave him as many as he needed, being moved
rather by a wish to avoid further annoyance than by benevolent thoughts:
from which the Lord would have us understand that, if even one who was
asleep is constrained to give, even in spite of himself, after being
disturbed in his sleep by the person who asks of him, how much more
kindly will He give who never sleeps, and who rouses us from sleep that
we may ask from Him. <span id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p64"></span>16. With the same design He added:
“Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you: for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that
seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. If a son
shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a
stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent? or if
he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give good things to them that ask Him?” <span
id="fr_2455"></span>[2456](#fn_2455.md) We have here what corresponds to
those three things which the apostle commends: *faith* is signified by
the fish, either on account of the element of water used in baptism, or
because it remains unharmed amid the tempestuous waves of this
world,—contrasted with which is the serpent, that with poisonous deceit
persuaded man to disbelieve God; *hope* is signified by the egg, because
the life of the young bird is not yet in it, but is to be—is not seen,
but hoped for, because “hope which is seen is not hope,” <span
id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456.md) —contrasted with which is the
scorpion, for the man who hopes for eternal life forgets the things
which are behind, and reaches forth to the things which are before, for
to him it is dangerous to look back; but the scorpion is to be guarded
against on account of what it has in its tail, namely, a sharp and
venomous sting; *charity*, is signified by bread, for “the greatest of
these is charity,” and bread surpasses all other kinds of food in
usefulness,—contrasted with which is a stone, because hard hearts refuse
to exercise charity. Whether this be the meaning of these symbols, or
some other more suitable be found, it is at least certain that He who
knoweth how to give good gifts to His children urges us to “ask and seek
and knock.”

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p67"></span>17. Why this should be done by Him who
“before we ask Him knoweth what things we have need of,” might perplex
our minds, if we did not understand that the Lord our God requires us to
ask not that thereby our wish may be intimated to Him, for to Him it
cannot be unknown, but in order that by prayer there may be exercised in
us by supplications that desire by which we may receive what He prepares
to bestow. His gifts are very great, but we are small and straitened in
our capacity of receiving. Wherefore it is said to us: “Be ye enlarged,
not bearing the yoke along with unbelievers. <span
id="fr_2457"></span>[2458](#fn_2457.md) For, in proportion to the
simplicity of our faith, the firmness of our hope, and the ardour of our
desire, will we more largely receive of that which is immensely great;
which “eye hath not seen,” <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_465"></span>for it is not colour; which “the ear
hath not heard,” for it is not sound; and which hath not ascended into
the heart of man, for the heart of man must ascend to it. <span
id="fr_2458"></span>[2459](#fn_2458.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p70"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p70.1"></span>Chap. IX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p71"></span>18. When we cherish uninterrupted
desire along with the exercise of faith and hope and charity, we “pray
always.” But at certain stated hours and seasons we also use words in
prayer to God, that by these signs of things we may admonish ourselves,
and may acquaint ourselves with the measure of progress which we have
made in this desire, and may more warmly excite ourselves to obtain an
increase of its strength. For the effect following upon prayer will be
excellent in proportion to the fervour of the desire which precedes its
utterance. And therefore, what else is intended by the words of the
apostle: “Pray without ceasing,” <span
id="fr_2459"></span>[2460](#fn_2459.md) than, “Desire without intermission,
from Him who alone can give it, a happy life, which no life can be but
that which is eternal”? This, therefore, let us desire continually from
the Lord our God; and thus let us pray continually. But at certain hours
we recall our minds from other cares and business, in which desire
itself somehow is cooled down, to the business of prayer, admonishing
ourselves by the words of our prayer to fix attention upon that which we
desire, lest what had begun to lose heat become altogether cold, and be
finally extinguished, if the flame be not more frequently fanned.
Whence, also, when the same apostle says, “Let your requests be made
known unto God,” <span id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460.md) this is not
to be understood as if thereby they become known to God, who certainly
knew them before they were uttered, but in this sense, that they are to
be made known to ourselves in the presence of God by patient waiting
upon Him, not in the presence of men by ostentatious worship. Or perhaps
that they may be made known also to the angels that are in the presence
of God, that these beings may in some way present them to God, and
consult Him concerning them, and may bring to us, either manifestly or
secretly, that which, hearkening to His commandment, they may have
learned to be His will, and which must be fulfilled by them according to
that which they have there learned to be their duty; for the angel said
to Tobias: <span id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461.md) “Now, therefore,
when thou didst pray, and Sara thy daughter-in-law, I did bring the
remembrance of your prayers before the Holy One.”

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p75"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p75.1"></span>Chap. X.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p76"></span>19. Wherefore it is neither wrong nor
unprofitable to spend much time in praying, if there be leisure for this
without hindering other good and necessary works to which duty calls us,
although even in the doing of these, as I have said, we ought by
cherishing holy desire to pray without ceasing. For to spend a long time
in prayer is not, as some think, the same thing as to pray “with much
speaking.” Multiplied words are one thing, long-continued warmth of
desire is another. For even of the Lord Himself it is written, that He
continued all night in prayer, <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462.md) and that His prayer was more
prolonged when He was in an agony; <span
id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463.md) and in this is not an example given
to us by Him who is in time an Intercessor such as we need, and who is
with the Father eternally the Hearer of prayer?

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p79"></span>20. The brethren in Egypt are reported
to have very frequent prayers, but these very brief, and, as it were,
sudden and ejaculatory, lest the wakeful and aroused attention which is
indispensable in prayer should by protracted exercises vanish or lose
its keenness. And in this they themselves show plainly enough, that just
as this attention is not to be allowed to become exhausted if it cannot
continue long, so it is not to be suddenly suspended if it is sustained.
Far be it from us either to use “much speaking” in prayer, or to refrain
from prolonged prayer, if fervent attention of the soul continue. To use
much speaking in prayer is to employ a superfluity of words in asking a
necessary thing; but to prolong prayer is to have the heart throbbing
with continued pious emotion towards Him to whom we pray. For in most
cases prayer consists more in groaning than in speaking, in tears rather
than in words. But He setteth our tears in His sight, and our groaning
is not hidden from Him who made all things by the word, and does not
need human words.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p80"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p80.1"></span>Chap. XI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p81"></span>21. To us, therefore, words are
necessary, that by them we may be assisted in considering and observing
what we ask, not as means by which we expect that God is to be either
informed or moved to compliance. When, therefore, we say: “Hallowed be
Thy name,” we admonish ourselves to desire that His name, which is
always holy, may be also among men esteemed holy, that is to say, not
despised; which is an advantage not to God, but to men. When we say:
“Thy kingdom come,” which shall certainly come whether we wish it or
not, we do by these words stir up our own desires for that kingdom, that
it may come to us, and that we may be found worthy to reign in it. When
we say: “Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven,” we pray for
ourselves that He would give us the grace of obedience, that His will
may be done by us in the same way as it is done in heavenly places by
His angels. When we say: “Give us this day our daily bread,” the word
“this day” signifies for the present time, in which we ask either for
that competency of tem<span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_466"></span>poral blessings which I have spoken of
before (“bread” being used to designate the whole of those blessings,
because of its constituting so important a part of them), or the
sacrament of believers, which is in this present time necessary, but
necessary in order to obtain the felicity not of the present time, but
of eternity. When we say: “Forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors,” we remind ourselves both what we should ask, and what we
should do in order that we may be worthy to receive what we ask. When we
say: “Lead us not into temptation,” we admonish ourselves to seek that
we may not, through being deprived of God’s help, be either ensnared to
consent or compelled to yield to temptation. When we say: “Deliver us
from evil,” we admonish ourselves to consider that we are not yet
enjoying that good estate in which we shall experience no evil. And this
petition, which stands last in the Lord’s Prayer, is so comprehensive
that a Christian, in whatsoever affliction he be placed, may in using it
give utterance to his groans and find vent for his tears—may begin with
this petition, go on with it, and with it conclude his prayer. For it
was necessary that by the use of these words the things which they
signify should be kept before our memory.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p82"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p82.1"></span>Chap. XII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p83"></span>22. For whatever other words we may
say,—whether the desire of the person praying go before the words, and
employ them in order to give definite form to its requests, or come
after them, and concentrate attention upon them, that it may increase in
fervour,—if we pray rightly, and as becomes our wants, we say nothing
but what is already contained in the Lord’s Prayer. And whoever says in
prayer anything which cannot find its place in that gospel prayer, is
praying in a way which, if it be not unlawful, is at least not
spiritual; and I know not how carnal prayers can be lawful, since it
becomes those who are born again by the Spirit to pray in no other way
than spiritually. For example, when one prays: “Be Thou glorified among
all nations as Thou art glorified among us,” and “Let Thy prophets be
found faithful,” <span id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464.md) what else
does he ask than, “Hallowed be Thy name”? When one says: “Turn us again,
O Lord God of hosts, cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved,” <span id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465.md) what else is he
saying than, “Let Thy kingdom come”? When one says: “Order my steps in
Thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me,” <span
id="fr_2466"></span>[2467](#fn_2466.md) what else is he saying than, “Thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven”? When one says: “Give me
neither poverty nor riches,” <span id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467.md)
what else is this than, “Give us this day our daily bread”? When one
says: “Lord, remember David, and all his compassion,” <span
id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468.md) or, “O Lord, if I have done this,
if there be iniquity in my hands, if I have rewarded evil to them that
did evil to me,” <span id="fr_2469"></span>[2470](#fn_2469.md) what else is
this than, “Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors”? When one
says: “Take away from me the lusts of the appetite, and let not sensual
desire take hold on me,” <span id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470.md) what
else is this than, “Lead us not into temptation”? When one says:
“Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God; defend me from them that rise
up against me,” <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471.md) what else is
this than, “Deliver us from evil”? And if you go over all the words of
holy prayers, you will, I believe, find nothing which cannot be
comprised and summed up in the petitions of the Lord’s Prayer.
Wherefore, in praying, we are free to use different words to any extent,
but we must ask the same things; in this we have no choice.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p92"></span>23. These things it is our duty to ask
without hesitation for ourselves and for our friends, and for
strangers—yea, even for enemies; although in the heart of the person
praying, desire for one and for another may arise, differing in nature
or in strength according to the more immediate or more remote
relationship. But he who says in prayer such words as, “O Lord, multiply
my riches;” or, “Give me as much wealth as Thou hast given to this or
that man;” or, “Increase my honours, make me eminent for power and fame
in this world,” or something else of this sort, and who asks merely from
a desire for these things, and not in order through them to benefit men
agreeably to God’s will, I do not think that he will find any part of
the Lord’s Prayer in connection with which he could fit in these
requests. Wherefore let us be ashamed at least to ask these things, if
we be not ashamed to desire them. If, however, we are ashamed of even
desiring them, but feel ourselves overcome by the desire, how much
better would it be to ask to be freed from this plague of desire by Him
to whom we say, “Deliver us from evil”!

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p93"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p93.1"></span>Chap. XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p94"></span>24. You have now, if I am not mistaken,
an answer to two questions,—what kind of person you ought to be if you
would pray, and what things you should ask in prayer; and the answer has
been given not by my teaching, but by His who has condescended to teach
us all. A happy life is to be sought after, and this is to be asked from
the Lord God. Many different answers have been given by many in
discussing wherein true happiness consists; but why should we go to many
teachers, or consider many answers to this question? It has been briefly
and truly stated in the divine Scriptures, <span id="page_467">p.
467</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_467"></span>“Blessed is the people
whose God is the Lord.” <span id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472.md) That
we may be numbered among this people, and that we may attain to
beholding Him and dwelling for ever with Him, “the end of the
commandment is, charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned.” <span id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473.md) In
the same three, hope has been placed instead of a good conscience.
Faith, hope, and charity, therefore, lead unto God the man who prays,
*i.e.* who believes, hopes, and desires, and is guided as to what he
should ask from the Lord by studying the Lord’s Prayer. Fasting, and
abstinence from gratifying carnal desire in other pleasures without
injury to health, and especially frequent almsgiving, are a great
assistance in prayer; so that we may be able to say, “In the day of my
trouble I sought the Lord, with my hands in the night before Him, and I
was not deceived.” <span id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474.md) For how
can God, who is a Spirit, and who cannot be touched, be sought with
hands in any other sense than by good works?

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p98"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p98.1"></span>Chap. XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p99"></span>25. Perhaps you may still ask why the
apostle said, “We know not what to pray for as we ought,” <span
id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475.md) for it is wholly incredible that
either he or those to whom he wrote were ignorant of the Lord’s Prayer.
He could not say this either rashly or falsely; what, then, do we
suppose to be his reason for the statement? Is it not that vexations and
troubles in this world are for the most part profitable either to heal
the swelling of pride, or to prove and exercise patience, for which,
after such probation and discipline, a greater reward is reserved, or to
punish and eradicate some sins; but we, not knowing what beneficial
purpose these may serve, desire to be freed from all tribulation? To
this ignorance the apostle showed that even he himself was not a
stranger (unless, perhaps, he did it notwithstanding his knowing what to
pray for as he ought), when, lest he should be exalted above measure by
the greatness of the revelations, there was given unto him a thorn in
the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him; for which thing, not
knowing surely what he ought to pray for, he besought the Lord thrice
that it might depart from him. At length he received the answer of God,
declaring why that which so great a man prayed for was denied, and why
it was expedient that it should not be done: “My grace is sufficient for
thee; my strength is made perfect in weakness.” <span
id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p102"></span>26. Accordingly, we know not what to
pray for as we ought in regard to tribulations, which may do us good or
harm; and yet, because they are hard and painful, and against the
natural feelings of our weak nature, we pray, with a desire which is
common to mankind, that they may be removed from us. But we ought to
exercise such submission to the will of the Lord our God, that if He
does not remove those vexations, we do not suppose ourselves to be
neglected by Him, but rather, in patient endurance of evil, hope to be
made partakers of greater good, for so His strength is perfected in our
weakness. God has sometimes in anger granted the request of impatient
petitioners, as in mercy He denied it to the apostle. For we read what
the Israelites asked, and in what manner they asked and obtained their
request; but while their desire was granted, their impatience was
severely corrected. <span id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477.md) Again, He
gave them, in answer to their request, a king according to their heart,
as it is written, not according to His own heart. <span
id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478.md) He granted also what the devil
asked, namely, that His servant, who was to be proved, might be
tempted. <span id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479.md) He granted also the
request of unclean spirits, when they besought Him that their legion
might be sent into the great herd of swine. <span
id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480.md) These things are written to prevent
any one from thinking too highly of himself if he has received an answer
when he was urgently asking anything which it would be more advantageous
for him not to receive, or to prevent him from being cast down and
despairing of the divine compassion towards himself if he be not heard,
when, perchance, he is asking something by the obtaining of which he
might be more grievously afflicted, or might be by the corrupting
influences of prosperity wholly destroyed. In regard to such things,
therefore, we know not what to pray for as we ought. Accordingly, if
anything is ordered in a way contrary to our prayer, we ought, patiently
bearing the disappointment, and in everything giving thanks to God, to
entertain no doubt whatever that it was right that the will of God and
not our will should be done. For of this the Mediator has given us an
example, inasmuch as, after He had said, “Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me,” transforming the human will which was in Him
through His incarnation, He immediately added, “Nevertheless, O Father,
not as I will but as Thou wilt.” <span
id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481.md) Wherefore, not without reason are
many made righteous by the obedience of One. <span
id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p109"></span>27. But whoever desires from the Lord
that “one thing,” and seeks after it, <span
id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483.md) asks in certainty and in
confidence, and has no fear lest when obtained it be injurious to him,
seeing that, without it, anything else which he may have obtained <span
id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_468"></span>by
asking in a right way is of no advantage to him. The thing referred to
is the one true and only happy life, in which, immortal and
incorruptible in body and spirit, we may contemplate the joy of the Lord
for ever. All other things are desired, and are without impropriety
prayed for, with a view to this one thing. For whosoever has it shall
have all that he wishes, and cannot possibly wish to have anything along
with it which would be unbecoming. For in it is the fountain of life,
which we must now thirst for in prayer so long as we live in hope, not
yet seeing that which we hope for, trusting under the shadow of His
wings before whom are all our desires, that we may be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of His house, and made to drink of the river
of His pleasures; because with Him is the fountain of life, and in His
light we shall see light, <span id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484.md)
when our desire shall be satisfied with good things, and when there
shall be nothing beyond to be sought after with groaning, but all things
shall be possessed by us with rejoicing. At the same time, because this
blessing is nothing else than the “peace which passeth all
understanding,” <span id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485.md) even when we
are asking it in our prayers, we know not what to pray for as we ought.
For inasmuch as we cannot present it to our minds as it really is, we do
not know it, but whatever image of it may be presented to our minds we
reject, disown, and condemn; we know it is not what we are seeking,
although we do not yet know enough to be able to define what we seek.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p113"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p113.1"></span>Chap. XV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p114"></span>28. There is therefore in us a certain
learned ignorance, so to speak—an ignorance which we learn from that
Spirit of God who helps our infirmities. For after the apostle said, “If
we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it,” he
added in the same passage, “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but
the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And He that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is in
the mind of the Spirit, because He maketh intercession for the saints
according to the will of God.” <span
id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486.md) This is not to be understood as if
it meant that the Holy Spirit of God, who is in the Trinity, God
unchangeable, and is one God with the Father and the Son, intercedes for
the saints like one who is not a divine person; for it is said, “He
maketh intercession for the saints,” because He enables the saints to
make intercession, as in another place it is said, “The Lord your God
proveth you, that He may know whether ye love Him,” <span
id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487.md) *i.e.* that He may make you know.
He therefore makes the saints intercede with groanings which cannot be
uttered, when He inspires them with longings for that great blessing, as
yet unknown, for which we patiently wait. For how is that which is
desired set forth in language if it be unknown, for if it were utterly
unknown it would not be desired; and on the other hand, if it were seen,
it would not be desired nor sought for with groanings?

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p117"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p117.1"></span>Chap. XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p118"></span>29. Considering all these things, and
whatever else the Lord shall have made known to you in this matter,
which either does not occur to me or would take too much time to state
here, strive in prayer to overcome this world: pray in hope, pray in
faith, pray in love, pray earnestly and patiently, pray as a widow
belonging to Christ. For although prayer is, as He has taught, the duty
of all His members, *i.e.* of all who believe in Him and are united to
His body, a more assiduous attention to prayer is found to be specially
enjoined in Scripture upon those who are widows. Two women of the name
of Anna are honourably named there,—the one, Elkanah’s wife, who was the
mother of holy Samuel; the other, the widow who recognised the Most Holy
One when He was yet a babe. The former, though married, prayed with
sorrow of mind and brokenness of heart because she had no sons; and she
obtained Samuel, and dedicated him to the Lord, because she vowed to do
so when she prayed for him. <span id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488.md)
It is not easy, however, to find to what petition of the Lord’s Prayer
her petition could be referred, unless it be to the last, “Deliver us
from evil,” because it was esteemed to be an evil to be married and not
to have offspring as the fruit of marriage. Observe, however, what is
written concerning the other Anna, the widow: she “departed not from the
temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.” <span
id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489.md) In like manner, the apostle said in
words already quoted, “She that is a widow indeed, and desolate,
trusteth in God and continueth in supplications and prayers night and
day;” <span id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490.md) and the Lord, when
exhorting men to pray always and not to faint, made mention of a widow,
who, by persevering importunity, persuaded a judge to attend to her
cause, though he was an unjust and wicked man, and one who neither
feared God nor regarded man. How incumbent it is on widows to go beyond
others in devoting time to prayer may be plainly enough seen from the
fact that from among them are taken the examples set forth as an
exhortation to all to earnestness in prayer.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p122"></span>30. Now what makes this work specially
suitable to widows but their bereaved and desolate <span
id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-Page_469"></span>condition? Whosoever, then, understands
that he is in this world bereaved and desolate as long as he is a
pilgrim absent from his Lord, is careful to commit his widowhood, so to
speak, to his God as his shield in continual and most fervent prayer.
Pray, therefore, as a widow of Christ, not yet seeing Him whose help you
implore. And though you are very wealthy, pray as a poor person, for you
have not yet the true riches of the world to come, in which you have no
loss to fear. Though you have sons and grandchildren, and a large
household, still pray, as I said already, as one who is desolate, for we
have no certainty in regard to all temporal blessings that they shall
abide for our consolation even to the end of this present life. If you
seek and relish the things that are above, you desire things everlasting
and sure; and as long as you do not yet possess them, you ought to
regard yourself as desolate, even though all your family are spared to
you, and live as you desire. And if you thus act, assuredly your example
will be followed by your most devout daughter-in-law, <span
id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491.md) and the other holy widows and
virgins that are settled in peace under your care; for the more pious
the manner in which you order your house, the more are you bound to
persevere fervently in prayer, not engaging yourselves with the affairs
of this world further than is demanded in the interests of religion.

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p124"></span>31. By all means remember to pray
earnestly for me. I would not have you yield such deference to the
office fraught with perils which I bear, as to refrain from giving the
assistance which I know myself to need. Prayer was made by the household
of Christ for Peter and for Paul. I rejoice that you are in His
household; and I need, incomparably more than Peter and Paul did, the
help of the prayers of the brethren. Emulate each other in prayer with a
holy rivalry, with one heart, for you wrestle not against each other,
but against the devil, who is the common enemy of all the saints. “By
fasting, by vigils, and all mortification of the body, prayer is greatly
helped.” <span id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492.md) Let each one do what
she can; what one cannot herself do, she does by another who can do it,
if she loves in another that which personal inability alone hinders her
from doing; wherefore let her who can do less not keep back the one who
can do more, and let her who can do more not urge unduly her who can do
less. For your conscience is responsible to God; to each other owe
nothing but mutual love. May the Lord, who is able to do above what we
ask or think, give ear to your prayers. <span
id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[459:2420](1010421.htm#fr_2419.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p4"></span> Anicia Faltonia Proba, the widow of
Sextus Petronius Probus, belonged to a Roman family of great wealth and
noble lineage. Three of her sons held the consulship, two of them
together in 395 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span>, and the third in 406 <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXXX-p4.2"></span>A.D.</span> When Rome was
taken by Alaric m 410, Proba and her family were in the city, and
narrowly escaped from violence during the six days in which the Goths
pillaged the city. About this time one of the sons of Proba died, and
very soon after this sad event she resolved to quit Rome, as the return
of Alaric was daily apprehended. Having realized her ample fortune, she
sailed to Africa, accompanied by her daughter-in-law Juliana (the widow
of Anicus Hermogenianus Olybrius), and the daughter of Juliana
Demetrias, the well known *religieuse*, whose taking of the veil in 413
produced so profound an impression throughout the ecclesiastical world.
A considerable retinue of widows and younger women, seeking protection
under her escort, accompanied the distinguished refugee to Carthage.
After paying a large sum to secure the protection of Heraclianus, Count
of Africa, she was permitted to establish herself with her community of
pious women in Carthage. Her piety led her to seek the friendship and
counsel of Augustin. How readily it was given is seen here, and in
Letters CXXXI., CL., and CLXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[460:2421](1010421.htm#fr_2420.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[460:2422](1010421.htm#fr_2421.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p9"></span> [Matt.
19.21-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[460:2423](1010421.htm#fr_2422.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p10"></span> [Luke
19.9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[460:2424](1010421.htm#fr_2423.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
6.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[460:2425](1010421.htm#fr_2424.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p14"></span> [Isa.
57:18](../../../bib/sep/isa057.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/sep/isa057.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p14.1"></span>, in LXX. version.

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[460:2426](1010421.htm#fr_2425.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p16"></span> [Rom.
12.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[461:2427](1010421.htm#fr_2426.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[461:2428](1010421.htm#fr_2427.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p19"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[461:2429](1010421.htm#fr_2428.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p20"></span> [2 Pet.
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[461:2430](1010421.htm#fr_2429.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p21"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[461:2431](1010421.htm#fr_2430.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p22"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[461:2432](1010421.htm#fr_2431.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p23"></span> [Ps.
116.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[461:2433](1010421.htm#fr_2432.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p24"></span> [Ps.
116.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p24.1"></span>. In the LXX., <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p24.2"></span>εὐαρεστήσω</span>; in Aug., “placebo.”

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[461:2434](1010421.htm#fr_2433.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p24.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p25"></span> [Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[461:2435](1010421.htm#fr_2434.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p26"></span> [Ps.
63.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[461:2436](1010421.htm#fr_2435.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p28"></span> [Ps.
90:14](../../../bib/sep/psa090.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/sep/psa090.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p28.1"></span>, version of LXX.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[461:2437](1010421.htm#fr_2436.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p31"></span> [1 Tim.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[461:2438](1010421.htm#fr_2437.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p32"></span> [Ps.
62.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2438"></span>[462:2439](1010421.htm#fr_2438.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p33"></span> [1 Cor.
15.54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2439"></span>[462:2440](1010421.htm#fr_2439.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p34"></span> [Rom.
13.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2440"></span>[462:2441](1010421.htm#fr_2440.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p35"></span> [Eph.
5.39](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2441"></span>[462:2442](1010421.htm#fr_2441.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p36"></span> [1 Tim.
5.23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2442"></span>[462:2443](1010421.htm#fr_2442.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p38"></span> [1 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2443"></span>[462:2444](1010421.htm#fr_2443.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p39"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[462:2445](1010421.htm#fr_2444.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p40"></span> [Ps.
22.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[462:2446](1010421.htm#fr_2445.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p43"></span> [Rom.
8.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2446"></span>[462:2447](1010421.htm#fr_2446.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p46"></span> Cicero Hortensius.

<span id="fn_2447"></span>[462:2448](1010421.htm#fr_2447.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p47"></span> Epimenides.

<span id="fn_2448"></span>[462:2449](1010421.htm#fr_2448.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p48"></span> [Titus
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2449"></span>[463:2450](1010421.htm#fr_2449.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p52"></span> [1 Tim.
6.6-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2450"></span>[463:2451](1010421.htm#fr_2450.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p53"></span> [Prov.
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2451"></span>[464:2452](1010421.htm#fr_2451.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p60"></span> [Ps.
27.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2452"></span>[464:2453](1010421.htm#fr_2452.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p61"></span> [Matt.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[464:2454](1010421.htm#fr_2453.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p62"></span> [Luke
18.1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[464:2455](1010421.htm#fr_2454.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p63"></span> [Luke
11.5-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2455"></span>[464:2456](1010421.htm#fr_2455.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p65"></span> [Luke
11.9-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p65.1"></span>, and [Matt.
7.7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p65.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[464:2457](1010421.htm#fr_2456.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p65.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p66"></span> [Rom
8.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2457"></span>[464:2458](1010421.htm#fr_2457.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p68"></span> [2 Cor.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2458"></span>[465:2459](1010421.htm#fr_2458.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p69"></span> [1 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2459"></span>[465:2460](1010421.htm#fr_2459.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p72"></span> [1 Thess.
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[465:2461](1010421.htm#fr_2460.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p73"></span> [Phil.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[465:2462](1010421.htm#fr_2461.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p74"></span> [Tob.
12.12](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[465:2463](1010421.htm#fr_2462.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p77"></span> [Luke
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[465:2464](1010421.htm#fr_2463.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p77.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p78"></span> [Luke
22.43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p78.1"></span>. English version, “more earnestly.”

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[466:2465](1010421.htm#fr_2464.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p84"></span> [Sir.
36:4](../../../bib/apo/sir036.htm#004.md),
[18](../../../bib/apo/sir036.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[466:2466](1010421.htm#fr_2465.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p85"></span> [Ps.
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2466"></span>[466:2467](1010421.htm#fr_2466.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p85.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p86"></span> [Ps.
119.133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[466:2468](1010421.htm#fr_2467.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p87"></span> [Prov.
30.8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[466:2469](1010421.htm#fr_2468.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p88"></span> [Ps.
132.1](../../../bib/sep/psa132.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p88.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2469"></span>[466:2470](1010421.htm#fr_2469.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p89"></span> [Ps.
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[466:2471](1010421.htm#fr_2470.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p89.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p90"></span> [Ecclus.
23.6](../../../bib/apo/sir023.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[466:2472](1010421.htm#fr_2471.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p91"></span>
[Ps.59.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[467:2473](1010421.htm#fr_2472.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p95"></span>
[Ps.144.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[467:2474](1010421.htm#fr_2473.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p96"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[467:2475](1010421.htm#fr_2474.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p97"></span> [Ps.
77.2](../../../bib/sep/psa077.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p97.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[467:2476](1010421.htm#fr_2475.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p100"></span> [Rom.
8.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[467:2477](1010421.htm#fr_2476.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p101"></span> [2 Cor.
12.7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[467:2478](1010421.htm#fr_2477.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p103"></span> [Num.
11](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[467:2479](1010421.htm#fr_2478.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p104"></span> [1 Sam.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[467:2480](1010421.htm#fr_2479.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p104.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p105"></span> [Job
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012.md), [Job
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[467:2481](1010421.htm#fr_2480.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p105.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p106"></span> [Luke
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#032.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[467:2482](1010421.htm#fr_2481.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p106.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p107"></span> [Matt.
26.39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[467:2483](1010421.htm#fr_2482.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p107.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p108"></span> [Rom.
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[467:2484](1010421.htm#fr_2483.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p109.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p110"></span> [Ps.
37.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[468:2485](1010421.htm#fr_2484.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p110.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p111"></span> [Ps.
36.8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[468:2486](1010421.htm#fr_2485.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p111.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p112"></span> [Phil.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[468:2487](1010421.htm#fr_2486.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p114.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p115"></span> [Rom.
8.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[468:2488](1010421.htm#fr_2487.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p115.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p116"></span> [Deut.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[468:2489](1010421.htm#fr_2488.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p119"></span> [1 Sam.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#000.md)<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[468:2490](1010421.htm#fr_2489.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p120"></span> [Luke
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[468:2491](1010421.htm#fr_2490.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p120.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p121"></span> [1 Tim.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[469:2492](1010421.htm#fr_2491.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p122.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p123"></span> Juliana, the mother of Demetrias.

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[469:2493](1010421.htm#fr_2492.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p125"></span> [Tob.
12.8](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[469:2494](1010421.htm#fr_2493.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p125.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXX-p126"></span> [Eph.
3.20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXX-p126.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXI](1010422.md)
