[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010328)  [Next](1010330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXII-p1.1"></span>Letter XXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392.)

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXII-p3.1"></span>To Bishop Aurelius, Augustin, Presbyter,
Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p5"></span>1. When, after long hesitation, I knew
not how to frame a suitable reply to the letter of your Holiness (for
all attempts to express my feelings were baffled by the strength of
affectionate emotions which, rising spontaneously, were by the reading
of your letter much more vehemently inflamed), I cast myself at last
upon God, that He might, according to my strength, so work in me that I
might address to you such an answer as should be suitable to the zeal
for the Lord and the care of His Church which we have in common, and in
accordance with your dignity and the respect which is due to you from
me. And, first of all, as to your belief that you are aided by my
prayers, I not only do not decline this assurance, but I do even
willingly accept it. For thus, though not through my prayers, assuredly
in yours, our Lord will hear me. As to your most benignant approval of
the conduct of brother Alypius in remaining in connection with us, to be
an example to the brethren who desire to withdraw themselves from this
world’s cares, I thank you more warmly than words can declare. May the
Lord recompense this to your own soul! The whole company, therefore, of
brethren which has begun to grow up together beside me, is bound to you
by gratitude for this great favour; in bestowing which, you, being far
separated from us only by distance on the surface of the earth, have
consulted our interest as one in spirit very near to us. Wherefore, to
the utmost of our power we give ourselves to prayer that the Lord may be
pleased to uphold along with you the flock which has been committed to
you, and may never anywhere forsake you, but be present as your help in
all times of need, showing in His dealings with His Church, through your
discharge of priestly functions, such mercy as spiritual men with tears
and groanings implore Him to manifest.

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p6"></span>2. Know, therefore, most blessed lord,
venerable for the superlative fulness of your charity, that I do not
despair, but rather cherish lively hope that, by means of that authority
which you wield, and which, as we trust, has been committed to your
spirit, not to your flesh alone, our Lord and God may be able, through
the respect due to councils <span id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481)
and to yourself, to bring healing to the many carnal blemishes and
disorders which the African Church is suffering in the conduct of many,
and is bewailing in the sorrow of a few of her members. For whereas the
apostle had in one passage briefly set forth as fit to be hated and
avoided three classes of vices, from which there springs an innumerable
crop of vicious courses, only one of these—that, namely, which he has
placed second—is very strictly punished by the Church; but the other
two, viz. the first and third, appear to be tolerable in the estimation
of men, and so it may gradually come to pass that they shall even cease
to be regarded as vices. The words of the chosen vessel are these: “Not
in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.” <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482)

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p9"></span>3. Of these three, then, chambering and
wantonness are regarded as crimes so great, that any one stained with
these sins is deemed unworthy not merely of holding office in the
Church, but also of participation in the sacraments; and rightly so. But
why restrict such censure to this form of sin alone? For rioting and
drunkenness are so tolerated and allowed by public opinion, that even in
services designed to honour the memory of the blessed martyrs, and this
not only on the annual festivals (which itself must be regarded as
deplorable by every one who looks with a spiritual eye upon these
things), but every day, they are openly practised. Were this corrupt
practice objectionable only because of its being disgraceful, and not on
the ground of impiety, we might consider it as a scandal to be tolerated
with such amount of forbearance as is within our power. And yet, even in
that case, what are we to make of the fact that, when the same apostle
had given a long list of vices, among which he mentioned drunkenness, he
concluded with the warning that we should not even eat bread <span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="vii.1.XXII-Page_240"></span>with
those who are guilty of such things? <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) But let us, if it must be so, bear
with these things in the luxury and disorder of families, and of those
convivial meetings which are held within the walls of private houses;
and let us take the body of Christ in communion with those with whom we
are forbidden to eat even the bread which sustains our bodies; but at
least let this outrageous insult be kept far away from the tombs of the
sainted dead, from the scenes of sacramental privilege, and from the
houses of prayer. For who may venture to forbid in private life excesses
which, when they are practised by crowds in holy places, are called an
honouring of the martyrs?

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p11"></span>4. If Africa were the first country in
which an attempt were made to put down these things, her example would
deserve to be esteemed worthy of imitation by all other countries; <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) but when, both throughout the
greater part of Italy and in all or almost all the churches beyond the
sea, these practices either, as in some places, never existed, or, as in
other places where they did exist, have been, whether they were recent
or of long standing, rooted out and put down by the diligence and the
censures of bishops who were holy men, entertaining true views
concerning the life to come;—when this, I say, is the case, do we
hesitate as to the possibility of removing this monstrous defect in our
morals, after an example has been set before us in so many lands?
Moreover, we have as our bishop a man belonging to those parts, for
which we give thanks earnestly to God; although he is a man of such
moderation and gentleness, in fine, of such prudence and zeal in the
Lord, that even had he been a native of Africa, the persuasion would
have been wrought in him by the Scriptures, that a remedy must be
applied to the wound which this loose and disorderly custom has
inflicted. But so wide and deep is the plague caused by this wickedness,
that, in my opinion, it cannot be completely cured without interposition
of a council’s authority. If, however, a beginning is to be made by one
church, it seems to me, that as it would be presumptuous for any other
church to attempt to change what the Church of Carthage still
maintained, so would it also be the height of effrontery for any other
to wish to persevere in a course which the Church of Carthage had
condemned. And for such a reform in Carthage, what better bishop could
be desired than the prelate who, while he was a deacon, solemnly
denounced these practices?

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p13"></span>5. But that over which you then
sorrowed you ought now to suppress, not harshly, but as it is written,
“in the spirit of meekness.” <span id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485)
Pardon my boldness, for your letter revealing to me your true brotherly
love gives me such confidence, that I am encouraged to speak as freely
to you as I would to myself. These offences are taken out of the way, at
least in my judgment, by other methods than harshness, severity, and an
imperious mode of dealing,—namely, rather by teaching than by
commanding, rather by advice than by denunciation. <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486) Thus at least we must deal with the
multitude; in regard to the sins of a few, exemplary severity must be
used. And if we do employ threats, let this be done sorrowfully,
supporting our threatenings of coming judgment by the texts of
Scripture, so that the fear which men feel through our words may be not
of us in our own authority, but of God Himself. Thus an impression shall
be made in the first place upon those who are spiritual, or who are
nearest to that state of mind; and then by means of the most gentle, but
at the same time most importunate exhortations, the opposition of the
rest of the multitude shall be broken down. <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487)

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p17"></span>6. Since, however, these drunken revels
and luxurious feasts in the cemeteries are wont to be regarded by the
ignorant and carnal multitude as not only an honour to the martyrs, but
also a solace to the dead, it appears to me that they might be more
easily dissuaded from such scandalous and unworthy practices in these
places, if, besides showing that they are forbidden by Scripture, we
take care, in regard to the offerings for the spirits of those who
sleep, which indeed we are bound to believe to be of some use, that they
be not sumptuous beyond what is becoming respect for the memory of the
departed, and that they be distributed without ostentation, and
cheerfully to all who ask a share of them; also that they be not sold,
but that if any one desires to offer any money as a religious act, it be
given on the spot to the poor. Thus the appearance of neglecting the
memory of their deceased friends, which might cause them no small sorrow
of heart, shall be avoided, and that which is a pious and honourable act
of religious service shall be celebrated as it should be in the Church.
This may suffice meanwhile in regard to rioting and drunkenness.

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p18"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXII-p18.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p19"></span>7. As to “strife and deceit,” <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488) what right have I to speak, seeing
that these vices prevail more seriously among our own order than among
our congregations? Let me, however, say that the source of these evils
is pride, and a desire for the praises of men, which also frequently
produces hypocrisy. This is successfully re<span id="page_241">p.
241</span> <span id="vii.1.XXII-Page_241"></span>sisted only by him who
is penetrated with love and fear of God, through the multiplied
declarations of the divine books; provided, however, that such a man
exhibit in himself a pattern both of patience and of humility, by
assuming as his due less praise and honour than is offered to him: at
the same time neither accepting all nor refusing all that is rendered to
him by those who honour him; and as to the portion which he does accept,
receiving it not for his own sake, seeing that he ought to live wholly
in the sight of God and to despise human applause, but for the sake of
those whose welfare he cannot promote if by too great self-abasement he
lose his place in their esteem. For to this pertains that word, “Let no
man despise thy youth;” <span id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489) while
he who said this says also in another place, “If I yet pleased men, I
should not be the servant of Christ.” <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490)

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p23"></span>8. It is a great matter not to exult in
the honours and praises which come from men, but to reject all vain
pomp; and, if some of this be necessary, to make whatever is thus
retained contribute to the benefit and salvation of those who confer the
honour. For it has not been said in vain, “God will break the bones of
those who seek to please men.” <span
id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491) For what could be feebler, what
more destitute of the firmness and strength which the bones here spoken
of figuratively represent, than the man who is prostrated by the tongue
of slanderers, although he knows that the things spoken against him are
false? The pain arising from this thing would in no wise rend the bowels
of his soul, if its bones had not been broken by the love of praise. I
take for granted your strength of mind: therefore it is to myself that I
say those things which I am now stating to you. Nevertheless you are
willing, I believe, to consider along with me how important and how
difficult these things are. For the man who has not declared war against
this enemy has no idea of its power; for if it be comparatively easy to
dispense with praise so long as it is denied to him, it is difficult to
forbear from being captivated with praise when it is offered. And yet
the hanging of our minds upon God ought to be so great, that we would at
once correct those with whom we may take that liberty, when we are by
them undeservedly praised, so as to prevent them from either thinking us
to possess what is not in us, or regarding that as ours which belongs to
God, or commending us for things which, though we have them, and perhaps
have them in abundance, are nevertheless in their nature not worthy of
commendation, such as are all those good things which we have in common
with the lower animals or with wicked men. If, however, we are
deservedly praised on account of what God has given us, let us
congratulate those to whom what is really good yields pleasure; but let
us not congratulate ourselves on the fact of our pleasing men, but on
the fact of our being (if it is the case) such in the sight of God as we
are in their esteem, and because praise is given not to us, but to God,
who is the giver of all things which are truly and justly praised. These
things are daily repeated to me by myself, or rather by Him from whom
proceed all profitable instructions, whether they are found in the
reading of the divine word or are suggested from within to the mind; and
yet, although strenuously contending with my adversary, I often receive
wounds from him when I am unable to put away from myself the fascinating
power of the praise which is offered to me.

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p25"></span>9. These things I have written, in
order that, if they are not now necessary for your Holiness (your own
thoughts suggesting to you other and more useful considerations of this
kind, or your Holiness being above the need of such remedies), my
disorders at least may be known to you, and you may know that which may
move you to deign to plead with God for me as my infirmity demands: and
I beseech you, by the humanity of Him who hath commanded us to bear each
other’s burdens, that you offer such intercession most importunately on
my behalf. There are many things in regard to my life and conversation,
of which I will not write, which I would confess with tears if we were
so situated that nothing was required but my mouth and your ears as the
means of communication between my heart and your heart. If, however, the
aged Saturninus, venerated by us and beloved by all here with unreserved
and unfeigned affection, whose brotherly love and devotion to you I
observed when I was with you,—if he, I say, is pleased to visit us so
soon as he finds it convenient, whatever converse we may be able to
enjoy with that holy and spiritually-minded man shall be esteemed by us
very little, if at all, different from personal conference with your
Excellency. With entreaties too earnest for words to express their
urgency, I beg you to condescend to join us in asking and obtaining from
him this favour. For the people of Hippo fear much, and far more than
they ought, to let me go to so great a distance from them, and will on
no account trust me by myself so far as to permit me to see the field
given by your care and generosity to the brethren, of which, before your
letter came, we had heard through our brother and fellow-servant
Parthenius, from whom we have also learned many other things which we
longed to know. The Lord will accomplish the fulfilment of all the other
things which we still desiderate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[239:1482](1010329.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p7"></span> We adopt the conjectural reading
“*conciliorum.*” Compare sec. 4, p. 240.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[239:1483](1010329.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p8"></span> [Rom.
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="vii.1.XXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[240:1484](1010329.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[240:1485](1010329.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p12"></span> Manifestly the correct punctuation
here is: *Hæc si prima Africa tentaret auferre, a cæteris terris
imitatione digna esse deberet.*

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[240:1486](1010329.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p14"></span> [Gal.
6.1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[240:1487](1010329.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p15"></span> *Magis monendo quam minando.*

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[240:1488](1010329.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p16"></span> One may see in Letter XXIX. how
admirably Augustin illustrated in his own practice the directions here
given.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[240:1489](1010329.htm#fr_1488) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p20"></span> “De contentione et dolo” is Augustin’s
translation of the words in [Rom. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)<span id="vii.1.XXII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[241:1490](1010329.htm#fr_1489) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p21"></span> [1 Tim.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[241:1491](1010329.htm#fr_1490) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p22"></span> [Gal.
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XXII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[241:1492](1010329.htm#fr_1491) <span
id="vii.1.XXII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXII-p24"></span> [Ps.
52.6](../../../bib/sep/psa052.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XXII-p24.1"></span>, Sept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIII](1010330)
