[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010081)  [Next](1010083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.VI"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.VI-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Faustus Was Indeed an Elegant
Speaker, But Knew Nothing of the Liberal Sciences.</span>

<span id="vi.V.VI-p2"></span>10. And for nearly the whole of those nine
years during which, with unstable mind, I had been their follower, I had
been looking forward with but too great eagerness for the arrival of
this same Faustus. For the other members of the sect whom I had chanced
to light upon, when unable to answer the questions I raised, always bade
me look forward to his coming, when, by discoursing with him, these, and
greater difficulties if I had them, would be most easily and amply
cleared away. When at last he did come, I found him to be a man of
pleasant speech, who spoke of the very same things as they themselves
did, although more fluently, and in better language. But of what profit
to me was the elegance of my cup-bearer, since he offered me not the
more precious draught for which I thirsted? My ears were already
satiated with similar things; neither did they appear to me more
conclusive, because better expressed; nor true, because oratorical; nor
the spirit necessarily wise, because the face was comely and the
language eloquent. But they who extolled him to me were not competent
judges; and therefore, as he was possessed of suavity of speech, he
appeared to them to be prudent and wise. Another sort of persons,
however, was, I was aware, suspicious even of truth itself, if
enunciated in smooth and flowing language. But me, O my God, Thou hadst
already instructed by wonderful and mysterious ways, and therefore I
believe that Thou instructedst me because it is truth; nor of truth is
there any other teacher—where or whencesoever it may shine upon us <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) —but Thee. From Thee, therefore, I had
now learned, that because a thing is eloquently expressed, it should not
of necessity seem to be true; nor, because uttered with stammering lips,
should it be false nor, again, perforce true, because unskilfully
delivered; nor consequently untrue, because the language is fine; but
that wisdom and folly are as food both wholesome and unwholesome, and
courtly or simple words as town-made or rustic vessels,—and both kinds
of food may be served in either kind of dish.

<span id="vi.V.VI-p4"></span>11. That eagerness, therefore, with which I
had so long waited for this man was in truth delighted with his action
and feeling when disputing, and the fluent and apt words with which he
clothed his ideas. I was therefore filled with joy, and joined with
others (and even exceeded them) in exalting and praising him. It was,
however, a source of annoyance to me that I was not allowed at those
meetings of his auditors to introduce and impart <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) any of those questions that troubled
me in familiar exchange of arguments with him. When I might speak, and
began, in conjunction with my friends, to engage his attention at such
times as it was not unseeming for him to enter into a discussion with
me, <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="vi.V.VI-Page_83"></span>and had mooted such questions as perplexed
me, I discovered him first to know nothing of the liberal sciences save
grammar, and that only in an ordinary way. Having, however, read some of
Tully’s *Orations*, a very few books of Seneca and some of the poets,
and such few volumes of his own sect as were written coherently in
Latin, and being day by day practised in speaking, he so acquired a sort
of eloquence, which proved the more delightful and enticing in that it
was under the control of ready tact, and a sort of native grace. Is it
not even as I recall, O Lord my God, Thou judge of my conscience? My
heart and my memory are laid before Thee, who didst at that time direct
me by the inscrutable mystery of Thy Providence, and didst set before my
face those vile errors of mine, in order that I might see and loathe
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[82:390](1010082.htm#fr_389) <span
id="vi.V.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VI-p3"></span> Sec. vii. sec. 15, below.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[82:391](1010082.htm#fr_390) <span
id="vi.V.VI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VI-p5"></span> “This was the old fashion of the East,
where the scholars had liberty to ask questions of their masters, and to
move doubts as the professors were reading, or so soon as the lecture
was done. Thus did our Saviour with the doctors ([Luke
2.46](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#046)<span id="vi.V.VI-p5.1"></span>).
So it is still in some European Universities.”—W. W.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](1010083)
