[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010322)  [Next](1010324.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XVI-p1.1"></span>Letter XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390)

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVI-p3.1"></span>From Maximus of Madaura to Augustin.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p4"></span>1. Desiring to be frequently made glad by
communications from you, and by the stimulus of your reasoning with
which in a most pleasant way, and without violation of good feeling, you
recently attacked me, I have not forborne from replying to you in the
same spirit, lest you should call my silence an acknowledgment of being
in the wrong. But I beg you to give these sentences an indulgent kindly
hearing, if you judge them to give evidence of the feebleness of old
age.

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p5"></span>Grecian mythology tells us, but without
sufficient warrant for our believing the statement, that Mount Olympus
is the dwelling-place of the gods. But we actually see the market-place
of our town occupied by a crowd of beneficient deities; and we approve
of this. Who could ever be so frantic and infatuated as to deny that
there is one supreme God, without beginning, without natural offspring,
who is, as it were, the great and mighty Father of all? The powers of
this Deity, diffused throughout the universe which He has made, we
worship under many names, as we are all ignorant of His true name, the
name God  <span id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470.md) being common to all
kinds of religious belief. Thus it comes, that while in diverse
supplications we approach separately, as it were, certain parts of the
Divine Being, we are seen in reality to be the worshippers of Him in
whom all these parts are one.

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p7"></span>2. Such is the greatness of your delusion
in another matter, that I cannot conceal the impatience with which I
regard it. For who can bear to find Mygdo honoured above that Jupiter
who hurls the thunderbolt; or Sanæ above Juno, Minerva, Venus, and
Vesta; or the arch-martyr Namphanio (oh horror!) above all the immortal
gods together? Among the immortals, Lucitas also is looked up to with no
less religious reverence, and others in an endless list (having names
abhorred both by gods and by men), who, when they met the ignominious
end which their character and conduct had deserved, put the crowning act
upon their criminal career by affecting to die nobly in a good cause,
though conscious of the infamous deeds for which they were condemned.
The tombs of these men (it is a folly almost beneath our notice) are
visited by crowds of simpletons, who forsake our temples and despise the
memory of their ancestors, so that the prediction of the indignant bard
is notably fulfilled: “Rome shall, in the temples of the gods, swear by
the shades of men.” <span id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471.md) To me it
almost seems at this time as if a second campaign of Actium had begun,
in which Egyptian monsters, doomed soon to perish, dare to brandish
their weapons against the gods of the Romans.

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p9"></span>3. But, O man of great wisdom, I beseech
you, lay aside and reject for a little while the vigour of your
eloquence, which has made you everywhere renowned; lay down also the
arguments of Chrysippus, which you are accustomed to use in debate;
leave for a brief season your logic, which aims in the forthputting of
its energies to leave nothing certain to any one; and show me plainly
and actually who is that God whom you Christians claim as belonging
specially to you, and pretend to see present among you in secret places.
For it is in open day, before the eyes and ears of all men, that we
worship our gods with pious supplications, and propitiate them by
acceptable sacrifices; and we take pains that these things be seen and
approved by all.

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p10"></span>4. Being, however, infirm and old, I
withdraw myself from further prosecution of this contest, and willingly
consent to the opinion of the rhetorician of Mantua, “Each one is drawn
by that which pleases himself best.” <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472.md)

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p12"></span><span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="vii.1.XVI-Page_234"></span>After this, O excellent man, who hast
turned aside from my faith, I have no doubt that this letter will be
stolen by some thief, and destroyed by fire or otherwise. Should this
happen, the paper will be lost, but not my letter, of which I will
always retain a copy, accessible to all religious persons. May you be
preserved by the gods, through whom we all, who are mortals on the
surface of this earth, with apparent discord but real harmony, revere
and worship Him who is the common Father of the gods and of all mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[233:1471](1010323.htm#fr_1470.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p6"></span> *Deus.*

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[233:1472](1010323.htm#fr_1471.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p8"></span> “Inque Deûm templis jurabit Roma per
umbras,” <span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XVI-p8.1"></span>Lucan</span>,
*Pharsalia*, vii. 459.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[233:1473](1010323.htm#fr_1472.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVI-p11"></span> Virg. *Eclog.* ii. 65: “Trahit sua
quemque voluptas.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XVII](1010324.md)
