[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010323)  [Next](1010325.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XVII-p1.1"></span>Letter XVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390.)

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVII-p3.1"></span>To Maximus of Madaura.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p4"></span>1. Are we engaged in serious debate with
each other, or is it your desire that we merely amuse ourselves? For,
from the language of your letter, I am at a loss to know whether it is
due to the weakness of your cause, or through the courteousness of your
manners, that you have preferred to show yourself more witty than
weighty in argument. For, in the first place, a comparison was drawn by
you between Mount Olympus and your market-place, the reason for which I
cannot divine, unless it was in order to remind me that on the said
mountain Jupiter pitched his camp when he was at war with his father, as
we are taught by history, which your religionists call sacred; and that
in the said market-place Mars is represented in two images, the one
unarmed, the other armed, and that a statue of a man placed over against
these restrains with three extended fingers the fury of their demonship
from the injuries which he would willingly inflict on the citizens.
Could I then ever believe that by mentioning that market-place you
intended to revive my recollection of such divinities, unless you wished
that we should pursue the discussion in a jocular spirit rather than in
earnest? But in regard to the sentence in which you said that such gods
as these are members, so to speak, of the one great God, I admonish you
by all means, since you vouchsafe such an opinion, to abstain very
carefully from profane jestings of this kind. For if you speak of the
One God, concerning whom learned and unlearned are, as the ancients have
said, agreed, do you affirm that those whose savage fury—or, if you
prefer it, whose power—the image of a dead man keeps in check are
members of Him? I might say more on this point, and your own judgment
may show you how wide a door for the refutation of your views is here
thrown open. But I restrain myself, lest I should be thought by you to
act more as a rhetorician than as one earnestly defending truth.

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p5"></span>2. As to your collecting of certain
Carthaginian names of deceased persons, by which you think reproach may
be cast, in what seems to you a witty manner, against our religion, I do
not know whether I ought to answer this taunt, or to pass it by in
silence. For if to your good sense these things appear as trifling as
they really are, I have not time to spare for such pleasantry. If,
however, they seem to you important, I am surprised that it did not
occur to you, who are apt to be disturbed by absurdly-sounding names,
that your religionists have among their priests Eucaddires, and among
their deities, Abaddires. I do not suppose that these were absent from
your mind when you were writing, but that, with your courtesy and genial
humour, you wished for the unbending of our minds, to recall to our
recollection what ludicrous things are in your superstition. For surely,
considering that you are an African, and that we are both settled in
Africa, you could not have so forgotten yourself when writing to
Africans as to think that Punic names were a fit theme for censure. For
if we interpret the signification of these words, what else does
Namphanio mean than “man of the good foot,” *i.e.* whose coming brings
with it some good fortune, as we are wont to say of one whose coming to
us has been followed by some prosperous event, that he came with a lucky
foot? And if the Punic language is rejected by you, you virtually deny
what has been admitted by most learned men, that many things have been
wisely preserved from oblivion in books written in the Punic tongue.
Nay, you ought even to be ashamed of having been born in the country in
which the cradle of this language is still warm, *i.e.* in which this
language was originally, and until very recently, the language of the
people. If, however, it is not reasonable to take offence at the mere
sound of names, and you admit that I have given correctly the meaning of
the one in question, you have reason for being dissatisfied with your
friend Virgil, who gives to your god Hercules an invitation to the
sacred rites celebrated by Evander in his honour, in these terms, “Come
to us, and to these rites in thine honour, with auspicious foot.” <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473.md) He wishes him to come “with
auspicious foot;” that is to say, he wishes Hercules to come as a
Namphanio, the name about which you are pleased to make much mirth at
our expense. But if you have a penchant for ridicule, you have among
yourselves ample material for witticisms—the god Stercutius, the goddess
Cloacina, the Bald Venus, the gods Fear and Pallor, and the goddess
Fever, and others of the same kind without number, to whom the ancient
Roman idolaters erected temples, and judged it right to offer worship;
which if you neglect, you are neg<span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="vii.1.XVII-Page_235"></span>lecting Roman gods, thereby making it
manifest that you are not thoroughly versed in the sacred rites of Rome;
and yet you despise and pour contempt on Punic names, as if you were a
devotee at the altars of Roman deities.

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p7"></span>3. In truth however, I believe that
perhaps you do not value these sacred rites any more than we do, but
only take from them some unaccountable pleasure in your time of passing
through this world: for you have no hesitation about taking refuge under
Virgil’s wing, and defending yourself with a line of his:

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p8"></span>“Each one is drawn by that which pleases
himself best.” <span id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474.md)

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p10"></span>If, then, the authority of Maro pleases
you, as you indicate that it does, you will be pleased with such lines
as these: “First Saturn came from lofty Olympus, fleeing before the arms
of Jupiter, an exile bereft of his realms,” <span
id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475.md) —and other such statements, by
which he aims at making it understood that Saturn and your other gods
like him were men. For he had read much history, confirmed by ancient
authority, which Cicero also had read, who makes the same statement in
his dialogues, in terms more explicit than we would venture to insist
upon, and labours to bring it to the knowledge of men so far as the
times in which he lived permitted.

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p12"></span>4. As to your statement, that your
religious services are to be preferred to ours because you worship the
gods in public, but we use more retired places of meeting, let me first
ask you how you could have forgotten your Bacchus, whom you consider it
right to exhibit only to the eyes of the few who are initiated. You,
however, think that, in making mention of the public celebration of your
sacred rites, you intended only to make sure that we would place before
our eyes the spectacle presented by your magistrates and the chief men
of the city when intoxicated and raging along your streets; in which
solemnity, if you are possessed by a god, you surely see of what nature
he must be who deprives men of their reason. If, however, this madness
is only feigned, what say you to this keeping of things hidden in a
service which you boast of as public, or what good purpose is served by
so base an imposition? Moreover, why do you not foretell future events
in your songs, if you are endowed with the prophetic gift? or why do you
rob the bystanders, if you are in your sound mind?

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p13"></span>5. Since, then, you have recalled to
our remembrance by your letter these and other things which I think it
better to pass over meanwhile, why may not we make sport of your gods,
which, as every one who knows your mind, and has read your letters, is
well aware, are made sport of abundantly by yourself? Therefore, if you
wish us to discuss these subjects in a way becoming your years and
wisdom, and, in fact, as may be justly required of us, in connection
with our purpose, by our dearest friends, seek some topic worthy of
being debated between us; and be careful to say on behalf of your gods
such things as may prevent us from supposing that you are intentionally
betraying your own cause, when we find you rather bringing to our
remembrance things which may be said against them than alleging anything
in their defence. In conclusion, however, lest this should be unknown to
you, and you might thus be brought unwittingly into jestings which are
profane, let me assure you that by the Christian Catholics (by whom a
church has been set up in your own town also) no deceased person is
worshipped, and that nothing, in short, which has been made and
fashioned by God is worshipped as a divine power. This worship is
rendered by them only to God Himself, who framed and fashioned all
things. <span id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476.md)

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p15"></span>These things shall be more fully
treated of, with the help of the one true God, whenever I learn that you
are disposed to discuss them seriously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[234:1474](1010324.htm#fr_1473.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p6"></span> Virg. *Æneid*, viii. 302: “Et nos et
tua dexter adi pede sacra secundo.”

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[235:1475](1010324.htm#fr_1474.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p9"></span> “Trahit sua quemque voluptas.”

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[235:1476](1010324.htm#fr_1475.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p11"></span> “Primus ab æthereo venit Saturnis
Olympo Arma Jovis fugiens et regnis exsul ademptis.” *Æn*. viii. 319,
320.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[235:1477](1010324.htm#fr_1476.md) <span
id="vii.1.XVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVII-p14"></span> We give the original of this important
sentence: “Scias a Christianis catholicis (quorum in vestro oppido etiam
ecclesia constituta est) nullum coli mortuorum, nihi denique ut numen
adorari quod sit factum et conditum a Deo, sed unum ipsum Deum qui fecit
et condidit omnia.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XVIII](1010325.md)
