[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010112)  [Next](1010114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.V"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.V-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.V-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Questions Concerning the Origin of
Evil in Regard to God, Who, Since He is the Chief Good, Cannot Be the
Cause of Evil.</span>

<span id="vi.VII.V-p2"></span>7. And I sought “whence is evil?” And
sought in an evil way; nor saw I the evil in my very search. And I set
in order before the view of my spirit the whole creation, and whatever
we can discern in it, such as earth, sea, air, stars, trees, living
creatures; yea, and whatever in it we do not see, as the firmament of
heaven, all the angels, too, and all the spiritual inhabitants thereof.
But these very beings, as though they were bodies, did my fancy dispose
in such and such places, and I made one huge mass of all Thy creatures,
distinguished according to the kinds of bodies,—some of them being real
bodies, some what I myself had feigned for spirits. And this mass I made
huge,—not as it was, which I could not know, but as large as I thought
well, yet every way finite. But Thee, O Lord, I imagined on every part
environing and penetrating it, though every way infinite; as if there
were a sea everywhere, and on every side through immensity nothing but
an infinite sea; and it contained within itself some sponge, huge,
though finite, so that the sponge would in all its parts be filled from
the immeasurable sea. So conceived I Thy Creation to be itself finite,
and filled by Thee, the Infinite. And I said, Behold God, and behold
what God hath created; and God is good, yea, most mightily and
incomparably better than all these; but yet He, who is good, hath
created them good, and <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="vi.VII.V-Page_105"></span>behold how He encircleth and filleth them.
Where, then, is evil, and whence, and how crept it in hither? What is
its root, and what its seed? Or hath it no being at all? Why, then, do
we fear and shun that which hath no being? Or if we fear it needlessly,
then surely is that fear evil whereby the heart is unnecessarily pricked
and tormented,—and so much a greater evil, as we have naught to fear,
and yet do fear. Therefore either that is evil which we fear, or the act
of fearing is in itself evil. Whence, therefore, is it, seeing that God,
who is good, hath made all these things good? He, indeed, the greatest
and chiefest Good, hath created these lesser goods; but both Creator and
created are all good. Whence is evil? Or was there some evil matter of
which He made and formed and ordered it, but left something in it which
He did not convert into good? But why was this? Was He powerless to
change the whole lump, so that no evil should remain in it, seeing that
He is omnipotent? Lastly, why would He make anything at all of it, and
not rather by the same omnipotency cause it not to be at all? Or could
it indeed exist contrary to His will? Or if it were from eternity, why
did He permit it so to be for infinite spaces of times in the past, and
was pleased so long after to make something out of it? Or if He wished
now all of a sudden to do something, this rather should the Omnipotent
have accomplished, that this evil matter should not be at all, and that
He only should be the whole, true, chief, and infinite Good. Or if it
were not good that He, who was good, should not also be the framer and
creator of what was good, then that matter which was evil being removed,
and brought to nothing, He might form good matter, whereof He might
create all things. For He would not be omnipotent were He not able to
create something good without being assisted by that matter which had
not been created by Himself. <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487)
Such like things did I revolve in my miserable breast, overwhelmed with
most gnawing cares lest I should die ere I discovered the truth; yet was
the faith of Thy Christ, our Lord and Saviour, as held in the Catholic
Church, fixed firmly in my heart, unformed, indeed, as yet upon many
points, and diverging from doctrinal rules, but yet my mind did not
utterly leave it, but every day rather drank in more and more of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_487"></span>[105:488](1010113.htm#fr_487) <span
id="vi.VII.V-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.V-p3"></span> See xi. sec. 7, note, below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1010114)
