[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010452)  [Next](1010454) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCI-p1.1"></span>Letter CCI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 419.)

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCI-p3.1"></span>The Emperors Honorius Augustus and Theodosius
Augustus to Bishop Aurelius Send Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p4"></span>1. It had been indeed long ago decreed
that Pelagius and Celestius, the authors of an execrable heresy, should,
as pestilent corruptors of the Catholic truth, be expelled from the city
of Rome, lest they should, by their baneful influence, pervert the minds
of the ignorant. In this our clemency followed up the judgment of your
Holiness, according to which it is beyond all question that they were
unanimously condemned after an impartial examination of their opinions.
Their obstinate persistence in the offence having, however, made it
necessary to issue the decree a second time, we have enacted further by
a recent edict, that if any one, knowing that they are concealing
themselves in any part of the provinces, shall delay either to drive
them out or to inform on them, he, as an accomplice, shall be liable to
the punishment prescribed.

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p5"></span>2. To secure, however, the combined
efforts of the Christian zeal of all men for the destruction of this
preposterous heresy, it will be proper, most dearly beloved father, that
the authority of <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCI-Page_557"></span>your Holiness be applied to the
correction of certain bishops, who either support the evil reasonings of
these men by their silent consent, or abstain from assailing them with
open opposition. Let your Reverence, then, by suitable writings, cause
all bishops to be admonished (as soon as they shall know, by the order
of your Holiness, that this order is laid upon them) that whoever shall,
through impious obstinacy, neglect to vindicate the purity of their
doctrine by subscribing the condemnation of the persons before
mentioned, shall, after being punished by the loss of their episcopal
office, be cut off by excommunication and banished for life from their
sees. For as, by a sincere confession of the truth, we ourselves, in
obedience to the Council of Nice, worship God as the Creator of all
things, and as the Fountain of our imperial sovereignty, your Holiness
will not suffer the members of this odious sect, inventing, to the
injury of religion, notions new and strange, to hide in writings
privately circulated an error condemned by public authority. For, most
beloved and loving father, the guilt of heresy is in no degree less
grievous in those who either by dissimulation lend the error their
secret support, or by abstaining from denouncing it extend to it a fatal
approbation.

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p6"></span>(*In another hand.*) May the Divinity
preserve you in safety for many years!

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p7"></span>Given at Ravenna, on the 9th day of June,
in the Consulship of Monaxius and Plinta.

<span id="vii.1.CCI-p8"></span>A letter, in the same terms, was also
sent to the holy Bishop Augustin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCII](1010454)
