[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010013)  [Next](1010015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span><span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_29"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>Translator’s Preface</span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>“<span class="c9"><span
id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>If</span> St. Augustin,” says Nourrisson <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) , “had left nothing but his *Confessions*
and the *City of God*, one could readily understand the respectful
sympathy that surrounds his memory. How, indeed, could one fail to
admire in the *City of God* the flight of genius, and in the
*Confessions*, what is better still, the effusions of a great soul?” It
may be safely predicted, that while the mind of man yearns for
knowledge, and his heart seeks rest, the *Confessions* will retain that
foremost place in the world’s literature which it has secured by its
sublime outpourings of devotion and profound philosophical spirit. There
is in the book a wonderful combination of childlike piety and
intellectual power. Desjardins’ idea, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) that, while in Augustin’s other works we
see the philosopher or the controversialist, here we see the man, is
only to be accepted as a comparative statement of Augustin’s attitude in
the *Confessions;* for philosophy and piety are in many of his
reflections as it were molten into one homogeneous whole. In his highest
intellectual flights we find the breathings of faith and love, and, amid
the profoundest expressions of penitential sorrow, gleams of his
metaphysical genius appear.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>It may, indeed, be from the man’s showing
himself so little, as distinguished from the philosopher, that some
readers are a little disappointed in the book. They have expected to
meet with a copiousness of biographic details, and have found,
commingled with such as are given, long disquisitions on Manichæanism,
Time, Creation, and Memory. To avoid such disappointment we must
ascertain the author’s design. The book is emphatically *not* an
autobiography. There is in it an outline of the author’s life up to his
mother’s death; but only so much of detail is given as may subserve his
main purpose. That purpose is clearly explained in the fourth section of
his Tenth Book. It was that the impenitent on reading it might not say,
“I cannot,” and “sleep in despair,” but rather that, looking to that God
who had raised the writer from his low estate of pride and sin to be a
pillar of the Church, he might take courage, and “awake in the sweetness
of His grace, by which he that is weak is made strong;” and that those
no longer in sin might rejoice and praise God as they heard of the past
lusts of him who was now freed from them. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) This, his design of encouraging penitence
and stimulating praise, is referred to in his *Retractations*, <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) and in his *Letter to Darius*. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md)

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>These two main ideas are embodied in the very
meaning of the title of the book, the word *confession* having, as
Augustin constantly urges, two meanings. In his exposition of the Psalms
we read: “Confession is understood in two senses, of our *sins*, and of
God’s *praise*. Confession of our sins is well known, so well known to
all the people, that whenever they hear the name of confession in the
lessons, whether it is said in praise or of sin, they beat their
breasts.” <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) Again: “Confession of sin
all know, but confession of praise few attend to.” <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) “The former but showeth the wound to the
physician, the latter giveth thanks for health.” <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) He would therefore have his hearers make
the sacrifice of praise their ideal, since, in the City of God, even in
the New Jerusalem, there will be no longer confession of sin, but there
will be confession of praise. <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) It is
not surprising, that with this view of confession he should hinge on the
incidents of his life such considerations as tend to elevate the mind
and heart of the reader. When, for example, he speaks of his youthful
sins, <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) he diverges into a
disquisition on the motives to sin; when his friend dies, <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) he moralizes on death; and—to give one
example of a reverse process—his profound psychological review of
memory <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) recalls his former sin
(which at times haunts him in his dreams), and leads up to devout
reflections on God’s power to cleanse from sin. This undertone of
penitence and praise which pervades the *Confessions* in all its
episodes, like the golden threads which run through the texture of an
Eastern garment, presents one of its peculiar charms.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>It would not be right to overlook a charge
that has been brought against the book by Lord Byron. He says, “Augustin
in his fine *Confessions* makes the reader envy his transgressions.”
Nothing could be more reckless or <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_30"></span>further from the truth than this charge. There
is here no dwelling on his sin, or painting it so as to satisfy a
prurient imagination. As we have already remarked, Augustin’s manner is
not to go into detail further than to find a position from which to
“edify” the reader, and he treats this episode in his life with his
characteristic delicacy and reticence. His sin was dead; and he had
carried it to its burial with tears of repentance. And when, ten years
after his baptism, he sets himself, at the request of some, to a
consideration of what he then was at the moment of making his
confessions, <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) he refers hardly at
all to this sin of his youth; and such allusions as he does make are of
the most casual kind. Instead of enlarging upon it, he treats it as
past, and only speaks of temptation and sin as they are common to all
men. Many of the French writers on the *Confessions <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md)* institute a comparison in this matter
between the confessions of Augustin and those of Rousseau.
Pressensé <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) draws attention to the
delicacy and reserve which characterise the one, and the arrogant
defiance of God and man manifested in the other. The confessions of the
one he speaks of as *“un grand acte de repentir et d’amour;”* and
eloquently says, “In it he seems, like the Magdalen, to have spread his
box of perfumes at the foot of the Saviour; from his stricken heart
there exhales the incense most agreeable to God—the homage of true
penitence.” The other he truly describes as uttering “a cry of triumph
in the very midst of his sin, and robing his shame in a royal purple.”
Well may Desjardins <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) express
surprise at a book of such foulness coming from a genius so great; and
perhaps his solution of the enigma is not far from the truth, when he
attributes it to an overweening vanity and egotism. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md)

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>It is right to point out, in connection with
this part of our subject, that in regard to some at least of Augustin’s
self-accusations, <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) there may be a
little of that pious exaggeration of his sinfulness which, as Lord
Macaulay points out in his essays on Bunyan, <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) frequently characterises deep penitence.
But however this may be, justice requires us to remember, in considering
his transgression, that from his very childhood he had been surrounded
by a condition of civilisation presenting manifold temptations.
Carthage, where he spent a large part of his life, had become, since its
restoration and colonization under Augustus Cæsar, an “exceeding great
city,” in wealth and importance next to Rome. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) “African Paganism,” says Pressensé, <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) “was half Asiatic; the ancient worship of
nature, the adoration of Astarte, had full licence in the city of
Carthage; Dido had become a mythological being, whom this dissolute city
had made its protecting divinity, and it is easy to recognise in her the
great goddess of Phœnicia under a new name.” The luxury of the period is
described by Jerome and Tertullian, when they denounce the custom of
painting the face and tiring the head, and the prodigality that would
give 25,000 golden crowns for a veil, immense revenues for a pair of
ear-rings, and the value of a forest or an island for a
head-dress. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) And Jerome, in one of
his epistles, gives an illustration of the Church’s relation to the
Pagan world at that time, when he represents an old priest of Jupiter
with his grand-daughter, a catechumen, on his knee, who responds to his
caresses by singing canticles. <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) It
was a time when we can imagine one of Augustin’s parents going to the
Colosseum, and enjoying the lasciviousness of its displays, and its
gladiatorial shows, with their contempt of human life; while the other
carefully shunned such scenes, as being under the ban of the teachers of
the Church. <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) It was an age in which
there was action and reaction between religion and philosophy; but in
which the power of Christianity was so great in its influences on
Paganism, that some received the Christian Scriptures only to embody in
their phraseology the ideas of heathenism. Of this last point
Manichæanism presents an illustration. Now all these influences left
their mark on Augustin. In his youth he plunged deep into the pleasures
of his day; and we know how he endeavoured to find in Manichæanism a
solution of those speculations which haunted his subtle and inquiring
mind. Augustin at this time, then, is not to be taken as a type of what
Christianity produced. He is to a great extent the outgrowth of the
Pagan influences of the time. Considerations such as these may enable us
to judge of his early sin more justly than if we measured it by our own
privileges and opportunities.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>The style of Augustin is sometimes criticised
as not having the refinement of Virgil, Horace, or Cicero. But it should
be remembered that he wrote in a time of national decay; and further, as
Desjardins has remarked in the introduction to his essay, he had *no
time* “to cut his phrases.” From the period of his conversion to that of
his death, he was constantly engaged in controversy with this or that
heresy; and if he did not write with classical accuracy, he so inspired
the language with his genius, and moulded it by his fire, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) that it appears almost to pulsate with
the throbbings of his brain. He seems likewise to have despised *mere*
elegance, for in his *Confessions*, <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md)
when <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_31"></span>speaking of the style of Faustus, he says,
“What profit to me was the elegance of my cup-bearer, since he offered
me not the more precious draught for which I thirsted?” In this
connection the remarks of Collenges <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) are worthy of note. He says, when
anticipating objections that might be made to his own style: “It was the
last of my study; my opinion always was what Augustin calls *diligens
negligentia* was the best diligence as to that; while I was yet a very
young man I had learned out of him that it was no solecism in a preacher
to use *ossum* for *os*, for (saith he) an iron key is better than one
made of gold if it will better open the door, for that is all the use of
the key. I had learned out of Hierom that a gaudry of phrases and words
in a pulpit is but *signum insipientiæ*. The words of a preacher, saith
he, ought *pungere, non palpare*, to prick the heart, not to smooth and
coax. The work of an orator is too precarious for a minister of the
gospel. Gregory observed that our Saviour had not styled us the *sugar*
but the *salt* of the earth, and Augustin observeth, that though Cyprian
in one epistle showed much of a florid orator, to show he could do it,
yet he never would do so any more, to show he would not.”

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>There are several features in the
*Confessions* deserving of remark, as being of special interest to the
philosopher, the historian or the divine.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>1. Chiefest amongst these is the intense
desire for knowledge and the love of truth which characterised Augustin.
This was noticeable before his conversion in his hungering after such
knowledge as Manichæanism and the philosophy of the time could
afford. <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) It is none the less
observable in that better time, when, in his quiet retreat at
Cassiciacum, he sought to strengthen the foundations of his faith, and
resolved to give himself up to the acquisition of divine
knowledge. <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) It was seen, too, in
the many conflicts in which he was engaged with Donatists, Manichæans,
Arians, and Pelagians, and in his earnest study of the deep things of
God. This love of knowledge is perhaps conveyed in the beautiful legend
quoted by Nourisson, <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) of the monk
wrapped in spirit, who expressed astonishment at not seeing Augustin
among the elect in heaven. “He is higher up,” he was answered, “he is
standing before the Holy Trinity disputing thereon for all eternity.”

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>While from the time of his conversion we find
him holding on to the fundamental doctrines of the faith with the
tenacity of one who had experienced the hollowness of the teachings of
philosophy, <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) this passion for
truth led him to handle most freely subjects of speculation in things
non-essential. <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) But whether
viewed as a controversialist, a student of Scripture, or a bishop of the
Church of God, he ever manifests those qualities of mind and heart that
gained for him not only the affection of the Church, but the esteem of
his unorthodox opponents. To quote Guizot’s discriminating words, there
was in him “*ce mélange de passion et de douccur, d’autorite et de
sympathie, d’ctendue d’esprit et de rigueur logique, qui lui donnait un
si rare pouvoir.*” <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md)

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>2. It is to this eager desire for truth in
his many-sided mind that we owe those trains of thought that read like
forecasts of modern opinion. We have called attention to some such
anticipations of modern thought as they recur in the notes throughout
the book; but the speculations on Memory, Time, and Creation, which
occupy so large a space in Books Ten and Eleven, deserve more particular
notice. The French essayists have entered very fully into these
questions. M. Saisset, in his admirable introduction to the *De Civitate
Dei, <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md)* reviews Augustin’s
theories as to the mysterious problems connected with the idea of
Creation. He says, that in his subtle analysis of Time, and in his
attempt at reconciling “the eternity of creative action with the
dependence of things created,…he has touched with a bold and delicate
hand one of the deepest mysteries of the human mind, and that to all his
glorious titles he has added another, that of an ingenious psychologist
and an eminent metaphysician.” Desjardins likewise commends the depth of
Augustin’s speculations as to Time, <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) and maintains that no one’s teaching
as to Creation has shown more clearness, boldness, and vigor—avoiding
the perils of dualism on the one hand, and atheism on the other. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) In his remarks on Augustin’s
disquisitions on the phenomena of Memory, his praise is of a more
qualified character. He compares his theories with those of Malebranche,
and, while recognising the practical and animated character of his
descriptions, thinks him obscure in his delineation of the *manner in
which* absent realities reproduce themselves on the memory. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md)

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>We have had occasion in the notes to refer to
the *Unseen Universe*. The authors of this powerful “Apologia” for
Christianity propose it chiefly as an antidote to the materialistic
disbelief in the immortality of the soul amongst scientific men, which
has resulted in this age from the recent advance in physical science;
just as in the last century English deism had its rise in a similar
influence. It is curious, in connection with this part of our subject,
to note <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_32"></span>that in leading up to the conclusion at which
he arrives, M. Saisset quotes a passage from the *City of God*, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) which contains an adumbration of the
theory of the above work in regard to the eternity of the invisible
universe. <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) Verily, the saying of
the wise man is true: “The thing that hath been, it is that which shall
be; and that which is done, is that which shall be done: and there is no
new thing under the sun.” <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)

<span id="vi.i-p54"></span>3. We have already, in a previous paragraph,
briefly adverted to the influence Christianity and Paganism had one on
the other. The history of Christianity has been a steady advance on
Paganism and Pagan philosophy; but it can hardly be denied that in this
advance there has been an absorption—and in some periods in no small
degree—of some of their elements. As these matters have been examined in
the notes, we need not do more than refer the reader to the Index of
Subjects for the evidence to be obtained in this respect from the
*Confessions* on such matters as Baptism, False Miracles, and Prayers
for the Dead.

<span id="vi.i-p55"></span>4. There is one feature in the *Confessions*
which we should not like to pass unnoticed. A reference to the
*Retractations <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)* will show that
Augustin highly appreciated the spiritual use to which the book might be
put in the edification of the brethren. We believe that it will prove
most useful in this way; and spiritual benefit will accrue in proportion
to the steadiness of its use. We would venture to suggest that Book X.,
from section 37 to the end, may be profitably used as a manual of
self-examination. We have pointed out in a note, that in his comment on
[Ps. 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.i-p56.1"></span> he
makes our Lord’s three temptations to be types of all the temptations to
which man can be subjected; and makes them correspond in their order, as
given by St. Matthew, to “the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life,” mentioned by St. John. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) Under each of these heads we have, in
this part of the *Confessions*, a most severe examination of conscience;
and the impression is deepened by his allegorically likening the three
divisions of temptation to the beasts of the field, the fish of the sea,
and the birds of the air. <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) We
have already remarked, in adverting to allegorical interpretation, <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) that where “the strict use of the
history is not disregarded,” to use Augustin’s expression, allegorizing,
by way of spiritual meditation, may be profitable. Those who employ it
with this idea will find their interpretations greatly aided, and made
more systematic, by realizing Augustin’s methods here and in the last
two books of the *Confessions*,—as when he makes the sea to represent
the wicked world, and the fruitful earth the Church. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md)

<span id="vi.i-p61"></span>It only remains to call attention to the
principles on which this translation and its annotations have been made.
The text of the Benedictine edition has been followed; but the
head-lines of the chapters are taken from the edition of Bruder, as
being the more definite and full. After carefully translating the whole
of the book, it has been compared, line by line, with the translation of
Watts <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) (one of the most nervous
translations of the seventeenth century), and that of Dr. Pusey, which
is confessedly founded upon that of Watts. Reference has also been made,
in the case of obscure passages, to the French translation of Du Bois,
and the English translation of the first Ten Books alluded to in the
note on Bk. ix. ch. 12. The references to Scripture are in the words of
the Authorized Version wherever the sense will bear it; and whenever
noteworthy variations from our version occur, they are indicated by
references to the old Italic version, or to the Vulgate. In some cases,
where Augustin has clearly referred to the LXX. in order to amend his
version thereby, such variations are indicated. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) The annotations are, for the most
part, such as have been derived from the translator’s own reading. Two
exceptions, however, must be made. Out of upwards of four hundred notes,
some forty are taken from the annotations in Pusey and Watts, but in
every case these have been indicated by the initials E. B. P. or W. W.
Dr. Pusey’s annotations (which will be found chiefly in the earlier part
of this work) consist almost entirely of quotations from other works of
Augustin. These annotations are very copious, and Dr. Pusey explains
that he resorted to this method “partly because this plan of
illustrating St. Augustin out of himself had been already adopted by M.
Du Bois in his Latin edition…and it seemed a pity not to use valuable
materials ready collected to one’s hand. The far greater part of these
illustrations are taken from that edition.” It seemed the most proper
course, in using such notes of Du Bois as appeared suitable for this
edition, to take them from Dr. Pusey’s edition, and, as above stated, to
indicate their source by his initials. A Textual Index has been added,
for the first time, to this edition, and both it and the Index of
Subjects have been prepared with the greatest possible care.

<span id="vi.i-p64"></span>J. G. P.

<span id="vi.i-p65"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>St. Mark’s Vicarage, West Hackney, 1876.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[29:74](1010014.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="vi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> *Philosophie de St. Augustin*, Preface.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[29:75](1010014.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> *Essai sur les Conf. de St. Aug*. p. 5.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[29:76](1010014.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span> *Confessions*, x. sec. 4.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[29:77](1010014.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span> See the passage quoted immediately after this
Preface.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[29:78](1010014.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span> *Ep.* ccxxxi. sec. 6.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[29:79](1010014.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span> *Enarr. in Ps.* cxli. sec. 19: see also *in
Ps.* cxvii. sec. 1, xxix. sec. 19, xciv. sec. 4, and xxix. sec. 19.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[29:80](1010014.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span> *Enarr. in Ps.* cxxxvii. sec. 2.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[29:81](1010014.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span> *Enarr. in Ps.* cx. sec. 2.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[29:82](1010014.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span> *In Ps.* xliv. sec. 33, xcix, sec. 16.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[29:83](1010014.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span> Book ii. secs. 6-18.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[29:84](1010014.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span> Book iv. secs. 11-15

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:85](1010014.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span> Book x. secs. 41, 42.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[30:86](1010014.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span> Book x. sec. 4.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[30:87](1010014.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="vi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span> In addition to those referred to, there is
one at the beginning of vol. ii. of Saint-Marc Girardin’s *Essais de
Litérature et de Morale*, devoted to this subject. It has some good
points in it, but has much of that sentimentality so often found in
French criticisms.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[30:88](1010014.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="vi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span> *Le Christianisme au Quatrième Siècle*, p.
269.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[30:89](1010014.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="vi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span> *Essai sur les Conf*., etc. p. 12.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[30:90](1010014.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span> He concludes: “*La folie de son orgueil,
voilá le mot de l’ênigme, ou l’ênigme n’en a pas*.”—*Ibid.* p. 13.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[30:91](1010014.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="vi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span> Compare *Confessions*, ii. sec. 2, and iii.
sec. 1, with iv. sec. 2.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[30:92](1010014.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="vi.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span> In vol. i. of his *Crit. and Hist. Essays*,
and also in his *Miscellaneous Writings*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[30:93](1010014.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span> Herodian *Hist.* vii. 6.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[30:94](1010014.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span> *Le Christianisme*, etc. as above, p. 274.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[30:95](1010014.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span> Quoted by Nourrisson, *Philosophie*, etc.
ii. 436.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[30:96](1010014.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span> *Ibid.* ii. 434, 435.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[30:97](1010014.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="vi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span> See *Confessions*, iii. sec. 2, note, and
vi. sec. 13, note.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[30:98](1010014.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="vi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span> See Poujoulat, *Lettres de St. Augustin*,
Introd. p. 12, who compares the language of the time to Ezekiel’s Valley
of Dry Bones, and say Augustin inspired it with life.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[30:99](1010014.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="vi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span> *Confessions*, v. sec. 10.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[31:100](1010014.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span> *The Intercourses of Divine Love betwixt
Christ and His Church*, Preface (1683).

<span id="fn_100"></span>[31:101](1010014.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span> See *Confessions*, iv. sec. 1, note.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[31:102](1010014.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="vi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span> *Ibid.* ix. sec. 7, note, and compare x.
sec. 55, note.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[31:103](1010014.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="vi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span> *Philosophie*, etc. as above, i. 320.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[31:104](1010014.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="vi.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span> See *Confessions*, xiii. sec. 33, note.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[31:105](1010014.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="vi.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span> *Ibid.* xi. sec. 3, note 4.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[31:106](1010014.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="vi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span> *Histoire de la Civilisation en France*, I.
203 (1829). Guizot is speaking of Augustin’s attitude in the Pelagian
controversy.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[31:107](1010014.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="vi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span> A portion of this introduction will be found
translated in Appendix ii. of M. Saisset’s *Essay on Religious
Philosophy* (Clark).

<span id="fn_107"></span>[31:108](1010014.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span> *Essai*, etc. as before, p. 129.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[31:109](1010014.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span> *Essai*, etc. p. 130.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[31:110](1010014.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span> *Ibid.* pp. 120-123. Nourrisson’s criticism
of Augustin’s views on Memory may well be compared with that of
Desjardins. He speaks of the powerful originality of Augustin—who is
ingenious as well as new—and says some of his disquisitions are “the
most admirable which have inspired psychological observation.” And
further, one does not meet in all the books of St. Augustin any
philosophical theories which have greater depth than that on
Memory.”—*Philosophie*, etc. as above, I. 133.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[32:111](1010014.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="vi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span> Book xii. chap. 15.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[32:112](1010014.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="vi.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p52"></span> This position is accepted by Leibnitz in his
*Essais de Théodicée*. See also M. Saisset, as above, ii. 196-8 (Essay
by the translator).

<span id="fn_112"></span>[32:113](1010014.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="vi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p53"></span> [Eccles.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.i-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[32:114](1010014.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="vi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p56"></span> Quoted immediately after this preface.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[32:115](1010014.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="vi.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p57"></span> [1 John
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.i-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[32:116](1010014.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="vi.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p58"></span> See *Confessions*, v. sec. 4, note, and x.
sec. 41, note.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[32:117](1010014.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="vi.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p59"></span> See *ibid.* vi. sec. 5, note.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[32:118](1010014.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="vi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p60"></span> See *Confessions*, xiii. sec. 20, note 3,
and sec. 21, note 1.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[32:119](1010014.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="vi.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p62"></span> “St. Augustin’s *Confessions* translated,
and with some marginal notes illustrated by William Watts, Rector of St.
Alban’s, Wood St. (1631).”

<span id="fn_119"></span>[32:120](1010014.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="vi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p63"></span> For whatever our idea may be as to the
extent of his knowledge of Greek, it is beyond dispute that he
frequently had recourse to the Greek of the Old and New Testament with
this view. See Nourrisson, *Philosophie*, etc. ii. p. 96.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Opinion of St. Augustin Concerning His Confessions](1010015.md)
