[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010342)  [Next](1010344) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 396.)

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p3.1"></span>To My Brother and Fellow-Presbyter
Casulanus, Most Beloved and Longed For, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p5"></span>1. I know not how it was that I did not
reply to your first letter; but I know that my neglect was not owing to
want of esteem for you. For I take pleasure in your studies, and even in
the words in which you express your thoughts; and it is my desire as
well as advice that you make great attainments in your early years in
the word of God, for the edification of the Church. Having now received
a second letter from you, in which you plead for an answer on the most
just and amiable ground of that brotherly love in which we are one, I
have resolved no longer to postpone the gratification of the desire
expressed by your love; and although in the midst of most engrossing
business, I address myself to discharge the debt due to you.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p6"></span>2. As to the question on which you wish
my opinion, “whether it is lawful to fast on the seventh day of the
week,” <span id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) I answer, that if it
were wholly unlawful, neither Moses nor Elijah, nor our Lord Himself,
would have fasted for forty successive days. But by the same argument it
is proved that even on the Lord’s day fasting is not unlawful. And yet,
if any one were to think that the Lord’s day should be appointed a day
of fasting, in the same way as the seventh day is observed by some, such
a man would be regarded, and not unjustly, as bringing a great cause of
offence into the Church. For in those things concerning which the divine
Scriptures have laid down no definite rule, the custom of the people of
God, or the practices instituted by their fathers, are to be held as the
law of the Church. <span id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) If we
choose to fall into a debate about these things, and to denounce one
party merely because their custom differs from that of others, the
consequence must be an endless contention, in which the utmost care is
necessary lest the storm of conflict overcast with clouds the calmness
of brotherly love, while strength is spent in mere controversy which
cannot adduce on either side any decisive testimonies of truth. This
danger the author has not been careful to avoid, whose prolix
dissertation you deemed worth sending to me with your former letter,
that I might answer his arguments.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p9"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p9.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p10"></span>3. I have not at my disposal
sufficient leisure to enter on the refutation of his opinions one by
one: my time is demanded by other and more important work. But if you
devote a little more carefully to this treatise of an anonymous Roman
author, <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) the talents which by
your letters you prove yourself to possess, and which I greatly love in
you as God’s gift, you will see that he has not hesitated to wound by
his most injurious language almost the whole Church of Christ, from the
rising of the sun to its going down. Nay, I may say not almost, but
absolutely, the whole Church. For he is found to have not even spared
the Roman Christians, whose custom he seems to himself to defend; but he
is not aware how the force of his invectives recoils upon them, for it
has escaped his observation. For when arguments to prove the <span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-Page_266"></span>obligation to fast on the seventh day
of the week fail him, he enters on a vehement blustering protest against
the excesses of banquets and drunken revelries, and the worst licence of
intoxication, as if there were no medium between fasting and rioting.
Now if this be admitted, what good can fasting on Saturday do to the
Romans? since on the other days on which they do not fast they must be
presumed, according to his reasoning, to be gluttonous, and given to
excess in wine. If, therefore, there is any difference between loading
the heart with surfeiting and drunkenness, which is always sinful, and
relaxing the strictness of fasting, with due regard to self-restraint
and temperance on the other, which is done on the Lord’s day without
censure from any Christian,—if, I say, there is a difference between
these two things, let him first mark the distinction between the repasts
of saints and the excessive eating and drinking of those whose god is
their belly, lest he charge the Romans themselves with belonging to the
latter class on the days on which they do not fast; and then let him
inquire, not whether it is lawful to indulge in drunkenness on the
seventh day of the week, which is not lawful on the Lord’s day, but
whether it is incumbent on us to fast on the seventh day of the week,
which we are not wont to do on the Lord’s day.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p12"></span>4. This question I would wish to see
him investigate, and resolve in such a manner as would not involve him
in the guilt of openly speaking against the whole Church diffused
throughout the world, with the exception of the Roman Christians, and
hitherto a few of the Western communities. Is it, I ask, to be endured
among the entire Eastern Christian communities, and many of those in the
West, that this man should say of so many and so eminent servants of
Christ, who on the seventh day of the week refresh themselves soberly
and moderately with food, that they “are in the flesh, and cannot please
God;” and that of them it is written, “Let the wicked depart from me, I
will not know their way;” and that they make their belly their god, that
they prefer Jewish rites to those of the Church, and are sons of the
bondwoman; that they are governed not by the righteous law of God, but
by their own good pleasure, consulting their own appetites instead of
submitting to salutary restraint; also that they are carnal, and savour
of death, and other such charges, which if he had uttered against even
one servant of God, who would listen to him, who would not be bound to
turn away from him? But now, when he assails with such reproachful and
abusive language the Church bearing fruit and increasing throughout the
whole world, and in almost all places observing no fast on the seventh
day of the week, I warn him, whoever he is, to beware. For in wishing to
conceal from me his name, you plainly showed your unwillingness that I
should judge him.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p13"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p13.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p14"></span>5. “The Son of man,” he says, “is Lord
of the Sabbath, and in that day it is by all means lawful to do good
rather than do evil.” <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) If,
therefore, we do evil when we break our fast, there is no Lord’s day
upon which we live as we should. As to his admission that the apostles
did eat upon the seventh day of the week, and his remark upon this, that
the time for their fasting had not then come, because of the Lord’s own
words, “The days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall the children of the Bridegroom fast;” <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) since there is “a time to rejoice,
and a time to mourn,” <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573) he
ought first to have observed, that our Lord was speaking there of
fasting in general, but not of fasting upon the seventh day. Again, when
he says that by fasting grief is signified, and that by food joy is
represented, why does he not reflect what it was which God designed to
signify by that which is written, “that He rested on the seventh day
from all His works,”—namely, that joy, and not sorrow, was set forth in
that rest? Unless, perchance, he intends to affirm that in God’s resting
and hallowing of the Sabbath, joy was signified to the Jews, but grief
to the Christians. But God did not lay down a rule concerning fasting or
eating on the seventh day of the week, either at the time of His
hallowing that day because in it He rested from His works, or
afterwards, when He gave precepts to the Hebrew nation concerning the
observance of that day. The only thing enjoined on man there is, that he
abstain from doing work himself, or requiring it from his servants. And
the people of the former dispensation, accepting this rest as a shadow
of things to come, obeyed the command by such abstinence from work as we
now see practised by the Jews; not, as some suppose, through their being
carnal, and misunderstanding what the Christians rightly understand. Nor
do we understand this law better than the prophets, who, at the time
when this was still binding, observed such rest on the Sabbath as the
Jews believe ought to be observed to this day. Hence also it was that
God commanded them to stone to death a man who had gathered sticks on
the Sabbath; <span id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574) but we nowhere
read of any one being stoned, or deemed worthy of any punishment
whatever, for either fasting or eating on the Sabbath. Which of the two
is more in keeping with rest, and which with toil, let our author
himself decide, who has regarded joy as the portion of <span
id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span id="vii.1.XXXVI-Page_267"></span>those
who eat, and sorrow as the portion of those who fast, or at least has
understood that these things were so regarded by the Lord, when, giving
answer concerning fasting, He said: “Can the children of the
bride-chamber mourn as long as the Bridegroom is with them?” <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575)

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p20"></span>6. Moreover, as to his assertion, that
the reason of the apostles eating on the seventh day (a thing forbidden
by the tradition of the elders) was, that the time for their fasting on
that day had not come; I ask, if the time had not then come for the
abolition of the Jewish rest from work on that day? Did not the
tradition of the elders prohibit fasting on the one hand, and enjoin
rest on the other? and.yet the disciples of Christ, of whom we read that
they did eat on the Sabbath, did on the same day pluck the ears of corn,
which was not then lawful, because forbidden by the tradition of the
elders. Let him therefore consider whether it might not with more reason
be said in reply to him, that the Lord desired to have these two things,
the plucking of the ears of corn and the taking of food, done in the
same day by His disciples, for this reason, that the former action might
confute those who would prohibit all work on the seventh day, and the
latter action confute those who would enjoin fasting on the seventh day;
since by the former action He taught that the rest from labour was now,
through the change in the dispensation, an act of superstition; and by
the latter He intimated His will, that under both dispensations the
matter of fasting or not was left to every man’s choice. I do not say
this by way of argument in support of my view, but only to show how, in
answer to him, things much more forcible than what he has spoken might
be advanced.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p21"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p21.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p22"></span>7. “How shall we,” says our author,
“escape sharing the condemnation of the Pharisee, if we fast twice in
the week?” <span id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) As if the Pharisee
had been condemned for fasting twice in the week, and not for proudly
vaunting himself above the publican. He might as well say that those
also are condemned with that Pharisee, who give a tenth of all their
possessions to the poor, for he boasted of this among his other works;
whereas I would that it were done by many Christians, instead of a very
small number, as we find. Or let him say, that whosoever is not an
unjust man, or adulterer, or extortioner, must be condemned with that
Pharisee, because he boasted that he was none of these; but the man who
could think thus is, beyond question, beside himself. Moreover, if these
things which the Pharisee mentioned as found in him, being admitted by
all to be good in themselves, are not to be retained with the haughty
boastfulness which was manifest in him, but are to be retained with the
lowly piety which was not in him; by the same rule, to fast twice in the
week is in a man such as the Pharisee unprofitable, but is in one who
has humility and faith a religious service. Moreover, after all, the
Scripture does not say that the Pharisee was condemned, but only that
the publican was “justified rather than the other.”

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p24"></span>8. Again, when our author insists upon
interpreting, in connection with this matter, the words of the Lord,
“Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven,” <span
id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) and thinks that we cannot fulfil
this precept unless we fast oftener than twice in the week, let him mark
well that there are seven days in the week. If, then, from these any one
subtract two, not fasting on the seventh day nor on the Lord’s day,
there remain five days in which he may surpass the Pharisee, who fasts
but twice in the week. For I think that if any man fast three times in
the week, he already surpasses the Pharisee who fasted but twice. And if
a fast is observed four times, or even so often as five times, passing
over only the seventh day and the Lord’s day without fasting,—a practice
observed by many through their whole lifetime, especially by those who
are settled in monasteries,—by this not the Pharisee alone is surpassed
in the labour of fasting, but that Christian also whose custom is to
fast on the fourth, and sixth, and seventh days, as the Roman community
does to a large extent. And yet your nameless metropolitan disputant
calls such an one carnal, even though for five successive days of the
week, excepting the seventh and the Lord’s day, he so fast as to
withhold all refection from the body; as if, forsooth, food and drink on
other days had nothing to do with the flesh, and condemns him as making
a god of his belly, as if it was only the seventh day’s repast which
entered into the belly.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p26"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p27"></span>            .            .           
.            .            .            .            .           
.            .            .

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p28"></span>We have no compunction in passing over
about eight columns here of this letter, in which Augustin exposes, with
a tedious minuteness and with a waste of rhetoric, other feeble and
irrelevant puerilities of the Roman author whose work Casulanus had
submitted to his review. Instead of accompanying him into the shallow
places into which he was drawn while pursuing such an insignificant foe,
let us resume the translation at the point at which Augustin gives his
own opinion regarding the question whether it is binding on Christians
to fast on Saturday.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p29"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p30"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p30.1"></span>Chap. XI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p31"></span>25. As to the succeeding paragraphs
with which he concludes his treatise, they are, like some other things
in it which I have not thought worthy of notice, even more irrelevant
<span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-Page_268"></span>to a discussion of the question whether
we should fast or eat on the seventh day of the week. But I leave it to
yourself, especially if you have found any help from what I have already
said, to observe and dispose of these. Having now to the best of my
ability, and as I think sufficiently, replied to the reasonings of this
author, if I be asked what is my own opinion in this matter, I answer,
after carefully pondering the question, that in the Gospels and
Epistles, and the entire collection of books for our instruction called
the New Testament, I see that fasting is enjoined. But I do not discover
any rule definitely laid down by the Lord or by the apostles as to days
on which we ought or ought not to fast. And by this I am persuaded that
exemption from fasting on the seventh day is more suitable, not indeed
to obtain, but to foreshadow, that eternal rest in which the true
Sabbath is realized, and which is obtained only by faith, and by that
righteousness whereby the daughter of the King is all glorious within.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p32"></span>26. In this question, however, of
fasting or not fasting on the seventh day, nothing appears to me more
safe and conducive to peace than the apostle’s rule: “Let not him that
eateth despise him that eateth not, and let not him which eateth not
judge him that eateth:” <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578) “for
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse;” <span id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579) our fellowship with
those among whom we live, and along with whom we live in God, being
preserved undisturbed by these things. For as it is true that, in the
words of the apostles, “it is evil for that man who eateth with
offence,” <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580) it is equally true
that it is evil for that man who fasteth with offence. Let us not
therefore be like those who, seeing John the Baptist neither eating nor
drinking, said, “He hath a devil;” but let us equally avoid imitating
those who said, when they saw Christ eating and drinking, “Behold a man
gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.” <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) After mentioning these sayings, the
Lord subjoined a most important truth in the words, “But Wisdom is
justified of her children;” and if you ask who these are, read what is
written, “The sons of Wisdom are the congregation of the
righteous:” <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) they are they
who, when they eat, do not despise others who do not eat; and when they
eat not, do not judge those who eat, but who do despise and judge those
who, with offence, either eat or abstain from eating.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p38"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p38.1"></span>Chap. XII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p39"></span>27. As to the seventh day of the week
there is less difficulty in acting on the rule above quoted, because
both the Roman Church and some other churches, though few, near to it or
remote from it, observe a fast on that day; but to fast on the Lord’s
day is a great offence, especially since the rise of that detestable
heresy of the Manichæans, so manifestly and grievously contradicting the
Catholic faith and the divine Scriptures: for the Manichæans have
prescribed to their followers the obligation of fasting upon that day;
whence it has resulted that the fast upon the Lord’s day is regarded
with the greater abhorrence. Unless, perchance, some one be able to
continue an unbroken fast for more than a week, so as to approach as
nearly as may be to the fast of forty days, as we have known some do;
and we have even been assured by brethren most worthy of credit, that
one person did attain to the full period of forty days. For as, in the
time of the Old Testament fathers, Moses and Elijah did not do anything
against liberty of eating on the seventh day of the week, when they
fasted forty days; so the man who has been able to go beyond seven days
in fasting has not chosen the Lord’s day as a day of fasting, but has
only come upon it in course among the days for which, so far as he might
be able, he had vowed to prolong his fast. If, however, a continuous
fast is to be concluded within a week, there is no day upon which it may
more suitably be concluded than the Lord’s day; but if the body is not
refreshed until more than a week has elapsed, the Lord’s day is not in
that case selected as a day of fasting, but is found occurring within
the number of days for which it had seemed good to the person to make a
vow.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p40"></span>28. Be not moved by that which the
Priscillianists <span id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) (a sect very
like the Manichæans) are wont to quote as an argument from the Acts of
the Apostles, concerning what was done by the Apostle Paul in Troas. The
passage is as follows: “Upon the first day of the week, when the
disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready
to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.” <span
id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584) Afterwards, when he had come down
from the supper chamber where they had been gathered together, that he
might restore the young man who, overpowered with sleep, had fallen from
the window and was taken up dead, the Scripture states further
concerning the apostle: “When he therefore was come up again, and had
broken bread, and eaten and talked a long while, even till break of day,
so he departed.” <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) Far be it
from us to accept this as affirming that the apostles were accustomed to
fast habitually on the Lord’s day. For the day now known as the Lord’s
day was then called <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-Page_269"></span>the first day of the week, as is more
plainly seen in the Gospels; for the day of the Lord’s resurrection is
called by Matthew <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43.2"></span>μία σαββάτων</span>, and by the other
three evangelists <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43.3"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43.4"></span>μία (τῶν) σαββάτων</span>, <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) and it is well ascertained that the
same is the day which is now called the Lord’s day. Either, therefore,
it was after the close of the seventh day that they had
assembled,—namely, in the beginning of the night which followed, and
which belonged to the Lord’s day, or the first day of the week,—and in
this case the apostle, before proceeding to break bread with them, as is
done in the sacrament of the body of Christ, continued his discourse
until midnight, and also, after celebrating the sacrament, continued
still speaking again to those who were assembled, being much pressed for
time in order that he might set out at dawn upon the Lord’s day; or if
it was on the first day of the week, at an hour before sunset on the
Lord’s day, that they had assembled, the words of the text, “Paul
preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow,” themselves expressly
state the reason for his prolonging his discourse,—namely, that he was
about to leave them, and wished to give them ample instruction. The
passage does not therefore prove that they habitually fasted on the
Lord’s day, but only that it did not seem meet to the apostle to
interrupt, for the sake of taking refreshment, an important discourse,
which was listened to with the ardour of most lively interest by persons
whom he was about to leave, and whom, on account of his many other
journeyings, he visited but seldom, and perhaps on no other occasion
than this, especially because, as subsequent events prove, he was then
leaving them without expectation of seeing them again in this life. Nay,
by this instance, it is rather proved that such fasting on the Lord’s
day was not customary, because the writer of the history, in order to
prevent this being thought, has taken care to state the reason why the
discourse was so prolonged, that we might know that in an emergency
dinner is not to stand in the way of more important work. But indeed the
example of these most eager listeners goes further; for by them all
bodily refreshment, not dinner only, but supper also, was disregarded
when thirsting vehemently, not for water, but for the word of truth; and
considering that the fountain was about to be removed from them, they
drank in with unabated desire whatever flowed from the apostle’s lips.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p45"></span>29. In that age, however, although
fasting upon the Lord’s day was not usually practised, it was not so
great an offence to the Church when, in any similar emergency to that in
which Paul was at Troas, men did not attend to the refreshment of the
body throughout the whole of the Lord’s day until midnight, or even
until the dawn of the following morning. But now, since heretics, and
especially these most impious Manichæans, have begun not to observe an
occasional fast upon the Lord’s day, when constrained by circumstances,
but to prescribe such fasting as a duty binding by sacred and solemn
institution, and this practice of theirs has become well known to
Christian communities; even were such an emergency arising as that which
the apostle experienced, I verily think that what he then did should not
now be done, lest the harm done by the offence given should be greater
than the good received from the words spoken. Whatever necessity may
arise, or good reason, compelling a Christian to fast on the Lord’s
day,—as we find, *e.g.*, in the Acts of the Apostles, that in peril of
shipwreck they fasted on board of the ship in which the apostle was for
fourteen days successively, within which the Lord’s day came round
twice, <span id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) —we ought to have no
hesitation in believing that the Lord’s day is not to be placed among
the days of voluntary fasting, except in the case of one vowing to fast
continuously for a period longer than a week.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p47"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p47.1"></span>Chap. XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p48"></span>30. The reason why the Church prefers
to appoint the fourth and sixth days of the week for fasting, is found
by considering the gospel narrative. There we find that on the fourth
day of the week <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) the Jews took
counsel to put the Lord to death. One day having intervened,—on the
evening of which, at the close, namely, of the day which we call the
fifth day of the week, the Lord ate the passover with His disciples,—He
was thereafter betrayed on the night which belonged to the sixth day of
the week, the day (as is everywhere known) of His passion. This day,
beginning with the evening, was the first day of unleavened bread. The
evangelist Matthew, however, says that the fifth day of the week was the
first of unleavened bread, because in the evening following it the
paschal supper was to be observed, at which they began to eat the
unleavened bread, and the lamb offered in sacrifice. From which it is
inferred that it was upon the fourth day of the week that the Lord said,
“You know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son
of man is betrayed to be crucified;” <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589) and for this reason that day has
been regarded as one suitable for fasting, because, as the evangelist
immediately adds: “Then assembled together the chief priests and the
scribes and the elders of the people unto the palace of the high priest,
who is called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might take Jesus by
subtilty and kill Him.” <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) After
<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-Page_270"></span>the intermission of one day,—the day,
namely, of which the evangelist writes: <span
id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) “Now, on the first day of the feast
of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto Him, Where
wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the passover? “—the Lord
suffered on the sixth day of the week, as is admitted by all: wherefore
the sixth day also is rightly reckoned a day for fasting, as fasting is
symbolical of humiliation; whence it is said, “I humbled my soul with
fasting.” <span id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592)

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p54"></span>31. The next day is the Jewish
Sabbath, on which day Christ’s body rested in the grave, as in the
original fashioning of the world God rested on that day from all His
works. Hence originated that variety in the robe of His bride <span
id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593) which we are now considering: some,
especially the Eastern communities, preferring to take food on that day,
that their action might be emblematic of the divine rest; others, namely
the Church of Rome, and some churches in the West, preferring to fast on
that day because of the humiliation of the Lord in death. Once in the
year, namely at Easter, all Christians observe the seventh day of the
week by fasting, in memory of the mourning with which the disciples, as
men bereaved, lamented the death of the Lord (and this is done with the
utmost devoutness by those who take food on the seventh day throughout
the rest of the year); thus providing a symbolical representation of
both events,—of the disciples’ sorrow on one seventh day in the year,
and of the blessing of repose on all the others. There are two things
which make the happiness of the just and the end of all their misery to
be confidently expected, viz. death and the resurrection of the dead. In
death is that rest of which the prophet speaks: “Come, my people, enter
thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as
it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.” <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594) In resurrection blessedness is
consummated in the whole man, both body and soul. Hence it came to be
thought that both of these things \[death and resurrection\] should be
symbolized, not by the hardship of fasting, but rather by the
cheerfulness of refreshment with food, excepting only the Easter
Saturday, on which, as I have said, it had been resolved to commemorate
by a more protracted fast the mourning of the disciples, as one of the
events to be had in remembrance.

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p57"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p57.1"></span>Chap. XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p58"></span>32. Since, therefore (as I have said
above), we do not find in the Gospels or in the apostolical writings,
belonging properly to the revelation of the New Testament, that any law
was laid down as to fasts to be observed on particular days; and since
this is consequently one of many things, difficult to enumerate, which
make up a variety in the robe of the King’s daughter, <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595) that is to say, of the Church,—I
will tell you the answer given to my questions on this subject by the
venerable Ambrose Bishop of Milan, by whom I was baptized. When my
mother was with me in that city, I, as being only a catechumen, felt no
concern about these questions; but it was to her a question causing
anxiety, whether she ought, after the custom of our own town, to fast on
the Saturday, or, after the custom of the Church of Milan, not to fast.
To deliver her from perplexity, I put the question to the man of God
whom I have just named. He answered, “What else can I recommend to
others than what I do myself?” When I thought that by this he intended
simply to prescribe to us that we should take food on Saturdays—for I
knew this to be his own practice—he, following me, added these words:
“When I am here I do not fast on Saturday; but when I am at Rome I do:
whatever church you may come to, conform to its custom, if you would
avoid either receiving or giving offence.” This reply I reported to my
mother, and it satisfied her, so that she scrupled not to comply with
it; and I have myself followed the same rule. Since, however, it
happens, especially in Africa, that one church, or the churches within
the same district, may have some members who fast and others who do not
fast on the seventh day, it seems to me best to adopt in each
congregation the custom of those to whom authority in its government has
been committed. Wherefore, if you are quite willing to follow my advice,
especially because in regard to this matter I have spoken at greater
length than was necessary, do not in this resist your own bishop, but
follow his practice without scruple or debate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[265:1569](1010343.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p7"></span> *Sabbato.*

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[265:1570](1010343.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p8"></span> We give the *ipsissima verba* of this
canon: “In his enim rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina
mos populi Dei vel instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt.”

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[265:1571](1010343.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p11"></span> In the text the name is Urbicus, from
Urbs Roma.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[266:1572](1010343.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p15"></span> [Matt.
12.8-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[266:1573](1010343.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p16"></span> [Matt.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[266:1574](1010343.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p17"></span> [Eccles.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[266:1575](1010343.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p18"></span> [Num.
15.35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[267:1576](1010343.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p19"></span> [Matt.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[267:1577](1010343.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p23"></span> [Luke
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[267:1578](1010343.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p25"></span> [Matt.
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[268:1579](1010343.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p33"></span> [Rom.
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[268:1580](1010343.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p34"></span> [1 Cor.
8.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[268:1581](1010343.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p35"></span> [Rom.
14.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[268:1582](1010343.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p36"></span> [Matt.
11.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[268:1583](1010343.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p37"></span> [Ecclus.
3.1](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[268:1584](1010343.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p41"></span> Priscillian, Bishop of Avila in
Spain, adopted Gnostic and Manichæan errors and practices. He was
condemned by the Synod of Saragossa in 381 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p41.1"></span>A.D.</span>, and beheaded, along with his
principal followers, by order of Maximus in 385 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p41.2"></span>A.D.</span>

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[268:1585](1010343.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p41.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p42"></span> [Acts
20.7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[268:1586](1010343.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43"></span> [Acts
20.11](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[269:1587](1010343.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p43.5"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p44"></span> “Prima Sabbati a Matthæo, a cætetis
autem tribus una Sabbati dicitur.” [Matt.
28.1](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p44.1"></span>; [Mark
16.2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p44.2"></span>; [Luke
24.1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p44.3"></span>; [John
20.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p44.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[269:1588](1010343.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p46"></span> [Acts
27.33](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#033)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[269:1589](1010343.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p49"></span> Commonly called *quarta feria*.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[269:1590](1010343.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p50"></span> [Matt.
26.2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[269:1591](1010343.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p51"></span> [Matt.
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[270:1592](1010343.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p52"></span> [Matt.
26.17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[270:1593](1010343.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p53"></span> [Ps.
35.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[270:1594](1010343.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p55"></span> [Ps.
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[270:1595](1010343.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p56"></span> [Isa.
26.20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[270:1596](1010343.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXVI-p59"></span> [Ps.
45.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XXXVI-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXVII](1010344)
