[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010444)  [Next](1010446.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 416.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p3.1"></span>To Augustin, My Truly Pious Lord and
Father, Worthy of My Utmost Affection and Veneration, Jerome Sends
Greeting in Christ.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p4"></span>1. That honourable man, my brother,
and your Excellency’s son, the presbyter Orosius, I have, both on his
own account and in obedience to your request, made welcome. But a most
trying time has come upon us, <span id="fr_2807"></span>[2808](#fn_2807.md)
in which I have found it better for me to hold my peace than to speak,
so that our studies have ceased, lest what Appius calls “the eloquence
of dogs” should be provoked into exercise. <span
id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808.md) For this reason I have not been
able at the present time to give to those two books dedicated to my
name—books of profound erudition, and brilliant with every charm of
splendid eloquence—the answer which I would otherwise have given; not
that I think anything said in them demands correction, but because I am
mindful of the words of the blessed apostle in regard to the variety of
men’s judgments, “Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind.” <span id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809.md) Certainly, whatever
can be said on the topics there discussed, and whatever can be drawn by
commanding genius from the fountain of sacred Scripture regarding them,
has been in these letters stated in your positions, and illustrated by
your arguments. But I beg your Reverence to allow me for a little to
praise your genius. For in any discussion between us, the object aimed
at by both of us is advancement in learning. But our rivals, and
especially heretics, if they see different opinions maintained by us,
will assail us with the calumny that our differences are due to mutual
jealousy. For my part, however, I am resolved to love you, to look up to
you, to reverence and admire you, and to defend your opinions as my own.
I have also in a dialogue, which I recently published, made allusion to
your Blessedness in suitable terms. Be it ours, therefore, rather to rid
the Church of that most pernicious heresy which always feigns
repentance, in order that it may have liberty to teach in our churches,
and may not be expelled and extinguished, as it would be if it disclosed
its real character in the light of day.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p8"></span>2. Your pious and venerable daughters,
Eusto<span id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-Page_544"></span>chium and Paula, continue to walk
worthy of their own birth and of your counsels, and they send special
salutations to your Blessedness: in which they are joined by the whole
brotherhood of those who with us labour to serve the Lord our Saviour.
As for the holy presbyter Firmus, we sent him last year to go on
business of Eustochium and Paula, first to Ravenna, and afterwards to
Africa and Sicily, and we suppose that he is now detained somewhere in
Africa. I beseech you to present my respectful salutations to the saints
who are associated with you. I have also sent to your care a letter from
me to the holy presbyter Firmus; if it reaches you, I beg you to take
the trouble of forwarding it to him. May Christ the Lord keep you in
safety, and mindful of me, my truly pious lord and most blessed father.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p9"></span>(*As a postscript.*) We suffer in this
province from a grievous scarcity of clerks acquainted with the Latin
language; this is the reason why we are not able to comply with your
instructions, especially in regard to that version of the Septuagint
which is furnished with distinctive asterisks and obelisks; <span
id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810.md) for we have lost, through some
one’s dishonesty, the most of the results of our earlier labour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2807"></span>[543:2808](1010445.htm#fr_2807.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p5"></span> The allusion is probably to the
acquittal of Pelagius in 415 by the Council of Diospolis (or Lydda, a
place between Joppa and Jerusalem). Augustin viewed this Council’s
decisions more favourably than Jerome, who denounces it without measure
as a pitiful assembly, which allowed itself to be imposed upon by the
evasions and feigned recantation of Pelagius; to this he makes reference
in the concluding sentence of this paragraph.

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[543:2809](1010445.htm#fr_2808.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p6"></span> We adopt here the reading found in
Letter CCII. *bis*, sec. 3, where this sentence is quoted by Augustin in
writing to Optatus, and we have “*ne* (instead of *et*) juxta Appium
canina facundia exerceretur.” On the phrase “canina facundia,” see
Lactantius, book vi. ch. 18.

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[543:2810](1010445.htm#fr_2809.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p7"></span> [Rom.
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p7.1"></span>. Translated by Jerome: “Unusquisque in
suo sensu abundet.”

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[544:2811](1010445.htm#fr_2810.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXII-p10"></span> Jerome probably alludes here to
Augustin’s request in Letter LXXI., sec. 3, 4; *Letters*, pp. 326, 327.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXIII](1010446.md)
