[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010170)  [Next](1010172.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XIV"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XIV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Concerning the Manner in Which
Joy and Sadness May Be Brought Back to the Mind and Memory.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XIV-p2"></span>21. This same memory contains also the
affections of my mind; not in the manner in which the mind itself
contains them when it suffers them, but very differently according to a
power peculiar to memory. For without being joyous, I remember myself to
have had joy; and with<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="vi.X.XIV-Page_148"></span>out being sad, I call to mind my past
sadness; and that of which I was once afraid, I remember without fear;
and without desire recall a former desire. Again, on the contrary, I at
times remember when joyous my past sadness, and when sad my joy. Which
is not to be wondered at as regards the body; for the mind is one thing,
the body another. If I, therefore, when happy, recall some past bodily
pain, it is not so strange a thing. But now, as this very memory itself
is mind (for when we give orders to have a thing kept in memory, we say,
“See that you bear this in mind;” and when we forget a thing, we say,
“It did not enter my mind,” and, “It slipped from my mind,” thus calling
the memory itself mind), as this is so, how comes it to pass that when
being joyful I remember my past sorrow, the mind has joy, the memory
sorrow,—the mind, from the joy than is in it, is joyful, yet the memory,
from the sadness that is in it, is not sad? Does not the memory
perchance belong unto the mind? Who will say so? The memory doubtless
is, so to say, the belly of the mind, and joy and sadness like sweet and
bitter food, which, when entrusted to the memory, are, as it were,
passed into the belly, where they can be reposited, but cannot taste. It
is ridiculous to imagine these to be alike; and yet they are not utterly
unlike.

<span id="vi.X.XIV-p3"></span>22. But behold, out of my memory I educe
it, when I affirm that there be four perturbations of the mind,—desire,
joy, fear, sorrow; and whatsoever I shall be able to dispute on these,
by dividing each into its peculiar species, and by defining it, there I
find what I may say, and thence I educe it; yet am I not disturbed by
any of these perturbations when by remembering them I call them to mind;
and before I recollected and reviewed them, they were there; wherefore
by remembrance could they be brought thence. Perchance, then, even as
meat is in ruminating brought up out of the belly, so by calling to mind
are these educed from the memory. Why, then, does not the disputant,
thus recollecting, perceive in the mouth of his meditation the sweetness
of joy or the bitterness of sorrow? Is the comparison unlike in this
because not like in all points? For who would willingly discourse on
these subjects, if, as often as we name sorrow or fear, we should be
compelled to be sorrowful or fearful? And yet we could never speak of
them, did we not find in our memory not merely the sounds of the names,
according to the images imprinted on it by the senses of the body, but
the notions of the things themselves, which we never received by any
door of the flesh, but which the mind itself, recognising by the
experience of its own passions, entrusted to the memory, or else which
the memory itself retained without their being entrusted to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](1010172.md)
