[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010390)  [Next](1010392.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 405.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Paulus, Most Beloved, My Brother
and Colleague in the Priesthood, Whose Highest Welfare is Sought by All
My Prayers, Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p4"></span>1. You would not call me so inexorable
if you did not think me also a dissembler. For what else do you believe
concerning my spirit, if I am to judge by what you have written, than
that I cherish towards you dislike and antipathy which merit blame and
detestation; as if in a matter about which, there could be but one
opinion I was not careful lest, while warning others, I myself should
deserve reproof, <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081.md) or were
wishing to cast the mote out of your eye while retaining and fostering
the beam in my own? <span id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082.md) It is by
no means as you suppose. Behold! I repeat this, and call God to witness,
that if you were only to desire for yourself what I desire on your
behalf, you would now be living in Christ free from all disquietude, and
would make the whole Church rejoice in glory brought by you to His name.
Observe, I pray you, that I have addressed you not only as my brother,
but also as my colleague. For it cannot be that any bishop whatsoever of
the Catholic Church should cease to be my colleague, so long as he has
not been condemned by any ecclesiastical tribunal. As to my refusing to
hold communion with you, the only reason for this is that I cannot
flatter you. For inasmuch as I have begotten you in Christ, I am under
very special obligation to render to you the salutary severity of love
in faithful admonition and reproof. It is true that I rejoice in the
numbers who have been, by God’s blessing on your work, gathered into the
Catholic Church; but this does not make me less bound to weep that a
greater number are being by you scattered from the Church. For you have
so wounded the Church of Hippo, <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083.md) that unless the Lord make you
disengage yourself from all secular cares and burdens, and recall you to
the manner of living and deportment which become the true bishop, the
wound may soon be beyond remedy.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p8"></span>2. Seeing, however, that you continue
to involve yourself more and more deeply in these affairs, and have,
notwithstanding your vow of renunciation, entangled yourself again with
the things which you had solemnly laid aside,—a step which could not be
justified even by the laws of ordinary human affairs; seeing also that
you are reported to be living in a style of extravagance which cannot be
maintained by the slender income of your church,—why do you insist upon
communion with me, while you refuse to hear my rebuke of your faults? Is
it that men whose complaints I cannot bear, may justly blame me for
whatever you do? You are, moreover, mistaken in suspecting that those
who find fault with you are persons who have always been against you
even in your earlier life. It is not so: and you have no reason to be
surprised that many things escape your observation. But even were this
the case, it is your duty to secure that they find nothing in your
conduct which they might reasonably blame, and for which they might
bring reproach against the Church. Perhaps you think that my reason for
saying these <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-Page_365"></span>things is, that I have not accepted
what you urged in your defence. Nay, rather my reason is, that if I were
to say nothing regarding these things, I would be guilty of that for
which I could urge nothing in my defence before God. I know your
abilities; but even a man of dull mind is kept from disquietude if he
sets his affections on heavenly things, whereas a man of acute mind has
this gift in vain if he set his affections on earthly things. The office
of a bishop is not designed to enable one to spend a life of vanity. The
Lord God, who has closed against you all the ways by which you were
disposed to make Him minister to your gain, in order that He may guide
you, if you but understand Him, into that way, with a view to the
pursuit of which that holy responsibility was laid upon you, will
Himself teach you what I now say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[364:2082](1010391.htm#fr_2081.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
9.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[364:2083](1010391.htm#fr_2082.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p6"></span> [Matt.
7.4](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[364:2084](1010391.htm#fr_2083.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXV-p7"></span> Cataqua (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXVI](1010392.md)
