[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010429)  [Next](1010431) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXLIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p3.1"></span>To Marcellinus, My Noble Lord, Justly
Distinguished, My Son Very Much Beloved, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p4"></span>1. Desiring to reply to the letter
which I received from you through our holy brother, my co-bishop
Boniface, I have sought for it, but have not found it. I have recalled
to mind, however, that you asked me in that letter how the magicians of
Pharaoh could, after all the water of Egypt had been turned into blood,
find any with which to imitate the miracle. There are two ways in which
the question is commonly answered: either that it was possible for water
to have been brought from the sea, or, which is more credible, that
these plagues were not inflicted on the district in which the children
of Israel were; for the clear, express statements to this effect in some
parts of that scriptural narrative entitle us to assume this in places
where the statement is omitted.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p5"></span>2. In your other letter, brought to me
by the presbyter Urbanus, a question is proposed, taken from a passage
not in the Divine Scriptures, but in one of my own books, namely, that
which I wrote on Free Will. On questions of this kind, however, I do not
bestow much labour; because even if the statement objected to does not
admit of unanswerable vindication, it is mine only; it is not an
utterance of that Author whose words it is impiety to reject, even when,
through our misapprehension of their meaning, the interpretation which
we put on them deserves to be rejected. I freely confess, accordingly,
that I endeavour to be one of those who write because they have made
some progress, and who, by means of writing, make further progress. If,
therefore, through inadvertence or want of knowledge, anything has been
stated by me which may with good reason be condemned, not only by others
who are able to discover this, but also by myself (for if I am making
progress, I ought, at least after it has been pointed out, to see it),
such a mistake is not to be regarded with surprise or grief, but rather
forgiven, and made the occasion of congratulating me, not, of course, on
having erred, but on having renounced an error. For there is an
extravagant perversity in the self-love of the man who desires other men
to be in error, that the fact of his having erred may not be discovered.
How much better and more profitable is it that in the points in which he
has erred others should not err, so that he may be delivered from his
error by their advice, or, if he refuse this, may at least have no
followers in his error. For, if God permit me, as I desire, to gather
together and point out, in a work devoted to this express purpose, all
the things which most justly displease me in my books, men will then see
how far I am from being a partial judge in my own case.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p6"></span>3. As for you, however, who love me
warmly, if, in opposing those by whom, whether through malice or
ignorance or superior intelligence, I am censured, you maintain the
position that I have nowhere in my writings made a mistake, you labour
in a hopeless enterprise—you have undertaken a bad cause, in which, even
if myself were judge, you must be easily worsted; for it is no pleasure
to me that my dearest friends should think me to be such as I am not,
since assuredly they love not me, but instead of me <span
id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-Page_491"></span>another under my name, if they love
not what I am, but what I am not; for in so far as they know me, or
believe what is true concerning me, I am loved by them; but in so far as
they ascribe to me what they do not know to be in me, they love another
person, such as they suppose me to be. Cicero, the prince of Roman
orators, says of some one, “He never uttered a word which he would wish
to recall.” This commendation, though it seems to be the highest
possible, is nevertheless more likely to be true of a consummate fool
than of a man perfectly wise; for it is true of idiots, <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) that the more absurd and foolish
they are, and the more their opinions diverge from those universally
held, the more likely are they to utter no word which they will wish to
recall; for to regret an evil, or foolish, or ill-timed word is
characteristic of a wise man. If, however, the words quoted are taken in
a good sense, as intended to make us believe that some one was such
that, by reason of his speaking all things wisely, he never uttered any
word which he would wish to recall,—this we are, in accordance with
sound piety, to believe rather concerning men of God, who spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, than concerning the man whom Cicero
commends. For my part, so far am I from this excellence, that if I have
uttered no word which I would wish to recall, it must be because I
resemble more the idiot than the wise man. The man whose writings are
most worthy of the highest authority is he who has uttered no word, I do
not say which it would be his desire, but which it would be his duty to
recall. Let him that has not attained to this occupy the second rank
through his humility, since he cannot take the first rank through his
wisdom. Since he has been unable, with all his care, to exclude every
expression whose use may be justly regretted, let him acknowledge his
regret for anything which, as he may now have discovered, ought not to
have been said.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p8"></span>4. Since, therefore, the words spoken
by me which I would if I could recall, are not, as my very dear friends
suppose, few or none, but perhaps even more than my enemies imagine, I
am not gratified by such commendation as Cicero’s sentence, “He never
uttered a word which he would wish to recall,” but I am deeply
distressed by the saying of Horace, “The word once uttered cannot be
recalled.” <span id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) This is the reason
why I keep beside me, longer than you wish or patiently bear, the books
which I have written on difficult and important questions on the book of
Genesis and the doctrine of the Trinity, hoping that, if it be
impossible to avoid having some things which may deservedly be found
fault with, the number of these may at least be smaller than it might
have been, if, through impatient haste, the works had been published
without due deliberation; for you, as your letters indicate (our holy
brother and co-bishop Florentius having written me to this effect), are
urgent for the publication of these works now, in order that they may be
defended in my own lifetime by myself, when, perhaps, they may begin to
be assailed in some particulars, either through the cavilling of enemies
or the misapprehensions of friends. You say this doubtless because you
think there is nothing in them which might with justice be censured,
otherwise you would not exhort me to publish the books, but rather to
revise them more carefully. But I fix my eye rather on those who are
true judges, sternly impartial, between whom and myself I wish, in the
first place, to make sure of my ground, so that the only faults coming
to be censured by them may be those which it was impossible for me to
observe, though using the most diligent scrutiny.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p10"></span>5. Notwithstanding what I have just
said, I am prepared to defend the sentence in the third book of my
treatise on Free Will, in which, discoursing on the rational substance,
I have expressed my opinion in these words: “The soul, appointed to
occupy a body inferior in nature to itself after the entrance of sin,
governs its own body, not absolutely according to its free will, but
only in so far as the laws of the universe permit.” I bespeak the
particular attention of those who think that I have here fixed and
defined, as ascertained concerning the human soul, either that it comes
by propagation from the parents, or that it has, through sins committed
in a higher celestial life, incurred the penalty of being shut up in a
corruptible body. Let them, I say, observe that the words in question
have been so carefully weighed by me, that while they hold fast what I
regard as certain, namely, that after the sin of the first man, all
other men have been born and continue to be born in that sinful flesh,
for the healing of which “the likeness of sinful flesh” <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) came in the person of the Lord,
they are also so chosen as not to pronounce upon any one of those four
opinions which I have in the sequel expounded and distinguished—not
attempting to establish any one of them as preferable to the others, but
disposing in the meantime of the matter under discussion, and reserving
the consideration of these opinions, so that whichever of them may be
true, praise should unhesitatingly be given to God.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p12"></span>6. For whether all souls are derived
by propagation from the first, or are in the case of each individual
specially created, or being created apart from the body are sent into
it, or introduce themselves into it of their own accord, without doubt
<span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-Page_492"></span>this creature endowed with reason,
namely, the human soul—appointed to occupy an inferior, that is, an
earthly body—after the entrance of sin, does not govern its own body
absolutely according to its free will. <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) For I did not say, “after his sin,”
or “after he sinned,” but after the entrance of sin, that whatever might
afterwards, if possible, be determined by reason as to the question
whether the sin was his own or the sin of the first parent of mankind,
it might be perceived that in saying that “the soul, appointed, after
the entrance of sin, to occupy an inferior body, does not govern its
body absolutely according to its own free will,” I stated what is true;
for “the flesh lusteth against the spirit, <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) and in this we groan, being
burdened,” <span id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) and “the
corruptible body weighs down the soul,” <span
id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574) —in short, who can enumerate all
the evils arising from the infirmity of the flesh, which shall assuredly
cease when “this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,” so that
“that which is mortal shall be swallowed up of life”? <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) In that future condition,
therefore, the soul shall govern its spiritual body with absolute
freedom of will; but in the meantime its freedom is not absolute, but
conditioned by the laws of the universe, according to which it is fixed,
that bodies having experienced birth experience death, and having grown
to maturity decline in old age. For the soul of the first man did,
before the entrance of sin, govern his body with perfect freedom of
will, although that body was not yet spiritual, but animal; but after
the entrance of sin, that is, after sin had been committed in that flesh
from which sinful flesh was thenceforward to be propagated, the
reasonable soul is so appointed to occupy an inferior body, that it does
not govern its body with absolute freedom of will. That infant children,
even before they have committed any sin of their own, are partakers of
sinful flesh, is, in my opinion, proved by their requiring to have it
healed in them also, by the application in their baptism of the remedy
provided in Him who came in the likeness of sinful flesh. But even those
who do not acquiesce in this view have no just ground for taking offence
at the sentence quoted from my book; for it is certain, if I am not
mistaken, that even if the infirmity be the consequence not of sin, but
of nature, it was at all events only after the entrance of sin that
bodies having this infirmity began to be produced; for Adam was not
created thus, and he did not beget any offspring before he sinned.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p18"></span>7. Let my critics, therefore, seek
other passages to censure, not only in my other more hastily published
works, but also in these books of mine on *Free Will*. For I by no means
deny that they may in this search discover opportunities of conferring a
benefit on me; for if the books, having passed into so many hands,
cannot now be corrected, I myself may, being still alive. Those words,
however, so carefully selected by me to avoid committing myself to any
one of the four opinions or theories regarding the soul’s origin, are
liable to censure only from those who think that my hesitation as to any
definite view in a matter so obscure is blameworthy; against whom I do
not defend myself by saying that I think it right to pronounce no
opinion whatever on the subject, seeing that I have no doubt either that
the soul is immortal—not in the same sense in which God is immortal, who
alone hath immortality, <span id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) but
in a certain way peculiar to itself—or that the soul is a creature and
not a part of the substance of the Creator, or as to any other thing
which I regard as most certain concerning its nature. But seeing that
the obscurity of this most mysterious subject, the origin of the soul,
compels me to do as I have done, let them rather stretch out a friendly
hand to me, confessing my ignorance, and desiring to know whatever is
the truth on the subject; and let them, if they can, teach or
demonstrate to me what they may either have learned by the exercise of
sound reason, or have believed on indisputably plain testimony of the
divine oracles. For if reason be found contradicting the authority of
Divine Scriptures, it only deceives by a semblance of truth, however
acute it be, for its deductions cannot in that case be true. On the
other hand, if, against the most manifest and reliable testimony of
reason, anything be set up claiming to have the authority of the Holy
Scriptures, he who does this does it through a misapprehension of what
he has read, and is setting up against the truth not the real meaning of
Scripture, which he has failed to discover, but an opinion of his own;
he alleges not what he has found in the Scriptures, but what he has
found in himself as their interpreter.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p20"></span>8. Let me give an example, to which I
solicit your earnest attention. In a passage near the end of
Ecclesiastes, where the author is speaking of man’s dissolution through
death separating the soul from the body, it is written, “Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God
who gave it.” <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) A statement
having the authority on which this one is based is true beyond all
dispute, and is not intended to deceive any one; yet if any one wishes
to put upon it such an interpretation as may help him in attempting to
support the theory of the propagation of souls, according to <span
id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-Page_493"></span>which all other souls are derived from
that one which God gave to the first man, what is there said concerning
the body under the name of “dust” (for obviously nothing else than body
and soul are to be understood by “dust” and “spirit” in this passage)
seems to favour his view; for he may affirm that the soul is said to
return to God because of its being derived from the original stock of
that soul which God gave to the first man, in the same way as the body
is said to return to the dust because of its being derived from the
original stock of that body which was made of dust in the first man and
therefore may argue that, from what we know perfectly as to the body, we
ought to believe what is hidden from our observation as to the soul; for
there is no difference of opinion as to the original stock of the body,
but there is as to the original stock of the soul. In the text thus
brought forward as a proof, statements are made concerning both, as if
the manner of the return of each to its original was precisely similar
in both,—the body, on the one hand, returning to the earth as it was,
for thence was it taken when the first man was formed; the soul, on the
other hand, returning to God, for He gave it when He breathed into the
nostrils of the man whom He had formed the breath of life, and he became
a living soul, <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) so that
thenceforward the propagation of each part should go on from the
corresponding part in the parent.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p23"></span>9. If, however, the true account of
the soul’s origin be, that God gives to each individual man a soul, not
propagated from that first soul, but created in some other way, the
statement that the “spirit returns to God who gave it,” is equally
consistent with this view. The two other opinions regarding the soul’s
origin are, then, the only ones which seem to be excluded by this text.
For in the first place, as to the opinion that every man’s soul is made
separately within him at the time of his creation, it is supposed that,
if this were the case, the soul should have been spoken of as returning,
not to God who gave it, but to God who made it; for the word “gave”
seems to imply that that which could be given had already a separate
existence. The words “returneth to God” are further insisted upon by
some, who say, How could it return to a place where it had never been
before? Accordingly they maintain that, if the soul is to be believed to
have never been with God before, the words should have been “it goes,”
or “goes on,” or “goes away,” rather than it “returns” to God. In like
manner, as to the opinion that each soul glides of its own accord into
its body, it is not easy to explain how this theory is reconcilable with
the statement that God gave it. The words of this scriptural passage are
consequently somewhat adverse to these two opinions, namely, the one
which supposes each soul to be created in its own body, and the one
which supposes each soul to introduce itself into its own body
spontaneously. But there is no difficulty in showing that the words are
consistent with either of the other two opinions, namely, that all souls
are derived by propagation from the one first created, or that, having
been created and kept in readiness with God, they are given to each body
as required.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p24"></span>10. Nevertheless, even if the theory
that each soul is created in its own body may not be wholly excluded by
this text,—for if its advocates affirm that God is here said to have
given the spirit (or the soul) in the same way as He is said to have
given us eyes, ears, hands, or other such members, which were not made
elsewhere by Him, and kept in store that He might give them, *i.e.* add
and join them to our bodies, but are made by Him in that body to which
He is said to have given them,—I do not see what could be said in reply,
unless, perchance, the opinion could be refuted, either by other
passages of Scripture, or by valid reasoning. In like manner, those who
think that each soul flows of its own accord into its body take the
words “God gave it” in the sense in which it is said, “He gave them up
to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts.” <span
id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) Only one word, therefore, remains
apparently irreconcilable with the theory that each soul is made in its
own body, namely, the word “returneth,” in the expression “returneth to
God;” for in what sense can the soul return to Him with whom it has not
formerly been? By this one word alone are the supporters of this one of
the four opinions embarrassed. And yet I do not think that this opinion
ought to be held as refuted by this one word, for it may be possible to
show that in the ordinary style of scriptural language it may be quite
correct to use the word “return,” as signifying the spirit created by
God returns to Him not because of its having been with Him before its
union with the body, but because of its having received being from His
creative power.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p26"></span>11. I have written these things in
order to show that whoever is disposed to maintain and vindicate any one
of these four theories of the soul’s origin, must bring forward, either
from the Scriptures received into ecclesiastical authority, passages
which do not admit of any other interpretation,—as the statement that
God made man,—or reasonings founded on premises so obviously true that
to call them in question would be madness, such as the statement that
<span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-Page_494"></span>none but the living are capable of
knowledge or of error; for a statement like this does not require the
authority of Scripture to prove its truth, as if the common sense of
mankind did not of itself announce its truth with such transparent
cogency of reason, that whoever contradicts it must be held to be
hopelessly mad. If any one is able to produce such arguments in
discussing the very obscure question of the soul’s origin, let him help
me in my ignorance; but if he cannot do this, let him forbear from
blaming my hesitation on the question.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p27"></span>12. As to the virginity of the Holy
Mary, if what I have written on this subject does not suffice to prove
that it was possible, we must refuse to believe every record of anything
miraculous having taken place in the body of any. If, however, the
objection to believing this miracle is, that it happened only once, ask
the friend who is still perplexed by this, whether instances may not be
quoted from secular literature of events which were, like this one,
unique, and which, nevertheless, are believed, not merely as fables are
believed by the simple, but with that faith with which the history of
facts is received—ask him, I beseech you, this question. For if he says
that nothing of this kind is to be found in these writings, he ought to
have such instances pointed out to him; if he admits this, the question
is decided by his admission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[491:2569](1010430.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p7"></span> *Quos vulgo moriones vocant.*

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[491:2570](1010430.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p9"></span> *Nescit vox missa reverti.*

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[491:2571](1010430.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p11"></span> [Rom.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[492:2572](1010430.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p13"></span> The text here obscure, we have
followed the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p13.1"></span>Mss.</span>, which omit the words,
“interim quod constat peccatum primi hominis.”

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[492:2573](1010430.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p14"></span> [Gal.
5.17.](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[492:2574](1010430.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p15"></span> [2 Cor.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[492:2575](1010430.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p16"></span> [Wisd.
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[492:2576](1010430.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
15.53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[492:2577](1010430.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p19"></span> [1 Tim.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[492:2578](1010430.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p21"></span> [Eccles.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[493:2579](1010430.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p22"></span> [Gen.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[493:2580](1010430.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIII-p25"></span> [Rom.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIII-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLIV](1010431)
